THE GOVERNESS;

OR, THE LITTLE FEMALE ACADEMY (1749)

by Sarah Fielding



There lived in the northern parts of England, a gentlewoman who
undertook the education of young ladies; and this trust she endeavoured
faithfully to discharge, by instructing those committed to her care in
reading, writing, working, and in all proper forms of behaviour. And
though her principal aim was to improve their minds in all useful
knowledge; to render them obedient to their superiors, and gentle, kind,
and affectionate to each other; yet did she not omit teaching them an
exact neatness in their persons and dress, and a perfect gentility in
their whole carriage.

This gentlewoman, whose name was Teachum, was the widow of a clergyman,
with whom she had lived nine years in all the harmony and concord which
forms the only satisfactory happiness in the married state. Two little
girls (the youngest of which was born before the second year of their
marriage was expired) took up a great part of their thoughts; and it was
their mutual design to spare no pains or trouble in their education.

Mr. Teachum was a very sensible man, and took great delight in improving
his wife; as she also placed her chief pleasure in receiving his
instructions. One of his constant subjects of discourse to her was
concerning the education of children: so that, when in his last illness
his physicians pronounced him beyond the power of their art to relieve
him, he expressed great satisfaction in the thought of leaving his
children to the care of so prudent a mother.

Mrs. Teachum, though exceedingly afflicted by such a loss, yet thought
it her duty to call forth all her resolutions to conquer her grief, in
order to apply herself to the care of these her dear husband’s children.
But her misfortunes were not here to end: for within a twelvemonth after
the death of her husband, she was deprived of both her children by a
violent fever that then raged in the country; and, about the same time,
by the unforeseen breaking of a banker, in whose hands almost all her
fortune was just then placed, she was bereft of the means of her future
support.

The Christian fortitude with which (through her husband’s instructions)
she had armed her mind, had not left it in the power of any outward
accident to bereave her of her understanding, or to make her incapable
of doing what was proper on all occasions. Therefore, by the advice
of all her friends, she undertook what she was so well qualified for;
namely, the education of children. But as she was moderate in her
desires, and did not seek to raise a great fortune, she was resolved to
take no more scholars than she could have an eye to herself without
the help of other teachers; and instead of making interest to fill her
school, it was looked upon as a great favour when she would take any
girl. And as her number was fixed to nine, which she on no account
would be prevailed on to increase, great application was made, when any
scholar went away, to have her place supplied; and happy were they who
could get a promise for the next vacancy.

Mrs. Teachum was about forty years old, tall and genteel in her person,
though somewhat inclined to fat. She had a lively and commanding eye,
insomuch that she naturally created an awe in all her little scholars;
except when she condescended to smile, and talk familiarly to them;
and then she had something perfectly kind and tender in her manner. Her
temper was so extremely calm and good, that though she never omitted
reprehending, and that pretty severely, any girl that was guilty of the
smallest fault proceeding from an evil disposition; yet for no cause
whatsoever was she provoked to be in a passion; but she kept up such a
dignity and authority, by her steady behavior, that the girls greatly
feared to incur her displeasure by disobeying her commands; and were
equally pleased with her approbation, when they had done anything worthy
her commendation.

At the time of the ensuing history, the school (being full) consisted of
the nine following young ladies:

     Miss JENNY PEACE.
     Miss NANNY SPRUCE.
     Miss SUKEY JENNETT.
     Miss BETTY FORD.
     Miss DOLLY FRIENDLY.
     Miss HENNY FRET.
     Miss LUCY SLY.
     Miss POLLY SUCKLING.
     Miss PATTY LOCKIT.

The eldest of these was but fourteen years old, and none of the rest had
yet attained their twelfth year.




AN ACCOUNT OF A FRAY,

BEGUN AND CARRIED ON FOR THE SAKE OF AN APPLE: IN WHICH ARE SHOWN THE
SAD EFFECTS OF RAGE AND ANGER.

It was on a fine summer’s evening when the school-hours were at an end,
and the young ladies were admitted to divert themselves for some time,
as they thought proper, in a pleasant garden adjoining to the house,
that their governess, who delighted in pleasing them, brought out a
little basket of apples, which were intended to be divided equally
amongst them; but Mrs. Teachum being hastily called away (one of her
poor neighhours having had an accident which wanted her assistance),
she left the fruit in the hands of Miss Jenny Peace, the eldest of her
scholars, with a strict charge to see that every one had an equal share
of her gift.

But here a perverse accident turned good Mrs. Teachum’s design of giving
them pleasure into their sorrow, and raised in their little hearts
nothing but strife and anger: for, alas! there happened to be one apple
something larger than the rest, on which the whole company immediately
placed their desiring eyes, and all at once cried out, ‘Pray, Miss
Jenny, give me that apple.’ Each gave her reasons why she had the best
title to it: the youngest pleaded her youth, and the eldest her age; one
insisted on her goodness, another from her meekness claimed a title to
preference; and one, in confidence of her strength, said positively,
she would have it; but all speaking together, it was difficult to
distinguish who said this, or who said that.

Miss Jenny begged them all to be quiet, but in vain; for she could not
be heard: they had all set their hearts on that fine apple, looking upon
those she had given them as nothing. She told them they had better
be contented with what they had, than be thus seeking what it was
impossible for her to give to them all. She offered to divide it into
eight parts, or to do anything to satisfy them; but she might as well
have been silent; for they were all talking and had no time to hear.
At last as a means to quiet the disturbance, she threw this apple,
the cause of their contention, with her utmost force over a hedge into
another garden, where they could not come at it.

At first they were all silent, as if they were struck dumb with
astonishment with the loss of this one poor apple, though at the same
time they had plenty before them.

But this did not bring to pass Miss Jenny’s design: for now they all
began again to quarrel which had the most right to it, and which ought
to have had it, with as much vehemence as they had before contended for
the possession of it; and their anger by degrees became so high, that
words could not vent half their rage; and they fell to pulling of caps,
tearing of hair, and dragging the clothes off one another’s backs:
though they did not so much strike, as endeavour to scratch and pinch
their enemies.

Miss Dolly Friendly as yet was not engaged in the battle; but on hearing
her friend Miss Nanny Spruce scream out, that she was hurt by a sly
pinch from one of the girls, she flew on this sly pincher, as she called
her, like an enraged lion on its prey; and not content only to return
the harm her friend had received, she struck with such force, as felled
her enemy to the ground. And now they could not distinguish between
friend and enemy; but fought, scratched, and tore, like so many cats,
when they extend their claws to fix them in their rival’s heart.

Miss Jenny was employed in endeavouring to part them.

In the midst of this confusion appeared Mrs. Teachum, who was returning
in hopes to see them happy with the fruit she had given them; but she
was some time there before either her voice or presence could awaken
them from their attention to the fight; when on a sudden they all faced
her, and fear of punishment began now a little to abate their rage.
Each of the misses held in her right hand, fast clenched, some marks
of victory; for they beat and were beaten by turns. One of them held a
little lock of hair torn from the head of her enemy; another grasped a
piece of a cap, which, in aiming at her rival’s hair, had deceived her
hand, and was all the spoils she could gain; a third clenched a piece of
an apron; a fourth, of a frock. In short, everyone unfortunately held
in her hand a proof of having been engaged in the battle. And the ground
was spread with rags and tatters, torn from the backs of the little
inveterate combatants.

Mrs. Teachum stood for some time astonished at the sight; but at last
she enquired of Miss Jenny Peace, who was the only person disengaged,
to tell her the whole truth, and to inform her of the cause of all this
confusion.

Miss Jenny was obliged to obey the commands of her governess; though
she was so good natured that she did it in the mildest terms; and
endeavoured all she could to lessen, rather than increase, Mrs.
Teachum’s anger. The guilty persons now began all to excuse themselves
as fast as tears and sobs would permit them.

One said, ‘Indeed, madam, it was none of my fault; for I did not begin;
for Miss Sukey Jennett, without any cause in the world (for I did
nothing to provoke her), hit me a great slap in the face, and made my
tooth ache; the pain DID make me angry; and then, indeed, I hit her a
little tap; but it was on her back; and I am sure it was the smallest
tap in the world and could not possibly hurt her half so much as her
great blow did me.’

‘Law, miss!’ replied Miss Jennett, ‘how can you say so? when you know
that you struck me first, and that yours was the great blow, and mine
the little tap; for I only went to defend myself from your monstrous
blows.’

Such like defences they would all have made for themselves, each
insisting on not being in fault, and throwing the blame on her
companion; but Mrs. Teachum silenced them by a positive command; and
told them, that she saw they were all equally guilty, and as such would
treat them.

Mrs. Teachum’s method of punishing I never could find out. But this
is certain, the most severe punishment she had ever inflicted on any
misses, since she had kept a school, was now laid on these wicked girls,
who had been thus fighting, and pulling one another to pieces, for a
sorry apple.

The first thing she did was to take away all the apples; telling them,
that before they had any more instances of such kindness from her, they
should give her proofs of their deserving them better. And when she had
punished them as much as she thought proper, she made them all embrace
one another, and promise to be friends for the future; which, in
obedience to her commands, they were forced to comply with, though there
remained a grudge and ill-will in their bosoms; every one thinking she
was punished most, although she would have it, that she deserved to be
punished least; and they continued all the sly tricks they could think
on to vex and tease each other.




A DIALOGUE BETWEEN MISS JENNY PEACE AND MISS SUKEY JENNETT;

WHEREIN THE LATTER IS AT LAST CONVINCED OF HER OWN FOLLY IN BEING SO
QUARRELSOME; AND, BY HER EXAMPLE, ALL HER COMPANIONS ARE BROUGHT TO SEE
AND CONFESS THEIR FAULT.

The next morning Miss Jenny Peace used her utmost endeavours to bring
her schoolfellows to be heartily reconciled, but in vain: for each
insisted on it, that she was not to blame; but that the whole quarrel
arose from the faults of others. At last ensued the following dialogue
between Miss Jenny Peace and Miss Sukey Jennett, which brought about
Miss Jenny’s designs; and which we recommend to the consideration of all
our young readers.

MISS JENNY. Now pray, Miss Sukey, tell me, what did you get by your
contention and quarrel about that foolish apple?

MISS SUKEY. Indeed, ma’am, I shall not answer you; I know that you only
want to prove, that you are wiser than I, because you are older. But I
don’t know but some people may understand as much at eleven years old as
others at thirteen: but, because you are the oldest in the school, you
always want to be tutoring and governing. I don’t like to have more than
one governess; and if I obey my mistress, I think that is enough.

MISS JENNY. Indeed, my dear, I don’t want to govern you, nor to prove
myself wiser than you; I only want that instead of quarrelling, and
making yourself miserable, you should live at peace and be happy.
Therefore, pray do answer my question, whether you get anything by your
quarrel?

MISS SUKEY. No I cannot say I got anything by it: for my mistress was
angry, and punished me; and my hair was pulled off, and my clothes torn
in the scuffle; neither did I value the apple; but yet I have too much
spirit to be imposed on. I am sure I had as good a right to it as any of
the others; and I would not give up my right to anyone.

MISS JENNY. But don’t you know, Miss Sukey, it would have shown much
more spirit to have yielded the apple to another, than to have fought
about it? Then indeed you would have proved your sense; for you would
have shown, that you had too much understanding to fight about a trifle.
Then your clothes had been whole, your hair not torn from your head,
your mistress had not been angry, nor had your fruit been taken away
from you.

MISS SUKEY. And so, miss, you would fain prove, that it is wisest to
submit to everybody that would impose upon one? But I will not believe
ii, say what you will.

MISS JENNY. But is not what I say true? If you had not been in the
battle, would not your clothes have been whole, your hair not torn, your
mistress pleased with you, and the apples your own?


Here Miss Sukey paused for some time: for as Miss Jenny was in the right
and had truth on her side, it was difficult for Miss Sukey to know what
to answer. For it is impossible, without being very silly, to contradict
truth; and yet Miss Sukey was so foolish, that she did not care to own
herself in the wrong; though nothing could have been so great a sign of
her understanding.

When Miss Jenny saw her thus at a loss for an answer, she was in hopes
of making her companion happy; for, as she had as much good nature as
understanding, that was her design. She therefore pursued her discourse
in the following manner:


MISS JENNY. Pray, Miss Sukey, do answer me one question more. Don’t you
lie awake at nights, and fret and vex yourself, because you are angry
with your school-fellows? Are not you restless and uneasy, because you
cannot find a safe method to be revenged on them, without being punished
yourself? Do tell me truly, is not this your case?

MISS SUKEY. Yes it is. For if I could but hurt my enemies, without
being hurt myself, it would be the greatest pleasure I could have in the
world.

MISS JENNY. Oh fie, Miss Sukey! What you have now said is wicked. Don’t
you consider what you say every day in your prayers’? And this way of
thinking will make you lead a very uneasy life. If you would hearken to
me, I could put you into a method of being very happy, and making all
those misses you call your enemies, become your friends.

MISS SUKEY. You could tell me a method, miss? Do you think I don’t know
as well as you what is fit to be done? I believe I am as capable of
finding the way to be happy, as you are of teaching me.


Here Miss Sukey burst into tears, that anybody should presume to tell
her the way to be happy.


MISS JENNY. Upon my word, my dear, I don’t mean to vex you; but only,
instead of tormenting yourself all night in laying plots to revenge
yourself, I would have you employ this one night in thinking of what I
have said. Nothing will show your sense so much, as to own that you have
been in the wrong. Nor will anything prove a right spirit so much as
to confess your fault. All the misses will be your friends, and perhaps
follow your example. Then you will have the pleasure of having caused
the quiet of the whole school; your governess will love you; and you
will be at peace in your mind, and never have any more foolish quarrels,
in which you all get nothing but blows and uneasiness.


Miss Sukey began now to find, that Miss Jenny was in the right, and she
herself in the wrong; but yet she was so proud she would not own it.
Nothing could be so foolish as this pride; because it would have been
both good and wise in her to confess the truth the moment she saw it.
However, Miss Jenny was so discreet as not to press her any farther that
night; but begged her to consider seriously on what she had said, and to
let her know her thoughts the next morning and then left her.

When Miss Sukey was alone she stood some time in great confusion. She
could not help seeing how much hitherto she had been in the wrong; and
that thought stung her to the heart. She cried, stamped, and was in as
great an agony as if some sad misfortune had befallen her. At last, when
she had somewhat vented her passion by tears, she burst forth into the
following speech:

‘It is very true what Miss Jenny Peace says; for I am always uneasy. I
don’t sleep in quiet because I am always thinking, either that I have
not my share of what is given us, or that I cannot be revenged on any of
the girls that offend me. And when I quarrel with them, I am scratched
and bruised; or reproached. And what do I get by all this? Why, I
scratch, bruise, and reproach them in my turn. Is not that gain enough?
I warrant I hurt them as much as they hurt me. But then indeed, as Miss
Jenny says, if I could make these girls my friends, and did not wish
to hurt them, I certainly might live a quieter, and perhaps a happier,
life. But what then, have I been always in the wrong all my lifetime?
for I always quarrelled and hated everyone who had offended me. Oh! I
cannot bear that thought! It is enough to make me mad! when I imagined
myself so wise and so sensible, to find out that I have been always a
fool. If I think a moment longer about it, I shall die with grief and
shame. I must think myself in the right; and I will too. But, as Miss
Jenny says, I really am unhappy; for I hate all my schoolfellows; and
yet I dare not do them any mischief; for my mistress will punish me
severely if I do. I should not so much mind that neither; but then those
I intend to hurt will triumph over me, to see me punished for their
sakes. In short, the more I reflect, the more I am afraid Miss Jenny is
in the right; and yet it breaks my heart to think so.’

Here the poor girl wept so bitterly, and was so heartily grieved, that
she could not utter one word more; but sat herself down, reclining her
head upon her hand, in the most melancholy posture that could be; nor
could she close her eyes all night, but lay tossing and raving with the
thought how she should act, and what she should say to Miss Jenny the
next day.

When the morning came, Miss Sukey dreaded every moment, as the time drew
nearer when she must meet Miss Jenny. She knew it would not be possible
to resist her arguments; and yet shame for having been in fault overcame
her.

As soon as Miss Jenny saw Miss Sukey with her eyes cast down, and
confessing, by a look of sorrow, that she would take her advice, she
embraced her kindly; and, without giving her the trouble to speak, took
it for granted, that she would leave off quarreling, be reconciled to
her schoolfellows, and make herself happy.

Miss Sukey did indeed stammer out some words, which implied a confession
of her fault; but they were spoke so low they could hardly be heard;
only Miss Jenny, who always chose to look at the fairest side of
her companions’ actions, by Miss Sukey’s look and manner guessed her
meaning.

In the same manner did this good girl, Jenny, persuade, one by one, all
her schoolfellows to be reconciled to each with sincerity and love.

Miss Dolly Friendly, who had too much sense to engage the battle for
the sake of an apple, and who was provoked to strike a blow only for
friendship’s sake, easily saw the truth of what Miss Jenny said; and was
therefore presently convinced, that the best part she could have acted
for her friend, would have been to have withdrawn her from the scuffle.




A SCENE OF LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP, QUITE THE REVERSE OF THE BATTLE,

WHEREIN ARE SHOWN THE DIFFERENT EFFECTS OF LOVE AND GOODNESS FROM THOSE
ATTENDING ANGER, STRIFE, AND WICKEDNESS: WITH THE LIFE OF MISS JENNY
PEACE.

After Miss Jenny had completed the good work of making all her
companions friends, she drew them round her in a little arbour, in that
very garden which had been the scene of their strife, and consequently
of their misery; and then spoke to them the following speech; which
she delivered in so mild a voice, that it was sufficient to charm her
hearers into attention, and to persuade them to be led by her advice,
and to follow her example in the paths of goodness.

‘My dear friends and schoolfellows, you cannot imagine the happiness it
gives me to see you thus all so heartily reconciled. You will find
the joyful fruits of it. Nothing can show so much sense as thus to own
yourselves in fault; for could anything have been so foolish as to spend
all your time in misery, rather than at once to make use of the power
you have of making yourselves happy? Now if you will use as many
endeavours to love as you have hitherto done to hate each other, you
will find that every one amongst you, whenever you have anything given
you, will have double, nay, I may say eight times (as there are eight of
you) the pleasure, in considering that your companions are happy. What
is the end of quarrels, but that everyone is fretted and vexed, and
no one gains anything! Whereas by endeavouring to please and love each
other, the end is happiness to ourselves, and joy to everyone around us.
I am sure, if you will speak the truth, none of you have been so easy
since you quarrelled, as you are now you are reconciled. Answer me
honestly, if this is not truth.’

Here Miss Jenny was silent, and waited for an answer. But the poor
girls, who had in them the seeds of goodwill to each other, although
those seeds were choked and overrun with the weeds of envy and pride;
as in a garden the finest strawberries will be spoiled by rank weeds, if
care is not taken to root them out; these poor girls, I say, now struck
with the force of truth, and sorry for what they had done, let drop some
tears, which trickled down their cheeks, and were signs of meekness,
and sorrow for their fault. Not like those tears which burst from their
swollen eyes, when anger and hatred choked their words, and their proud
hearts laboured with stubbornness and folly; when their skins reddened,
and all their features were changed and distorted by the violence of
passion, which made them frightful to the beholders, and miserable
to themselves;-- No! Far other cause had they now for tears, and far
different were the tears they shed; their eyes, melted with sorrow for
their faults, let fall some drops, as tokens of their repentance; but,
as soon as they could recover themselves to speak, they all with one
voice cried out, ‘Indeed, Miss Jenny, we are sorry for our fault, and
will follow your advice; which we now see is owing to your goodness.’

Miss Jenny now produced a basket of apples, which she had purchased out
of the little pocket-money she was allowed, in order to prove, that the
same things may be a pleasure or a pain, according as the persons to
whom they are given are good or bad.

These she placed in the midst of her companions, and desired them to
eat, and enjoy themselves; and now they were so changed, that each
helped her next neighbour before she would touch any for herself; and
the moment they were grown thus good natured and friendly, they were as
well-bred, and as polite, as it is possible to describe.

Miss Jenny’s joy was inexpressible, that she had caused this happy
change; nor less was the joy of her companions, who now began to
taste pleasures, from which their animosity to each other had hitherto
debarred them. They all sat looking pleased on their companions; their
faces borrowed beauty from the calmness and goodness of their minds;
and all those ugly frowns, and all that ill-natured sourness, which when
they were angry and cross were but too plain in their faces, were now
entirely fled; jessamine and honeysuckles surrounded their seats, and
played round their heads, of which they gathered nosegays to present
each other with. They now enjoyed all the pleasure and happiness that
attend those who are innocent and good.

Miss Jenny, with her heart overflowing with joy at this happy change,
said, ‘Now, my dear companions, that you may be convinced what I have
said and done was not occasioned by any desire of proving myself wiser
than you, as Miss Sukey hinted while she was yet in her anger, I will,
if you please, relate to you the history of my past life; by which you
will see in what manner I came by this way of thinking; and as you will
perceive it was chiefly owing to the instructions of a kind mamma, you
may all likewise reap the same advantage under good Mrs. Teachum, if
you will obey her commands, and attend to her precepts. And after I have
given you the particulars of my life, I must beg that every one of you
will, some day or other, when you have reflected upon it, declare all
that you can remember of your own; for, should you not be able to relate
anything worth remembering as an example, yet there is nothing more
likely to amend the future part of anyone’s life, than the recollecting
and confessing the faults of the past.’

All our little company highly approved of Miss Jenny’s proposal, and
promised, in their turns, to relate their own lives; and Miss Polly
Suckling cried out, ‘Yes indeed, Miss Jenny, I’ll tell all when it comes
to my turn; so pray begin, for I long to hear what you did, when you was
no bigger than I am now.’ Miss Jenny then kissed little Polly, and said
she would instantly begin.

But as in the reading of any one’s story, it is an additional pleasure
to have some acquaintance with their persons; and as I delight in giving
my little readers every pleasure that is in my power; I shall endeavour,
as justly as I can, by description, to set before their eyes the picture
of this good young creature: and in the same of every one of our young
company, as they begin their lives.




THE DESCRIPTION OF MISS JENNY PEACE.

Miss Jenny Peace was just turned of fourteen, and could be called
neither tall nor short of her age; but her whole person was the most
agreeable that can be imagined. She had an exceeding fine complexion,
with as much colour in her cheeks as is the natural effect of perfect
health. Her hair was light brown, and curled in so regular and yet easy
a manner, as never to want any assistance from art. Her eyebrows (which
were not of that correct turn as to look as if they were drawn with a
pencil) and her eyelashes were both darker than her hair; and the
latter being very long, gave such a shade to her eyes as made them often
mistaken for black, though they were only a dark hazel. To give any
description of her eyes beyond the colour and size, which was perfectly
the medium, would be impossible; except by saying they were expressive
of everything that is amiable and good; for through them might be read
every single thought of the mind; from whence they had such a brightness
and cheerfulness, as seemed to cast a lustre over her whole face. She
had fine teeth, and a mouth answering to the most correct rules of
beauty; and when she spoke (though you were at too great a distance to
hear what she said) there appeared so much sweetness, mildness, modesty
and good nature, that you found yourself filled more with pleasure than
admiration in beholding her. The delight which everyone took in looking
on Miss Jenny was evident in this, that though Miss Sukey Jennett and
Miss Patty Lockit were both what may be called handsomer girls (and if
you asked any persons in company their opinion, they would tell you so)
yet their eyes were a direct contradiction to their tongues, by being
continually fixed on Miss Jenny; for, while she was in the room, it
was impossible to fix them anywhere else. She had a natural ease and
gentility in her shape; and all her motions were more pleasing, though
less striking than what is commonly acquired by the instruction of
dancing masters.

Such was the agreeable person of Miss Jenny Peace, who, in her usual
obliging manner, and with an air pleasing beyond my power to express, at
the request of her companions began to relate the history of her life,
as follows:




THE LIFE OF MISS JENNY PEACE.

‘My father dying when I was but half a year old, I was left to the care
of my mamma, who was the best woman in the world, and to whose memory
I shall ever pay the most grateful honour. From the time she had any
children, she made it the whole study of her life to promote their
welfare, and form their minds in the manner she thought would best
answer her purpose of making them both good and happy; for it was her
constant maxim, that goodness and happiness dwelt in the same bosoms,
and were generally found to life so much together, that they could not
easily be separated.

‘My mother had six children born alive; but could preserve none beyond
the first year, except my brother, Harry Peace, and myself. She made it
one of her chief cares to cultivate and preserve the most perfect love
and harmony between us. My brother is but a twelvemonth older than I;
so that, till I was six years old (for seven was the age in which he was
sent to school) he remained at home with me; in which time we often had
little childish quarrels; but my mother always took care to convince us
of our error in wrangling and fighting about nothing, and to teach
us how much more pleasure we enjoyed whilst we agreed. She showed no
partiality to either, but endeavoured to make us equal in all things,
any otherwise than that she taught me I owed a respect to my brother as
the eldest.

‘Before my brother went to school, we had set hours appointed us, in
which we regularly attended to learn whatever was thought necessary
for our improvement; my mamma herself daily watching the opening of our
minds, and taking great care to instruct us in what manner to make the
best use of the knowledge we attained. Whatever we read she explained to
us, and made us understand, that we might be the better for our lessons.
When we were capable of thinking, we made it so much a rule to obey our
parent, the moment she signified her pleasure, that by that means we
avoided many accidents and misfortunes; for example: my brother was
running one day giddily round the brink of a well; and if he had made
the least false step, he must have fallen to the bottom, and been
drowned; my mamma, by a sign with her finger that called him to her,
preserved him from the imminent danger he was in of losing his life;
and then she took care that we should both be the better for this little
incident, by laying before us how much our safety and happiness, as well
as our duty, were concerned in being obedient.

‘My brother and I once had a quarrel about something as trifling as
your apple of contention; and, though we both heartily wished to be
reconciled to each other, yet did our little hearts swell so much with
stubbornness and pride, that neither of us would speak first; by which
means we were so silly as to be both uneasy, and yet would not use the
remedy that was in our own power to remove that uneasiness. My mamma
found it out, and sent for me into her closet, and said, “She was sorry
to see her instructions had no better effect on me; for,” continued she,
“indeed, Jenny, I am ashamed of your folly, as well as wickedness, in
thus contending with your brother.” A tear, which I believe flowed from
shame, started from my eyes at this reproof; and I fixed them on the
ground, being too much overwhelmed with confusion to dare to lift them
up on mamma. On which she kindly said, “She hoped my confusion was a
sign of my amendment. That she might indeed have used another method, by
commanding me to seek a reconciliation with my brother; for she did not
imagine I was already so far gone in perverseness, as not to hold her
commands as inviolable; but she was willing, for my good, first to
convince me of my folly.” As soon as my confusion would give me leave
to speak, on my knees I gave her a thousand thanks for her goodness,
and went immediately to seek my brother. He joyfully embraced the
first opportunity of being reconciled to me; and this was one of the
pleasantest hours of my life. This quarrel happened when my brother came
home at a breaking-up, and I was nine years old.

‘My mamma’s principal care was to keep up a perfect amity between me
and my brother. I remember once, when Harry and I were playing in the
fields, there was a small rivulet stopped me in my way. My brother,
being nimbler and better able to jump than myself, with one spring
leaped over, and left me on the other side of it; but seeing me uneasy
that I could not get over to him, his good nature prompted him to come
back and to assist me; and, by the help of his hand, I easily passed
over. On this my good mamma bid me remember how much my brother’s
superior strength might assist me in his being my protector; and that I
ought to return to use my utmost endeavours to oblige him; and that
then we should be mutual assistants to each other throughout life. Thus
everything that passed was made use of to improve my understanding and
amend my heart.

‘I believe no child ever spent her time more agreeably than I did; for I
not only enjoyed my own pleasures, but also those of others. And when my
brother was carried abroad, and I was left at home, that HE was pleased,
made me full amends for the loss of any diversion, the contentions
between us (where our parent’s commands did not interfere) were always
exerted in endeavours each to prefer the other’s pleasures to our own.
My mind was easy and free from anxiety; for as I always took care to
speak truth, I had nothing to conceal from my mamma, and consequently
had never any fears of being found in a lie. For one lie obliges us
to tell a thousand others to conceal it; and I have no notion of
any conditions being so miserable, as to live in a continual fear of
detection. Most particularly, my mamma instructed me to beware of all
sorts of deceit; so that I was accustomed, not only in words to speak
truth, but also not to endeavour by any means to deceive.

‘But though the friendship between my brother and me was so strongly
cultivated, yet we were taught, that lying for each other, or praising
each other when it was not deserved, was not only a fault, but a very
great crime; for this, my mamma used to tell us, was not love, but
hatred; as it was encouraging one another in folly and wickedness.
And though my natural disposition inclined me to be very tender of
everything in my power, yet was I not suffered to give way even to THIS
in an unreasonable degree. One instance of which I remember.

‘When I was about eleven years old, I had a cat that I had bred up from
a little kitten, that used to play round me, till I had indulged for the
poor animal a fondness that made me delight to have it continually with
me wherever I went; and, in return for my indulgence, the cat seemed
to have changed its nature, and assumed the manner that more properly
belongs to dogs than cats; for it would follow me about the house and
gardens, mourn for my absence, and rejoice at my presence. And, what was
very remarkable, the poor animal would, when fed by my hand, lose that
caution which cats are known to be possessed of, and eat whatever I gave
it, as if it could reflect that I meant only its good, and no harm could
come from me.

‘I was at last so accustomed to see this little Frisk (for so I called
it) playing round me, that I seemed to miss part of myself in its
absence. But one day the poor little creature followed me to the door;
when a parcel of schoolboys coming by, one of them catched her up in his
arms, and ran away with her. All my cries were to no purpose; for he was
out of sight with her in a moment, and there was no method to trace his
steps. The cruel wretches, for sport, as they called it, hunted it the
next day from one to the other, in the most barbarous manner; till at
last it took shelter in that house that used to be its protection, and
came and expired at my feet.

‘I was so struck with the sight of the little animal dying in that
manner, that the great grief of my heart overflowed at my eyes, and I
was for some time inconsolable.

‘My indulgent mamma comforted without blaming me, till she thought I
had sufficient time to vent my grief; and then, sending for me into her
chamber, spoke as follows:

‘“Jenny, I have watched you ever since the death of your little
favourite cat; and have been in hopes daily, that your lamenting and
melancholy on that account would be at an end. But I find you still
persist in grieving, as if such a loss was irreparable. Now, though
I have always encouraged you in all sentiments of good nature and
compassion; and am sensible, that where those sentiments are strongly
implanted, they will extend their influence even to the least animal;
yet you are to consider, my child, that you are not to give way to
any passions that interfere with your duty; for whenever there is any
contention between your duty and your inclinations, you must conquer the
latter, or become wicked and contemptible. If, therefore, you give way
to this melancholy, how will you be able to perform your duty towards
me, in cheerfully obeying my commands, and endeavouring, by your lively
prattle and innocent gaiety of heart, to be my companion and delight?
Nor will you be fit to converse with your brother, whom (as you lost
your good papa when you were too young to know that loss) I have
endeavoured to educate in such a manner, that I hope he will be a father
to you, if you deserve his love and protection. In short, if you do
not keep command enough of yourself to prevent being ruffled by every
accident, you will be unfit for all the social offices of life, and be
despised by all those whose regard and love are worth your seeking. I
treat you, my girl, as capable of considering what is for your own good;
for though you are but eleven years of age, yet I hope the pains I have
taken in explaining all you read, and in answering all your questions in
search of knowledge, has not been so much thrown away, but that you are
more capable of judging, than those unhappy children are, whose parents
have neglected to instruct them. And therefore, farther to enforce what
I say, remember, that repining at any accident that happens to you, is
an offence to that God to whom I have taught you daily to pray for all
the blessings you can receive, and to whom you are to return humble
thanks for every blessing.”

‘“I expect therefore, Jenny, that you now dry up your tears, and resume
your usual cheerfulness. I do not doubt but your obedience to me will
make you at least put on the appearance of cheerfulness in my sight. But
you will deceive yourself, if you think that is performing your duty;
for if you would obey me as you ought, you must try heartily to root
from your mind all sorrow and gloominess. You may depend upon it, this
command is in your power to obey; for you know I never require anything
of you that is impossible.”

‘After my mamma had made this speech, she went out to take a walk in the
garden, and left me to consider of what she had said.

‘The moment I came to reflect seriously, I found it was indeed in my
power to root all melancholy from my heart, when I considered it was
necessary, in order to perform my duty to God, to obey the best of
mothers, and to make myself a blessing and a cheerful companion to her,
rather than a burden, and the cause of her uneasiness, by my foolish
melancholy.

‘This little accident, as managed by my mamma, has been a lesson to me
in governing my passions ever since.

‘It would be endless to repeat all the methods this good mother invented
for my instruction, amendment, and improvement. It is sufficient to
acquaint you, that she contrived that every new day should open to me
some new scene of knowledge; and no girl could be happier than I was
during her life. But, alas! when I was thirteen years of age, the scene
changed. My dear mamma was taken ill of a scarlet fever. I attended her
day and night whilst she lay ill, my eyes starting with tears to see her
in that condition; and yet I did not dare to give my sorrows vent, for
fear of increasing her pain.’

Here a trickling tear stole from Miss Jenny’s eyes. She suppressed some
rising sobs that interrupted her speech, and was about to proceed in her
story, when, casting her eyes on her companions, she saw her sorrow had
such an effect upon them all, that there was not one of her hearers who
could refrain from shedding a sympathising tear. She therefore thought
it was more strictly following her mamma’s precepts to pass this part
of her story in silence, rather than to grieve her friends; and having
wiped away her tears, she hastened to conclude her story; which she did
as follows:

‘After my mamma’s death, my Aunt Newman, my father’s sister, took the
care of me; but being obliged to go to Jamaica, to settle some affairs
relating to an estate she is possessed of there, she took with her my
Cousin Harriet, her only daughter, and left me under the care of the
good Mrs. Teachum till her return. And since I have been here, you all
know as much of my history as I do myself.’


As Miss Jenny spoke these words, the bell summoned them to supper into
the presence of their governess, who having narrowly watched their looks
ever since the fray, had hitherto plainly perceived, that though they
did not dare to break out again into an open quarrel, yet their hearts
had still harboured unkind thoughts of one another. She was surprised
NOW, as she stood at a window in the hall that overlooked the garden, to
see all her scholars walk towards her hand in hand, with such cheerful
countenances, as plainly showed their inward good humour. And as she
thought proper to mention to them her pleasure in seeing them thus
altered, Miss Jenny Peace related to her governess all that had passed
in the arbour, with their general reconciliation. Mrs. Teachum gave Miss
Jenny all the applause due to her goodness, saying, she herself had only
waited a little while, to see if their anger would subside, and love
take its place in their bosoms, without her interfering again; for THAT
she certainly should otherwise have done, to have brought about what
Miss Jenny had so happily effected.

Miss Jenny thanked her governess for her kind approbation, and said,
that if she would give them leave, she would spend what time she was
pleased to allow them from school in this little arbour, in reading
stories, and such things as she should think a proper and innocent
amusement.

Mrs. Teachum not only gave leave, but very much approved of this
proposal; and desired Miss Jenny, as a reward for what she had already
done, to preside over these diversions, and to give her an account in
what manner they proceeded. Miss Jenny promised in all things to be
guided by good Mrs. Teachum. And now, soon after supper, they retired to
rest, free from those uneasy passions which used to prevent their quiet;
and as they had passed the day in pleasure, at night they sunk in soft
and sweet repose.




MONDAY.

THE FIRST DAY AFTER THEIR REPENTANCE; AND, CONSEQUENTLY, THE FIRST DAY
OF THE HAPPINESS OF MISS JENNY PEACE AND HER COMPANIONS.

Early in the morning, as soon as Miss Jenny arose, all her companions
flocked round her; for they now looked on her as the best friend they
had in the world; and they agreed, when they came out of school, to
adjourn into their arbour, and divert themselves till dinner-time; which
they accordingly did. When Miss Jenny proposed, if it was agreeable to
them to hear it, to read them a story which she had put in her pocket
for that purpose; and as they now began to look upon her as the most
proper person to direct them in their amusements, they all replied, What
was most agreeable to her would please them best. She then began to
read the following story, with which we shall open their first day’s
amusement.




THE STORY OF THE CRUEL GIANT BARBARICO, THE GOOD GIANT BENEFICO,

AND THE LITTLE PRETTY DWARF MIGNON.

A great many hundred years ago, the mountains of Wales were inhabited
by two giants; one of whom was the terror of all his neighbours and the
plague of the whole country. He greatly exceeded the size of any giant
recorded in history; and his eyes looked so fierce and terrible, that
they frightened all who were so unhappy as to behold them.

The name of this enormous wretch was Barbarico. A name which filled
all who heard it with fear and astonishment. The whole delight of this
monster’s life was in acts of inhumanity and mischief; and he was the
most miserable as well as the most wicked creature that ever yet was
born. He had no sooner committed one outrage, but he was in agonies
till he could commit another; never satisfied, unless he could find an
opportunity of either torturing or devouring some innocent creature.
And whenever he happened to be disappointed in any of his malicious
purposes, he would stretch his immense bulk on the top of some high
mountain, and groan, and beat the earth, and bellow with such a hollow
voice, that the whole country heard and trembled at the sound.

The other giant, whose name was Benefico, was not so tall and bulky as
the hideous Barbarico. He was handsome, well proportioned, and of a very
good-natured turn of mind. His delight was no less in acts of goodness
and benevolence than the other’s was in cruelty and mischief. His
constant care was to endeavour if possible to repair the injuries
committed by this horrid tyrant, which he had sometimes an opportunity
of doing; for though Barbarico was much larger and stronger than
Benefico, yet his coward mind was afraid to engage with him, and always
shunned a meeting; leaving the pursuit of any prey, if he himself was
pursued by Benefico: nor could the good Benefico trust farther to
this coward spirit of his base adversary, than only to make the horrid
creature fly; for he well knew that a close engagement might make him
desperate; and fatal to himself might be the consequence of such a
brutal desperation; therefore he prudently declined any attempt to
destroy this cruel monster, till he should gain some sure advantage over
him.

It happened on a certain day, that as the inhuman Barbarico was prowling
along the side of a craggy mountain overgrown with brambles and briery
thickets, taking most horrid strides, rolling his ghastly eyes around
in quest of human blood, and having his breast tortured with inward rage
and grief, that he had been so unhappy as to live one whole day without
some act of violence, he beheld, in a pleasant valley at a distance, a
little rivulet winding its gentle course through rows of willows mixed
with flowery shrubs. Hither the giant hasted; and being arrived, he
gazed about to see if in this sweet retirement any were so unhappy as to
fall within his power; but finding none, the disappointment set him in
a flame of rage, which, burning like an inward furnace, parched his
throat. And now he laid him down on the bank, to try if in the cool
stream, that murmured as it flowed, he could assuage or slack the fiery
thirst that burnt within him.

He bent him down to drink; and at the same time casting his baleful eyes
towards the opposite side, he discovered within a little natural arbour
formed by the branches of a spreading tree, within the meadow’s flowery
lawn, the shepherd Fidus and his loved Amata.

The gloomy tyrant no sooner perceived this happy pair, than his heart
exulted with joy; and, suddenly leaping up on the ground, he forgot his
thirst, and left the stream untasted. He stood for a short space to
view them in their sweet retirement; and was soon convinced that, in
the innocent enjoyment of reciprocal affection, their happiness was
complete. His eyes, inflamed with envy to behold such bliss, darted a
fearful glare; and his breast swelling with malice and envenomed rage,
he with gigantic pace approached their peaceful seat.

The happy Fidus was at that time busy in entertaining his loved Amata
with a song which he had that very morning composed in praise of
constancy; and the giant was now within one stride of them, when Amata,
perceiving him, cried out in a trembling voice, ‘Fly, Fidus, fly, or
we are lost for ever; we are pursued by the hateful Barbarico!’ She had
scarce uttered these words, when the savage tyrant seized them by the
waist in either hand, and holding up to his nearer view, thus said:
‘Speak, miscreants; and, if you would avoid immediate death, tell me
who you are, and whence arises that tranquility of mind, which even at a
distance was visible in your behaviour.’

Poor Fidus, with looks that would have melted the hardest heart,
innocently replied, that they were wandering that way without designing
offence to any creature on earth. That they were faithful lovers; and,
with the consent of all their friends and relations, were soon to be
married; therefore he entreated him not to part them.

The giant now no sooner perceived, from the last words of the affrighted
youth, what was most likely to give them the greatest torment, than with
a spiteful grin which made his horrible face yet more horrible, and in
a hollow voice, as loud as thunder, he tauntingly cried out, ‘Ho-hoh!
You’d not be parted, would you? For once I’ll gratify thy will, and thou
shalt follow this thy whimpering fondling down my capatious maw.’ So
saying, he turned his ghastly visage on the trembling Amata who, being
now no longer able to support herself under his cruel threats, fainted
away, and remained in his hand but as a lifeless corpse. When lifting
up his eyes towards the hill on the opposite side, he beheld Benefico
coming hastily towards him. This good giant having been that morning
informed that Barbarico was roaming in the mountains after prey,
left his peaceful castle, in hopes of giving protection to whatever
unfortunate creature should fall into the clutches of this so cruel a
monster.

Barbarico, at the sight of the friendly Benefico, started with fear; for
although in bulk and stature he was, as we have said, the superior: yet
that cowardice, which ever accompanies wickedness, now wrought in him in
such a manner that he could not bear to confront him, well knowing the
courage and fortitude that always attend the good and virtuous; and
therefore instantly putting Fidus into the wallet that hung over his
shoulder, he flung the fainting Amata, whom he took to be quite expired,
into the stream that ran hard by, and fled to his cave, not daring once
to cast his eyes behind him.

The good Benefico perceiving the monster’s flight, and not doubting but
he had been perpetrating some horrid mischief, immediately hastened
to the brook; where he found the half-expiring Amata floating down
the stream, for her clothes had yet borne her up on the surface of the
water. He speedily stepped in and drew her out, and taking her in his
arms, pressed her to his warm bosom; and in a short space perceiving
in her face the visible marks of returning life, his heart swelled with
kind compassion, and he thus bespoke the tender maid: ‘Unhappy damsel,
lift up thy gentle eyes, and tell me by what hard fate thou hast fallen
into the power of that barbarous monster, whose savage nature delights
in nothing but ruin and desolation. Tremble not thus, but without fear
or terror behold one who joys in the thought of having saved thee from
destruction, and will bring thee every comfort his utmost power can
procure.’

The gentle Amata was now just enough recovered to open her eyes: but
finding herself in a giant’s arms, and still retaining in her mind the
frightful image of the horrid Barbarico, she fetched a deep sigh, crying
out in broken accents, ‘Fly, Fidus, fly;’ and again sunk down upon the
friendly giant’s breast. On hearing these words, and plainly seeing by
the anguish of her mind that some settled grief was deeply rooted at her
heart, and therefore despairing to bring her to herself immediately, the
kind Benefico hastened with her to his hospitable castle; where every
imaginable assistance was administered to her relief, in order to
recover her lost sense, and to reconcile her to her wretched fate.

The cruel Barbarico was no sooner arrived at his gloomy cave, than he
called to him his little page; who, trembling to hear the tyrant now
again returned, quickly drew near to attend his stern commands: when
drawing out of the wallet the poor Fidus, more dead than alive, the
monster cried out, ‘Here, caitiff, take in charge this smoothed-faced
miscreant; and, d’ye hear me? see that his allowance be no more than one
small ounce of mouldy bread and half a pint of standing water, for each
day’s support, till his now blooming skin be withered, his flesh be
wasted from his bones, and he dwindle to a meagre skeleton.’ So saying
he left them, as he hoped, to bewail each other’s sad condition. But the
unhappy Fidus, bereft of his Amata, was not to be appalled by any of the
most horrid threats; for now his only comfort was the hopes of a speedy
end to his miserable life, and to find a refuge from his misfortunes
in the peaceful grave. With this reflection the faithful Fidus was
endeavouring to calm the inward troubles of his mind, when the little
page, with looks of the most tender compassion, and in gentle words,
bid him be comforted, and with patience endure his present affliction;
adding that he himself had long suffered the most rigorous fate, yet
despaired not but that one day would give them an opportunity to free
themselves from the wicked wretch, whose sole delight was in others’
torments. ‘As to his inhuman commands,’ continued he, ‘I will sooner
die than obey them; and in a mutual friendship perhaps we may find some
consolation, even in this dismal cave.’

This little page the cruel Barbarico had stolen from his parents at five
years old; ever since which time he had tortured and abused him, till he
had now attained the age of one-and-twenty. His mother had given him
the name of Mignon; by which name the monster always called him, as it
gratified his insolence to make use of that fond appellation whilst he
was abusing him, only when he said Mignon he would in derision add the
word Dwarf; for, to say the truth, Mignon was one of the least men that
was ever seen, though at the same time one of the prettiest: his limbs,
though small, were exactly proportioned; his countenance was at once
sprightly and soft; and whatever his head thought, or his heart felt,
his eyes by their looks expressed; and his temper was as sweet as his
person was amiable. Such was the gentle creature Barbarico chose to
torment. For wicked giants, no less than wicked men and women, are
constantly tormented at the appearance of those perfections in another,
to which they themselves have no pretensions.

The friendship and affection of Fidus and Mignon now every day
increased; and the longer they were acquainted, the mere delight
they took in each other’s company. The faithful Fidus related to
his companion the story of his loved Amata, whilst the tender Mignon
consoled his friend’s inward sorrows, and supplied him with necessaries,
notwithstanding the venture he run of the cruel tyrant’s heavy
displeasure. The giant ceased not every day to view the hapless Fidus,
to see if the cruelty of his intentions had in any degree wrought its
desired effect; but perceiving in him no alteration, he now began to be
suspicious that the little Mignon had not punctually obeyed his savage
command. In order therefore to satisfy his wicked curiosity, he resolved
within himself narrowly to watch every occasion these poor unhappy
captives had of conversing with each other. Mignon, well knowing the
implacable and revengeful disposition of this barbarous tyrant, had
taken all the precautions imaginable to avoid discovery; and therefore
generally sought every opportunity of being alone with Fidus, and
carrying him his daily provisions at those hours he knew the giant was
most likely to be asleep.

It so befell that, on a certain day, the wicked giant had, as was his
usual custom, been abroad for many hours in search of some unhappy
creature on whom to glut his hateful inhumanity; when, tired with
fruitless roaming, he returned to his gloomy cave, beguiled of all his
horrid purposes; for he had not once that day espied so much as the
track of man, or other harmless animal, to give him hopes even to
gratify his rage or cruelty; but now raving with inward torment and
despair, he laid him down upon his iron couch, to try if he could close
his eyes and quiet the tumultuous passions of his breast. He tossed and
tumbled and could get no rest, starting with fearful dreams, and horrid
visions of tormenting furies.

Meanwhile the gentle Mignon had prepared a little delicate repast, and
having seen the monster lay himself at length, and thinking now that a
fit occasion offered in which to comfort and refresh his long-expecting
friend, was hastening with it to the cell where the faithful Fidus
was confined. At the fatal moment the giant, rearing himself up on his
couch, perceived the little Mignon just at the entrance of the cell;
when calling to him in a hollow voice, that dismally resounded through
the cave, he so startled the poor unhappy page, that he dropped the
cover from his trembling hand and stood fixed and motionless as a
statue.

‘Come hither, Mignon, caitiff, dwarf,’ said then the taunting homicide:
but the poor little creature was so thunderstruck he was quite unable
to stir one foot. Whereat the giant, rousing himself from off his couch,
with one huge stride reached out his brawny arm, and seized him by
the waist; and, pointing to the scattered delicates, cried out, ‘Vile
miscreant! is it thus thou hast obeyed my orders? Is this the mouldy
bread and muddy water, with which alone it was my command thou shouldst
sustain that puny mortal? But I’ll--’ Here raising him aloft, he was
about to dash him to the ground, when suddenly revolving in his wicked
thoughts, that if at once he should destroy his patient slave, his
cruelty to him must also have an end, he paused--and then recovering, he
stretched out his arm, and bringing the little trembler near his glaring
eyes, he thus subjoins: ‘No; I’ll not destroy thy wretched life; but
thou shalt waste thy weary days in a dark dungeon, as far remote from
the least dawn of light as from thy loved companion. And I myself will
carefully supply you both so equally with mouldy bread and water,
that each by his own sufferings shall daily know what his dear friend
endures.’ So saying, he hastened with him to his deepest dungeon; and
having thrust him in, he doubly barred the iron door. And now again
retiring to his couch, this new-wrought mischief, which greatly
gratified his raging mind, soon sunk him down into a sound and heavy
sleep. The reason this horrid monster had not long ago devoured his
little captive (for he thought him a delicious morsel) was, that he
might never want an object at hand to gratify his cruelty. For though
extremely great was his voracious hunger, yet greater still was his
desire of tormenting; and oftentimes when he had teased, beat, and
tortured the poor gentle Mignon, so as to force from him tears, and
sometimes a soft complaint, he would, with a malicious sneer, scornfully
reproach him in the following words: ‘Little does it avail to whine, to
blubber, or complain; for, remember, abject wretch,

     I am a giant, and I can eat thee:
     Thou art a dwarf, and thou canst not eat me.’

When Mignon was thus alone, he threw himself on the cold ground,
bemoaning his unhappy fate. However, he soon recollected that patience
and resignation were his only succour in this distressful condition; not
doubting but that, as goodness cannot always suffer, he should in time
meet with some unforeseen deliverance from the savage power of the
inhuman Barbarico.

Whilst the gentle Mignon was endeavouring to comfort himself in his
dungeon with these good reflections, he suddenly perceived, at a little
distance from him, a small glimmering light. Immediately he rose from
the ground, and going towards it, found that it shone through a little
door that had been left at jar, which led him to a spacious hall,
wherein the giant hoarded his immense treasures. Mignon was at first
dazzled with the lustre of so much gold and silver, and sparkling jewels
as were there heaped together. But casting his eyes on a statue that was
placed in the middle of the room, he read on the pedestal, written in
very small letters, the following verses:

     Wouldst thou from the rage be free
     Of the tyrant’s tyranny,
     Loose the fillet which is bound
     Twice three times my brows around;
     Bolts and bars shall open fly,
     By a magic sympathy.
     Take him in his sleeping hour;
     Bind his neck and break his pow’r.
     Patience bids, make no delay:
     Haste to bind him, haste away.

Mignon’s little heart now leapt for joy, that he had found the means
of such a speedy deliverance; and eagerly climbing up the statue, he
quickly unbound the magic fillet; which was no sooner done, but suddenly
the bolts and bars of the brazen gates through which the giant used to
pass to this his treasury, were all unloosed, and the folding-doors of
their own accord flew open, grating harsh thunder on their massy hinges.
At the same instant, stretched on his iron couch in the room adjoining
to the hall, the giant gave a deadly groan. Here again the little
Mignon’s trembling heart began to fail; for he feared the monster was
awakened by the noise, and that he should now suffer the cruellest
torments his wicked malice could invent. Wherefore for a short space he
remained clinging round the statue, till he perceived that all again was
hushed and silent; when, getting down, he gently stole into the giant’s
chamber, where he found him still in a profound sleep.


But here, to the great mortification of Miss Jenny’s attentive hearers,
the hour of entertaining themselves being at an end, they were obliged
to leave the poor little Mignon in the greatest distress and fright
lest the giant should awake before he could fulfil the commands of
the oracle, and to wait for the remainder of the story till another
opportunity.

In the evening, as soon as school was over, the little company again met
in their arbour, and nothing could be greater than their impatience to
hear the event of Mignon’s hazardous undertaking. Miss Dolly Friendly
said that if the poor little creature was destroyed, she should not
sleep that night. But they all joined in entreating Miss Jenny to
proceed; which she did in the following manner:




A CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF THE GIANTS.

Now, thought Mignon, is the lucky moment to fulfil the instructions of
the oracle. And then cautiously getting up the side of the couch, with
trembling hands he put the fillet round the monster’s neck, and tied it
firmly in a threefold knot; and again softly creeping down, he retired
into a corner of the room to wait the wished event. In a few minutes the
giant waked; and opening his enormous eyes, he glared their horrid orbs
around (but without the least motion of his head or body) and spied the
little Mignon where he lay, close shrinking to avoid his baleful sight.

The giant no sooner perceived his little page at liberty, but his heart
sorely smote him, and he began to suspect the worst that could befall;
for, recollecting that he had carelessly left open the little door
leading from the dungeon to the great hall wherein was placed the fatal
magic statue, he was now entirely convinced that Mignon had discovered
the secret charm on which his power depended; for he already found the
magic of the fillet round his neck fully to operate, his sinews all
relax, his joints all tremble; and when he would by his own hand have
tried to free himself, his shivering limbs he found refused obedience to
their office. Thus bereft of all his strength, and well nigh motionless,
in this extremity of impotence he cast about within himself by what sly
fraud (for fraud and subtlety were now his only refuge) he best might
work upon the gentle Mignon to lend his kind assistance to unloose him.
Wherefore with guileful words and seeming courtesy, still striving to
conceal his cursed condition, he thus bespake his little captive:

‘Come hither Mignon; my pretty gentle boy, come near me. This fillet
thou has bound around my neck, to keep me from the cold, gives me some
pain. I know thy gentle nature will not let thee see thy tender master
in the least uneasiness, without affording him thy cheerful aid and kind
relief. Come hither, my dear child, I say, and loose the knot which in
thy kind concern (I thank thee for thy care) thou hast tied so hard, it
somewhat frets my neck.’

These words the insidious wretch uttered in such a low trembling tone of
voice, and with such an affectation of tenderness, that the little page,
who had never before experience from him any such kind of dialect, and
but too well knew his savage nature to believe that anything but guile
or want of power could move him to the least friendly speech, or kind
affection, began now strongly to be persuaded that all was as he wished,
and that the power of the inhuman tyrant was at an end. He knew full
well, that if the giant had not lost the ability of rising from the
couch, he should ere now too sensibly have felt the sad effects of his
malicious resentment, and therefore boldly adventured to approach him,
and coming near the couch, and finding not the least effort in the
monster to reach him, and from thence quite satisfied of the giant’s
total incapacity of doing farther mischief, he flew with raptures to the
cell where Fidus lay confined.

Poor Fidus all this time was quite disconsolate; nor could he guess the
cause why his little friend so long had kept away; one while he thought
the giant’s stern commands had streightened him of all subsistence;
another while his heart misgave him for his gentle friend, lest unawares
his kind beneficence towards him had caused him to fall a sacrifice
to the tyrant’s cruel resentment. With these and many other like
reflections the unhappy youth was busied, when Mignon, suddenly unbarred
the cell, flew to his friend, and eagerly embraced him, cried out, ‘Come
Fidus, haste, my dearest friend; for thou and all of us are from this
moment free. Come and behold the cruel monster, where he lies, bereft of
all his strength. I cannot stay to tell thee now the cause; but haste,
and thou shall see the dreadful tyrant stretched on his iron couch,
deprived of all his wicked power. But first let us unbar each cell,
wherein is pent some wretched captive, that we may share a general
transport for this our glad deliverance.’

The faithful Fidus, whose heart had known but little joy since he had
lost his loved Amata, now felt a dawning hope that he might once more
chance to find her, if she had survived their fatal separation; and,
without one word of answer, he followed Mignon to the several cells, and
soon released all the astonished captives.

Mignon first carried them to behold their former terror, now, to
appearance, almost a lifeless corpse; who on seeing them all surround
his couch, gave a most hideous roar, which made them tremble, all but
the gentle Mignon, who was convinced of the impotence of his rage, and
begged them to give him their attendance in the hall; where they were no
sooner assembled than he showed them the statue, read them the oracle,
and told them every circumstance before related.

They now began to bethink themselves of what method was to be taken
to procure their entire liberty; for the influence of the magic
fillet extended only to the gates of the hall; and still they remained
imprisoned within the dismal cave; and though they knew from the oracle,
as well as from what appeared, that the monster’s power was at an end,
yet still were they to seek the means of their escape from this his
horrid abode. At length Mignon again ascended the couch to find the
massy key, and spying one end of it peep out from under the pillow, he
called to Fidus, who first stepped up to his friend’s assistance; the
rest by his example quickly followed; and now, by their united force,
they dragged the ponderous key from under the monster’s head; and then
descending they all went to the outer door of the cave, where, with some
difficulty, they set wide open the folding iron gates.

They now determined to dispatch a messenger to the good Benefico with
the news, which they knew would be so welcome to him and all his guests,
and with one voice agreed that Fidus should bear the joyful tidings;
and then returned to observe the monster, and to wait the coming of
Benefico. The nimble Fidus soon reached the giant’s dwelling, where, at
a little distance from the castle, he met the good Benefico with a
train of happy friends, enjoying the pleasures of the evening, and the
instructive and cheerful conversation of their kind protector. Fidus
briefly told his errand; and instantly Benefico, with all his train,
joyfully hastened to behold the wonders he had related; for now many
hearts leapt for joy, in hopes of meeting some friend of whom they had
been bereft by the cruelty of the savage Barbarico.

They were not long before they arrived at the horrid cave, where
Benefico, proceeding directly to the monster’s chamber, suddenly
appeared to him at the side of his couch. Barbarico, on seeing him,
gave a hideous yell, and rolled his glaring eyes in such a manner as
expressed the height of rage and envious bitterness.

Benefico, turning to all the company present, thus spoke, ‘How shall I
enough praise and admire the gentle Mignon for having put in my power
to justice on this execrable wretch, and freeing you all from an
insufferable slavery, and the whole country from their terror?’ Then
reaching the monster’s own sword, which hung over his couch, his hand
yet suspended over the impious tyrant, he thus said, ‘Speak, wretch,
if yet the power of speech is left thee; and with thy latest breath
declare, what advantage hast thou found of all thy wicked life?’

Barbarico well knew that too bad had been that life, to leave the least
room for hope of mercy; and therefore, instead of an answer, he gave
another hideous yell, gnashing his horrid teeth, and again rolling his
ghastly eyes on all around.

Benefico seeing him thus impenitent and sullen, lifted on high the
mighty sword, and with one blow severed his odious head from his
enormous body.

The whole assembly gave a shout for joy; and Benefico holding in his
hand the monster’s yet grinning head, thus addressed his half-astonished
companions: ‘See here, my friends, the proper conclusion of a rapacious
cruel life. But let us hasten from this monster’s gloomy cave; and on
the top of one of our highest mountains, fixed on a pole, will I set up
this joyful spectacle, that all the country round may know themselves at
liberty to pursue their rural business or amusements, without the
dread of any annoyance from a devouring vile tormentor. And when his
treasures, which justly all belong to the good patient Mignon, are
removed, we will shut up the mouth of this abominable dwelling; and,
casting on the door a heap of earth, we’ll hope, in time, that both
place and remembrance of this cruel savage may in time be lost.’

Every one readily cried out, that to Benefico, the good Benefico,
alone belonged the tyrant’s treasures; that Benefico should ever be, as
heretofore, their governor, their father, and their kind protector.

The beneficent heart of the good giant was quite melted with this their
kind confidence and dependence upon him, and assured them, he should
ever regard them as his children: and now, exulting in the general joy
that must attend the destruction of this savage monster, when the whole
country should find themselves freed from the terror his rapine and
desolation, he sent before to his castle, to give intelligence to all
within that happy place of the grim monster’s fall, and little Mignon’s
triumph; giving in charge to the harbinger of these tidings, that it
should be his first and chiefest care to glad the gentle bosom of a
fair disconsolate (who kept herself retired and pent up within her own
apartment) with the knowledge that the inhuman monster was no more; and
that henceforth sweet peace and rural innocence might reign in all their
woods and groves. The hearts of all within the castle bounded with
joy, on hearing the report of the inhuman monster’s death, and the
deliverance of all his captives, and with speedy steps they hastened
to meet their kind protector; nor did the melancholy fair one, lest
she should seem unthankful for the general blessing, refuse to join the
train.

It was not long after the messenger that Benefico, and those his joyful
friends, arrived: but the faithful Fidus alone, of all this happy
company, was tortured with the inward pangs of a sad grief he could
not conquer, and his fond heart remained still captivated to a melting
sorrow: nor could even the tender friendship of the gentle Mignon quite
remove, though it alleviated, his sadness; but the thoughts of his loved
lost amata embittered every joy, and overwhelmed his generous soul with
sorrow.

When the company from the castle joined Benefico, he declared to them in
what manner their deliverance was effected; and, as a general shout of
joy resounded through the neighbouring mountains, Fidus, lifting up
his eyes, beheld in the midst of the multitude, standing in a pensive
posture, the fair disconsolate. Her tender heart was at the instant
overflowing in soft tears, caused by a kind participation of their
present transport, yet mixed with the deep sad impression of a grief her
bosom was full fraught with. Her face, at first, was almost hid by her
white handkerchief, with which she wiped away the trickling drops, which
falling, had bedewed her beauteous cheeks: but as she turned her lovely
face to view the joyful conquerors, and to speak a welcome to her kind
protector, what words can speak the raptures, the astonishment, that
swelled the bosom of the faithful youth, when in this fair disconsolate
he saw his loved, his constant, his long-lost Amata! Their delighted
eyes in the same instant beheld each other, and, breaking on each
side from their astonished friends, they flew like lightning into each
other’s arms.

After they had given a short account of what had passed in their
separation, Fidus presented to his loved Amata the kind, the gentle
Mignon, with lavish praises of his generous friendship, and steady
resolution, in hazarding his life by disobeying the injunctions of the
cruel tyrant. No sooner had Amata heard the name of Mignon, but she
cried out, ‘Surely my happiness is now complete, and all my sorrows, by
this joyful moment, are more than fully recompensed; for, in the kind
preserver of my Fidus, I have found my brother. My mother lost her
little Mignon when he was five years old; and pining grief, after some
years vain search, ended her wretched life.’

The generous hearts of all who were present shared the raptures of
the faithful Fidus, the lovely Amata, and gentle Mignon, on this happy
discovery; and in the warmest congratulations they expressed their joy.

Benefico now led all the delighted company into his castle, where
freedom was publicly proclaimed; and every one was left a liberty either
to remain there with Benefico, or, loaded with wealth sufficient for
their use, to go where their attachments or inclinations might invite
them.

Fidus, Amata, and the little Mignon, hesitated not one moment to declare
their choice of staying with the generous Benefico.

The nuptials of the faithful Fidus, and his loved Amata, were solemnized
in the presence of all their friends.

Benefico passed the remainder of his days in pleasing reflections on his
well-spent life.

The treasures of the dead tyrant were turned into blessings by the use
they were now made of: little Mignon was loved and cherished by all his
companions. Peace, harmony and love reigned in every bosom; dissension,
discord, and hatred were banished from this friendly dwelling; and that
happiness, which is the natural consequence of goodness, appeared in
every cheerful countenance throughout the castle of the good Benefico;
and as heretofore affright and terror spread itself from the monster’s
hateful cave, so now from this peaceful castle was diffused tranquility
and joy through all the happy country round.


Thus ended the story of the two giants: and Miss Jenny being tired with
reading, they left the arbour for that night, and agreed to meet there
again the next day.

As soon as they had supped, Mrs. Teachum sent for Miss Jenny Peace into
her closet, and desired an exact account from her of this their first
day’s amusement, that she might judge from thence how far they might be
trusted with the liberty she had given them.

Miss Jenny showed her governess the story she had read; and said, ‘I
hope, madam, you will not think it an improper one; for it was given
me by my mamma; and she told me, that she thought it contained a very
excellent moral.’

Mrs. Teachum, having looked it over, thus spoke: ‘I have no objection,
Miss Jenny, to your reading any stories to amuse you, provided you read
them with the proper disposition of mind not to be hurt by them. A very
good moral may indeed be drawn from the whole, and likewise from almost
every part of it; and as you had this story from your mamma, I doubt not
but you are very well qualified to make the proper remarks yourself
upon the moral of it to your companions. But here let me observe to you
(which I would have you communicate to your little friends) that giants,
magic, fairies, and all sorts of supernatural assistances in a story,
are only introduced to amuse and divert: for a giant is called so only
to express a man of great power; and the magic fillet round the statue
was intended only to show you, that by patience you will overcome all
difficulties. Therefore, by no means let the notion of giants or magic
dwell upon your minds. And you may farther observe, that there is
a different style adapted to every sort of writing; and the various
sounding epithets given to Barbarico are proper to express the raging
cruelty of his wicked mind. But neither this high-sounding language, nor
the supernatural contrivances in this story, do I so thoroughly approve,
as to recommend them much to your reading; except, as I said before,
great care is taken to prevent your being carried away, by these
high-flown things, from that simplicity of taste and manners which it is
my chief study to inculcate.’

Here Miss Jenny looked a little confounded; and, by her down-cast eye,
showed a fear that she had incurred the disapprobation, if not the
displeasure, of her governess: upon which Mrs. Teachum thus proceeded:

‘I do not intend by this, my dear, to blame you for what you have done;
but only to instruct you how to make the best use of even the most
trifling things: and if you have any more stories of this kind, with
an equal good moral, when you are not better employed, I shall not be
against your reading them; always remembering the cautions I have this
evening been giving you.’

Miss Jenny thanked her governess for her instructions, and kind
indulgence to her, and promised to give her an exact account of their
daily amusements; and, taking leave, retired to her rest.




TUESDAY. THE SECOND DAY.

That Miss Jenny’s meeting with her companions in the morning, after
school, she asked them how they liked the history of the giants? They
all declared they thought it a very pretty diverting story. Miss Jenny
replied, though she was glad they were pleased, yet she would have them
look farther than the present amusement: ‘for,’ continued she, ‘my mamma
always taught me to understand what I read; otherwise, she said, it was
to no manner of purpose to read ever so many books, which would only
stuff my brain, without being any improvement to my mind.’

The misses all agreed, that certainly it was of no use to read, without
understanding what they read; and began to talk of the story of the
giants, to prove they could make just remarks on it.

Miss Sukey Jennett said, ‘I am most pleased with that part of the story
where the good Benefico cuts off the monster’s head, and puts an end
to his cruelty, especially as he was so sullen he would not confess his
wickedness; because, you know, Miss Jenny, if he had had sense enough to
have owned his error, and have followed the example of the good giant,
he might have been happy.’

Miss Lucy Sly delivered the following opinion: ‘My greatest joy was
whilst Mignon was tying the magic fillet round the monster’s neck, and
conquering him.’

‘Now I (said Miss Dolly Friendly) am most pleased with that part of the
story, were Fidus and Amata meet the reward of their constancy and love,
when they find each other after all their sufferings.’

Miss Polly Suckling said, with some eagerness, ‘My greatest joy was in
the description of Mignon; and to think that it should be in the power
of that little creature to conquer such a great monster.’

Miss Patty Lockit, Miss Nanny Spruce, Miss Betty Ford, and Miss Henny
Fret, advanced no new opinions; but agreed some to one, and some to
another, of those that were already advanced. And as every one was eager
to maintain her own opinion, an argument followed, the particulars of
which I could never learn: only thus much I know, that it was concluded
by Miss Lucy Sly, saying, with an air and tone of voice that implied
more anger than had been heard since the reconciliation, that she was
sure Miss Polly Suckling only liked that part about Mignon, because she
was the least in the school; and Mignon being such a little creature,
put her in mind of herself.

Miss Jenny Peace now began to be frighted, lest this contention should
raise another quarrel; and therefore begged to be heard before they went
any farther. They were not yet angry enough to refuse hearing what she
had to say: and then Miss Jenny desired them to consider the moral of
the story, and what use they might make of it, instead of contending
which was the prettiest part: ‘For otherwise,’ continued she, ‘I have
lost my breath in reading to you; and you will be worse, rather than
better, for what you have heard. Pray observe, that Benefico’s happiness
arose entirely from his goodness: he had less strength, and less riches,
than the cruel monster; and yet, by the good use he made of what he
possessed, you see how he turned all things to his advantage. But
particularly remember, that the good little Mignon, in the moment
that he was patiently submitting to his sufferings, found a method of
relieving himself from them, and of overcoming a barbarous monster, who
had so cruelly abused him.

‘Our good governess last night not only instructed me in this moral I
am now communicating to you, but likewise bid me warn you by no means
to let the notion of giants or magic to dwell upon your minds; for by a
giant is meant no more than a man of great power; and the magic fillet
round the head of the statue was only intended to teach you, that by the
assistance of patience you may overcome all difficulties.

‘In order therefore to make what you read of any use to you, you must
not only think of it thus in general, but make the application to
yourselves. For when (as now) instead of improving yourselves by
reading, you make what you read a subject to quarrel about, what is this
less than being like the monster Barbarico, who turned his very riches
to a curse? I am sure it is not following the example of Benefico, who
made everything a blessing to him. Remember, if you pinch and abuse a
dog or cat, because it is in your power, you are like the cruel Monster,
when he abused the little Mignon, and said,

     I am a giant, and I can eat thee;
     Thou art a dwarf, and thou canst not eat me.

‘In short, if you will reap any benefit from this story towards
rendering you happy, whenever you have any power, you must follow the
example of the giant Benefico, and do good with it: and when you are
under any sufferings, like Mignon, you must patiently endure them till
you can find a remedy: then, in one case, like Benefico, you will enjoy
what you possess; and, in the other, you will in time, like Mignon,
overcome your sufferings: for the natural consequence of indulging
cruelty and revenge in the mind, even where there is the highest power
to gratify it, is misery.’

Here Miss Sukey Jennet interrupted Miss Jenny, saying, that she herself
had experienced the truth of that observation in the former part of her
life: for she never had known either peace or pleasure, till she had
conquered in her mind the desire of hurting and being revenged on those
who she thought did not by their behaviour show the same regard for her,
that her own good opinion of herself made her think she deserved. Miss
Jenny then asked her, if she was willing to lead the way to the rest of
her companions, by telling her past life? She answered, she would do it
with all her heart; and, by having so many and great faults to confess,
she hoped she should, by her true confessions, set them an example of
honesty and ingenuity.




THE DESCRIPTION OF MISS SUKEY JENNETT.

Miss Sukey Jennett, who was next in years to Miss Jenny Peace, was not
quite twelve years old; but so very tall of her age, that she was within
a trifle as tall as Miss Jenny Peace; and, by growing so fast, was
much thinner: and though she was not really so well made, yet, from an
assured air in her manner of carrying herself, she was called much the
genteelest girl. There was, on first view, a great resemblance in their
persons. Her face was very handsome, and her complexion extremely good;
but a little more inclined to pale than Miss Jenny’s. Her eyes were a
degree darker, and had a life and fire in them which was very beautiful:
but yet her impatience on the least contradiction often brought a
fierceness into her eyes, and gave such a discomposure to her whole
countenance, as immediately took off your admiration. But her eyes had
now, since her hearty reconciliation with her companions, lost a great
part of their fierceness; and with great mildness, and an obliging
manner, she told her story as follows:




THE LIFE OF MISS SUKEY JENNETT.

‘My mamma died when I was so young that I cannot remember her; and my
papa marrying again within half a year after her death, I was chiefly
left to the care of an old servant, that had lived many years in the
family. I was a great favourite of hers, and in everything had my own
way. When I was but four years old, if ever anything crossed me, I was
taught to beat it, and be revenged of it, even though it could not
feel. If I fell down and hurt myself, the very ground was to be beat for
hurting the sweet child: so that, instead of fearing to fall, I did not
dislike it; for I was pleased to find, that I was of such consequence,
that everything was to take care that I came by no harm.

‘I had a little playfellow, in a child of one of my papa’s servants, who
was to be entirely under my command. This girl I used to abuse and beat,
whenever I was out of humour; and when I had abused her, if she dared
to grumble, or make the least complaint, I thought it the greatest
impudence in the world; and, instead of mending my behaviour to her,
I grew very angry that she should dare to dispute my power: for my
governess always told her, that she was but a servant’s girl, and I was
a gentleman’s daughter; and that therefore she ought to give way to me;
for that I did her great honour in playing with her. Thus I thought the
distance between us was so great, that I never considered that she could
feel: but whilst I myself suffered nothing, I fancied everything was
very right; and it never once came into my head, that I could be in the
wrong.

‘This life I led till I came to school, when I was eleven years
old. Here I had nobody in my power; for all my schoolfellows thought
themselves my equals: so that I could only quarrel, fight, and contend
for everything: but being liable to be punished, when I was trying to be
revenged on any of my enemies, as I thought them, I never had a moment’s
ease or pleasure, till Miss Jenny was so good to take the pains to
convince me of my folly, and made me be reconciled to you, my dear
companions.’

Here Miss Sukey ceased; and Miss Jenny smiled with pleasure, at the
thoughts that she had been the cause of her happiness.

Mrs. Teachum being now come into the arbour, to see in what manner
her little scholars passed their time, they all rose up and do her
reverence. Miss Jenny gave her an account how they had been employed;
and she was much pleased with their innocent and useful entertainment;
but especially with the method they had found out of relating their past
lives. She took little Polly Suckling by the hand, and bidding the rest
follow, it being now dinner time, she walked towards the house, attended
by the whole company.

Mrs. Teachum had a great inclination to hear the history of the lives
of all her little scholars: but she thought, that being present at those
relations might be a balk to the narration, as perhaps they might be
ashamed freely to confess their past faults before her; and therefore,
that she might not be any bar in this case to the freedom of their
speech, and yet might be acquainted with their stories (though this was
not merely a vain curiosity, but a desire by this means to know their
different dispositions), she called Miss Jenny Peace to her parlour
after dinner, and told her, she would have her get the lives of her
companions in writing, and bring them to her; and Miss Jenny readily
promised to obey her commands.

In the evening our little company again met in their charming arbour;
where they were no sooner seated, with that calmness and content which
now always attended them, than the cries and sobs of a child, at a
little distance from their garden, disturbed their tranquility.

Miss Jenny, ever ready to relieve the distressed, ran immediately to
the place whence the sound seemed to come, and was followed by all her
companions: when, at a small distance from Mrs. Teachum’s garden-wall,
over which from the terrace our young company looked, they saw, under a
large spreading tree, part of the branches of which shaded a seat at
the end of that terrace, a middle-aged woman beating a little girl, who
looked to be about eight years old, so severely, that it was no wonder
her cries had reached their arbour.

Miss Jenny could not forbear calling out to the woman, and begging her
to forbear: and little Polly Suckling cried as much as the girl, and
desired she might not be beat any more. The woman, in respect to them,
let the child go; but said, ‘Indeed, young ladies, you don’t know what
a naughty girl she is: for though you now see me correct her in this
manner, yet am I in all respects very kind to her, and never strike her
but for lying. I have tried all means, good and bad, to break her of
this vile fault; but hitherto all I have done has been in vain: nor
can I ever get one word of truth out of her mouth. But I am resolved to
break her of this horrid custom, or I cannot live with her: for though I
am but poor, yet I will breed up my child to be honest, both in word and
deed.’

Miss Jenny could not but approve of what the poor woman said. However,
they all joined in begging forgiveness for the girl this time, provided
she promised amendment for the future: and then our little society
returned to their arbour.

Miss Jenny could not help expressing her great detestation of all lying
whatsoever; when Miss Dolly Friendly, colouring, confessed she had often
been guilty of this fault, though she never scarcely did it but for her
friend.

Here Miss Jenny, interrupting her, said, that even that was no sort of
excuse for lying; besides that the habit of it on any occasion, even
with the appearance of a good intention, would but too likely lead to
the use of it on many others: and as she did not doubt, by Miss Dolly’s
blushing, that she was now very sensible of the truth of what she had
just been saying, she hoped she would take this opportunity of obliging
them with the history of her past life: which request she made no
hesitation to grant, saying, the shame of her past faults should by o
means induce her to conceal them.




THE DESCRIPTION OF MISS DOLLY FRIENDLY.

Miss Dolly Friendly was just turned of eleven years of age. Her person
was neither plain nor handsome: and though she had not what is properly
called one fine feature in her face, yet the disposition of them were so
suitable to each other, that her countenance was rather agreeable than
otherwise. She had generally something very quiet, or rather indolent,
in her look, except when she was moved by anger; which seldom happened,
but in defense of some favourite or friend; and she had then a
fierceness and eagerness which altered her whole countenance: for she
could not bear the least reflection or insult on those she loved. This
disposition made her always eager to comply with her friends’ requests;
and she immediately began, as follows:




THE LIFE OF MISS DOLLY FRIENDLY.

‘I was bred up, till I was nine years of age, with a sister, who was one
year younger than myself. The chief care of our parents was to make us
love each other; and, as I was naturally inclined to have very strong
affections, I became so fond of my sister Molly, which was her name,
that all my delight was to please her; and this I carried to such a
height, that I scrupled no lies to excuse her faults: and whatever she
did, I justified, and thought right, only because she did it.

‘I was ready to fight her quarrels, whether right or wrong; and hated
everybody that offended her. My parents winked at whatever I did in
defence of my sister; and I had no notion that any thing done for her
could be unreasonable. In short, I made it my study to oblige and please
her, till I found at last it was out of my power; for she grew so very
humoursome, that she could not find out what she had most mind to have;
and I found her always miserable; for she would cry only because she did
not know her own mind.

‘She never minded what faults she committed, because she knew I would
excuse her; and she was forgiven in consideration of our friendship,
which gave our parents great pleasure.

‘My poor little sister grew very sickly, and she died just before I
came to school: but the same disposition still continued; and it was my
friend’s outcries of being hurt, that drew me into that odious quarrel,
that we have all now repented.’



Here Miss Dolly Friendly ceased; and Miss Jenny said, she hoped Miss
Dolly would remember, for the rest of her life, what HER good mamma had
always taught her; namely, that it was not the office of friendship, to
justify or excuse our friend when in the wrong; for that was the way
to prevent their ever being in the right: that it was rather hatred,
or contempt, than love, when the fear of another’s anger made us forego
their good, for the sake of our own present pleasure; and that the
friends who expected such flattery were not worth keeping.

The bell again summoned our little company to supper: but, before they
went in, Miss Dolly Friendly said, if Miss Jenny approved of it, she
would the next morning read them a story given her by an uncle of
hers, that, she said, she was sure would please her, as its subject was
friendship. Miss Jenny replied, that she was certain it would be a great
pleasure to them all, to hear any story Miss Dolly thought proper to
read them.




WEDNESDAY. THE THIRD DAY.

As soon as school was over in the morning, our little company were
impatient to go into the arbour, to hear Miss Dolly’s story: but
Mrs. Teachum told them they must be otherwise employed; for their
writing-master, who lived some miles off; and who was expected in the
afternoon, was just then come in, and begged that they would give him
their attendance, though out of school-time; because he was obliged to
be at home again before the afternoon, to meet a person who would confer
some favour on him, and would be highly disobliged should he not keep
his appointment: ‘And I know (said Mrs. Teachum) my little dears, you
would rather lose your own amusement, than let any one suffer a
real inconvenience on your accounts.’ They all readily complied, and
cheerfully set to their writing; and in the afternoon Mrs. Teachum
permitted them to leave off work an hour sooner than usual, as a reward
for their readiness to lose their amusement in the morning: and being
met in their arbour, Miss Dolly read as follows:




THE STORY OF CAELIA AND CHLOE.

Caelia and Chloe were both left orphans, at the tender age of six years.
Amanda their aunt, who was very rich, and a maiden, took them directly
under her care, and bred them up as her own children. Caelia’s mother
was Amanda’s sister; and Chloe’s father was her brother; so that she was
equally related to both.

They were left entirely unprovided for; were both born on the same day;
and both lost their mothers on the day of their birth: their fathers
were soldiers of fortune; and both killed in one day, in the fame
engagement. But their fortunes were not more similar than their persons
and dispositions. They were both extremely handsome; and in their
Childhood were so remarkable for liveliness of parts, and sweetness of
temper, that they were the admiration of the whole country where they
lived.

Their aunt loved them with a sincere and equal affection, and took the
greatest pleasure imaginable in their education, and particularly to
encourage that love and friendship which she with pleasure perceived
between them. Amanda being (as was said) very rich, and having no other
relations, it was supposed that these her nieces would be very great
fortunes; and as soon as they became women, they were addressed by all
the men of fortune and no fortune round the neighbourhood. But as the
love of admiration, and a desire of a large train of admirers, had
no place in their minds, they soon dismissed, in the most civil and
obliging manner, one after another, all these lovers.

The refusing such numbers of men, and some such as by the world were
called good offers, soon got them the name of jilts; and by that means
they were freed from any farther importunity, and for some years enjoyed
that peace and quiet they had long wished. Their aunt, from being their
mother and their guardian, was now become their friend. For, as she
endeavoured not in the least to force their inclinations, they never
kept anything concealed from her; and every action of their lives was
still guided by her advice and approbation.

They lived on in this way, perfectly happy in their own little
community, till they were about two-and-twenty years old when there
happened to be a regiment quartered in the neighbouring town, to which
their house was nearly situated; and the lieutenant-colonel, a man about
four-and-thirty years old, hearing their names, had a great desire to
see them. For when he was a boy of sixteen, he was put into the Army
under the care of Chloe’s father, who treated him with the greatest
tenderness; and (in that fatal engagement in which he lost his life)
received his death’s wound by endeavouring to save him from being taken
by the enemy. And gratitude to the memory of so good a friend was as
great an inducement to make him desire to see his daughter, as the
report he had heard both of hers and her cousin’s great beauty.

Sempronius (for so this Colonel was called) was a very sensible,
well-bred, agreeable man; and from the circumstances of his former
acquaintance, and his present proper and polite behaviour, he soon
became very intimate in the family. The old lady was particularly
pleased with him; and secretly wished, that before she died she might
be so happy as to see one of her nieces married to Sempronius. She could
not from his behaviour see the least particular liking to either, though
he showed an equal and very great esteem and regard for both.

He in reality liked them both extremely; and the reason of making no
declaration of love was, his being so undetermined in any preference
that was due to either. He saw plainly that he was very agreeable to
both; and with pleasure he observed, that they made use of none of those
arts which women generally do to get away a disputed lover: and this
sincere friendship which subsisted between them raised in him the
highest degree of love and admiration. However he at last determined to
make the following trial:

He went first to Chloe, and (finding her alone) told her, that he had
the greatest liking in the world to her cousin; and had really a mind
to propose himself to her: but as he saw a very great friendship between
them, he was willing to ask her advice in the matter; and conjured her
to tell him sincerely, whether there was anything in Caelia’s temper
(not discoverable by him) which as a wife would make him unhappy? He
told her, that, if she knew any such thing, it would be no treachery,
but rather kind in her to declare it, as it would prevent her friend’s
being unhappy; which must be the consequence, in marriage, of her making
him so.

Chloe could not help seeing very plainly, that if Caelia was removed she
stood the very next in Sempronius’s favour. Her lover was present--her
friend was absent--and the temptation was too strong and agreeable to be
resisted. She then answered, that since he insisted upon the truth, and
had convinced her that it was in reality acting justly and kindly by her
friend, she must confess, that Caelia was possessed (though in a very
small degree) of what she had often heard him declare most against of
anything in the world; and that was, an artfulness of temper, and some
few sparks of envy.

Chloe’s confused manner of speaking, and frequent hesitation, as
unwilling to pronounce her friend’s condemnation (which, as being
unused to falsehood, was really unaffected) he imputed to tenderness
and concern for Caelia; but he did not in the least doubt, but on his
application to her he should soon be convinced of the truth of what
Chloe had said.

He then went directly to the arbour at the end of the garden, and there
to his wish he found Caelia quite alone; and he addressed her exactly in
the same manner concerning her cousin, as he had before spoke to Chloe
concerning her. Caelia suddenly blushed (from motives I leave those to
find out who can put themselves in her circumstances) and then fetched a
soft sigh, from the thought that she was hearing a man she loved declare
a passion of which she was not the object. But after some little
pause, she told him, that if Chloe had any faults, they were to her yet
undiscovered, and she really and sincerely believed her cousin would
make him extremely happy. Sempronius then said, that of all other
things, TREACHERY and ENVY were what he had the greatest dislike to: and
he asked her, if she did not think her cousin was a little tainted with
these?--Here Caelia could not help interrupting, and assuring him, that
she believed her totally free from both. And, from his casting on
her friend an aspersion which her very soul abhorred, forgetting all
rivalship, she could not refrain from growing quite lavish in her
praise. ‘Suppose then (said Sempronius) I was to say the same to your
cousin concerning my intentions towards you as I have to you concerning
her, do you think she would say as many fine things in your praise as
you have done in hers?’

Caelia answered, that she verily believed her cousin would say as much
for her as she really deserved; but whether that would be equal to what
with justice she could say of Chloe, her modesty left her in some doubt
of.

Sempronius had too much penetration not to see the real and true
difference in the behaviour of these two women, and could not help
crying out, ‘O Caelia! your honest truth and goodness in every word and
look are too visible to leave me one doubt of their reality. But, could
you believe it? this friend of yours is false. I have already put her
to the trial, by declaring to her my sincere and unalterable passion
for you. When, on my insisting, as I did to you, upon her speaking the
truth, she accused you of what nothing should now convince me you are
guilty of. I own, that hitherto my regard, esteem, and love, have been
equal to both; but now I offer to the sincere, artless, and charming
Caelia, my whole heart, love, and affection, and the service of every
minute of my future life; and from this moment I banish from my mind the
false and ungrateful Chloe.’

Caelia’s friendship for Chloe was so deeply rooted in her breast, that
even a declaration of love from Sempronius could not blot it one moment
from her heart; and on his speaking the words ‘false Chloe,’ she burst
into tears, and said, ‘Is it possible that Chloe should act such a part
towards her Caelia! You must forgive her, Sempronius: it was her violent
passion for you, and fear of losing you, which made her do what hitherto
her nature has ever appeared averse to.’

Sempronius answered, ‘that he could not enough admire her goodness to
her friend Chloe; but such proofs of passion, he said, were to him at
the same time proofs of its being such a passion as he had no regard
for; since it was impossible for any one to gain or increase his love
by an action which at the same time lessened his esteem.’ This was so
exactly Caelia’s own way of thinking, that she could not but assent to
what he said.

But just as they were coming out of the arbour, Chloe, unseen by them,
passed by; and from seeing him kiss her hand, and the complacency of
Caelia’s look, it was easy for her to guess what had been the result
of their private conference. She could not however help indulging her
curiosity, so far as to walk on the other side of a thick yew hedge, to
listen to their discourse; and as they walked on, she heard Sempronius
entreat Caelia to be cheerful, and think no more of her treacherous
friend, whose wickedness he doubted not would sufficiently punish
itself. She then heard Caelia say, ‘I cannot bear, Sempronius, to hear
you speak so hardly of my Chloe. Say that you forgive her, and I will
indeed be cheerful.’

Nothing upon earth can be conceived so wretched as poor Chloe, for on
the first moment that she suffered herself to reflect on what she had
done, she thoroughly repented, and heartily detested herself for
such baseness. She went directly into the garden in hopes of meeting
Sempronius, to have thrown herself at his feet, confessed her treachery,
and to have begged him never to have mentioned it to Caelia; but now she
was conscious her repentance would come too late; and he would despise
her, if possible still more, for such a recantation, after her knowledge
of what had passed between him and Caelia.

She could indeed have gone to him, and not have owned what she had seen
or heard; but now her abhorrence of even the appearance of treachery or
cunning was so great, that she could not bear to add the smallest grain
of falsehood or deceit to the weight of her guilt, which was already
almost insupportable: and should she tell him of her repentance, with a
confession of her knowledge of his engagement with Caelia, it would (as
has been before observed) appear both servile and insincere.

Nothing could now appear so altered as the whole face of this once happy
family. Sempronius as much as possible shunned the sight of Chloe; for
as she was the cause of all the confusion amongst them, he had almost an
aversion to her. Though he was not of an implacable temper, yet, as the
injury was intended to one he sincerely loved, he found it much harder
to forgive it, than if it had even succeeded against himself; and as he
still looked upon Chloe as the cause of melancholy in his dear Caelia,
he could hardly have any patience with her.

No words can describe the various passions which were expressed in the
sad countenance of Chloe, when first she met her friend. They were both
afraid of speaking. Shame, and the fear of being (and with too good
reason) suspected of insincerity, withheld Chloe; and an unwillingness
to accuse or hurt her friend withheld the gentle Caelia. She sometimes
indeed thought she saw repentance in Chloe’s face, and wished for
nothing more than to seal her pardon. But till it was asked, she was
in doubt (from what had passed) whether such pardon and proffered
reconciliation might not be rejected. She knew that her friend’s
passions were naturally stronger than hers; and she therefore trembled
at the consequences of coming to an explanation.

But there was hardly a greater sufferer in this scene of confusion than
the poor old Lady Amanda. She saw a sort of horror and wildness in the
face of Chloe; and in Caelia’s a settled melancholy, and such an unusual
reserve in both towards each other, as well as to herself, as quite
astonished her.

Sempronius came indeed to the house as often as usual; but in his
countenance she could perceive a sort of anger and concern which
perfectly frightened her. But as they did not speak to her, she could
not bring herself to ask the cause of this woeful change, for fear of
hearing something too bad to bear.

Caelia had absolutely refused granting to Sempronius leave to ask her
aunt’s consent, till she should come to some explanation with Chloe,
which seemed every day farther off than ever.

The great perturbation of Chloe’s mind threw her into a disorder not
many degrees short of madness; and at last she was seized with a violent
fever so as to keep her bed. She said she could not bear to look on
Amanda; but begged Caelia to be with her as much as possible; which she
did, in hopes of bringing herself to ease her mind, by speaking to her
of what had given them all this torment.

Caelia watched with her night and day for three days, when the physician
who attended her pronounced that there was no hope of her life. Caelia
could not any longer bear to stay in the room, and went downstairs,
expecting every moment to hear she was expired.

Chloe soon perceived by Caelia’s abrupt leaving the room, and the looks
of those who were left in it, that her fate was pronounced; which,
instead of sinking her spirits, and making her dejected, gave a
tranquillity to her mind; for she thought within herself, ‘I shall now
make my dear cousin happy, by removing out of her way an object that
must embitter all her joy; and now likewise, as she is convinced I am on
my death-bed, she will once more believe me capable of speaking truth;
and will, in the manner I could wish, receive my sincere repentance.’
Then sending for Caelia up to her bedside, she in a weak voice, with
hardly strength for utterance, spoke in this manner: ‘My dear Caelia,
though you know me to be a worthless base wretch, yet do not think so
hardly of me, as to imagine I would deceive you with my last breath.
Believe me then when I tell you, that I sincerely repent of my treachery
towards you; and as sincerely rejoice that it has in reality been
the cause of your happiness with Sempronius. Tell him this; and then,
perhaps, he will not hate my memory.’ Here she fainted away, and they
forced Caelia out of the room, thinking her breath was for ever flown.
But in some time she came again to herself, and cried out, ‘What! would
not my dear Caelia say that she forgave me? Methinks I would not die,
till I had obtained her pardon. She is too good to refuse her friend
this last request.’ Her attendants then told her, that seeing her faint
away, they had forced Caelia out of the room; and they begged her to try
to compose herself, for they were sure that seeing her friend again, at
this time, would only disturb her mind, and do her an injury.

Chloe, from the vent she had given her grief in speaking to Caelia,
found herself something more easy and composed; and desiring the room to
be made perfectly quiet, she fell into a gentle sleep, which lasted two
hours; and when she awaked she found herself so much better, that those
about her were convinced, from her composed manner of speaking, that she
was now able to bear another interview.

They again called for Caelia, and told her of her cousin’s amendment.
She flew with all speed to her chamber; and the moment she entered,
Chloe cried out, ‘Can you forgive me, Caelia?’ ‘Yes, with the greatest
joy and sincerity imaginable, my dearest Chloe,’ answered Caelia, ‘and
never let it be again mentioned or remembered.’

The sudden recovery of Chloe was almost incredible; for in less than a
week she was able to quit both her bed and room, and go into her aunt’s
chamber. The good old lady shed tears of joy, to see such a return of
Chloe’s health, and of cheerfulness in the family; and was perfectly
contented, now she saw their melancholy removed, not to inquire into the
late cause of it, for fear of renewing their trouble even one moment by
the remembrance of it.

Sempronius, in the meantime, upon some affairs of his duty in the army,
had been called away, and was absent the whole time of Chloe’s illness,
and was not yet returned. Caelia spent almost her whole time with Chloe;
but three weeks passed on, and they were often alone; yet they had never
once mentioned the name of Sempronius, which laid Caelia still under
the greatest difficulty how to act, so as to avoid giving her friend any
uneasiness, and yet not disoblige Sempronius; for she had promised
him at his departure, that she would give him leave to ask her aunt’s
consent immediately upon his return. But the very day he was expected,
she was made quite easy by what passed between her and her friend.

Chloe, in this time, by proper reflections, and a due sense of Caelia’s
great goodness and affection to her, had so entirely got the better
of herself in this affair, that she found she could now, without any
uneasiness, see them married; and calling Caelia to her, she said with a
smile, ‘I have, my dear friend, been so long accustomed to read in that
intelligible index, your countenance, all your most inmost thoughts,
that I have not been unobserving of those kind fears you have had on
my account; and the reason I have so long delayed speaking was, my
resolution, if possible, never again to deceive you. I can with pleasure
now assure you, that nothing can give me so much joy as to see your
wedding with Sempronius. I make no doubt, but if you ask it, you will
have my aunt’s consent; and, if any intercession should be wanting
towards obtaining it, I will (if you can trust me) use all my influence
in your behalf. Be assured, my dear Caelia, I have now no farther regard
left for Sempronius, than as your husband; and that regard will increase
in proportion as he is the cause of your happiness.’

They were interrupted in their discourse by news being brought of
the arrival of Sempronius, and Chloe received him with that ease and
cheerfulness as convinced Caelia her professions were unfeigned.

Caelia related to Sempronius all that had passed between her and
Chloe; and by her continued cheerfulness of behaviour, the peace and
tranquillity of the family was perfectly restored, and their joy greatly
increased by Amanda’s ready consent to the marriage of Sempronius and
Caelia, having first settled all her fortune to be divided at her death
equally between her nieces; and in her lifetime there was no occasion of
settlements, or deeds of gift, for they lived all together, and separate
property was not so much as mentioned or thought on in this family of
harmony and peace.

Here Miss Dolly ceased reading; and all her hearers sat some little time
silent, and then expressed their great joy that Caelia and Chloe were at
last happy; for none of them had been able to refrain from tears whilst
they were otherwise. On which Miss Jenny Peace begged them to observe
from this story, the miserable effects that attend deceit and treachery:
‘For,’ continued she, ‘you see you could not refrain from tears, only by
imagining what Chloe must feel after her wickedness (by which indeed she
lost the very happiness she intended treacherously to gain); nor could
she enjoy one moment’s peace, till by confessing her fault, and
heartily repenting of it, her mind was restored to its former calm and
tranquility.’ Miss Dolly thanked Miss Jenny for her remarks; but Miss
Lucy Sly was most sensibly touched with this story, as cunning had
formerly entirely possessed HER mind; and said, that if her companions
were not weary at present of their arbour, she would now recount to them
the history of her life, as this story was a proper introduction to it.




THE DESCRIPTION OF MISS LUCY SLY.

Miss Lucy Sly was of the same age as Miss Dolly Friendly; but shorter,
at least, by half the head. She was generally called a pretty girl,
from having a pair of exceeding fine black eyes, only with the allay of
something cunning in their look. She had a high forehead, and very good
curling black hair. She had a sharp high nose, and a very small mouth.
Her complexion was but indifferent, and the lower part of her face
ill-turned, for her chin was too long for due proportion.




THE LIFE OF MISS LUCY SLY.

From the time I was two years old, (said Miss Lucy) my mamma was so
sickly, that she was unable to take any great care of me herself, and I
was left to the care of a governess, who made it her study to bring me
to do what she had a mind to have done, without troubling her head what
induced me so to do. And whenever I did anything wrong, she used to say
it was the foot-boy, and not miss, that was naughty. Nay, she would say,
it was the dog, or the cat, or anything she could lay the blame upon,
sooner than own it was me. I thought this pure, that I was never in
fault; and soon got into a way of telling any lies, and of laying my own
faults on others, since I found I should be believed. I remember once,
when I had broken a fine china-cup, that I artfully got out of the
scrape, and hid the broken cup in the foot-boy’s room. He was whipped
for breaking it; and the next day whilst I was at play about the room,
I heard my governess say to a friend who was with her, “Yesterday Miss
Lucy broke a china-cup; but the artful little hussy went and hid it
in the foot-boy’s room, and the poor boy was whipped for it. I don’t
believe there was ever a girl of her age that had half her cunning and
contrivance.” I knew by her tone of voice, and her manner of speaking,
that she did not blame me in her heart, but rather commended my
ingenuity. And I thought myself so wise, that I could thus get off the
blame from myself, that I every day improved in new inventions to save
myself, and have others punished in my place.

‘This life of endeavouring to deceive I led till I came to school. But
here I found that I could not so well carry on my little schemes; for I
was found out and punished for my own faults; and this created in me a
hatred to my companions. For whatever Miss I had a mind to serve as I
used to serve our foot-boy, in laying the blame falsely upon her, if she
could justify herself, and prove me in the wrong, I was very angry with
her, for daring to contradict me, and not submitting as quietly to be
punished wrongfully, as the foot-boy was forced to do.

‘This is all I know of my life hitherto.’


Thus ended Miss Lucy Sly: and Miss Jenny Peace commended Miss Lucy for
her free confession of her faults, and said, ‘She doubted not but she
would find the advantage of amending, and endeavouring to change a
disposition so very pernicious to her own peace and quiet, as well as
to that of all her friends;’ but they now obeyed the summons of the
supper-bell, and soon after retired to rest.




THURSDAY. THE FOURTH DAY.

Our little company, as soon as the morning school-hours were over,
hastened to their arbour, and were attentive to what Miss Jenny Peace
should propose to them for their amusement till dinner-time; when Miss
Jenny, looking round upon them, said, ‘that she had not at present any
story to read; but that she hoped, from Miss Dolly Friendly’s example
yesterday, some of the rest might endeavour sometimes to furnish out
the entertainment of the day.’ Upon which Miss Sukey Jennett said,
‘that though she could not promise them such an agreeable story as Miss
Dolly’s; yet she would read them a letter she had received the evening
before from her Cousin Peggy Smith, who lived at York; in which there
was a story that she thought very strange and remarkable. They were all
very desirous of it, when Miss Sukey read as follows:


‘Dear cousin,--I promised, you know, to write to you when I had anything
to tell you; and as I think the following story very extraordinary, I
was willing to keep my word.

‘Some time ago there came to settle in this city, a lady, whose name was
Dison. We all visited her: but she had so deep a melancholy, arising, as
it appeared, from a settled state of ill health, that nothing we could
do could afford her the least relief, or make her cheerful. In this
condition she languished amongst us five years, still continuing to grow
worse and worse.

‘We all grieved at her fate. Her flesh was withered away; her appetite
decayed by degrees, till all food became nauseous to her sight; her
strength failed her; her feet could not support her tottering body,
lean and worn away as it was; and we hourly expected her death. When, at
last, she one day called her most intimate friends to her bedside, and,
as well as she could, spoke to the following purpose: “I know you all
pity me; but, alas! I am not so much the object of your pity, as your
contempt; for all my misery is of my own seeking, and owing to the
wickedness of my own mind. I had two sisters, with whom I was bred up;
and I have all my lifetime been unhappy, for no other cause but for
their success in the world. When we were young, I could neither eat nor
sleep in peace, when they had either praise or pleasure. When we grew
up to be women, they were both soon married much to their advantage and
satisfaction. This galled me to the heart; and, though I had several
good offers, yet as I did not think them in all respects equal to my
sisters, I would not accept them; and yet was inwardly vexed to refuse
them, for fear I would get no better. I generally deliberated so long
that I lost my lovers, and then I pined for that loss. I never wanted
for anything; and was in a situation in which I might have been happy,
if I pleased. My sisters loved me very well, for I concealed as much
as possible from them my odious envy; and yet never did any poor wretch
lead so miserable a life as I have done; for every blessing they enjoyed
was as so many daggers to my heart. ‘Tis this envy that has caused all
my ill health, has preyed upon my very vitals, and will now bring me to
my Grave.”

‘In a few days after this confession she died; and her words and death
made such a strong impression on my mind, that I could not help sending
you this relation; and begging you, my dear Sukey, to remember how
careful we ought to be to curb in our minds the very first risings of a
passion so detestable, and so fatal, as this proved to poor Mrs. Dison.
I know I have no particular reason for giving you this caution; for I
never saw anything in you, but what deserved the love and esteem of

‘Your very affectionate cousin,

‘M. SMITH.’


As soon as Miss Sukey had finished her letter, Miss Patty Lockit rose
up, and, flying to Miss Jenny Peace, embraced her, and said, ‘What
thanks can I give you, my dear friend, for having put me into a way of
examining my heart, and reflecting on my own actions; by which you have
saved me, perhaps, from a life as miserable as that of the poor woman
in Miss Sukey’s letter!’ Miss Jenny did not thoroughly understand her
meaning; but imagining it might be something relating to her past life,
desired her to explain herself; which she said she would do, telling
now, in her turn, all that had hitherto happened to her.




THE DESCRIPTION OF MISS PATTY LOCKIT.

Miss Patty Lockit was but ten years old; tall, inclined to fat. Her
neck was short; and she was not in the least genteel. Her face was very
handsome; for all her features were extremely good. She had large blue
eyes; was exceeding fair; and had a great bloom on her cheeks. Her hair
was the very first degree of light brown; was bright and shining; and
hung in ringlets half way down her back. Her mouth was rather too large;
but she had such fine teeth, and looked so agreeably when she smiled,
that you was not sensible of any fault in it.

This was the person of Miss Patty Lockit, who was slow to relate her
past life; which she did, in the following manner:




THE LIFE OF MISS PATTY LOCKIT.

I lived, till I was six years old, in a very large family; for I had
four sisters, all older than myself, and three brothers. We played
together, and passed our time much in the common way: sometimes we
quarrelled, and sometimes agreed, just as accident would have it. Our
parents had no partiality to any of us; so we had no cause to envy one
another on that account; and we lived tolerably well together.

‘When I was six years old, my grandmother by my father’s side (and
who was also my godmother) offering to take me to live with her, and
promising to look upon me as her own child, and entirely to provide
for me, my father and mother, as they had a large family, very readily
accepted her offer, and sent me directly to her house.

‘About half a year before this, she had taken another goddaughter, the
only child of my Aunt Bradly, who was lately dead, and whose husband was
gone to the West Indies. My cousin, Molly Bradly, was four years older
than I; and her mother had taken such pains in her education, that the
understood more than most girls of her age; and had so much liveliness,
good humour, and ingenuity, that everybody was fond of her; and wherever
we went together, all the notice was taken of my cousin, and I was very
little regarded.

‘Though I had all my life before lived in a family where every one in it
was older, and knew more than myself, yet I was very easy; for we were
generally together in the nursery; and nobody took much notice of us,
whether we knew anything, or whether we did not. But now, as I lived
in the house with only one companion, who was so much more admired than
myself, the comparison began to vex me, and I found a strong hatred and
aversion for my cousin arising in my mind; and yet, I verily believe I
should have got the better of it, and been willing to have learnt of my
cousin, and should have loved her for teaching me, if any one had told
me it was right; and if it had not been that Betty, the maid who took
care of us, used to be for ever teasing me about the preference that was
shown to my cousin, and the neglect I always met with. She used to tell
me, that she wondered how I could bear to see Miss Molly so caressed;
and that it was want of spirit not to think myself as good as she was;
and, if she was in my place, she would not submit to be taught by a
child; for my Cousin Molly frequently offered to instruct me in anything
she knew; but I used to say (as Betty had taught me) that I would not
learn of her; for she was but a child, though she was a little older;
and that I was not put under her care, but that of my grandmamma. But
she, poor woman, was so old and unhealthy, that she never troubled her
head much about us, but only to take care that we wanted for nothing. I
lived in this manner three years, fretting and vexing myself that I did
not know so much, nor was not so much liked, as my Cousin Molly, and yet
resolving not to learn anything she could teach me; when my grandmamma
was advised to send me to school; but, as soon as I came here, the case
was much worse; for, instead of one person to envy, I found many;
for all my schoolfellows had learned more than I; and, instead of
endeavouring to get knowledge, I began to hate all those who knew more
than myself; and this, I am now convinced, was owing to that odious
envy, which, if not cured, would always have made me as miserable as
Mrs. Dison was and which constantly tormented me, till we came to live
in that general peace and good-humour we have lately enjoyed: and as I
hope this wicked spirit was not natural to me, but only blown up by
that vile Betty’s instigations, I don’t doubt but I shall now grow
very happy, and learn something every day, and be pleased with being
instructed, and that I shall always love those who are so good as to
instruct me.’


Here Miss Patty Lockit ceased; and the dinner-bell called them from
their arbour.

Mrs. Teachum, as soon as they had dined, told them, that she thought
it proper they would use some bodily exercise, that they might not,
by sitting constantly still, impair their health. Not but that she was
greatly pleased with their innocent and instructive manner of employing
their leisure hours; but this wise woman knew that the faculties of the
mind grow languid and useless, when the health of the body is lost.

As soon as they understood their governess’s pleasure, they readily
resolved to obey her commands, and desired that, after school, they
might take a walk as far as the dairy house, to eat some curds and
cream. Mrs. Teachum not only granted their request, but said she would
dispense with their school-attendance that afternoon, in order to give
them more time for their walk, which was between two and three miles;
and she likewise added, that she herself would go with them. They all
flew like lightning to get their hats, and to equip themselves for their
walk; and, with cheerful countenances, attended Mrs. Teachum in the
schoolroom. This good gentlewoman, so far from laying them under a
restraint by her presence, encouraged them to run in the fields, and
to gather flowers; which they did, each miss trying to get the best
to present to her governess. In this agreeable manner, with laughing,
talking, and singing, they arrived at the dairy-house, before they
imagined they had walked a mile.

There lived at this dairy-house an old woman, near seventy years of age.
She had a fresh colour in her face; but was troubled with the palsy,
that made her head shake a little. She was bent forward with age, and
her hair was quite grey: but she retained much good-humour, and received
this little party with hearty welcome.

Our little gentry flocked about this good woman, asking her a thousand
questions. Miss Polly Suckling asked her, ‘Why she shook her head so?’
and Miss Patty Lockit said, ‘She hoped her hair would never be of such a
colour.’

Miss Jenny Peace was afraid they would say something that would offend
the old woman, and advised them to turn their discourse. ‘Oh! let the
dear rogues alone,’ says the old woman; ‘I like their prattle;’ and,
taking Miss Polly by the hand, said, ‘Come, my dear, we will go into
the dairy, and skim the milk pans.’ At which words they all run into the
dairy, and some of them dipped their fingers in the cream; which when
Mrs. Nelly perceived (who was the eldest daughter of the old woman,
and who managed all the affairs) she desired they would walk out of the
dairy, and she would bring them what was fit for them: upon which Miss
Dolly Friendly said, ‘she had rather be as old and good-natured as the
mother, than as young and ill-natured as the daughter.’

The old woman desired her company to sit down at a long table, which
she soon supplied with plenty of cream, strawberries, brown bread, and
sugar. Mrs. Teachum took her place at the upper end, and the rest sat
down in their usual order, and eat plentifully of these good things.
After which, Mrs. Teachum told them they might walk out and see the
garden and orchard, and by that time it would be proper to return home.

The good old woman showed them the way into the garden; and gathered the
finest roses and pinks she could pick, and gave them to Miss Polly, to
whom she had taken a great Fancy.

At their taking leave, Mrs. Teachum rewarded the good old woman for her
trouble; who, on her part, expressed much pleasure in feeing so many
well-behaved young ladies; and said, she hoped they would come often.

These little friends had not walked far in their way home, before they
met a miserable ragged fellow, who begged their charity. Our young
folks immediately gathered together about this poor creature, and were
hearkening very earnestly to his story, which he set forth in a terrible
manner, of having been burnt out of his house, and, from one distress
to another, reduced to that miserable state they saw him in, when Mrs.
Teachum came up to them. She was not a little pleased to see all
the misses’ hands in their pockets, pulling out half-pence, and some
sixpences. She told them, she approved of their readiness to assist the
poor fellow, as he appeared to them; but oftentimes those fellows made
up dismal stories without much foundation, and because they were lazy,
and would not work. Miss Dolly said, indeed she believed the poor
man spoke truth; for he looked honest; and, besides, he seemed almost
starved.

Mrs. Teachum told them it would be late before they could get home;
so, after each of them had given what they thought proper, they pursued
their walk, prattling all the way.

They got home about nine o’clock; and, as they did not choose any
supper, the bell rang for prayers; after which our young travellers
retired to their rest, where we doubt not but they had a good repose.




FRIDAY. THE FIFTH DAY.

Mrs. Teachum, in the morning, inquired how her scholars did after
their walk, and was pleased to hear they were all very well. They then
performed their several tasks with much cheerfulness; and, after the
school-hours, they were hastening, as usual, to their arbour, when Miss
Jenny desired them all to go thither without her, and she would soon
follow them; which they readily consented to; but begged her not to
deprive them long of the pleasure of her sweet company.

Miss Jenny then went directly into her governess’s parlour, and told her
that she had some thoughts of reading to her companions a fairy tale,
which was also given her by her mamma; and though it was not in such a
pompous style, nor so full of wonderful images, as the giant-story;
yet she would not venture to read anything of that kind without her
permission; but, as she had not absolutely condemned all that sort
of writing, she hoped she was not guilty of a fault in asking that
permission. Mrs. Teachum, with a gracious smile, told her, that she
seemed so thoroughly well to understand the whole force of her Monday
night’s discourse to her, that she might be trusted almost in anything;
and desired her to go and follow her own judgment and inclinations in
the amusement of her happy friends. Miss Jenny, overjoyed with this kind
condescension in her governess, thanked her, with, a low courtesy, and
said, she hoped she should never do anything unworthy of the confidence
reposed on her; and, hastening to the arbour, she there found all her
little companions quite impatient of this short absence.

Miss Jenny told them, that she had by her a fairy-tale, which, if they
liked it, she would read; and, as it had pleased her, she did not doubt
but it would give them equal pleasure.

It was the custom now so much amongst them to assent to any proposal
that came from Miss Jenny, that they all with one voice desired her
to read it; till Miss Polly Suckling said, ‘that although she was very
unwilling to contradict anything Miss Jenny liked, yet she could not
help saying, she thought it would be better if they were to read some
true history, from which they might learn something; for she thought
fairy-tales were fit only for little children.

Miss Jenny could not help smiling at such an objection’s coming from
the little dumpling, who was not much above seven years of age; and then
said, ‘I will tell you a story, my little Polly, of what happened to me
whilst I was at home.

‘There came into our village, when I was six years old, a man who
carried about a raree-show, which all the children of the parish were
fond of seeing; but I had taken it into my head, that it was beneath my
wisdom to see raree-shows; and therefore would not be persuaded to
join my companions to see this sight; and although I had as great an
inclination as any of them to see it, yet I avoided it, in order to
boast of my own great sense, in that I was above such trifles.

‘When my mamma asked me, why I would not see the show, when she had
given me leave? I drew up my head, and said, “Indeed I did not like
raree-shows. That I had been reading; and I thought that much more
worth my while, than to lose my time at such foolish entertainments.”
 My mamma, who saw the cause of my refusing this amusement was only a
pretence of being wise, laughed, and said, “She herself had seen it,
and it was really very comical and diverting.” On hearing this, I was
heartily vexed to think I had denied myself a pleasure, which I fancied
was beneath me, when I found even my mamma was not above seeing it. This
in a great measure cured me of the folly of thinking myself above any
innocent amusement. And when I grew older, and more capable of hearing
reason, my mamma told me, “She had taken this method of laughing at me,
as laughing is the proper manner of treating affectation; which of all
things, she said, she would have me carefully avoid; otherwise, whenever
I was found out, I should become contemptible.”’

Here Miss Jenny ceased speaking; and Miss Polly Suckling, blushing that
she had made any objection to what Miss Jenny had proposed, begged her
to begin the fairy tale; when just at that instant, Mrs. Teachum, who
had been taking a walk in the garden, turned into the arbour to delight
herself with a view of her little school united in harmony and love, and
Miss Jenny, with great good humour, told her mistress the small contest
she had just had with Miss Polly about reading a fairy tale, and the
occasion of it. Mrs. Teachum kindly chucking the little dumpling under
the chin, said, she had so good an opinion of Miss Jenny, as to answer
for her, that she would read nothing to them but what was proper; and
added, that she herself would stay and hear this fairy tale which Miss
Jenny, on her commands, immediately began.




THE PRINCESS HEBE. A FAIRY TALE.

Above two thousand years ago, there reigned over the kingdom of Tonga,
a king, whose name was Abdallah. He was married to a young princess, the
daughter of a king of a neighbouring country, whose name was Rousignon.
Her beauty and prudence engaged him so far in affection to her, that
every hour he could possibly spare from attending the affairs of his
kingdom he spent in her apartment. They had a little daughter, to whom
they gave the name of Hebe, who was the darling and mutual care of both.

The king was quiet in his dominion, beloved by his subjects, happy in
his family, and all his days rolled on in calm content and joy. The
king’s brother Abdulham was also married to a young princess, named
Tropo, who in seven years had brought him no children; and she conceived
so mortal a hatred against the queen (for she envied her the happiness
of the little Princess Hebe) that she resolved to do her some mischief.
It was impossible for her, during the king’s lifetime, to vent her
malice without being discovered, and therefore she pretended the
greatest respect and friendship imaginable for the unsuspecting queen.

Whilst things were in this situation, the king fell into a violent
fever, of which he died; and during the time that the queen was in the
height of her affliction for him, and could think of nothing but his
loss, the Princess Tropo took the opportunity of putting in execution
her malicious intentions. She inflamed her husband’s passions, by
setting forth the meanness of his spirit, in letting a crown be ravished
from his head by a female infant, till ambition seized his mind, and he
resolved to wield the Tongian sceptre himself. It was very easy to bring
this about, for, by his brother’s appointment, he was protector of
the realm, and guardian to the young princess his niece; and the queen
taking him and the princess his wife for her best friends, suspected
nothing of their designs, but in a manner gave herself up to their
power.

The protector Abdulham, having the whole treasure of the kingdom at
his command, was in possession of the means to make all his schemes
successful; and the Princess Tropo, by lavishly rewarding the
instruments of her treachery, contrived to make it generally believed,
that the queen had poisoned her husband, who was so much beloved by his
subjects, that the very horror of the action, without any proof of her
guilt, raised against the poor unhappy Queen a universal clamour, and a
general aversion throughout the whole kingdom. The princess had so well
laid her scheme, that the guards were to seize the queen, and convey her
to a place of confinement, till she could prove her innocence; which,
that she might never be able to do, proper care was taken by procuring
sufficient evidence to accuse her on oath; and the Princess Hebe, her
daughter, was to be taken from her, and educated under the care of her
uncle. But the night before this cruel design was to have been put in
execution, a faithful attendant of the queen’s, named Loretta, by the
assistance of one of the Princess Tropo’s confidants (who had long
professed himself her lover) discovered the whole secret, of which she
immediately informed her royal mistress.

The horrors which filled the queen’s mind at the relation of the
Princess Tropo’s malicious intentions, were inexpressible, and her
perturbation so great, that she could not form any scheme that appeared
probable to execute for her own preservation. Loretta told her that the
person who had given her this timely notice, had also provided a peasant
who knew the country, and would meet her at the western gate of the
city, and, carrying the young Princess Hebe in his arms, would conduct
her to some place of safety; but she must consent to put on a disguise,
and escape that very night from the palace, or she would be lost for
ever. Horses or mules, she said, it would be impossible to come at
without suspicion; therefore she must endeavour (though unused to such
fatigue) to travel afoot till she got herself concealed in some cottage
from her pursuers, if her enemies should think of endeavouring to find
her out. Loretta offered to attend her mistress, but she absolutely
forbad her going any farther than to the western gate; where delivering
the little Princess Hebe into the arms of the peasant, who was there
waiting for them, she reluctantly withdrew.

The good queen, who saw no remedy to this her terrible disgrace, could
have borne this barbarous usage without much repining, had she herself
been the only sufferer by it; for the loss of the good king her husband
so far exceeded all her other misfortunes, that every everything else
was trifling in comparison of so dreadful an affliction. But the young
Princess Hebe, whom she was accustomed to look on as her greatest
blessing, now became to her an object of pity and concern; for, from
being heiress to a throne, the poor infant, not yet five years old, was,
with her wretched mother, become a vagabond, and knew not whither to fly
for protection.

Loretta had prevailed on her royal mistress to take with her a few
little necessaries, besides a small picture of the king, and some of her
jewels, which the queen contrived to conceal under her night-clothes, in
the midst of that hair they were used to adorn, when her loved husband
delighted to see it displayed in flowing ringlets round her snowy neck.
This lady, during the life of her fond husband, was by his tender
care kept from every inclemency of the air, and preserved from every
inconvenience that it was possible for human nature to suffer. What then
must be her condition now, when through bypaths and thorny ways, she was
obliged to fly with all possible speed, to escape the fury of her cruel
pursuers: for she too well knew the merciless temper of her enemies,
to hope that they would not pursue her with the utmost diligence,
especially as she was accompanied by the young Princess Hebe; whose life
was the principal cause of their disquiet, and whose destruction they
chiefly aimed at.

The honest peasant, who carried the Princess Hebe in his arms, followed
the queen’s painful steps; and seeing the day begin to break, he begged
her, if possible, to hasten on to a wood which was not far off, where it
was likely she might find a place of safety. But the afflicted queen,
at the sight of the opening morn (which once used to fill her mind with
rising joy) burst into a flood of tears, and, quite overcome with
grief and fatigue, cast herself on the ground, crying out in the most
affecting manner, ‘The end of my misfortunes is at hand. My weary limbs
will no longer support me. My spirits fail me. In the grave alone must
I seek for shelter.’ The poor princess, seeing her mother in tears, cast
her little arms about her neck, and wept also, though she knew not why.

Whilst she was in this deplorable condition, turning round her head, she
saw behind her a little girl, no older in appearance than the Princess
Hebe; who, with an amiable and tranquil countenance, begged her to
rise and follow her, and she would lead her where she might refresh and
repose herself.

The queen was surprised at the manner of speaking of this little child,
as she took her to be; but soon thought it was some kind fairy sent to
protect her, and was very ready to submit herself to her guidance and
protection.

The little fairy (for such indeed was the seeming child who had thus
accosted them) ordered the peasant to return back, and said that she
would take care of the queen, and her young daughter; and he, knowing
her to be the good fairy Sybella, very readily obeyed.

Sybella then striking the ground three times with a little wand, there
suddenly rose up before them a neat plain car, and a pair of milk-white
horses; and placing the queen with the Princess Hebe in her lap by her
side, she drove with excessive swiftness full westward for eight hours;
when (just as the sun began to have power enough to make the queen
almost faint with the heat and her former fatigue) they arrived at the
side of a shady wood; upon entering of which, the fairy made her horses
slacken in their speed, and having travelled about a mile and a half,
through rows of elms and beech trees, they came to a thick grove of
firs, into which there seemed to be no entrance. For there was not any
opening to a path, and the underwood consisting chiefly of rose-bushes,
white-thorn, eglantine, and other flowering shrubs, was so thick, that
it appeared impossible to attempt forcing through them. But alighting
out of the car (which immediately disappeared) the fairy (bidding the
queen follow her) pushed her way through a large bush of jessamine,
whose tender branches gave way for their passage and then closed again,
so as to leave no traces of an entrance into this charming grove.

Having gone a little way through an extreme narrow path, they came into
an opening (quite surrounded by these firs and sweet underwood) not very
large, but in which was contained everything that is necessary towards
making life comfortable. At the end of a green meadow was a plain neat
house, built more for convenience than beauty, fronting the rising sun;
and behind it was a small garden, stored only with fruits and useful
herbs. Sybella conducted her guests into this her simple lodging; and
as repose was the chief thing necessary for the poor fatigued queen,
she prevailed with her to lie down on a couch. Some hours’ sound sleep,
which her weariness induced, gave her a fresh supply of spirits; the
ease and safety from her pursuers, in which she then found herself, made
her for a short time tolerably composed; and she begged the favour
of knowing to whom she was so greatly obliged for this her happy
deliverance; but the fairy seeing her mind too unsettled to give any
due attention to what she should say, told her that she would defer the
relation of her own life (which was worth her observation) till she had
obtained a respite from her own sorrows; and in the meantime, by all
manner of obliging ways, she endeavoured to divert and amuse her.

The queen, after a short interval of calmness of mind, occasioned only
by her so sudden escape from the terrors of pursuit, returned to her
former dejection, and for some time incessantly wept at the dismal
thought, that the princess seemed now, by this reverse of fate, to be
for ever excluded all hopes of being seated on her father’s throne;
and, by a strange perverse way of adding to her own grief, she afflicted
herself the more, because the little princess was ignorant of her
misfortune; and whenever she saw her diverting herself with little
childish plays, instead of being pleased with such her innocent
amusement, it added to her sorrow, and made her tears gush forth in a
larger stream than usual. She could not divert her thoughts from the
palace from which she had been driven, to fix them on any other object;
nor would her grief suffer her to reflect, that it was possible for the
princess to be happy without a crown.

At length time, the great cure of all ills, in some measure abated her
Sorrows; her grief began to subside; in spite of herself, the reflection
that her misery was only in her own fancy, would sometimes force itself
on her mind. She could not avoid seeing, that her little hostess enjoyed
as perfect a state of happiness as is possible to attain in this world;
that she was free from anxious cares, undisturbed by restless passions,
and mistress of all things that could be of any use to make life easy or
agreeable. The oftener this reflection presented itself to her thoughts,
the more strength it gained; and, at last, she could even bear to think,
that her beloved child might be as happy in such a situation, as was her
amiable hostess. Her countenance now grew more cheerful; she could take
the Princess Hebe in her arms, and thinking the jewels she had preserved
would secure her from any fear of want, look on her with delight; and
began even to imagine, that her future life might be spent in calm
content and pleasure.

As soon as the voice of reason had gained this power over the queen,
Sybella told her, that now her bosom was so free from passion, she would
relate the history of her life. The queen, overjoyed that her curiosity
might now be gratified, begged her not to delay giving her that pleasure
one moment; on which our little fairy began in the following manner.


But there Mrs. Teachum told Miss Jenny that the bell rung for dinner; on
which she was obliged to break off. But meeting again in the same arbour
in the evening, when their good mistress continued to them the favour of
her presence, Miss Jenny pursued her story.




THE FAIRY TALE CONTINUED.

‘My father,’ said the fairy, ‘was a magician: he married a lady for
love, whose beauty far outshone that of all her neighbours; and by means
of that beauty, she had so great an influence over her husband, that she
could command the utmost power of his art. But better had it been for
her, had that beauty been wanting; for her power only served to make her
wish for more, and the gratification of every desire begot a new one,
which often it was impossible for her to gratify. My father, though he
saw his error in thus indulging her, could not attain steadiness of mind
enough to mend it, nor acquire resolution enough to suffer his beloved
wife once to grieve or shed a tear to no purpose, though in order to
cure her of that folly which made her miserable.

‘My grandfather so plainly saw the temper and disposition of his son
towards women, that he did not leave him at liberty to dispose of his
magic art to any but his posterity, that it might not be in the power
of a wife to tease him out of it. But his caution was to very little
purpose; for although my mother could not from herself exert any magic
power, yet such was her unbounded influence over her husband, that she
was sure of success in every attempt to persuade him to gratify her
desires. For if every argument she could invent happened to fail, yet
the shedding but one tear was a certain method to prevail with him to
give up his reason, whatever might be the consequence.

‘When my father and mother had been married about a year, she was
brought to bed of a daughter, to whom she gave the name of Brunetta. Her
first request to my father was, that he would endow this infant with as
much beauty as she herself was possessed of, and bestow on her as much
of his art as should enable her to succeed in all her designs. My father
foresaw the dreadful tendency of granting this request, but said he
would give it with this restriction, that she should succeed in all
her designs that were not wicked; for, said he, the success of wicked
designs always turns out as a punishment to the person so succeeding.
In this resolution he held for three days, till my mother (being weak
in body after her lying-in) worked herself with her violent passions to
such a degree, that the physicians told my father, they despaired of her
life, unless some method could be found to make her mind more calm
and easy. His fondness for his wife would not suffer him to bear the
thoughts of losing her, and the horror with which that apprehension had
but for a moment possessed his mind, prevailed with him to bestow on
the little Brunetta (though foreseeing it would make her miserable) the
fatal gift in its full extent. But one restriction it was out of his
power to take off, namely, that all wicked designs ever could and should
be rendered ineffectual by the virtue and perseverance of those against
whom they were intended, if they in a proper manner exerted that virtue.

‘I was born in two years after Brunetta, and was called Sybella: but my
mother was so taken up with her darling Brunetta, that she gave herself
nut the least concern about me; and I was left wholly to the care of my
father. In order to make the gift she had extorted from her fond husband
as fatal as possible to her favourite child, she took care in her
education (by endeavouring to cultivate in her the spirit of revenge and
malice against those who had in the least degree offended her) to
turn her mind to all manner of mischief; by which means she lived in a
continual passion.

‘My father, as soon as I was old enough to hearken to reason, told me
of the gift he had conferred on my sister; said he could not retract it;
and therefore, if she had any mischievous designs against me, they must
in some measure succeed; but she would endow me with a power superior to
this gift of my sister’s, and likewise superior to any thing else that
he was able to bestow, which was strength and constancy of mind enough
to bear patiently any injuries I might receive; and this was a strength,
he said, which would not decay, but rather increase, by every new
exercise of it; and, to secure me in the possession of this gift, he
likewise gave me a perfect knowledge of the true value of everything
around me, by which means I might learn, whatever outward accidents
befell me, not to lose the greatest blessing in this world, namely, a
calm and contented mind. He taught me so well my duty, that I cheerfully
obeyed my mother in all things, though she seldom gave me a kind word,
or even a kind look; for my spiteful sister was always telling some lies
to make her angry with me. But my heart overflowed with gratitude to my
father, that he would give me leave to love him, whilst he instructed me
that it was my duty to pay him the most strict obedience.

‘Brunetta was daily encouraged by her mother to use me ill, and chiefly
because my father loved me; and although she succeeded in all her
designs of revenge on me, yet was she very uneasy, because she could not
take away the cheerfulness of my mind; for I bore with patience whatever
happened to me: and she would often say, “must I with all my beauty,
power, and wisdom (for so she called her low cunning) be suffering
perpetual uneasiness? and shall you, who have neither beauty, power, nor
wisdom, pretend to be happy and cheerful?” Then would she cry and stamp,
and rave like a mad creature, and set her invention at work to make my
mother beat me, or lock me up, or take from me some of my best clothes
to give to her; yet still could not her power extend to vex my mind: and
this used to throw her again into such passions, as weakened her health,
and greatly impaired her so much boasted beauty.

‘In this manner we lived, till on a certain day, after Brunetta had been
in one of her rages with me for nothing, my father came in and chid
her for it; which, when my mother heard, she threw herself into such a
violent passion, that her husband could not pacify her. And, being big
with child, the convulsions, caused by her passions, brought her to her
grave. Thus my father lost her, by the same uncontrollable excesses, the
fatal effects of which he had before ruined his daughter to preserve her
from. He did not long survive her; but, before he died, gave me a little
wand, which, by striking three times on the ground, he said, would at
any time produce me any necessary or convenience of life, which I really
wanted, either for myself, or the assistance of others; and this he gave
me, because he was very sensible, he said, that as soon as he was dead,
my sister would never rest till she had got from me both his castle,
and everything that I had belonging to me, in it. “But,” continued he,
“whenever you are driven from thence, bend your course directly into the
pleasant wood Ardella; there strike with your wand, and everything you
want, will be provided for you. But keep this wand a profound secret, or
Brunetta will get it from you; and then (though you can never, while you
preserve your patience, be unhappy) you will not have it in your power
to be of so much use as you would wish to be, to those who shall stand
in need of your assistance.” Saying these words, he expired, as I
kneeled by his bedside, attending his last commands, and bewailing the
loss of so good a father.

‘In the midst of this our distress, we sent to my Uncle Sochus, my
father’s brother, to come to us, and to assist us in an equal division
of my deceased father’s effects; but my sister soon contrived to make
him believe, that I was the wickedest girl alive, and had always set
my father against her by my art, which she said I pretended to call my
wisdom; and by several handsome presents she soon persuaded him (for he
did not care a farthing for either of us) to join with her in saying,
that, as she was the eldest sister, she had a full right to the castle,
and everything in it; but she told me I was very welcome to stay there,
and live with her, if I pleased; and while I behaved myself well, she
should be very glad of my company.

‘As it was natural for me to love every one that would give me leave to
love them, I was quite overjoyed at this kind offer of my sister’s, and
never once thought on the treachery she had so lately been guilty of;
and I have since reflected, that happy was it for me, that passion was
so much uppermost with her, that she could not execute any plot, that
required a dissimulation of any long continuance; for had her good
humour lasted but one four-and-twenty hours, it is very probable that
I should have opened my whole heart to her; should have endeavoured to
have begun a friendship with her, and perhaps have betrayed the secret
of my wand; but just as it was sunset, she came into the room where I
was, in the most violent passion in the world, accusing me to my uncle
of ingratitude to her great generosity, in suffering me to live in her
castle. She said, “that she had found me out, and that my crimes were of
the blackest dye,” although she would not tell me either what they were,
or who were my accusers. She would not give me leave to speak, either
to ask what my offence was, or to justify my innocence; and I plainly
perceived, that her pretended kindness was only designed to make my
disappointment the greater; and that she was now determined to find me
guilty, whether I pleaded, or not. And after she had raved on for some
time, she said to me with a sneer, “Since you have always boasted of
your calm and contented mind, you may now try to be contented this night
with the softness of the grass for your bed; for here in my castle you
shall not stay one moment longer.” And so saying, she and my uncle led
me to the outer court, and thrusting me with all their force from them,
they shut up the gates, bolting and barring them as close as if to keep
out a giant; and left me, at that time of night, friendless, and, as
they thought, destitute of any kind of support.

‘I then remembered my dear father’s last words, and made what haste I
could to this wood, which is not above a mile distant from the castle;
and being, as I thought, about the middle of it, I struck three times
with my wand, and immediately up rose this grove of trees, which you
see, this house, and all the other conveniences, which I now enjoy; and
getting that very night into this my plain and easy bed, I enjoyed as
sweet a repose as ever I did in my life, only delayed, indeed, a short
time, by a few sighs, for the loss of so good a parent, and the unhappy
state of a self-tormented sister, whose slumbers (I fear) on a bed of
down, were more restless and interrupted that night than mine would have
been, even had not my father’s present of the wand prevented me from the
necessity of using the bed of grass, which she, in her wrath, allotted
me. In this grove, which I call Placid Grove, is contained all that I
want; and it is so well secured from any invaders, by the thick briars
and thorns which surround it, having no entrance but through that tender
jessamine, that I live in no apprehensions of any disturbance, though so
near my sister’s castle. But once, indeed, she came with a large train,
and, whilst I was asleep, set fire to the trees all around me; and
waking, I found myself almost suffocated with smoke, and the flames had
reached one part of my House. I started from my bed, and striking on
the ground three times with my wand, there came such a quantity of water
from the heavens, as soon extinguished the fire; and the next morning,
by again having recourse to my wand, all things grew up into their
convenient and proper order. When my sister Brunetta found that I had
such a supernatural power at my command, though she knew not what it
was, she desisted from ever attempting any more by force to disturb me;
and now only uses all sorts of arts and contrivances to deceive me,
or any persons whom I would wish to secure. One of my father’s daily
lessons to me was, that I should never omit any one day of my life
endeavouring to be as serviceable as I possibly could to any person in
distress. And I daily wander, as far as my feet will carry me, in search
of any such, and hither I invite them to peace and calm contentment. But
my father added also this command, that I should never endeavour doing
any farther good to those whom adversity had not taught to hearken to
the voice of reason, enough to enable them so to conquer their passions
as not to think themselves miserable in a safe retreat from noise and
confusion. This was the reason I could not gratify you in relating the
history of my life, whilst you gave way to raging passions, which only
serve to blind your eyes, and shut your ears from truth. But now, great
queen (for I know your state, from what you vented in your grief), I am
ready to endow this little princess with any gift in my power, that I
know will tend really to her good; and I hope your experience of the
world has made you too reasonable to require any other.’

The queen considered a little while, and then desired Sybella to endow
the princess with that only wisdom which would enable her to see and
follow what was her own true good, to know the value of everything
around her, and to be sensible that following the paths of goodness and
performing her duty was the only road to content and happiness.

Sybella was overjoyed at the queen’s request, and immediately granted
it, only telling the Princess Hebe, that it was absolutely necessary
towards the attainment of this great blessing, that she should entirely
obey the queen her mother, without ever pretending to examine her
commands; for ‘true obedience (said she) consists in submission; and
when we pretend to choose what commands are proper and fit for us,
we don’t obey, but set up our own wisdom in opposition to our
governors--this, my dear Hebe, you must be very careful of avoiding, if
you would be happy.’ She then cautioned her against giving way to the
persuasions of any of the young shepherdesses thereabouts, who would
endeavour to allure her to disobedience, by striving to raise in her
mind a desire of thinking herself wise, whilst they were tearing from
her what was indeed true wisdom. ‘For (said Sybella) my sister Brunetta,
who lives in the castle she drove me from (about a mile from this wood)
endows young shepherdesses with great beauty, and everything that is in
appearance amiable, and likely to persuade, in order to allure away and
make wretched, those persons I would preserve: and all the wisdom with
which I have endowed the Princess Hebe will not prevent her falling into
my sister’s snares, if she gives the least way to temptation; for my
father’s gift to Brunetta, in her infancy, enables her (as I told you)
to succeed in all her designs, except they are resisted by the virtue of
the person she is practising against. Many poor wretches has my sister
already decoyed away from me, whom she now keeps in her castle;
where they live in splendor and seeming joy, but in real misery, from
perpetual jars and tumults, railed by envy, malice, and all the train of
tumultuous and tormenting passions.’

The Princess Hebe said, she doubted not but she should be able to
withstand any of Brunetta’s temptations. Her mother interrupting her,
cried out, ‘Oh, my dear child, though you are endowed with wisdom enough
to direct you in the way to virtue, yet if you grow conceited and proud
of that wisdom, and fancy yourself above temptation, it will lead you
into the worst of all evils.’ Here the fairy interposed, and told the
Princess Hebe, that if she would always carefully observe and obey her
mother, who had learned wisdom in that best school, adversity, she would
then, indeed, be able to withstand and overcome every temptation, and
would likewise be happy herself, and able to dispense happiness to all
around her. Nothing was omitted by the fairy to make this retirement
agreeable to her royal guests; and they had now passed near seven years
in this delightful grove, in perfect peace and tranquillity; when one
evening, as they were walking in the pleasant wood which surrounded
their habitation, they espied under the shade, and leaning against
the bark of a large oak, a poor old man, whose limbs were withered and
decayed, and whose eyes were hollow, and sunk with age and misery. They
stopped as soon as they saw him, and heard him in the anguish of his
heart, with a loud groan, utter these words: ‘When will my sorrows end?
Where shall I find the good fairy Sybella?’ The fairy immediately begged
to know his business with her; and said, if his sorrows would end on
finding Sybella, he might set his heart at ease; for she stood now
before him, and ready to serve him, if his distresses were such as would
admit of relief, and he could prove himself worthy of her friendship.
The old Man appeared greatly overjoyed at having found the fairy, and
began the following story:

‘I live from hence a thousand leagues. All this tiresome way have I come
in search of you. My whole life has been spent in amassing wealth, to
enrich one only son, whom I doted on to distraction. It is now five
years since I have given him up all the riches I had laboured to get,
only to make him happy. But, alas how am I disappointed! His wealth
enables him to command whatever this world produces; and yet the poorest
wretch that begs his bread cannot be more miserable. He spends his days
in riot and luxury; has more slaves and attendants than wait in the
palace of a prince; and still he sighs from morning till night, because,
he says, there is nothing in this world worth living for. All his
dainties only sate his palate, and grow irksome to his sight. He daily
changes his opinion of what is pleasure; and, on the trial, finds
none that he can call such; and then falls to sighing again, for the
emptiness of all that he has enjoyed. So that, instead of being my
delight, and the comfort of my old age, sleepless nights, and anxious
days, are all the rewards of my past labours for him. But I have had
many visions and dreams to admonish me, that if I would venture with my
old frame to travel hither a-foot in search of the fairy Sybella, she
had a glass, which if she showed him, he would be cured of this dreadful
melancholy, and I have borne the labour and fatigue of coming this
long tiresome way, that I may not breathe my last with the agonizing
reflection, that all the labours of my life have been thrown away.
But what shall I say to engage you to go with me? Can riches tempt, or
praise allure you?’

‘No, (answered the fairy) neither of them has power to move me; but
I compassionate your age; and if I thought I could succeed, would not
refuse you. The glass which I shall bid him look in, will show him his
inward self; but if he will not open both his eyes and heart enough to
truth, to let him understand, that the pleasures he pursues not only are
not but cannot be satisfactory, I can be of no sort of service to him.
And know, old man, that the punishment you now feel is the natural
result of your not having taught him this from his infancy; for, instead
of heaping up wealth, to allure him to seek for happiness from such
deceitful means, you should have taught him, that the only path to it
was to be virtuous and good.’

The old man said, he heartily repented of his conduct, and on his knees
so fervently implored Sybella’s assistance, that at last she consented
to go with him. Then striking on the ground three times with her wand,
the car and horses rose up, and placing the old Man by her, after taking
leave of the queen, and begging the Princess Hebe to be careful to guard
against all temptations to disobedience, she set out on her journey.


It being now come to the latest hour that Mrs. Teachum thought proper
for her little scholars to stay out in the air, she told Miss Jenny that
she must defer reading the remaining part of her story till the next
day. Miss Jenny always with great cheerfulness obeyed her governess, and
immediately left off reading; and said she was ready to attend her; and
the whole company rose up to follow her.

Mrs. Teachum had so much judgment, that, perceiving such a ready
obedience to all her commands, she now endeavoured, by all means she
could think of; to make her scholars throw off that reserve before her,
which must ever make it uneasy to them for her ever to be present
whilst they were following their innocent diversions; for such was the
understanding of this good woman, that she could keep up the authority
of the governess in her school, yet at times become the companion of
her scholars. And as she now saw, by their good behaviour, they deserved
that indulgence, she took the little dumpling by the hand, and, followed
by the rest, walked towards the house, and discoursed familiarly with
them the rest of the evening, concerning all their past amusements.




SATURDAY. THE SIXTH DAY.

It was the custom on Saturdays to have no school in the afternoon, and
it being also their writing day from morning-school till dinner, Mrs.
Teachum, knowing how eager Miss Jenny’s hearers were for the rest of the
story, accompanied them into the arbour, early in the afternoon, when
Miss Jenny went on as follows:




THE FAIRY TALE CONTINUED.

The queen and the Princess Hebe remained, by the good fairy’s desire, in
her habitation during her absence. They spent their time in serenity and
content; the princess daily improving herself in wisdom and goodness, by
hearkening to her mother’s instructions, and obeying all her commands,
and the queen in studying what would be of most use to her child. She
had now forgot her throne and palace, and desired nothing for her, than
her present peaceful retreat. One morning, as they were sitting in a
little arbour at the corner of a pleasant meadow, on a sudden they
heard a voice, much sweeter than they had ever heard, warble through the
following song:


A SONG.

     Virtue, soft balm of every woe,
       Of ev’ry grief the cure,
     ‘Tis thou alone that canst best bestow
       Pleasures unmix’d and pure.

     The shady wood, the verdant mead,
       Are Virtue’s flow’ry road;
     Nor painful are the steps which lead
       To her divine abode.

     ‘Tis not in palaces of halls,
       She or their train appear;
     Far off she flies from pompous walls;
       Virtue and Peace dwell here.


The queen was all attention, and at the end of the song she gazed around
her, in hopes of seeing the person whose enchanting voice she had been
so eagerly listening to, when she espied a young shepherdess, not
much older than the Princess Hebe, but possessed of such uncommon and
dazzling beauty, that it was some time before she could disengage her
eyes from so agreeable an object. As soon as the young shepherdess found
herself observed, she seemed modestly to offer to withdraw; but the
queen begged her not to go till she had informed them who she was, that,
with such a commanding aspect, had so much engaged them in her favour.

The shepherdess coming forward, with a bashful blush, and profound
obedience, answered, that her name was Rozella, and she was the daughter
of a neighbouring shepherd and shepherdess, who lived about a quarter of
a mile from thence; and, to confess the truth, she had wandered thither,
in hopes of seeing the young stranger, whose fame for beauty and wisdom
had filled all that country round.

The Princess Hebe, well knowing of whom she spoke, conceived from that
moment such an inclination fur her acquaintance, that she begged her to
stay and spend that whole day with them in Placid Grove. Here the queen
frowned upon her, for she had, by the fairy’s desire, charged her never
to bring any one, without her permission, into that peaceful grove.

The young Rozella answered, that nothing could be more agreeable to her
inclinations; but she must be at home by noon, for so in the morning
had her father commanded her, and never yet in her life had she either
disputed or disobeyed her parent’s commands. Here the young princess
looked on her mother with eyes expressive of her joy at finding a
companion, which she, and even the fairy herself, could not disapprove.

When Rozella took her leave, she begged the favour that the little Hebe
(for so she called her, not knowing her to be a princess) might come
to her father’s small cottage, and there partake such homely fare as it
afforded; a welcome, she said, she could insure her; and though poor,
yet from the honesty of her parents, who would be proud to entertain
so rare a beauty, she was certain no sort of harm could happen to the
pretty Hebe, from such a friendly visit; and she would be in the same
place again tomorrow, to meet her, in hopes, as she said, to conduct her
to her humble habitation.

When Rozella was gone, the queen, though highly possessed in her favour,
both by her beauty and modest behaviour, yet pondered some time on the
thought, whether or no she was a fit companion for her daughter. She
remembered what Sybella had told her, concerning Brunetta’s adorning
young shepherdesses with beauty, and other excellences, only to enable
them the better to allure and entice others into wickedness. Rozella’s
beginning her acquaintance too with the princess, by flattery, had no
good aspect; and the sudden effect it had upon her, so as to make her
forget, or wilfully disobey, her commands, by inviting Rozella to
Placid Grove, were circumstances which greatly alarmed her. But, by
the repeated entreaties of the princess, she gave her consent that she
should meet Rozella the next day, and walk with her in that meadow, and
in the wood, but upon no account should she go home with her, or
bring Rozella back with her. The queen then, in gentle terms, chid the
princess for her invitation to the young shepherdess, which was contrary
to an absolute command; and said, ‘You must, my dear Hebe, be very
careful to guard yourself extremely well against those temptations
which wear the face of virtue. I know that your sudden affection to this
apparent good girl, and your desire of her company, to partake with
you the innocent pleasures of this happy place, arise from a good
disposition; but where the indulgence of the most laudable passion, even
benevolence and compassion itself, interferes with, or runs counter to
your duty, you must endeavour to suppress it, or it will fare with you,
as it did with that hen, who, thinking that she heard the voice of a
little duckling in distress, flew from her young ones, to go and give it
assistance, and following the cry, came at last to a hedge, out of which
jumped a subtle and wicked fox, who had made that noise to deceive
her, and devoured her in an instant. A kite at the same time, taking
advantage of her absence, carried away, one by one, all her little
innocent brood, robbed of that parent who should have been their
protector.’ The princess promised her mother that she would punctually
obey all her commands, and be very watchful and observant of everything
Rozella said and did, till she had approved herself worthy of her
confidence and friendship.

The queen the next morning renewed her injunctions to her daughter, that
she should by no means go farther out of the wood than into the meadow,
where she was to meet Rozella, and that she should give her a faithful
account of all that should pass between them.

They met according to appointment, and the princess brought home so good
an account of their conversation, which the queen imagined would help to
improve, rather than seduce her child, that she indulged her in the same
pleasure as often as she asked it. They passed some hours every day
in walking round that delightful wood, in which were many small green
meadows, with little rivulets running through them, on the banks of
which, covered with primroses and violets, Rozella, by the side of her
sweet companion, used to sing the most enchanting songs in the world:
the words were chiefly in praise of innocence and a country life.

The princess came home every day more and more charmed with her young
shepherdess, and recounted, as near as she could remember, every word
that had passed between them. The queen very highly approved of their
manner of amusing themselves; but again enjoined her to omit nothing
that passed in conversation, especially if it had the least tendency
towards alluring her from her duty.

One day, as the princess Hebe and Rozella were walking alone, and
talking, as usual, of their own happy state, and the princess was
declaring how much her own happiness was owing to her thorough obedience
to her mother, Rozella, with a tone of voice as half in jest, said, ‘But
don’t you think, my little Hebe, that if I take a very great pleasure in
any thing that will do me no hurt, though it is forbidden, I may disobey
my parents in enjoying it, provided I don’t tell them of it to vex them
with the thought that I have disobeyed them? And then, my dear, what
harm is done?’

‘Great harm (answered the princess, looking grave and half angry): I am
ashamed to hear you talk so, Rozella. Are you not guilty of treachery,
as well as disobedience? Neither ought you to determine that no harm
is done, because you do not feel the immediate effects of your
transgression; for the consequence may be out of our narrow
inexperienced view; and I have been taught whenever my mother lays
any commands on me, to take it for granted, she has some reason for
so doing; and I obey her, without examining what those reasons are;
otherwise, it would not be obeying her, but setting up my own wisdom,
and doing what she bid me, only when I thought proper.’

They held a long argument on this head, in which Rozella made use of
many a fallacy to prove her point; but the princess, as she had not yet
departed from Truth, nor failed in her duty, could not be imposed upon.
Rozella, seeing every attempt to persuade her was in vain, turned all
her past discourse into a jest; said she had only a mind to try her; and
was overjoyed to find her so steady in the cause of truth and virtue.
The princess resumed her usual cheerfulness and good humour. Rozella
sung her a song in praise of constancy of mind; and they passed the rest
of the time they stayed together, as they used to do.

But, just before they parted, Rozella begged she would not tell her
mother of the first part of the conversation that had passed between
them. The princess replied, that it would be breaking through one of her
mother’s commands, and therefore she dared not grant her request. Then,
said Rozella, ‘Here I must for ever part with my dear little Hebe.
Your mother, not knowing the manner in which I spoke, will have an ill
opinion of me, and will never trust you again in my company. Thus will
you be torn from me; and loss will be irreparable.’ These words she
accompanied with a flood of tears, and such little tendernesses, as
quite melted the princess into tears also. But she still said, that she
could not dare to conceal from her mother anything that had happened,
though she could not but own, she believed their separation would be
the consequence. ‘Well then (cried Rozella) I will endeavour to be
contented, as our separation will give you less pain than what you call
this mighty breach of your duty: and though I would willingly undergo
almost any torments that could be invented, rather than be debarred one
moment the company of my dearest Hebe, yet I will not expect that she
should suffer the smallest degree of pain, or uneasiness, to save me
from losing what is the whole pleasure of my life.’

The princess could not bear the thought of appearing ungrateful to such
a warm friendship as Rozella expressed; and, without farther hesitation,
promised to conceal what she had said, and to undergo anything, rather
than lose so amiable a friend.

After this they parted. But when the princess entered the Grove, she did
not, as usual, run with haste and joy into the presence of her indulgent
mother; for her mind was disturbed: she felt a conscious shame on seeing
her, and turned away her face, as wanting to shun the piercing look of
that eye, which she imagined would see the secret lurking in her
bosom. Her mother observed with concern her downcast look, and want of
cheerfulness. And asking her what was the matter, she answered, her
walk had fatigued her, and she begged early to retire to rest. Her
kind mother consented; but little rest had the poor princess that whole
night, for the pain of having her mind touched with guilt, and the fear
she was under of losing her dear companion, kept her thoughts in one
continued tumult and confusion. The fairy’s gift now became her curse;
for the power of seeing what was right, as she had acted contrary to her
knowledge, only tormented her.

She hastened the next morning to meet Rozella, and told her all that had
passed in her own mind the preceding night; declaring that she would not
pass such another for the whole world; but yet would not dispense with
her promise to her, without her consent; and therefore came to ask her
leave to acquaint her good mother with all that had passed: ‘For (said
she) my dear Rozella, we must, if we would be happy, do always what is
right, and trust for the consequences.’ Here Rozella drew her features
into the most contemptuous sneer imaginable, and said, ‘Pray what are
all these mighty pains you have suffered? Are they not owing only to
your want of sense enough to know, that you can do your mother no harm,
by concealing from her this, or anything else that will vex her? and,
my dear girl (continued she) when you have once entered into this way of
thinking, and have put this blind duty out of your head, you will spend
no more such restless nights, which you must see was entirely owing to
your own imaginations.’

This startled the princess to such a degree, that she was breaking from
her, but, putting on a more tender air, Rozella cried, ‘And can
you then, my dear Hebe, determine to give me up for such a trifling
consideration?’ Then raising her voice again, in a haughty manner, she
said, ‘I ought to despise and laugh at you for your folly, or at best
pity your ignorance, rather than offer a sincere friendship to one so
undeserving.’

The princess, having once swerved from her duty, was now in the power of
every passion that should attack her.

Pride and indignation, at the thought of being despised, bore more sway
with her, than either her duty or affection to her fond mother; and she
was now determined, she said, to think for herself, and make use of her
own understanding, which she was convinced would always teach her what
was right. Upon this Rozella took her by the hand, and, with tears
of joy, said, ‘Now, my dearest girl, you are really wise, and cannot
therefore (according to your own rule) fail of being happy. But to show
that you are in earnest in this resolution, you shall this morning go
home with me to my father’s cot; it is not so far off, but you will be
back by the time your mother expects you; and as that will be obeying
the chief command, it is but concealing from her the thing that would
vex her, and there will be no harm done.’ Here a ray of truth broke in
upon our young princess; but as a false shame, and fear of being laughed
at, had now got possession of her, she, with a soft sigh, consented to
the proposal.

Rozella led the way. But just as they were turning round the walk, which
leads out of the wood, a large serpent darted from one side out of a
thicket, directly between them, and turning its hissing mouth towards
the princess, as seeming to make after her, she fled hastily back, and
ran with all her speed towards the grove, and panting for breath, flew
into the arms of her ever kind protectress.

Her mother was vastly terrified to see her tremble, and look so pale;
and as soon as she was a little recovered, asked her the occasion of her
fright, and added (with tears running down her cheeks) ‘I am afraid, my
dear Hebe, some sad disaster has befallen you, for, indeed, my child, I
but too plainly saw last night--’

Here the princess was so struck with true shame and confusion, for her
past behaviour, that she fell down upon her knees, confessed the whole
truth, and implored forgiveness for her fault.

The queen kindly raised her up, kissed and forgave her. ‘I am overjoyed,
my dear child (said she) at this your sweet repentance, though the
effect of mere accident, as it appears but sent, without doubt, by some
good fairy, to save you from destruction; and I hope you are thoroughly
convinced, that the serpent which drove you home, was not half so
dangerous as the false Rozella.’

The princess answered, that she was thoroughly sensible of the dangers
she had avoided, and hoped she never should again, by her own folly and
wickedness, deserve to be exposed to the danger from which she had so
lately escaped.

Some days passed, without the princess’s offering to stir out of the
grove; and in that time she gave a willing and patient ear to all her
mother’s instructions, and seemed thoroughly sensible of the great
deliverance she had lately experienced. But yet there appeared in her
countenance an uneasiness, which the queen wishing to remove, asked her
the cause of.

‘It is, dear madam,’ answered the princess, ‘because I have not yet had
it in my power to convince you of my repentance, which (though I know it
to be sincere) you have had no proof of, but in words only; and, indeed,
my heart longs for an occasion to show you, that I am now able to resist
any allurement which would tempt me from my duty; and I cannot be easy
till you have given me an opportunity of showing you the firmness of
my resolution; and if you will give me leave to take a walk in the
wood alone, this evening, I shall return to you with pleasure, and will
promise not to exceed any bounds that you shall prescribe.’

The queen was not much pleased with this request; but the princess was
so earnest with her to grant it, that she could not well refuse, without
seeming to suspect her sincerity; which she did not, but only feared for
her safety, and, giving her a strict charge, not to stir a step out of
the wood, or to speak to the false Rozella, if she came in her way, she
reluctantly gave her consent.

The princess walked through all the flowery labyrinths, in which she had
so often strayed with Rozella; but she was so shocked with the thoughts
of her wickedness, that she hardly gave a sigh for the loss of a
companion once so dear to her; and as a proof that her repentance
was sincere, though she heard Rozella singing in an arbour (purposely
perhaps to decoy her) she turned away without the least emotion, and
went quite to the other side of the wood; where looking into the meadow,
in which she first beheld that false friend, she saw a girl about her
own age, leaning against a tree, and crying most bitterly. But the
moment she came in sight, the young shepherdess (for such by her dress
she appeared to be) cried out, ‘O help, dear young lady, help me; for I
am tied here to this tree, by the spiteful contrivance of a wicked young
shepherdess called Rozella: my hands too, you see, are bound behind me,
so that I cannot myself unloose the knot; and if I am not released, here
must I lie all night and my wretched parents will break their hearts,
for fear some sad accident should have befallen their only child, their
poor unhappy Florimel!’

The Princess, hearing her speak of Rozella in that manner, had no
suspicion of her being one of that false girl’s deluding companions;
but rather thought that she was a fellow-sufferer with herself; and
therefore, without any consideration of the bounds prescribed, she
hastened to relieve her, and even thought that she should have great
pleasure in telling her mother, that she had saved a poor young
shepherdess from Rozella’s malice, and restored her to her fond parents.
But as soon as she had unloosed the girl from the tree, and unbound her
hands, instead of receiving thanks for what she had done, the wicked
Florimel burst into a laugh, and suddenly snatching from the Princess
Hebe’s side her father’s picture, which she always wore hanging in a
ribbon, she ran away with it, as fast as she could, over the meadow.

The Princess was so astonished at this strange piece of ingratitude
and treachery, and was so alarmed for fear of losing what she knew her
mother so highly valued, that hardly knowing what she was about, she
pursued Florimel with all her speed, begging and entreating her not to
bereave her so basely and ungratefully of that picture, which she would
not part with for the world: but it was all to no purpose for Florimel
continued her flight, and the princess her pursuit, till they arrived
at Brunetta’s castle-gate; where the fairy herself appeared dressed and
adorned in the most becoming manner, and, with the most bewitching smile
that can come from dazzling beauty, invited the princess to enter her
castle (into which Florimel was run to hide herself) and promised her,
on that condition, to make the idle girl restore the picture.

It was now so late, that it was impossible for the princess to think
of returning home that night; and the pleasing address of Brunetta,
together with the hopes of having her picture restored, soon prevailed
with her to accept of the fairy’s invitation.

The castle glittered with gaudy furniture; sweet music was heard in
every room; the whole company, who were all of the most beautiful forms
that could be conceived, strove who should be most obliging to this
their new guest. They omitted nothing that could amuse and delight the
senses. And the Princess Hebe was so entranced with joy and rapture,
that she had not time for thought, or for the least serious reflection;
and she now began to think, that she had attained the highest happiness
upon earth.

After they had kept her three days in this round of pleasure and
delight, they began to pull of the mask; nothing was heard but quarrels,
jars, and galling speeches. Instead of sweet music, the apartments were
filled with screams and howling; for every one giving way to the most
outrageous passions, they were always doing each other some malicious
turn, and only universal horror and confusion reigned.

The princess was hated by all, and was often asked, with insulting
sneers, why she did not return to her peaceful grove, and condescending
mother? But her mind having been thus turned aside from what was right,
could not bear the thoughts of returning; and though by her daily tears,
she showed her repentance, shame prevented her return: but this again
was not the right sort of shame; for then she would humbly have taken
the punishment due to her crime; and it was rather a stubborn pride,
which, as she knew herself so highly to blame, would not give her leave
to suffer the confusion of again confessing her fault; and till she
could bring herself to such a state of mind, there was no remedy for her
misery.


Just as Miss Jenny had read these words, Mrs. Teachum remembering some
orders necessary to give in her family, left them, but bid them go on,
saying she would return again in a quarter of an hour. But she was no
sooner gone from them, than our little company, hearing the sound of
trumpets and kettle-drums, which seemed to be playing at some little
distance from Mrs. Teachum’s house, suddenly started from their seats,
running directly to the terrace; and, looking over the garden wall,
they saw a troop of soldiers riding by, with these instruments of music
playing before them.

They were highly delighted with the gallant and splendid appearance of
these soldiers, and watched them till they were out of sight, and were
then returning to their arbour, where Miss Jenny had been reading; but
Miss Nanny Spruce espied another such troop coming out of the lane from
whence the first had issued, and cried out, ‘O! here is another fine
sight; let us stay, and see these go by too.’ ‘Indeed (said Miss Dolly
Friendly) I am in such pain for the poor princess Hebe, while she is in
that sad castle, that I had rather hear how she escaped (for that I hope
she will) than see all the soldiers in the world; and besides, it is but
seeing the same thing we have just looked at before.’ Here some were for
staying, and others for going back; but as Miss Dolly’s party was the
strongest, the few were ashamed to avow their inclinations; and they
were returning to the arbour, when they met Mrs. Teachum, who informed
them their dancing master was just arrived, and they must attend him;
but in the evening they might finish their story.

They were so curious (and especially Miss Dolly Friendly) to know what
was to become of the princess, that they could have wished not to have
been interrupted; but yet, without one word of answer, they complied
with what their governess thought most proper; and in the evening,
hastening to their arbour, Mrs. Teachum herself being present, Miss
Jenny went on in the following manner:




THE FAIRY TALE CONTINUED.

The queen, in the meantime, suffered for the loss of her child more than
words can express, till the good fairy Sybella returned. The queen burst
into tears at the sight of her; but the fairy immediately cried out,
‘You may spare yourself, my royal guest, the pain of relating what has
happened. I know it all; for that old man, whom I took such pity on, was
a phantom, raised by Brunetta, to allure me hence, in order to have an
opportunity, in my absence, of seducing the princess from her duty.
She knew nothing but a probable story could impose on me, and therefore
raised that story of the misery of the old man’s son (from motives which
too often, indeed, cause the misery of mortals); as knowing I should
think it my duty to do what I could to relieve such a wretch. I will not
tell you all my journey, nor what I have gone through. I know your
mind is at present too much fixed on the princess, to attend to such
a relation I’ll only tell you what concerns yourself. When the phantom
found, that by no distress he could perturb my mind, he said he was
obliged to tell the truth, what was the intention of my being deluded
from home, and what had happened since; and then vanished away.’ Here
the fairy related to the queen everything that had happened to the
princess, as has already been written; and concluded with saying, that
she would wander about the castle walls (for Brunetta had no power over
her); and if she could get a sight of the princess, she would endeavour
to bring her to a true sense of her fault, and then she might again be
restored to happiness.

The queen blessed the fairy for her goodness; and it was not long before
Sybella’s continual assiduity got her a sight of the princess; for
she often wandered a little way towards that wood she had once so
much delighted in, but never could bring herself to enter into it: the
thought of seeing her injured mother made her start back, and run half
wild into the fatal castle. Rozella used frequently to throw herself
in her way; and on hearing her sighs, and seeing her tears, would burst
into a sneering laugh at her folly; to avoid which laugh, the poor
princess first suffered herself to throw off all her principles of
goodness and obedience, and was now fallen into the very contempt she so
much dreaded.

The first time the fairy got a sight of her, she called to her with the
most friendly voice; but the princess, stung to the soul with the sight
of her, fled away, and did not venture out again in several days. The
kind Sybella began almost to despair of regaining her lost child; but
never failed walking round the castle many hours every day. And one
evening, just before the sun set, she heard within the gates a loud
tumultuous noise, but more like riotous mirth, than either the voice
either of rage or anger; and immediately she saw the princess rush out
at the gate, and about a dozen girls, laughing and shouting, running
after her. The poor princess flew with all her speed till she came to a
little arbour, just by the side of the wood; and her pursuers, as they
intended only to tease her, did not follow her very close; but, as soon
as they lost sight of her, turned all back again to the castle.

Sybella went directly into the arbour, where she found the little
trembler prostrate on the ground, crying and sobbing as if her heart was
breaking. The fairy seized her hand, and would not let her go till she
had prevailed with her to return to the Placid Grove, to throw herself
once more at her mother’s feet, assuring her, that nothing but this
humble state of mind could cure her misery and restore her wonted peace.

The queen was filled with the highest joy to see her child; but
restrained herself so much, that she showed not the least sign of it,
till she had seen her some time prostrate at her feet, and had heard
her with tears properly confess, and ask pardon for, all her faults. She
then raised, and once more forgave her; but told her that she must learn
more humility and distrust of herself, before she should again expect to
be trusted.

The princess answered not, but with a modest downcast look which
expressed her concern and true repentance, and in a short time recovered
her former peace of mind; and as she never afterwards disobeyed her
indulgent mother, she daily increased in wisdom and goodness.

After having lived on in the most innocent and peaceful manner for three
years (the princess being just turned of eighteen years old) the fairy
told the queen that she would now tell her some news of her kingdom,
which she had heard in her journey; namely, that her sister-in-law
was dead, and her brother-in-law had made proclamation throughout the
kingdom, of great rewards to any one who should produce the queen and
the Princess Hebe, whom he would immediately reinstate on the throne.

The Princess Hebe was by when she related this, and said she begged
to lead a private life, and never more be exposed to the temptation of
entering into vice, for which she already had so severely smarted.

The fairy told her, that, since she doubted herself, she was now fit
to be trusted; for, said she, ‘I did not like your being so sure of
resisting temptation, when first I conferred on you the gift of wisdom.
But you will, my princess, if you take the crown, have an opportunity
of doing so much good, that, if you continue virtuous, you will have
perpetual pleasures; for power, if made a right use of, is indeed a very
great blessing.’

The princess answered, that if the queen, her mother, thought it her
duty to take the crown, she would cheerfully submit, though a private
life would be otherwise her choice.

The queen replied, that she did not blame her for choosing a private
life; but she thought she could not innocently refuse the power that
would give her such opportunities of doing good, and making others
happy; since, by that refusal, the power might fall into hands that
would make an ill use of it.

After this conversation, they got into the same car in which they
travelled to the wood of Ardella; arrived safely at the city of
Algorada; and the Princess Hebe was seated, with universal consent, on
her father’s throne; where she and her people were reciprocally happy,
by her great wisdom and prudence; and the queen-mother spent the
remainder of her days in peace and joy, to see her beloved daughter
prove a blessing to such numbers of human creatures; whilst she herself
enjoyed that only true content and happiness this world can produce;
namely, a peaceful conscience, and a quiet mind.


When Miss Jenny had finished her story, Mrs. Teachum left them for
the present, that they might with the utmost freedom make their own
observations; for she knew she should be acquainted with all their
sentiments from Miss Jenny afterwards.

The little hearts of all the company were swelled with joy, in that
the Princess Hebe was at last made happy; for hope and fear had each by
turns possessed their bosoms for the fate of the little princess; and
Miss Dolly Friendly said, that Rozella’s artful manner was enough to
have drawn in the wisest girl into her snares; and she did not see how
it was possible for the Princess Hebe to withstand it, especially when
she cried for fear of parting with her.

Miss Sukey Jennett said, that Rozella’s laughing at her, and using her
with contempt, she thought was insupportable, for who could bear the
contempt of a friend?

Many and various were the remarks made by Miss Jenny’s hearers on the
story she had read to them. But now they were so confirmed in goodness,
and every one was so settled in her affection for her companions,
that, instead of being angry at any opposition that was made to their
judgments, every one spoke her opinion with the utmost mildness.

Miss Jenny sat some time silent to hear their conversation on her fairy
tale. But her seeing them so much altered in their manner of talking to
each other, since the time they made their little remarks on her story
of the giants, filled her whole mind with the most sincere pleasure; and
with a smile peculiar to herself, and which diffused a cheerfulness to
all around her, she told her companions the joy their present behaviour
had inspired her with; but saying that it was as late as their governess
chose they should stay out, she rose, and walked towards the house,
whither she was cheerfully followed by the whole company.

Mrs. Teachum after supper, again, in a familiar manner, talked to
them on the subject of the fairy tale, and encouraged them, as much as
possible, to answer her freely in whatever she asked them; and at last
said, ‘My good children, I am very much pleased when you are innocently
amused; and yet I would have you consider seriously enough of what you
read, to draw such morals from your books, as may influence your future
practice; and as to fairy tales in general, remember, that the fairies,
as I told Miss Jenny before of giants and magic, are only introduced by
the writers of those tales, by way of amusement to the reader. For if
the story is well written, the common course of things would produce the
same incidents, without the help of fairies.

‘As for example, in this of the Princess Hebe, you see the queen her
mother was not admitted to know the fairy’s history, till she could calm
her mind enough to hearken to reason; which only means, that whilst we
give way to the raging of our passions, nothing useful can ever sink
into our minds. For by the fairy Sybella’s story you find, that by our
own faults we may turn the greatest advantages into our own misery, as
Sybella’s mother did her beauty, by making use of the influence it gave
her over her husband, to tease him into the ruin of his child; and as
also Brunetta did, by depending on her father’s gift, to enable her to
complete her desires, and therefore never endeavouring to conquer them.

‘You may observe also on the other side, that no accident had any power
to hurt Sybella, because she followed the paths of virtue, and kept her
mind free from restless passions.

‘You see happiness in the good Sybella’s peaceful grove, and misery
in the wicked Brunetta’s gaudy castle. The queen desiring the fairy to
endow her child with true wisdom, was the cause that the Princess Hebe
had it in her power to be happy. But take notice, that when she swerved
from her duty, all her knowledge was of no use, but only rendered her
more miserable, by letting her see her own folly in the stronger light.
Rozella first tempted the princess to disobedience, by moving her
tenderness, and alarming her friendship, in fearing to part with her;
and then by persuading her to set up her own wisdom, in opposition to
her mother’s commands, rather than be laughed at, and despised by
her friends. You are therefore to observe, that if you would steadily
persevere in virtue, you must have resolution enough to stand the sneers
of those who would allure you to vice; for it is the constant practice
of the vicious, to endeavour to allure others to follow their example,
by an affected contempt and ridicule of virtue.

‘By the Princess Hebe’s being drawn at last beyond the prescribed
bounds, by the cries and entreaties of that insidious girl, you are to
learn, that whatever appearance of virtue any action may be attended
with, yet if it makes you go contrary to the commands of those who know
better what is for your good, than you do your selves, and who can see
farther into the consequences of actions than can your tender years, it
will certainly lead you into error and misfortune; and you find, as soon
as the princess had once overleaped the bounds, another plausible excuse
arose to carry her on; and by a false fear of incurring her mother’s
displeasure, she really deserved that displeasure, and was soon reduced
into the power of her enemy.

‘The princess, you see, could have no happiness till she returned again
to her obedience, and had confessed her fault. And though in this story
all this is brought about by fairies, yet the moral of it is, that
whenever we give way to our passions, and act contrary to our duty, we
must be miserable.

‘But let me once more observe to you, that these fairies are only
intended to amuse you; for remember that the misery which attended the
Princess Hebe, on her disobedience, was the natural consequence of that
disobedience, as well as the natural consequence of her amendment and
return to her duty, was content and happiness for the rest of her life.’

Here good Mrs. Teachum ceased, and Miss Jenny, in the name of the
company, thanked her for her kind instructions, and promised that they
would endeavour, to the utmost of their power, to imprint them on their
memory for the rest of their lives.




SUNDAY. THE SEVENTH DAY.

This morning our little society rose very early, and were all dressed
with neatness and elegance, in order to go to church. Mrs. Teachum put
Miss Polly Suckling before her, and the rest followed, two and two, with
perfect regularity.

Mrs. Teachum expressed great approbation, that her scholars, at this
solemn place, showed no sort of childishness, notwithstanding their
tender age; but behaved with decency and devotion suitable to the
occasion.

They went again in the same order, and behaved again in the same manner,
in the afternoon; and when they returned from church, two young ladies,
Lady Caroline and Lady Fanny Delun, who had formerly known Miss Jenny
Peace, and who were at present in that neighbourhood with their uncle,
came to make her a visit.

Lady Caroline was fourteen years of age, tall and genteel in her person,
of a fair complexion, and a regular set of features so that, upon the
whole, she was generally complimented with being very handsome.

Lady Fanny, who was one year younger than her sister, was rather little
of her age, of a brown complexion, her features irregular; and, in
short, she had not the least real pretensions to beauty.

It was but lately that their father was, by the death of his eldest
brother, become Earl of Delun; so that their titles were new, and they
had not been long used to your ladyship.

Miss Jenny Peace received them as her old acquaintance: however, she
paid them the deference due to their quality, and, at the same time,
took care not to behave as if she imagined they thought of anything
else.

As it was her chief delight to communicate her pleasures to others, she
introduced her new-made friends to her old acquaintance, and expected to
have spent a very agreeable afternoon. But to describe the behaviour of
these two young ladies is very difficult. Lady Caroline, who was dressed
in a pink robe, embroidered thick with gold, and adorned with very fine
jewels, and the finest Mechlin lace, addressed most of her discourse to
her sister, that she might have the pleasure every minute of uttering
‘Your ladyship,’ in order to show what she herself expected. And as
she spoke, her fingers were in perpetual motion, either adjusting her
tucker, placing her plaits of her robe, or fiddling with a diamond
cross, that hung down on her bosom, her eyes accompanying her fingers as
they moved, and then suddenly being snatched off, that she might not be
observed to think of her own dress; yet was it plain, that her thoughts
were employed on only that and her titles. Miss Jenny Peace, although
she would have made it her choice always to have been in company who did
not deserve ridicule, yet had she humour enough to treat affectation
as it deserved. And she addressed herself to Lady Caroline with so many
ladyships, and such praises of her fine clothes, as she hoped would have
made her ashamed; but Lady Caroline was too full of her own vanity, to
see her design, and only exposed herself ten times the more, till she
really got the better of Miss Jenny, who blushed for her, since she was
incapable of blushing for herself.

Lady Fanny’s dress was plain and neat only, nor did she mention anything
about it; and it was very visible her thoughts were otherwise employed,
neither did she seem to take any delight in the words ‘Your ladyship’:
but she tossed and threw her person about into so many ridiculous
postures, and as there happened unfortunately to be no looking-glass
in the room where they sat, she turned and rolled her eyes so many
different ways, in endeavouring to view as much of herself as possible,
that it was very plain to the whole company she thought herself a
beauty, and admired herself for being so.

Our little society, whose hearts were so open to each other, that they
had not a thought they endeavoured to conceal, were so filled with
contempt at Lady Caroline and Lady Fanny’s behaviour, and yet so
strictly obliged, by good manners, not to show that contempt, that
the reserve they were forced to put on, laid them under so great a
restraint, that they knew not which way to turn themselves, or how
to utter one word; and great was their joy when Lady Caroline, as the
eldest, led the way, and with a swimming curtsey, her head turned half
round on one shoulder, and a disdainful eye, took her leave, repeating
two or three times the word ‘misses,’ to put them in mind, that she
was a lady. She was followed by her sister Lady Fanny, who made a slow
distinct curtsey to every one in the room, that she might be the
longer under observation. And then taking Miss Jenny by the hand, said,
‘Indeed, Miss, you are very pretty,’ in order to put them in mind of her
own beauty.

Our little society, as soon as they were released, retired to their
arbour, where, for some time, they could talk of nothing but this visit.
Miss Jenny Peace remarked how many shapes vanity would turn itself into,
and desired them to observe, how ridiculously Lady Caroline Delun turned
her whole thoughts on her dress, and condition of life; and how absurd
it was in Lady Fanny, who was a very plain girl, to set up for a beauty,
and to behave in a manner which would render her contemptible, even if
she had that beauty her own vanity made her imagine herself possessed
of.

Miss Nanny Spruce said, ‘She was greatly rejoiced that she had seen her
folly; for she could very well remember when she had the same vanity of
dress and superiority of station with Lady Caroline, though she had not,
indeed, a title to support it; and in what manner, she said, she would
tell them in the story of her life.




THE DESCRIPTION OF MISS NANNY SPRUCE.

Miss Nanny Spruce was just nine years old, and was the very reverse of
Patty Lockit, in all things; for she had little limbs, little features,
and such a compactness in her form, that she was often called the little
fairy. She had the misfortune to be lame in one of her hips; but by good
management, and a briskness and alacrity in carrying herself, it was a
very small blemish to her, and looked more like an idle childish gait,
than any real defect.




THE LIFE OF MISS NANNY SPRUCE.

‘My delight,’ said Miss Nanny Spruce, ‘ever since I can remember,
has been in dress and finery; for whenever I did as I was bid, I was
promised fine coats, ribbons, and laced caps; and when I was stubborn
and naughty, then my fine things were all to be locked up, and I was to
wear only an old stuff coat; so that I thought the only reward I could
have was to be dressed fine and the only punishment was to be plainly
dressed. By this means I delighted so much in fine clothes, that I never
thought of anything but when I should have something new to adorn myself
in; and I have sat whole days considering what should be my next new
coat; for I had always my choice given me of the colour.

‘We lived in a country parish, my papa being the only gentleman, so that
all the little girls in the parish used to take it as a great honour to
play with me. And I used to delight to show them my fine things, and to
see that they could not come at any but very plain coats. However, as
they did not pretend to have anything equal with me, I was kind enough
to them. As to those girls whose parents were so very poor that they
went in rags, I did not suffer them to come near me.

‘Whilst I was at home, I spent my time very pleasantly, as no one
pretended to be my equal; but as soon as I came to school, where other
misses were as fine as myself, and some finer, I grew very miserable.
Every new coat, every silver ribbon, that any of my schoolfellows wore,
made me unhappy. Your scarlet damask, Miss Betty Ford, cost me a week’s
pain; and I lay awake, and sighed and wept all night, because I did not
dare to spoil it. I had several plots in my head, to have dirtied it, or
cut it, so as to have made it unfit to wear; by some accident my plots
were prevented; and then I was so uneasy, I could not tell what to do
with myself; and so afraid, lest any body should suspect me of such a
thing, that I could not sleep in peace, for fear I should dream of it,
and in my sleep discover it to my bedfellow. I would not go through the
same dreads and terrors again for the world. But I am very happy now,
in having no thoughts but what my companions may know; for since that
quarrel, and Miss Jenny Peace was so good as to show me what I’m sure
I never thought of before, that is, that the road to happiness is by
conquering such foolish vanities, and the only way to be pleased is
to endeavour to please others, I have never known what it was to be
uneasy.’


As soon as Miss Nanny had finished speaking, Miss Betty Ford said, that
she heartily forgave her all her former designs upon her scarlet coat;
but, added she, Lady Fanny Delun put me no less in mind of my former
life, than Lady Caroline did you of yours; and if Miss Jenny pleases, I
will now relate it.




THE DESCRIPTION OF MISS BETTY FORD.

Miss Betty Ford was of the same age with Miss Nanny Spruce, and much of
the same height, and might be called the plainest girl in the school;
for she had nothing pleasing either in her person or face, except an
exceeding fair skin, and tolerable good black eyes; but her face was
ill-shaped and broad, her hair very red, and all the summer she was
generally very full of freckles; and she had also a small hesitation in
her speech. But without preamble, she began her life as follows.




THE LIFE OF MISS BETTY FORD.

‘My life,’ said Miss Betty Ford, ‘has hitherto passed very like that of
Miss Nanny Spruce, only with this difference, that as all her thoughts
were fixed on finery, my head ran on nothing but beauty. I had an elder
sister, who was, I must own, a great deal handsomer than me; and yet, in
my own mind, at that time, I did not think so, though I was always told
it was not for me to pretend to the same things with pretty Miss Kitty
(which was the name of my sister); and in all respects she was taken so
much more notice of than I was, that I perfectly hated her, and could
not help wishing that, by some accident, her beauty might be spoiled:
whenever any visitors came to the house, their praises of her gave me
the greatest vexation; and as I had made myself believe I was a very
great beauty, I thought that it was prejudice and ill-nature in all
around me, not to view me in that light. My sister Kitty was very good
natured; and though she was thus cried up for her beauty, and indulged
most on that account, yet she never insulted me, but did all in her
power to oblige me. But I could not love her, and sometimes would raise
lies against her, which did not signify, for she could always justify
herself. I could not give any reason for hating her, but her beauty,
for she was very good; but the better she was, I thought the worse
I appeared. I could not bear her praises without teasing and vexing
myself. At last, little Kitty died of a fever, to my great joy, though,
as everybody cried for her, I cried too for company, and because I would
not be thought ill-natured.

‘After Kitty’s death, I lived tolerably easy, till I came to school.
Then the same desire of beauty returned, and I hated all the misses who
were handsomer than myself, as much as I had before hated my sister, and
always took every opportunity of quarrelling with them, till I found my
own peace was concerned, in getting the better of this disposition; and
that, if I would have any content, I must not repine at my not being so
handsome as others.’


When Miss Betty Ford ceased, Miss Jenny said, ‘Indeed, my dear, it is
well you had not at that time the power of the eagle in the fable;
for your poor sister might then, like the peacock, have said in a soft
voice, “You are, indeed, a great beauty; but it lies in your beak and
your talons, which make it death to me to dispute it.”’

Miss Betty Ford rejoiced, that her power did not extend to enable her to
do mischief, before she had seen her folly. And now this little society,
in good humour and cheerfulness, attended their kind governess’s summons
to supper; and then, after the evening prayers, they retired to their
peaceful slumbers.




MONDAY. THE EIGHTH DAY.

Early in the morning, after the public prayers which Mrs. Teachum read
every day, our little company took a walk in the garden whilst the
breakfast was preparing.

The fine weather, the prospects round them, all conspired to increase
their pleasure. They looked at one another with delight; their minds
were innocent and satisfied; and therefore every outward object was
pleasing in their sight.

Miss Jenny Peace said, she was sure they were happier than any other
society of children whatever, except where the same harmony and love
were preserved, as were kept up in their minds: ‘For (continued she)
I think now, my dear companions, I can answer for you all, that
no mischievous, no malicious plots disturb the tranquility of your
thoughts; plots, which in the end, constantly fall on the head of
those who invent them, after all the pains they cost in forming, and
endeavouring to execute.’

Whilst Miss Jenny Peace was talking, Miss Dolly Friendly looked at her
very earnestly. She would not interrupt her; but the moment she was
silent, Miss Dolly said, ‘My dear Miss Jenny, what is the matter with
you? your eyes are swelled, and you look as if you had been crying. If
you have any grief that you keep to yourself, you rob us of the share we
have a right to demand in all that belongs to you.’

‘No, indeed (answered Miss Jenny), I have nothing that grieves me;
though, if I had, I should think it increased, rather than lessened, by
your being grieved too; but last night, after I went upstairs, I found
amongst my books the play of the Funeral, or, Grief-a-la-mode; where the
faithful and tender behaviour of a good old servant, who had long lived
in his lord’s family, with many other passages in the play (which I
cannot explain, unless you knew the whole story) made me cry, so that I
could hardly stop my tears.’

‘Pray, Miss Jenny, let us hear this play, that had such an effect on
you,’ was the general request; and Miss Jenny readily promised, when
they met in their arbour, to read it to them.

They eagerly ran to their arbour as soon as school was over, and Miss
Jenny performed her promise, and was greatly pleased to find such a
sympathy between her companions and herself; for they were most of them
affected just in the same manner, and with the same parts of the play,
as had before affected her.

By the time they had wiped their eyes, and were rejoicing at the turn
at the end of the play, in favour of the characters with which they were
most pleased, Mrs. Teachum entered the arbour, and inquired what they
had been reading. Miss Jenny immediately told her, adding, ‘I hope,
Madam, you will not think reading a play an improper amusement for us;
for I should be very sorry to be guilty myself, or cause my companions
to be guilty, of any thing that would meet with your disapprobation.’
Mrs. Teachum answered, that she was not at all displeased with her
having read a play, as she saw by her fear of offending, that her
discretion was to be trusted to. ‘Nay (continued this good woman), I
like that you should know something of all kinds of writings, where
neither morals nor manners are offended; for if you read plays, and
consider them as you ought, you will neglect and despise what is light
and useless, whilst you will imprint on your mind’s every useful lesson
that is to be drawn from them. I am very well acquainted with the play
you have been reading; but that I may see whether you give the proper
attention to what you have heard, I desire, my little girls, that one of
you will give me an account of the chief incidents in the play, and tell
me the story, just as you would do to one of your companions that had
happened to have been absent.’

Here they all looked upon Miss Jenny Peace, as thinking her the most
capable of doing what their governess required. But Mrs. Teachum,
reading their thoughts in their looks, said, ‘I exclude Miss Jenny in
this case; for as the play was of her choosing to read to you, I doubt
not but she is thoroughly enough acquainted with every part of it; and
my design was to try the memory and attention of some of the others.’

They all remained silent, and seemed to wait for a more particular
command, before any one would offer at the undertaking; not through
any backwardness to comply with Mrs. Teachum’s request, but each from a
diffidence of herself to perform it.

Miss Jenny Peace then said, that she had observed a great attention in
them all; and she did not doubt but every one was able to give a very
good account of what they had heard. ‘But, as Miss Sukey Jennet is the
eldest, I believe, madam, (continued she), if you approve it, they will
all be very ready to depute her as their speaker.’

Each smiled at being so relieved by Miss Jenny; and Mrs. Teachum, taking
Miss Sukey Jennet by the hand, said, ‘Come, my dear, throw off all fear
and reserve; imagine me one of your companions, and tell me the story of
the play you have been reading.’

Miss Sukey, thus encouraged by her kind governess, without any
hesitation, spoke in the following manner:

‘If I understand your commands, madam, by telling the story of the play,
you would not have me tell you the acts and scenes as they followed one
another for that I am afraid I can hardly remember, as I have heard
it only once but I must describe the chief people in the play, and the
plots and contrivances that are carried on amongst them.’

Mrs. Teachum nodded her head, and Miss Sukey thus proceeded:


‘There is an old Lord Brumpton, who had married a young wife, that had
lived with him some years, and by her deceitful and cunning ways had
prevailed with him to disinherit his only son Lord Hardy (who was a very
sensible good young man) and to leave him but a shilling. And this Lord
Brumpton was taken in a fit, so that all the house thought he was dead,
and his lady sent for an undertaker, one Mr. Sable, to bury him. But
coming out of his fit, when nobody but this Mr. Sable, and an old
servant, called Trusty, were by, he was prevailed upon by the good old
Trusty to feign himself still dead (and the undertaker promises secrecy)
in order to detect the wickedness of his wife, which old Trusty assures
him is very great; and then he carries his lord where he overhears
a discourse between the widow (as she thinks herself) and her maid
Tattleaid; and he bears his once beloved wife rejoicing in his supposed
death, and in the success of her own arts to deceive him. Then there are
two young ladies, Lady Charlotte and Lady Harriet Lovely, to whom this
Lord Brumpton was guardian; and he had also left them in the care of
this wicked woman. And this young Lord Hardy was in love with Lady
Charlotte; and Mr. Camply, a very lively young gentleman, his friend,
was in love with Lady Harriet and Lady Brumpton locked the two young
ladies up, and would not let them be seen by their lovers. But there
at last they contrived, by the help of old Trusty, who had their real
guardian’s consent for it, both to get away; and Lady Harriet married
Mr. Camply directly; but Lady Charlotte did not get away so soon, and
so was not married till the end of the play. This Mr. Camply was a
very generous man, and was newly come to a large fortune; and in the
beginning of the play he contrives, in a very genteel manner, to give
his friend Lord Hardy, who very much wanted it, three hundred pounds;
but he takes care to let us know, that my lord had formerly, when he
waited his assistance, been very kind to him. And there at last, when
Lady Brumpton finds out that the two young ladies are gone, she goes
away in a rage to Lord Hardy’s lodgings, and in an insulting manner she
pays all due legacies, as she calls it, that is, she gives Lord Hardy
the shilling, which, by her wicked arts, was all his father had left
him; and she was insulting the young ladies, and glorying in her
wickedness, when honest old Trusty came in, and brought in old Lord
Brumpton, whom they imagined to be dead, and all but Lady Brumpton
were greatly overjoyed to see him alive; but when he taxed her with
her falsehood, she defied him, and said that she had got a deed of
gift under his hand, which he could not revoke, and she WOULD enjoy his
fortune in spite of him. Upon which they all looked sadly vexed, till
the good old Trusty went out and came in again, and brought in a man
called Cabinet, who confessed himself the husband to the pretended Lady
Brumpton, and that he was married to her half a year before she was
married to my Lord Brumpton; but as my lord happened to fall in love
with her, they agreed to keep their marriage concealed, in order that
she should marry my lord, and cheat him in the manner she had done; and
the reason that Cabinet came to confess all this was, that he looked
into a closet and saw my lord writing, after he thought he was dead,
and, taking it for his ghost, was by that means frightened into this
confession, which he first made in writing to old Trusty, and therefore
could not now deny it. They were all rejoiced at this discovery, except
the late pretended Lady Brumpton, who sneaked away with Cabinet her
husband; and my Lord Brumpton embraced his son, and gave his consent,
that he should marry Lady Charlotte; and they were all pleased and
happy.’

Here Miss Sukey ceased, and Mrs. Teachum told her she was a very good
girl, and had remembered a great deal of the play. ‘But (said she) in
time, with using yourself to this way of repeating what you have read,
you will come to a better manner, and a more regular method of telling
your story, which you was now so intent upon finishing, that you forgot
to describe what sort of women those two young ladies were, though, as
to all the rest, you have been particular enough.’

‘Indeed, madam, (said Miss Sukey), I had forgot that, but Lady Charlotte
was a very sensible, grave young lady, and lady Harriet was extremely
gay and coquettish; but Mr. Camply tells her how much it misbecomes her
to be so and she having good sense, as well as good nature, is convinced
of her folly, and likes him so well for his reproof, that she consents
to marry him.’

Mrs. Teachum, addressing herself to them all, told them, that this was
a method she wished they would take with whatever they read; for nothing
so strongly imprinted anything on the memory as such a repetition; and
then turning to Miss Jenny Peace, she said, ‘And now, Miss Jenny, I
desire you will speak freely what you think is the chief moral to be
drawn from the play you have just read.’

Miss Jenny being thus suddenly asked a question of this nature,
considered some time before she gave an answer; for she was naturally
very diffident of her own opinion in anything where she had not been
before instructed by some one she thought wiser than herself. At last,
with a modest look, and an humble voice, she said, ‘Since, madam,
you have commanded me to speak my sentiments freely, I think by what
happened to each character in this play, the author intended to prove
what my good mamma first taught me, and what you, madam, since have so
strongly confirmed me in; namely, that folly, wickedness, and misery,
all three, as constantly dwell together, as wisdom, virtue, and
happiness do.’

‘’Tis very true (answered Mrs. Teachum); but this moral does not arise
only from the happy turn in favour of the virtuous characters in the
conclusion of the play, but is strongly inculcated, as you see all
along, in the peace of mind that attends the virtuous, even in the
midst of oppression and distress, while the event is yet doubtful, and
apparently against them; and, on the contrary, in the confusion of mind
which the vicious are tormented with, even whilst they falsely imagine
themselves triumphant.’

Mrs. Teachum then taking the book out of Miss Jenny’s hands, and turning
to the passage, said, ‘How does Lady Brumpton show us the wretched
condition of her own mind, when she says,

‘“How miserable ‘tis to have one one hates always about one! And when
one can’t endure one’s own reflections upon some actions, who can bear
the thoughts of another upon them?”

‘Then with what perturbation of mind does she proceed, to wish it was in
her power to increase her wickedness, without making use enough of her
understanding, to see that by that means she would but increase her own
misery.

‘On the other hand, what a noble figure does Lord Hardy make, when, by
this wicked woman’s contrivances, he thinks himself disinherited of his
whole fortune, ill-treated, and neglected by a father, he never had in
thought offended! He could give an opportunity to a sincere friend, who
would not flatter him, to say,

‘“No; you are, my lord, the extraordinary man, who, on the loss of an
almost princely fortune, can be master of a temper that makes you the
envy rather than pity, of your more fortunate, not more happy friends.”

‘This is a fine distinction between fortunate and happy; and intimates
this happiness must dwell in the mind, and depends upon no outward
accidents.

‘Fortune, indeed, is a blessing, if properly used; which Camply shows,
when by that means he can assist and relieve his worthy friend.

‘With what advantage does Lady Charlotte appear over her sister, when
the latter is trifling and dancing before the glass, and the former
says,

‘“If I am at first so silly as to be a little taken with myself, I know
it is a fault, and take pains to correct it.”

‘And on Lady Harriet’s saying, very giddily, that it was too soon for
her to think at that rate, Lady Charlotte properly adds,

‘“They that think it too soon to understand themselves, will very soon
find it too late.”

‘In how ridiculous a light does Lady Harriet appear, while she is
displaying all that foolish coquetry! And how different a figure does
she make, when she has got the better of it?

‘My Lady Brumpton, when alarmed with the least noise, breaks out into
all the convulsive starts natural to conscious guilt.

‘“Ha! what noise is that--that noise of fighting?--Run, I say.--Whither
are you going?--What, are you mad?--Will you leave me alone?--Can’t you
stir?--What, you can’t take your message with you!--Whatever ‘tis, I
suppose you are not in the plot, not you--nor that now they’re breaking
open my house for Charlotte--Not you.--Go see what’s the matter, I say;
I have nobody I can trust.--One minute I think this wench honest, and
the next false.--Whither shall I turn me?”

‘This is a picture of the confused, the miserable mind of a close,
malicious, cruel, designing woman, as Lady Brumpton was, and as Lady
Harriet very properly calls her.

‘Honesty and faithfulness shine forth in all their lustre, in the
good old Trusty. We follow him throughout with anxious wishes for his
success, and tears of joy for his tenderness. And when he finds that he
is likely to come at the whole truth, and to save his lord from being
deceived and betrayed into unjustly ruining his noble son, you may
remember that he makes this pious reflection:

All that is ours, is to be justly bent; And Heaven in its own time will
bless th’ event.

‘This is the natural thought that proceeds from innocence and goodness;
and surely this state of mind is happiness.

‘I have only pointed out a few passages, to show you, that though it is
the nature of comedy to end happily, and therefore the good characters
must be successful in the last act; yet the moral lies deeper, and is
to be deduced from a proof throughout this play, that the natural
consequence of vice is misery within, even in the midst of an apparent
triumph; and the natural consequence of goodness is a calm peace of
mind, even in the midst of oppression and distress.

‘I have endeavoured, my little dears, to show you, as clearly as I can,
not only what moral is to be drawn from this play, but what is to be
sought for in all others; and where that moral is not to be found, the
writer will have it to answer for, that he has been guilty of one of
the worst of evils; namely, that he has clothed vice in so beautiful
a dress, that, instead of deterring, it will allure and draw into its
snares the young and tender mind. And I am sorry to say, that too many
of our dramatic performances are of this latter cast; which is
the reason, that wise and prudent parents and governors in general
discourage in very young people the reading of plays. And though by what
I have said (if it makes a proper impression) I doubt not but you will
all have a just abhorrence of such immoral plays, instead of being
pleased with them, should they fall in your way; yet I would advise you
rather to avoid them, and never to read any but such as are approved of;
and recommended to you by those who have the care of your education.’

Here good Mrs. Teachum ceased, and left her little scholars to reflect
on what she had been saying; when Miss Jenny Peace declared, for her
part, that she could feel the truth of her governess’s observations; for
she had rather be the innocent Lord Hardy, though she was to have but
that one shilling in the world which was so insolently offered him as
his father’s last legacy, than be the Lady Brumpton, even though she had
possessed the fortune she so treacherously endeavoured to obtain.

‘Nay (said Miss Dolly Friendly) I had rather have been old Trusty, with
all the infirmities of age, following my Lord Hardy through the world,
had his poverty and distress been ever so great, than have been the
malicious Lady Brumpton, in the height of her beauty, surrounded by a
crowd of lovers and flatterers.’

Miss Henny Fret then declared how glad she was that she had now no
malice in her mind; though she could not always have said so, as she
would inform them in the history of her past life.




THE DESCRIPTION OF MISS HENNY FRET.

Miss Henny Fret was turned of nine years old. She was very prettily
made, and remarkably genteel. All her features were regular. She was not
very fair, and looked pale. Her upper lip seemed rather shorter than it
should be; for it was drawn up in such a manner, as to show her upper
teeth; and though this was in some degree natural, yet it had been very
much increased by her being continually on the fret for every trifling
accident that offended her, or on every contradiction that was offered
to her. When you came to examine her face, she had not one feature but
what was pretty; yet, from that constant uneasiness which appeared in
her countenance, it gave you so little pleasure to look at her, that she
seldom had common justice done her, but had generally hitherto passed
for a little insignificant plain girl, though her very face was so
altered since she was grown good natured, and had got the better of that
foolish fretfulness she used to be possessed of, that she appeared from
her good-humoured smiles quite a different person; and, with a mild
aspect, thus began her story:




THE LIFE OF MISS HENNY FRET.

‘I had one brother,’ said Miss Henny, ‘as well as Miss Jenny Peace; but
my manner of living with him was quite the reverse to that in which
she lived with her brother. All my praise or blame was to arise from my
being better or worse than my brother. If I was guilty of any fault,
it was immediately said, “Oh! fie, miss! Master George (that was my
brother’s name) would not be guilty of such a thing for the world.” If
he was carried abroad, and I stayed at home, then I was bemoaned over,
that poor Miss Henny was left at home, and her brother carried abroad.
And then I was told, that I should go abroad one of these days, and my
brother be left at home so that whenever I went abroad, my greatest joy
was, that he was left at home; and I was pleased to see him come out
to the coach-door with a melancholy air that he could not go too. If
my brother happened to have any fruit given him, and was in a peevish
humour, and would not give me as much as I desired, the servant that
attended me was sure to bid me take care, when I had anything he waited,
not to give him any. So that I thought, if I did not endeavour to be
revenged of him, I should show a want of spirit, which was of all things
what I dreaded most. I had a better memory than my brother, and whenever
I learnt anything, my comfort was to laugh at him because he could not
learn so fast; by which means I got a good deal of learning, but never
minded what I learnt, nor took any pains to keep it; so that what I was
eager to learn one day, to show George how much I knew more than he, I
forgot the next. And so I went on learning, and forgetting as fast as I
learnt; and all the pains I took served only to show that I COULD learn.

‘I was so great a favourite, that I was never denied any thing I
asked for; but I was very unhappy for the same reason that Miss Dolly
Friendly’s sister was so; and I have often sat down and cried, because I
did not know what I would have, till at last I own I grew so peevish and
humoursome, that I was always on the fret, and harboured in my mind a
kind of malice that made me fancy whatever my brother got, I lost; and
in this unhappy condition I lived, till I came to school, and here I
found that other misses wanted to have their humours as well as myself.
This I could not bear, because I had been used to have my own will, and
never to trouble myself about what others felt. For whenever I beat or
abused my brother, his pain did not make me cry; but I believe it was
thinking wrong made me guilty of these faults; for I don’t find I am
ill-natured; for now I have been taught to consider that my companions
can feel as well as myself, I am sorry for their pain, and glad when
they are pleased, and would be glad to do anything to oblige them.’


Here Miss Henny ceased, and Miss Jenny Peace then told her how glad she
was to hear that she had subdued all malice in her mind, adding, ‘These
weeds, my dear, unless early plucked up, are (as I have heard our good
governess observe upon a like occasion) very apt to take such deep root,
as to choke every good seed around them; and then who can tell whether,
with the same opportunities, they might not become Lady Brumptons before
the end of their lives?’

Little Polly Suckling remembered that all the company had told the story
of their past lives, except herself; and she thought she would not be
left out; but yet she had a mind to be asked to tell it, hoping that her
companions thought her of consequence enough not to leave her out of
any scheme; therefore, addressing herself to Miss Jenny, she said she
thought it was very pleasant to hear anybody tell the history of their
own lives. Miss Jenny saw her meaning, and answered, ‘So it is, my
little dear; and now, if you please, you shall oblige us with relating
the history of yours.’ Polly smiled at this request, and said she was
ready to comply.




THE DESCRIPTION OF MISS POLLY SUCKLING.

Miss Polly Suckling was just turned of eight years old, but so short
of her age, that few people took her to be above five. It was not a
dwarfish shortness; for she had the most exact proportioned limbs in
the world, very small bones, and was as fat as a little cherub. She was
extremely fair, and her hair quite flaxen. Her eyes a perfect blue, her
mouth small, and her lips quite plump and red. She had the freshness
of a milkmaid; and when she smiled and laughed, she seemed to show an
hundred agreeable dimples. She was, in short, the very picture of health
and good-humour, and was the plaything and general favorite of the whole
school.




THE LIFE OF MISS POLLY SUCKLING.

‘Now,’ said little Polly, ‘I will tell you all my whole history. I
hardly remember anything before I came to school, for I was but five
years old when I was brought hither.

‘All I know is, that I don’t love quarrelling, for I like better to
live in peace and quietness. But I have been always less than any of
my companions, ever since I have been here; and so I only followed the
example of the rest; and as I found they contended about everything, I
did so too. Besides, I have been always in fear that my schoolfellows
wanted to impose on me, because I was little; and so I used to engage in
every quarrel, rather than be left out, as if I was too little to give
any assistance; but, indeed, I am very glad now we all agree, because I
always came by the worst of it. And, besides, it is a great pleasure
to me to be loved, and every Miss is kind and good to me, and ready to
assist me whenever I ask them. And this is all I know of my whole life.’


When little Polly ceased, she was kissed and applauded by the whole
company, for the agreeable simplicity of her little history.

And thus ended the eighth day’s amusement.




TUESDAY. THE NINTH DAY.

Miss Jenny rose early in the morning, and, having collected the lives of
her companions (which she had wrote down each day, as they related them)
she carried them, after morning school, according to her promise, to her
governess.

Mrs. Teachum, when she had perused them, was much pleased; and said that
she perceived, by the manner in which her scholars had related their
lives, how much they were in earnest in their design of amendment. ‘For
(continued she) they have all confessed their faults without reserve;
and the untowardly bent of their minds, which so strongly appeared
before the quarrel, has not broke out in these their little histories;
but, on the contrary, they all seem, according to their capacities, to
have endeavoured at imitating your style, in the account you gave of
your own life. I would have you continue to employ your leisure hours
in the manner you have lately done, only setting apart a proper time
for exercise; and today I will dispense with your attendance in the
school-room and indulge you this afternoon in another walk, either to
the dairy house, or to the cherry-garden, whichever you all agree on.
But as I shall not go with you myself, and shall only find a servant
to take care of you, I hope to hear from you, Miss Jenny, so good an
account of the behaviour of your little friends and companions, that I
shall have no cause to repent my indulgence.’

Miss Jenny Peace respectfully took leave of her governess, and hastened
to the arbour, where her little friends were met, in expectation of her
coming. She told them how well pleased their governess was with them
all, for the ingenuous confession of their faults in their past lives;
and she then declared Mrs. Teachum’s kind permission to them to take
another walk that afternoon.

As no one had at present any story to read or relate, they employed
their time till dinner, some in walking and running about the garden;
others in looking after and tending some plant or flower, that they had
taken particularly under their care, which Mrs. Teachum both permitted
and encouraged them in, whilst Miss Jenny Peace, Miss Sukey Jennett,
and Miss Dolly Friendly, remained in the arbour, the two latter asking
a thousand questions of the former, both concerning all the instructions
she had ever learned from her mamma, and by what means they should best
be able to preserve that friendship and happiness, which had of late
subsisted amongst them; saying, how pleased their friends and relations
would be, to see such a change in their temper and behaviour, and how
much they should be beloved by every one.

When they met at dinner, Mrs. Teachum asked them, whether they had
determined upon the choice she had given them in their afternoon’s walk;
and they were all desirous of going to the dairy house; for little Polly
said, she longed to see the good-humoured old woman again, and, indeed,
she would not now say anything to her of her shaking head, or her
grey hair. Mrs. Teachum was pleased, that little Polly so gratefully
remembered the old woman, who had been so kind to her; and readily
consented to their choice, and approved of their determination.

Being soon equipped for their walk, they set out, attended by two
maidservants; and as soon as they arrived, the good old woman expressed
the highest joy on seeing them, and told little Polly, that she should
have plenty of cream and strawberries, for her daughter had been that
day in the wood, and had brought home three baskets of very fine ones.
Mrs. Nelly, her daughter, said very crossly, that she supposed there
would be fine work amongst them, now their governess was not with them;
but ‘twas her mother’s way, to let all children be as rude as they
pleased. Miss Sukey Jennett, with some indignation in her look, was
going to answer her; but Miss Jenny Peace, fearing she would say
something less mild than she wished, gave her a nod; and, turning to the
young woman, with great modesty and temper, thus said: ‘You shall see,
Mrs. Nelly, that our good governess’s instructions are of more force
with us, than to lose all their effect when we are out of her presence;
and I hope you will have no cause, when we go away, to complain of the
ill behaviour of any of us.’

The good old woman declared she never saw such sweet-tempered children
in all her life; and after they had eat their strawberries and cream,
and were loaded with pinks and roses by the good woman’s bounty (for
they did not gather one without her permission), they took their leave
with the utmost civility, and Miss Jenny handsomely rewarded the old
woman for her good cheer. Mrs. Nelly herself was so pleased with their
regular and inoffensive behaviour, that she could not help telling Miss
Jenny, that she, and all her companions, had, indeed, behaved as well as
if their governess had been with them: on which Miss Jenny (as they were
walking home) observed to Miss Sukey Jennett (whom she had prevented
from making any reply to Mrs. Nelly’s speech) how much better it was to
gain another’s good will by our own endeavours to be obliging, than to
provoke them to be more cross, by our angry answers and reproaches.

When this little company, employed in pleasing talk and lively
observations, were come within about a mile of Mrs. Teachum’s house, and
within view of a nobleman’s fine seat, Miss Jenny said, that the next
time their governess permitted them to walk out, she would ask her
leave, that they might go and see that fine house; for some time ago she
had told them, that they should go thither when the family were absent.
Mrs. Wilson, the housekeeper, who by chance was walking that way, and
heard what Miss Jenny said, came up to them, and told Miss Jenny that
her lord and lady were now both absent, having set out, one for London,
and the other for another fine seat, forty miles off, that very morning;
and as she knew them to be Mrs. Teachum’s well-regulated family, they
should be welcome to see the house and gardens now, if they liked it.
Miss Jenny thanked her, and said, as it was near two hours sooner than
their governess expected them home, she would accept of her kind offer.
The housekeeper led them through an avenue of tall elm-trees into this
magnificent house, in which were many spacious apartments, furnished
with the utmost grandeur and elegance. Some of the rooms were adorned
with fine pictures, others were hung with tapestry almost as lively as
those paintings, and most of the apartments above stairs were furnished
with the finest sorts of needle-work. Our little company were struck
into a sort of silent wonder and admiration at the splendid appearance
of everything around them; nor could they find words to express the
various reflections that passed in their minds, on seeing such a variety
of dazzling gaudy things: but when they came to the needlework, Miss
Jenny could not help smiling, to see how every one seemed most fixed in
attention upon that sort of work, which she herself was employed in, and
she saw in every face a secret wish, that their own piece of work might
be finished with equal neatness and perfection. The housekeeper was
greatly pleased to see them so much delighted, and answered all their
questions concerning the stories that were represented in the pictures
and tapestry as fully as the time would permit; but Miss Jenny, being
fearful of exceeding the hour in which they would be expected home, told
them they must not now stay any longer, but if their governess would
give them leave, and it would not be troublesome to Mrs. Wilson, they
would come another time. She answered, that it was so far from being
troublesome, that she never had more pleasure in her life, than to see
so many well-behaved young ladies, who all seemed not only pleased with
what they saw, but doubly delighted, and happy, in seeing each other so;
and for her part, she could wish they were to stay with her all their
lives; and, in short, they should not go till they had been in her room,
and eat some sweetmeats of her own making. The good woman seemed to take
so much delight in giving them any pleasure, that Miss Jenny could not
refuse accepting her offer; and, when they were all in her room, Polly
Suckling said, ‘Well, this is a most charming house; I wish we could all
live here for ever. How happy must the lord and lady of this fine place
be!’

‘Indeed, my little Polly,’ said Miss Jenny, ‘you may be very much
mistaken; for you know our good governess has taught us, that there is
no happiness but in the content of our own minds; and perhaps we may
have more pleasure in viewing these fine things, than the owners have in
the possession of them.’

‘It is very true,’ said the housekeeper, ‘for my lord and lady have no
delight in all this magnificence; for, by being so accustomed to it,
they walk through all these apartments, and never so much as observe or
amuse themselves with the work, the pictures, or anything else, or if
they observe them at all, it is rather with a look that denotes a sort
of weariness, at seeing the same things continually before them, than
with any kind of pleasure.’ And then, with a deep sigh, she added, ‘You
are, indeed, young lady, perfectly in the right, when you say grandeur
and happiness do not always go together.’ But turning off the discourse,
Mrs. Wilson forced them to take as many dried sweetmeats as they
could carry away with them, and insisted upon their promise (with
Mrs. Teachum’s consent) that they should come another time to see the
gardens. They then took their leave with many thanks, and the greatest
civility; and discoursed all the way home, on the fine things they
had seen. Miss Betty Ford said, that the fine gilding, and so many
glittering looking-glasses, made her think herself in Barbarico’s great
hall, where he kept all his treasure.

‘No,’ says Miss Nancy Spruce, ‘it was not half so much like that, as it
was like Brunetta’s fine castle; and I could not help thinking myself
the Princess Hebe, and how much I should have been pleased with such a
fine place at first, just as she was.’

‘Indeed,’ says Miss Betty Ford, ‘you are in the right of it, Miss Nanny;
for ‘twas much more like the description of Brunetta’s castle, than what
I said myself.’

Miss Jenny was pleased to hear Miss Betty so ready to own herself
mistaken; and said to Miss Nanny Spruce, ‘I am glad, my dear, to
find that you so well remember what you read; for it is by recalling
frequently into our memories the things we have read, that they are
likely to be of any service to us.’

Being now come home, they entered into the presence of their governess
with that pleasure, and proper confidence, which ever attends innocence
and goodness; and Mrs. Teachum received them with a pleasing smile.

Miss Jenny gave her governess a faithful account of all that had passed,
with the agreeable entertainment they had accidentally met with, of
seeing Lord X----‘s fine house, and the great civility of Mrs. Wilson,
‘Which I hope, madam,’ said Miss Jenny, ‘I did not do wrong in
accepting.’ ‘You did very properly, my dear,’ said Mrs. Teachum, ‘for
when any person is willing to oblige you, without any inconvenience to
themselves, it is always right to accept their offer, as you thereby
gratify them, by putting it in their power to give you pleasure.’

Miss Jenny then with great cheerfulness and freedom, told her governess
all that had paled in conversation, both in their walk to the
dairy house, and at Lord X--‘s, what little Polly had said in the
housekeeper’s room, as also Mrs. Wilson’s answer; and said, by Mrs.
Wilson’s downcast look, she was afraid that poor Lord X---- and his lady
were not so happy as might be wished. ‘But,’ continued she, ‘I did
not ask Mrs. Wilson any questions, because you have taught me, madam,
carefully to avoid the least appearance of impertinent curiosity.’

‘You was very right, my dear,’ said Mrs. Teachum, ‘in asking no farther
questions; nor would she, I dare say, as she is a prudent woman, have
gratified you if you had; for though the unhappy story is too well known
all over the country, yet it would have been very unbecoming in one
of the family to have published it.’ Mrs. Teachum saw in her little
scholars’ eyes, a secret wish of knowing what this story was; and, after
a short pause, she said, ‘Since I find you disposed, my good girls, to
make the proper use of what you hear, I will indulge your curiosity.

‘Lord X---- and his lady have been married seven years; Lord X---- is
the wretchedest creature breathing, because he has no children, and
therefore no heir to his title and large estate. He was naturally of a
haughty impetuous temper, and impatient of any the least disappointment;
and this disposition not being subdued in his youth, has led him into
all sort of excesses. His lady is not much better tempered than himself,
and valuing herself highly upon her beauty, and the large fortune
she brought him, greatly resents his sometimes insolent, and always
neglectful usage of her. They have hitherto lived on in the most
jarring, disputing manner, and took no care to conceal their quarrels
from the world; but at last they have agreed to part by consent, and the
different journeys they this morning took, I suppose, was with an intent
of final separation.

‘That grandeur and happiness do not always go together (as Mrs. Wilson
observed to you) is seen by this story, which I was the more willing
to tell you, as it was a proper introduction to a fable I have been
collecting together from others, for your use. You know that all my
endeavours to make you good, are only intended to make you happy; and
if you thoroughly reflect upon the truth of this maxim, which I so often
endeavour to inculcate, you will doubtless reap no small advantage from
it.’

Here Mrs. Teachum ceased speaking, and, giving Miss Jenny Peace a paper,
she bid her read it aloud; which she did, and it contained the following
fable:




THE ASSEMBLY OF THE BIRDS. A FABLE.

In ancient days, there was a great contention amongst the birds, which,
from his own perfections, and peculiar advantages, had the strongest
title to happiness; and at last they agreed to refer the decision of the
debate to the eagle.

A day was appointed for their meeting; the eagle took his seat, and the
birds all attended to give in their several pleas.

First spoke the parrot. Her voice so dearly resembling human speech, and
which enabled her to converse with such a superior race, she doubted not
(she said) would have its just weight with the eagle, and engage him to
grant a decree in her favour; and to this plea she also added, that she
dwelt in a fine cage adorned with gold, and was fed every day by the
hands a fair lady.

‘And pray, Mrs. Poll,’ said the eagle, ‘how comes it, since you fare so
sumptuously, that you are so lean and meagre, and seem scarcely able
to exert that voice you thus make your boast of?’ ‘Alas!’ replied
the parrot, ‘poor Poll’s lady has kept her bed almost this week; the
servants have all forgot to feed me; and I am almost starved.’ ‘Pray
observe,’ said the eagle, ‘the folly of such pride! Had you been able to
have conversed only with your own kind, you would have fared in common
with them; but it is to this vaunted imitation of the human voice, that
you owe your confinement, and consequently (though living in a golden
cage) your dependence upon the will and memory of others, even for
common necessary food.’

Thus reproved, the parrot, with shame, hastily retired from the
assembly.

Next stood forth the daw, and, having tricked himself in all the gay
feathers he could muster together, on the credit of these borrowed
ornaments, pleaded his beauty, as a title to the preference in dispute.
Immediately the birds agreed to divest the silly counterfeit of all his
borrowed plumes; and, more abashed than the parrot, he secretly slunk
away.

The peacock, proud of native beauty, now flew into the midst of the
assembly. He displayed before the sun his gorgeous tail. ‘Observe (said
he) how the vivid blue of the sapphire glitters in my neck; and when
thus I spread my tail, a gemmy brightness strikes the eye from a plumage
varied with a thousand glowing colours.’ At this moment, a nightingale
began to chant forth his melodious lay; at which the peacock, dropping
his expanded tail, cried out, ‘Ah what avails my silent unmeaning
beauty, when I am so far excelled in voice by such a little
russet-feathered wretch as that!’ And, by retiring, he gave up all claim
to the contended-for preference.

The nightingale was so delighted with having got the better of the
peacock, that he exerted his little voice, and was so lost in the
conceit of his own melody, that he did not observe a hawk, who flew upon
him, and carried him off in his claws.

The eagle then declared, ‘That as the peacock’s envy had taken away all
his claim, so no less had the nightingale’s self-conceit frustrated
all his pretensions; for those who are so wrapped up in their own
perfections, as to mind nothing but themselves, are forever liable to
all sorts of accidents.’ And, besides, it was plain, by the exultation
the nightingale expressed on his imagined glory over the peacock, that
he would have been equally dejected on any preference given to another.

And now the owl, with an affected gravity, and whooting voice, pleaded
his well-known wisdom; and said, ‘He doubted not but the preference
would be granted to him without contest, by all the whole assembly for
what was so likely to produce happiness as wisdom?’

The eagle declared, ‘That, if his title to wisdom could be proved, the
justice of his claim should be allowed; and then asked him, how he could
convince them of the truth of what he had advanced?’ The owl answered,
‘That he would willingly appeal to the whole assembly for their
decision in this point; for he was positive nobody could deny his great
superiority as to wisdom.’ Being separately asked, they most of them
declared, that they knew no one reason, either from his words or
actions, to pronounce him a wise bird; though it was true, that by an
affected solemnity in his looks, and by frequent declarations of his
own, that he was very wife, he had made some very silly birds give
him that character; but, since they were called upon to declare their
opinions, they must say, that he was ever the object of contempt to all
those birds who had any title to common understanding. The eagle then
said, ‘He could by no means admit a plea, which as plainly appeared
to be counterfeit, as were the jay’s borrowed feathers.’ The owl, thus
disappointed, flew away, and has ever since shunned the light of the
sun, and has never appeared in the daytime, but to be scorned and
wondered at.


It would be endless to repeat all the several pleas brought by the
birds, each desiring to prove, that happiness ought to be his own
peculiar lot. But the eagle observing that the arguments made use of to
prove their point were chiefly drawn from the disadvantages of others,
rather than from any advantage of their own, told them, ‘There was too
much envy and malice amongst them, for him to pronounce any of them
deserving or capable of being happy; but I wonder,’ says he, ‘why the
dove alone is absent from this meeting?’ ‘I know of one in her nest hard
by,’ answered the redbreast, ‘shall I go and call her?’ ‘No,’ says the
eagle, ‘since she did not obey our general summons, ‘tis plain she had
no ambition for a public preference; but I will take two or three chosen
friends, and we will go softly to her nest, and see in what manner she
is employing herself; for from our own observations upon the actions
of any one, we are more likely to form a judgment of them, than by any
boasts they can make.’

The eagle was obeyed, and, accompanied only by the linnet, the lark, the
lapwing, and the redbreast for his guide, he stole gently to the place
where the dove was found hovering over her nest, waiting the return of
her absent mate; and, thinking herself quite unobserved,


     [*] While o’er her callow brood she hung,
     She fondly thus address’d her young:
         ‘Ye tender objects of my care,
     Peace! peace! ye little helpless pair.
     Anon! he comes, your gentle sire,
     And brings you all your hearts require;
     For us, his infants and his bride,
     For us, with only love to guide,
     Our lord assumes an eagle’s speed,
     And, like a lion, dares to bleed:
     Nor yet by wintry skies confin’d,
     He mounts upon the rudest wind,
     From danger tears the vital spoil,
     And with affection sweetens toil.
     Ah! cease, too vent’rous, cease to dare;
     In thine, our dearer safety spare.
     From him, ye cruel falcons stray;
     And turn, ye fowlers, far away,
     --All-giving Pow’r, great source of life,
     Oh! hear the parent, hear the wife:
     That life thou lendest from above,
     Though little, make it large in love.
     Oh! bid my feeling heart expand
     To ev’ry claim on ev’ry hand,
     To those, from whom my days I drew,
     To these in whom those days renew,
     To all my kin, however wide,
     In cordial warmth as blood allied.
     To friends in steely fetters twin’d
     And to the cruel not unkind;
     But chief the lord of my desire,
     My life, myself, my soul, my sire,
     Friends, children, all that wish can claim,
     Chaste passion clasp, and rapture name.
     Oh! spare him, spare him, gracious Pow’r:
     Oh! give him to my latest hour,
     Let me my length of life employ,
     To give my sole enjoyment joy.
     His love let mutual love excite;
     Turn all my cares to his delight,
     And ev’ry needless blessing spare,
     Wherein my darling wants a share.
     --Let one unruffled calm delight
     The loving and belov’d unite;
     One pure desire our bosoms warm;
     One will direct, one wish inform;
     Through life one mutual aid sustain;
     In death one peaceful grave contain.’
     While, swelling with the darling theme,
     Her accents pour’d an endless stream.
     The well-known wings a sound impart
     That reach’d her ear, and touch’d her heart.
     Quick dropp’d the music of her tongue,
     And forth, with eager joy, she sprung.
     As swift her ent’ring consort flew,
     And plum’d, and kindled at the view.
     Their wings, their souls, embracing, meet,
     Their hearts with answ’ring measure beat,
     Half lost in sacred sweets, and bless’d
     With raptures felt, but ne’er express’d.
         Strait to her humble roof she led
     The partner of her spotless bed;
     Her young, a flutt’ring pair, arise,
     Their welcome sparkling in their eyes,
     Transported, to their sire they bound,
     And hang, with speechless action, round.
     In pleasure wrapt, the parents stand,
     And see their little wings expand;
     The sire his life sustaining prize
     To each expecting bill applies;
     There fondly pours the wheaten spoil,
     With transport giv’n, though won with toil;
     While, all collected at the sight,
     And silent through supreme delight,
     The fair high heav’n of bliss beguiles,
     And on her lord and infants smiles.


     [*] These verses are a quotation from that tender fable of
     the Sparrow and the Dove, in the ‘Fables for the Female
     Sex.’


The eagle now, without any hesitation, pronounced the dove to be
deservedly the happiest of the feathered kind; and however unwilling the
rest of the birds were to assent to the judgment given, yet could they
not dispute the justice of the decree.


Here Miss Jenny ceased reading, and all the little company expressed by
their looks, that they were overjoyed at the eagle’s determination; for
they had all in their own minds forestalled the eagle’s judgment, of
giving the preference to the dove. ‘Now, my good children,’ said Mrs.
Teachum, ‘if you will pass through this life with real pleasure, imitate
the dove; and remember, that innocence of mind, and integrity of heart,
adorn the female character, and can alone produce your own happiness,
and diffuse it to all around you.’

Our little company thanked their governess for her fable; and, just
at that instant, they heard a chariot drive into the court, and Mrs.
Teachum went out to see what visitor could be arrived so late in the
evening; for it was near eight o’clock.

They all remained in the room where their governess left them; for they
had been taught never to run out to the door, or to the windows, to look
at any strangers that came, till they knew whether it was proper for
them to see them or not.

Mrs. Teachum soon returned with a letter open in her hand, and remained
some little time silent; but cast on every one round such a tender
and affectionate look, a tear almost starting from her eye, that the
sympathising sorrow seemed to spread through the whole company, and they
were all silent, and ready to cry, though they knew not for what reason.
‘I am sorry, my little dears,’ said Mrs. Teachum, ‘to give your tender
bosoms the uneasiness I fear the contents of this letter will do, as it
will deprive you of that your hearts so justly hold most dear.’ And, so
saying, she delivered to Miss Jenny Peace, the following letter:--


‘To Miss Jenny Peace.

‘Monday night, June 24.

‘My dear niece,--I arrived safe at my own house, with your cousin
Harriet, last Saturday night, after a very tedious voyage by sea, and
a fatiguing journey by land. I long to see my dear Jenny as soon as
possible, and Harriet is quite impatient for that pleasure.

‘I have ordered my chariot to be with you tomorrow night; and I desire
you would set out on Wednesday morning, as early as your inclination
shall prompt you to come to

‘Your truly affectionate aunt,

‘M. NEWMAN.

‘I have writ a letter of thanks to your kind governess, for her care of
you.’


It is impossible to describe the various sensations of Miss Jenny’s
mind, on the reading this letter. Her rising joy at the thoughts of
seeing her kind aunt safely returned from a long and tedious voyage,
was suppressed by a sorrow, which could not be resisted, on parting with
such dear friends, and so good a governess; and the lustre which such a
joy would have given to her eye, was damped by rising tears. Her heart
for some time was too full for utterance. At last, turning to her
governess, she said, ‘And is the chariot really come, to carry me to my
dear aunt?’ Then, after a pause, the tears trickling down her cheeks,
‘And must I so soon leave you, madam, and all my kind companions?’ Mrs.
Teachum, on seeing Miss Jenny’s tender struggles of mind, and all her
companions at once bursting into tears, stood up, and left the room,
saying, ‘She would come to them again after supper.’ For this prudent
woman well knew, that it was in vain to contend with the very first
emotions of grief on such an occasion, but intended, at her return, to
show them how much it was their duty and interest to conquer all sorts
of extravagant sorrow.

They remained some time silent, as quite struck dumb with concern, till
at last Miss Dolly Friendly, in broken accents, cried out, ‘And must we
lose you, my dear Miss Jenny, now we are just settled in that love and
esteem for you, which your goodness so well deserves?’

Miss Jenny endeavoured to dry up her tears, and then said, ‘Although
I cannot but be pleased, my dear companions, at every mark of your
affection for me; yet I beg that you would not give me the pain to see
that I make so many dear friends unhappy. Let us submit cheerfully to
this separation (which, believe me, is as deeply felt by me as any
of you) because it is our duty so to do; and let me entreat you to be
comforted, by reflecting, how much my good aunt’s safe return must
be conducive to my future welfare; nor can you be unhappy, while you
continue with so good a governess, and persist in that readiness to obey
her, which you have lately shown. She will direct who shall preside over
your innocent amusements in my place. I will certainly write to you, and
shall always take the greatest delight in hearing from each of you, both
while you continue here, and when your duty and different connections
shall call you elsewhere. We may some, and perhaps all, of us, happen
often to meet again; and I hope a friendship, founded on so innocent and
so good a foundation as ours is, will always subsist, as far as shall be
consistent with our future situations in life.’

Miss Jenny’s friends could not answer her but by sobs and tears; only
little Polly Suckling, running to her, clung about her neck, and cried,
‘Indeed, indeed, Miss Jenny, you must not go; I shall break my heart, if
I lose you: sure we shan’t, nor we can’t, be half so happy, when you are
gone, though our governess was ten times better to us than she is.’

Miss Jenny again entreated them to dry up their tears, and to be more
contented with the present necessity; and begged, that they would not
let their governess see them so overwhelmed in sorrow on her return; for
she might take it unkindly, that they should be so afflicted at the loss
of one person, while they still remained under her indulgent care and
protection.

It was with the utmost difficulty, that Miss Jenny refrained from
shedding tear for tear with her kind companions; but as it was her
constant maxim to partake with her friends all her pleasure, and to
confine her sorrows as much as possible within her own bosom, she chose
rather to endeavour, by her own cheerfulness and innocent talk, to steal
insensibly from the bosoms of her little companions half their sorrow;
and they begin to appear tolerably easy.

After supper, Mrs. Teachum returned; and, seeing them all striving who
should most conceal their grief, for fear of giving uneasiness to the
rest, yet with a deep dejection fixed in every countenance, and little
Polly still sobbing behind Miss Jenny’s chair, she was so moved herself
with the affecting scene, that the tears stole from her eyes; and the
sympathising company once more eased their almost bursting hearts, by
another general flow of melting sorrow.

‘My dear children,’ said Mrs. Teachum, ‘I am not at all surprised at
your being so much concerned to part with Miss Jenny. I love her myself
with a motherly affection (as I do all of you, and shall ever continue
to do so while you so well deserve it); and I could wish, for my own
sake, never to part with her as long as I live; but I consider, that it
is for her advantage, and I would have you all remember, in her absence,
to let her example and friendship fill your hearts with joy, instead of
grief. It is now pretty late in the evening, and as Miss Jenny is to set
out very early in the morning, I must insist upon shortening your pain
(for such is your present situation), and desire you would take your
leave of this your engaging friend.’

They none of them attempted to speak another word, for their hearts were
still too full for utterance; and Miss Jenny took every one by the hand
as they went out of the room, saluted them with the tenderest affection,
mingling tears with those which flowed from every streaming eye; and,
wishing them all happiness and joy till their next meeting, they all,
with heavy hearts, retired to rest.

Miss Jenny returned the warmest and most grateful acknowledgments to her
good governess, for all her care of her; and said, ‘I shall attribute
every happy hour, madam, that I may hereafter be blessed with, to
your wise and kind instruction, which I shall always remember with the
highest veneration, and shall ever consider you as having been to me no
less than a fond and indulgent mother.’

Mrs. Teachum kept Miss Jenny in the room with her no longer than to
assure her how sincerely she should regret her absence, and confessed
how much of the regularity and harmony of her school she owed to her
good example, for sweetness of temper, and conformity to rules.




THE END OF THE NINTH DAY.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE HISTORY OF MRS. TEACHUM, &C.


Although Miss Jenny Peace did not return any more to school; yet she
ever gratefully remembered the kindness of her governess, and frequently
corresponded with all her companions. And as they continued their
innocent amusements and meetings in the arbour, whenever the weather
would permit, there was no day thought to be better employed than that
in which they received a letter from their absent instructive friend,
whose name was always mentioned with gratitude and honour.

Mrs. Teachum continued the same watchful care over any young persons who
were entrusted to her management; and she never increased the number
of her scholars, though often entreated so to do. All quarrels and
contentions were banished her house; and if ever any such thing was
likely to arise, the story of Miss Jenny Peace’s reconciling all her
little companions was told to them; so that Miss Jenny, though absent,
still seemed (by the bright example which she left behind her) to be the
cement of union and harmony in this well-regulated society. And if any
girl was found to harbour in her breast a rising passion, which it was
difficult to conquer, the name and story of Miss Jenny Peace soon gained
her attention, and left her without any other desire than to emulate
Miss Jenny’s virtues.

In short, Mrs. Teachum’s school was always mentioned throughout the
country, as an example of peace and harmony; and also by the daily
improvement of all her girls, it plainly appeared how early young people
might attain great knowledge, if their minds were free from foolish
anxieties about trifles, and properly employed on their own improvement;
for never did any young lady leave Mrs. Teachum, but that her parents
and friends were greatly delighted with her behaviour, as she had made
it her chief study to learn always to pay to her governors the most
exact obedience, and to exert towards her companions all the good
effects of a mind filled with benevolence and love.
