OROONOKO; OR THE ROYAL SLAVE.


  Epistle Dedicatory.

  TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAITLAND.


  My Lord,

Since the World is grown so Nice and Critical upon Dedications, and will
Needs be Judging the Book by the Wit of the Patron; we ought, with a
great deal of Circumspection to chuse a Person against whom there can be
no Exception; and whose Wit and Worth truly Merits all that one is
capable of saying upon that Occasion.

The most part of Dedications are charg’d with Flattery; and if the World
knows a Man has some Vices, they will not allow one to speak of his
Virtues. This, My Lord, is for want of thinking Rightly; if Men wou’d
consider with Reason, they wou’d have another sort of Opinion, and
Esteem of Dedications; and wou’d believe almost every Great Man has
enough to make him Worthy of all that can be said of him there. My Lord,
a Picture-drawer, when he intends to make a good Picture, essays the
Face many Ways, and in many Lights, before he begins; that he may chuse
from the several turns of it, which is most Agreeable and gives it the
best Grace; and if there be a Scar, an ungrateful Mole, or any little
Defect, they leave it out; and yet make the Picture extreamly like: But
he who has the good Fortune to draw a Face that is exactly Charming in
all its Parts and Features, what Colours or Agreements can be added to
make it Finer? All that he can give is but its due; and Glories in a
Piece whose Original alone gives it its Perfection. An ill Hand may
diminish, but a good Hand cannot augment its Beauty. A Poet is a Painter
in his way; he draws to the Life, but in another kind; we draw the
Nobler part, the Soul and Mind; the Pictures of the Pen shall out-last
those of the Pencil, and even Worlds themselves. ’Tis a short Chronicle
of those Lives that possibly wou’d be forgotten by other Historians, or
lye neglected there, however deserving an immortal Fame; for Men of
eminent Parts are as Exemplary as even Monarchs themselves; and Virtue
is a noble Lesson to be learn’d, and ’tis by Comparison we can Judge and
Chuse. ’Tis by such illustrious Presidents as your Lordship the World
can be Better’d and Refin’d; when a great part of the lazy Nobility
shall, with Shame, behold the admirable Accomplishments of a Man so
Great, and so Young.

Your Lordship has Read innumerable Volumes of Men and Books, not Vainly
for the gust of Novelty, but Knowledge, excellent Knowledge: Like the
industrious Bee, from every Flower you return Laden with the precious
Dew, which you are sure to turn to the Publick Good. You hoard no one
Reflection, but lay it all out in the Glorious Service of your Religion
and Country; to both which you are a useful and necessary Honour: They
both want such Supporters; and ’tis only Men of so elevated Parts, and
fine Knowledge; such noble Principles of Loyalty and Religion this
Nation Sighs for. Where shall we find a Man so Young, like St.
Augustine, in the midst of all his Youth and Gaiety, Teaching the World
Divine Precepts, true Notions of Faith, and Excellent Morality, and, at
the same time be also a perfect Pattern of all that accomplish a Great
Man? You have, My Lord, all that refin’d Wit that Charms, and the
Affability that Obliges; a Generosity that gives a Lustre to your
Nobility; that Hospitality, and Greatness of Mind that ingages the
World; and that admirable Conduct, that so well Instructs it. Our Nation
ought to regret and bemoan their Misfortunes, for not being able to
claim the Honour of the Birth of a Man who is so fit to serve his
Majesty, and his Kingdoms in all Great and Publick Affairs; And to the
Glory of your Nation, be it spoken, it produces more considerable Men,
for all fine Sence, Wit, Wisdom, Breeding and Generosity (for the
generality of the Nobility) than all other Nations can Boast; and the
Fruitfulness of your Virtues sufficiently make amends for the Barrenness
of your Soil: Which however cannot be incommode to your Lordship; since
your Quality and the Veneration that the Commonalty naturally pay their
Lords creates a flowing Plenty there . . . that makes you Happy. And to
compleat your Happiness, my Lord, Heaven has blest you with a Lady, to
whom it has given all the Graces, Beauties, and Virtues of her Sex; all
the Youth, Sweetness of Nature, of a most illustrious Family; and who is
a most rare Example to all Wives of Quality, for her eminent Piety,
Easiness, and Condescention; and as absolutely merits Respect from all
the World as she does that Passion and Resignation she receives from
your Lordship; and which is, on her part, with so much Tenderness
return’d. Methinks your tranquil Lives are an Image of the new Made and
Beautiful Pair in Paradise: And ’tis the Prayers and Wishes of all, who
have the Honour to know you, that it may Eternally so continue with
Additions of all the Blessings this World can give you.

My Lord, the Obligations I have to some of the Great Men of your Nation,
particularly to your Lordship, gives me an Ambition of making my
Acknowledgements by all the Opportunities I can; and such humble Fruits
as my Industry produces I lay at your Lordship’s Feet. This is a true
Story, of a Man Gallant enough to merit your Protection, and, had he
always been so Fortunate, he had not made so Inglorious an end: The
Royal Slave I had the Honour to know in my Travels to the other World;
and though I had none above me in that Country yet I wanted power to
preserve this Great Man. If there be anything that seems Romantick I
beseech your Lordship to consider these Countries do, in all things, so
far differ from ours that they produce unconceivable Wonders, at least,
so they appear to us, because New and Strange. What I have mentioned I
have taken care shou’d be Truth, let the Critical Reader judge as he
pleases. ’Twill be no Commendation to the Book to assure your Lordship I
writ it in a few Hours, though it may serve to Excuse some of its Faults
of Connexion, for I never rested my Pen a Moment for Thought: ’Tis
purely the Merit of my Slave that must render it worthy of the Honour it
begs; and the Author of that of Subscribing herself,

  My Lord
    Your Lordship’s most oblig’d
      and obedient Servant
        A. Behn.




THE HISTORY OF THE _ROYAL SLAVE_.


I do not pretend, in giving you the History of this _ROYAL SLAVE_, to
entertain my Reader with the Adventures of a feign’d _Hero_, whose Life
and Fortunes Fancy may manage at the Poet’s Pleasure; nor in relating
the Truth, design to adorn it with any Accidents, but such as arrived in
earnest to him: And it shall come simply into the World, recommended by
its own proper Merits, and natural Intrigues; there being enough of
Reality to support it, and to render it diverting, without the Addition
of Invention.

I was myself an Eye-witness to a great Part of what you will find here
set down; and what I could not be Witness of, I receiv’d from the Mouth
of the chief Actor in this History, the _Hero_ himself, who gave us the
whole Transactions of his Youth: And I shall omit, for Brevity’s Sake,
a thousand little Accidents of his Life, which, however pleasant to us,
where History was scarce, and Adventures very rare, yet might prove
tedious and heavy to my Reader, in a World where he finds Diversions for
every Minute, new and strange. But we who were perfectly charm’d with
the Character of this great Man, were curious to gather every
Circumstance of his Life.

The Scene of the last Part of his Adventures lies in a Colony in
_America_, called _Surinam_, in the _West-Indies_.

But before I give you the Story of this _Gallant Slave_, ’tis fit I tell
you the Manner of bringing them to these new _Colonies_; those they make
Use of there, not being _Natives_ of the Place: for those we live with
in perfect Amity, without daring to command ’em; but, on the contrary,
caress ’em with all the brotherly and friendly Affection in the World;
trading with them for their Fish, Venison, Buffaloes Skins, and little
Rarities; as _Marmosets_, a sort of Monkey, as big as a Rat or Weasel,
but of a marvellous and delicate Shape, having Face and Hands like a
Human Creature; and _Cousheries_, a little Beast in the Form and Fashion
of a Lion, as big as a Kitten, but so exactly made in all Parts like
that Noble Beast, that it is it in _Miniature_: Then for little
_Paraketoes_, great _Parrots_, _Muckaws_, and a thousand other Birds and
Beasts of wonderful and surprizing Forms, Shapes, and Colours: For Skins
of prodigious Snakes, of which there are some three-score Yards in
Length; as is the Skin of one that may be seen at his Majesty’s
_Antiquary’s_; where are also some rare Flies, of amazing Forms and
Colours, presented to ’em by myself; some as big as my Fist, some less;
and all of various Excellencies, such as Art cannot imitate. Then we
trade for Feathers, which they order into all Shapes, make themselves
little short Habits of ’em, and glorious Wreaths for their Heads, Necks,
Arms and Legs, whose Tinctures are unconceivable. I had a Set of these
presented to me, and I gave ’em to the _King’s Theatre_; it was the
Dress of the _Indian Queen_, infinitely admir’d by Persons of Quality;
and was inimitable. Besides these, a thousand little Knacks, and
Rarities in Nature; and some of Art, as their Baskets, Weapons, Aprons,
&c. We dealt with ’em with Beads of all Colours, Knives, Axes, Pins and
Needles, which they us’d only as Tools to drill Holes with in their
Ears, Noses and Lips, where they hang a great many little Things; as
long Beads, Bits of Tin, Brass or Silver beat thin, and any shining
Trinket. The Beads they weave into Aprons about a Quarter of an Ell
long, and of the same Breadth; working them very prettily in Flowers of
several Colours; which Apron they wear just before ’em, as _Adam_ and
_Eve_ did the Fig-leaves; the Men wearing a long Stripe of Linen, which
they deal with us for. They thread these Beads also on long
Cotton-threads, and make Girdles to tie their Aprons to, which come
twenty times, or more, about the Waste, and then cross, like a
Shoulder-belt, both Ways, and round their Necks, Arms and Legs. This
Adornment, with their long black Hair, and the Face painted in little
Specks or Flowers here and there, makes ’em a wonderful Figure to
behold. Some of the Beauties, which indeed are finely shap’d, as almost
all are, and who have pretty Features, are charming and novel; for they
have all that is called Beauty, except the Colour, which is a reddish
Yellow; or after a new Oiling, which they often use to themselves, they
are of the Colour of a new Brick, but smooth, soft and sleek. They are
extreme modest and bashful, very shy, and nice of being touch’d. And
tho’ they are all thus naked, if one lives for ever among ’em, there is
not to be seen an indecent Action, or Glance: and being continually us’d
to see one another so unadorn’d, so like our first Parents before the
Fall, it seems as if they had no Wishes, there being nothing to heighten
Curiosity: but all you can see, you see at once, and every Moment see;
and where there is no Novelty, there can be no Curiosity. Not but I have
seen a handsome young _Indian_, dying for Love of a very beautiful young
_Indian_ Maid; but all his Courtship was, to fold his Arms, pursue her
with his Eyes, and Sighs were all his Language: While she, as if no such
Lover were present, or rather as if she desired none such, carefully
guarded her Eyes from beholding him; and never approach’d him, but she
looked down with all the blushing Modesty I have seen in the most Severe
and Cautious of our World. And these People represented to me an
absolute _Idea_ of the first State of Innocence, before Man knew how to
sin: And ’tis most evident and plain, that simple Nature is the most
harmless, inoffensive and virtuous Mistress. ’Tis she alone, if she were
permitted, that better instructs the World, than all the Inventions of
Man: Religion would here but destroy that Tranquillity they possess by
Ignorance; and Laws would but teach ’em to know Offences, of which now
they have no Notion. They once made Mourning and Fasting for the Death
of the _English_ Governor, who had given his Hand to come on such a Day
to ’em, and neither came nor sent; believing, when a Man’s Word was
past, nothing but Death could or should prevent his keeping it: And when
they saw he was not dead, they ask’d him what Name they had for a Man
who promis’d a Thing he did not do? The Governor told them, Such a Man
was a _Lyar_, which was a Word of Infamy to a Gentleman. Then one of ’em
reply’d, _Governor, you are a Lyar, and guilty of that Infamy_. They
have a native Justice, which knows no Fraud; and they understand no
Vice, or Cunning, but when they are taught by the _White_ Men. They have
Plurality of Wives; which, when they grow old, serve those that succeed
’em, who are young, but with a Servitude easy and respected; and unless
they take Slaves in War, they have no other Attendants.

Those on that _Continent_ where I was, had no King; but the oldest
War-Captain was obey’d with great Resignation.

A War-Captain is a Man who has led them on to Battle with Conduct and
Success; of whom I shall have Occasion to speak more hereafter, and of
some other of their Customs and Manners, as they fall in my Way.

With these People, as I said, we live in perfect Tranquillity, and good
Understanding, as it behoves us to do; they knowing all the Places where
to seek the best Food of the Country, and the Means of getting it; and
for very small and unvaluable Trifles, supplying us with what ’tis
almost impossible for us to get; for they do not only in the Woods, and
over the _Sevana’s_, in Hunting, supply the Parts of Hounds, by swiftly
scouring thro’ those almost impassable Places, and by the mere Activity
of their Feet, run down the nimblest Deer, and other eatable Beasts; but
in the Water, one would think they were Gods of the Rivers, or
Fellow-Citizens of the Deep; so rare an Art they have in swimming,
diving, and almost living in Water; by which they command the less swift
Inhabitants of the Floods. And then for shooting, what they cannot take,
or reach with their Hands, they do with Arrows; and have so admirable an
Aim, that they will split almost an Hair, and at any Distance that an
Arrow can reach: they will shoot down Oranges, and other Fruit, and only
touch the Stalk with the Dart’s Point, that they may not hurt the Fruit.
So that they being on all Occasions very useful to us, we find it
absolutely necessary to caress ’em as Friends, and not to treat ’em as
Slaves; nor dare we do otherwise, their Numbers so far surpassing ours
in that Continent.

Those then whom we make use of to work in our Plantations of Sugar, are
_Negroes_, Black-Slaves altogether, who are transported thither in this
Manner.

Those who want Slaves, make a Bargain with a Master, or a Captain of a
Ship, and contract to pay him so much apiece, a Matter of twenty Pound a
Head, for as many as he agrees for, and to pay for ’em when they shall
be deliver’d on such a Plantation: So that when there arrives a Ship
laden with Slaves, they who have so contracted, go aboard, and receive
their Number by Lot; and perhaps in one Lot that may be for ten, there
may happen to be three or four Men, the rest Women and Children. Or be
there more or less of either Sex, you are obliged to be contented with
your Lot.

_Coramantien_, a Country of _Blacks_ so called, was one of those Places
in which they found the most advantageous Trading for these Slaves, and
thither most of our great Traders in that Merchandize traffick; for that
Nation is very warlike and brave; and having a continual Campaign, being
always in Hostility with one neighbouring Prince or other, they had the
Fortune to take a great many Captives: for all they took in Battle were
sold as Slaves; at least those common Men who could not ransom
themselves. Of these Slaves so taken, the General only has all the
Profit; and of these Generals our Captains and Masters of Ships buy all
their Freights.

The King of _Coramantien_ was of himself a Man of an hundred and odd
Years old, and had no Son, tho’ he had many beautiful Black Wives: for
most certainly there are Beauties that can charm of that Colour. In his
younger Years he had had many gallant Men to his Sons, thirteen of whom
died in Battle, conquering when they fell; and he had only left him for
his Successor, one Grand-child, Son to one of these dead Victors, who,
as soon as he could bear a Bow in his Hand, and a Quiver at his Back,
was sent into the Field, to be train’d up by one of the oldest Generals
to War; where, from his natural Inclination to Arms, and the Occasions
given him, with the good Conduct of the old General, he became, at the
Age of seventeen, one of the most expert Captains, and bravest Soldiers
that ever saw the Field of _Mars_: so that he was ador’d as the Wonder
of all that World, and the Darling of the Soldiers. Besides, he was
adorn’d with a native Beauty, so transcending all those of his gloomy
Race, that he struck an Awe and Reverence, even into those that knew not
his Quality; as he did into me, who beheld him with Surprize and Wonder,
when afterwards he arrived in our World.

He had scarce arrived at his seventeenth Year, when, fighting by his
Side, the General was kill’d with an Arrow in his Eye, which the Prince
_Oroonoko_ (for so was this gallant _Moor_ call’d) very narrowly
avoided; nor had he, if the General who saw the Arrow shot, and
perceiving it aimed at the Prince, had not bow’d his Head between, on
Purpose to receive it in his own Body, rather than it should touch that
of the Prince, and so saved him.

’Twas then, afflicted as _Oroonoko_ was, that he was proclaimed General
in the old Man’s Place: and then it was, at the finishing of that War,
which had continu’d for two Years, that the Prince came to Court, where
he had hardly been a Month together, from the Time of his fifth Year to
that of seventeen: and ’twas amazing to imagine where it was he learn’d
so much Humanity; or to give his Accomplishments a juster Name, where
’twas he got that real Greatness of Soul, those refined Notions of true
Honour, that absolute Generosity, and that Softness, that was capable of
the highest Passions of Love and Gallantry, whose Objects were almost
continually fighting Men, or those mangled or dead, who heard no Sounds
but those of War and Groans. Some Part of it we may attribute to the
Care of a _Frenchman_ of Wit and Learning, who finding it turn to a very
good Account to be a sort of Royal Tutor to this young Black, and
perceiving him very ready, apt, and quick of Apprehension, took a great
Pleasure to teach him Morals, Language and Science; and was for it
extremely belov’d and valu’d by him. Another Reason was, he lov’d when
he came from War, to see all the _English_ Gentlemen that traded
thither; and did not only learn their Language, but that of the
_Spaniard_ also, with whom he traded afterwards for Slaves.

I have often seen and conversed with this Great Man, and been a Witness
to many of his mighty Actions; and do assure my Reader, the most
illustrious Courts could not have produced a braver Man, both for
Greatness of Courage and Mind, a Judgment more solid, a Wit more quick,
and a Conversation more sweet and diverting. He knew almost as much as
if he had read much: He had heard of and admired the _Romans_: He had
heard of the late Civil Wars in _England_, and the deplorable Death of
our great Monarch; and would discourse of it with all the Sense and
Abhorrence of the Injustice imaginable. He had an extreme good and
graceful Mien, and all the Civility of a well-bred Great Man. He had
nothing of Barbarity in his Nature, but in all Points address’d himself
as if his Education had been in some _European_ Court.

This great and just Character of _Oroonoko_ gave me an extreme Curiosity
to see him, especially when I knew he spoke _French_ and _English_, and
that I could talk with him. But tho’ I had heard so much of him, I was
as greatly surprized when I saw him, as if I had heard nothing of him;
so beyond all Report I found him. He came into the Room, and addressed
himself to me, and some other Women, with the best Grace in the World.
He was pretty tall, but of a Shape the most exact that can be fancy’d:
The most famous Statuary could not form the Figure of a Man more
admirably turn’d from Head to Foot. His Face was not of that brown rusty
Black which most of that Nation are, but a perfect Ebony, or polished
Jet. His Eyes were the most aweful that could be seen, and very
piercing; the White of ’em being like Snow, as were his Teeth. His Nose
was rising and _Roman_, instead of _African_ and flat: His Mouth the
finest shaped that could be seen; far from those great turn’d Lips,
which are so natural to the rest of the Negroes. The whole Proportion
and Air of his Face was so nobly and exactly form’d, that bating his
Colour, there could be nothing in Nature more beautiful, agreeable and
handsome. There was no one Grace wanting, that bears the Standard of
true Beauty. His Hair came down to his Shoulders, by the Aids of Art,
which was by pulling it out with a Quill, and keeping it comb’d; of
which he took particular Care. Nor did the Perfections of his Mind come
short of those of his Person; for his Discourse was admirable upon
almost any Subject: and whoever had heard him speak, would have been
convinced of their Errors, that all fine Wit is confined to the white
Men, especially to those of Christendom; and would have confess’d that
_Oroonoko_ was as capable even of reigning well, and of governing as
wisely, had as great a Soul, as politick Maxims, and was as sensible of
Power, as any Prince civiliz’d in the most refined Schools of Humanity
and Learning, or the most illustrious Courts.

This Prince, such as I have describ’d him, whose Soul and Body were so
admirably adorned, was (while yet he was in the Court of his
Grandfather, as I said) as capable of Love, as ’twas possible for a
brave and gallant Man to be; and in saying that, I have named the
highest Degree of Love: for sure great Souls are most capable of that
Passion.

I have already said, the old General was kill’d by the Shot of an Arrow,
by the Side of this Prince, in Battle; and that _Oroonoko_ was made
General. This old dead Hero had one only Daughter left of his Race,
a Beauty, that to describe her truly, one need say only, she was Female
to the noble Male; the beautiful Black _Venus_ to our young _Mars_; as
charming in her Person as he, and of delicate Virtues. I have seen a
hundred White Men sighing after her, and making a thousand Vows at her
Feet, all in vain and unsuccessful. And she was indeed too great for any
but a Prince of her own Nation to adore.

_Oroonoko_ coming from the Wars (which were now ended) after he had made
his Court to his Grandfather, he thought in Honour he ought to make a
Visit to _Imoinda_, the Daughter of his Foster-father, the dead General;
and to make some Excuses to her, because his Preservation was the
Occasion of her Father’s Death; and to present her with those Slaves
that had been taken in this last Battle, as the Trophies of her Father’s
Victories. When he came, attended by all the young Soldiers of any
Merit, he was infinitely surpriz’d at the Beauty of this fair Queen of
Night, whose Face and Person were so exceeding all he had ever beheld,
that lovely Modesty with which she receiv’d him, that Softness in her
Look and Sighs, upon the melancholy Occasion of this Honour that was
done by so great a Man as _Oroonoko_, and a Prince of whom she had heard
such admirable Things; the Awfulness wherewith she receiv’d him, and the
Sweetness of her Words and Behaviour while he stay’d, gain’d a perfect
Conquest over his fierce Heart, and made him feel, the Victor could be
subdu’d. So that having made his first Compliments, and presented her an
hundred and fifty Slaves in Fetters, he told her with his Eyes, that he
was not insensible of her Charms; while _Imoinda_, who wish’d for
nothing more than so glorious a Conquest, was pleas’d to believe, she
understood that silent Language of new-born Love; and, from that Moment,
put on all her Additions to Beauty.

The Prince return’d to Court with quite another Humour than before; and
tho’ he did not speak much of the fair _Imoinda_, he had the Pleasure to
hear all his Followers speak of nothing but the Charms of that Maid,
insomuch, that, even in the Presence of the old King, they were
extolling her, and heightning, if possible, the Beauties they had found
in her: so that nothing else was talk’d of, no other Sound was heard in
every Corner where there were Whisperers, but _Imoinda! Imoinda!_

’Twill be imagin’d _Oroonoko_ stay’d not long before he made his second
Visit; nor, considering his Quality, not much longer before he told her,
he ador’d her. I have often heard him say, that he admir’d by what
strange Inspiration he came to talk Things so soft, and so passionate,
who never knew Love, nor was us’d to the Conversation of Women; but
(to use his own Words) he said, ‘Most happily, some new, and, till then,
unknown Power instructed his Heart and Tongue in the Language of Love;
and at the same Time, in Favour of him, inspir’d _Imoinda_ with a Sense
of his Passion.’ She was touch’d with what he said, and return’d it all
in such Answers as went to his very Heart, with a Pleasure unknown
before. Nor did he use those Obligations ill, that Love had done him,
but turn’d all his happy Moments to the best Advantage; and as he knew
no Vice, his Flame aim’d at nothing but Honour, if such a Distinction
may be made in Love; and especially in that Country, where Men take to
themselves as many as they can maintain; and where the only Crime and
Sin against a Woman, is, to turn her off, to abandon her to Want, Shame
and Misery: such ill Morals are only practis’d in _Christian_ Countries,
where they prefer the bare Name of Religion; and, without Virtue or
Morality, think that sufficient. But _Oroonoko_ was none of those
Professors; but as he had right Notions of Honour, so he made her such
Propositions as were not only and barely such; but, contrary to the
Custom of his Country, he made her Vows, she should be the only Woman he
would possess while he liv’d; that no Age or Wrinkles should incline him
to change: for her Soul would be always fine, and always young; and he
should have an eternal _Idea_ in his Mind of the Charms she now bore;
and should look into his Heart for that _Idea_, when he could find it no
longer in her Face.

After a thousand Assurances of his lasting Flame, and her eternal Empire
over him, she condescended to receive him for her Husband; or rather,
receive him, as the greatest Honour the Gods could do her.

There is a certain Ceremony in these Cases to be observ’d, which I
forgot to ask how ’twas perform’d; but ’twas concluded on both Sides,
that in Obedience to him, the Grandfather was to be first made
acquainted with the Design: For they pay a most absolute Resignation to
the Monarch, especially when he is a Parent also.

On the other Side, the old King, who had many Wives, and many
Concubines, wanted not Court-Flatterers to insinuate into his Heart a
thousand tender Thoughts for this young Beauty; and who represented her
to his Fancy, as the most charming he had ever possess’d in all the long
Race of his numerous Years. At this Character, his old Heart, like an
extinguish’d Brand, most apt to take Fire, felt new Sparks of Love, and
began to kindle; and now grown to his second Childhood, long’d with
Impatience to behold this gay Thing, with whom, alas! he could but
innocently play. But how he should be confirm’d she was this _Wonder_,
before he us’d his Power to call her to Court, (where Maidens never
came, unless for the King’s private Use) he was next to consider; and
while he was so doing, he had Intelligence brought him, that _Imoinda_
was most certainly Mistress to the Prince _Oroonoko_. This gave him some
Chagrine: however, it gave him also an Opportunity, one Day, when the
Prince was a hunting, to wait on a Man of Quality, as his Slave and
Attendant, who should go and make a Present to _Imoinda_, as from the
Prince; he should then, unknown, see this fair Maid, and have an
Opportunity to hear what Message she would return the Prince for his
Present, and from thence gather the State of her Heart, and Degree of
her Inclination. This was put in Execution, and the old Monarch saw, and
burn’d: He found her all he had heard, and would not delay his
Happiness, but found he should have some Obstacle to overcome her Heart;
for she express’d her Sense of the Present the Prince had sent her, in
Terms so sweet, so soft and pretty, with an Air of Love and Joy that
could not be dissembled, insomuch that ’twas past Doubt whether she
lov’d _Oroonoko_ entirely. This gave the old King some Affliction; but
he salv’d it with this, that the Obedience the People pay their King,
was not at all inferior to what they paid their Gods; and what Love
would not oblige _Imoinda_ to do, Duty would compel her to.

He was therefore no sooner got into his Apartment, but he sent the Royal
Veil to _Imoinda_; that is the Ceremony of Invitation: He sends the Lady
he has a Mind to honour with his Bed, a Veil, with which she is covered,
and secur’d for the King’s Use; and ’tis Death to disobey; besides, held
a most impious Disobedience.

’Tis not to be imagin’d the Surprize and Grief that seiz’d the lovely
Maid at this News and Sight. However, as Delays in these Cases are
dangerous, and Pleading worse than Treason; trembling, and almost
fainting, she was oblig’d to suffer herself to be cover’d, and led away.

They brought her thus to Court; and the King, who had caus’d a very rich
Bath to be prepar’d, was led into it, where he sat under a Canopy, in
State, to receive this long’d-for Virgin; whom he having commanded to be
brought to him, they (after disrobing her) led her to the Bath, and
making fast the Doors, left her to descend. The King, without more
Courtship, bad her throw off her Mantle, and come to his Arms. But
_Imoinda_, all in Tears, threw herself on the Marble, on the Brink of
the Bath, and besought him to hear her. She told him, as she was a Maid,
how proud of the Divine Glory she should have been, of having it in her
Power to oblige her King: but as by the Laws he could not, and from his
Royal Goodness would not take from any Man his wedded Wife; so she
believ’d she should be the occasion of making him commit a great Sin, if
she did not reveal her State and Condition; and tell him she was
another’s, and could not be so happy to be his.

The King, enrag’d at this Delay, hastily demanded the Name of the bold
Man, that had married a Woman of her Degree, without his Consent.
_Imoinda_ seeing his Eyes fierce, and his Hands tremble, (whether with
Age or Anger, I know not, but she fancy’d the last) almost repented she
had said so much, for now she fear’d the Storm would fall on the Prince;
she therefore said a thousand Things to appease the raging of his Flame,
and to prepare him to hear who it was with Calmness: but before she
spoke, he imagin’d who she meant, but would not seem to do so, but
commanded her to lay aside her Mantle, and suffer herself to receive his
Caresses, or, by his Gods he swore, that happy Man whom she was going to
name should die, tho’ it was even _Oroonoko_ himself. _Therefore_
(said he) _deny this Marriage, and swear thyself a Maid. That_ (reply’d
_Imoinda_) _by all our Powers I do; for I am not yet known to my
Husband. ’Tis enough_ (said the King) _’tis enough both to satisfy my
Conscience and my Heart._ And rising from his Seat, he went and led her
into the Bath; it being in vain for her to resist.

In this Time, the Prince, who was return’d from Hunting, went to visit
his _Imoinda_, but found her gone; and not only so, but heard she had
receiv’d the Royal Veil. This rais’d him to a Storm; and in his Madness,
they had much ado to save him from laying violent Hands on himself.
Force first prevail’d, and then Reason: They urg’d all to him, that
might oppose his Rage; but nothing weigh’d so greatly with him as the
King’s old Age, uncapable of injuring him with _Imoinda_. He would give
Way to that Hope, because it pleas’d him most, and flatter’d best his
Heart. Yet this serv’d not altogether to make him cease his different
Passions, which sometimes rag’d within him, and soften’d into Showers.
’Twas not enough to appease him, to tell him, his Grandfather was old,
and could not that Way injure him, while he retain’d that awful Duty
which the young Men are us’d there to pay to their grave Relations. He
could not be convinc’d he had no Cause to sigh and mourn for the Loss of
a Mistress, he could not with all his Strength and Courage retrieve, and
he would often cry, ‘Oh, my Friends! were she in wall’d Cities, or
confin’d from me in Fortifications of the greatest Strength; did
Inchantments or Monsters detain her from me; I would venture thro’ any
Hazard to free her; But here, in the Arms of a feeble old Man, my Youth,
my violent Love, my Trade in Arms, and all my vast Desire of Glory,
avail me nothing. _Imoinda_ is as irrecoverably lost to me, as if she
were snatch’d by the cold Arms of Death: Oh! she is never to be
retrieved. If I would wait tedious Years; till Fate should bow the old
King to his Grave, even that would not leave me _Imoinda_ free; but
still that Custom that makes it so vile a Crime for a Son to marry his
Father’s Wives or Mistresses, would hinder my Happiness; unless I would
either ignobly set an ill Precedent to my Successors, or abandon my
Country, and fly with her to some unknown World who never heard our
Story.’

But it was objected to him, That his Case was not the same: for
_Imoinda_ being his lawful Wife by solemn Contract, ’twas he was the
injur’d Man, and might, if he so pleas’d, take _Imoinda_ back, the
Breach of the Law being on his Grandfather’s Side; and that if he could
circumvent him, and redeem her from the _Otan_, which is the Palace of
the King’s Women, a sort of _Seraglio_, it was both just and lawful for
him so to do.

This Reasoning had some Force upon him, and he should have been entirely
comforted, but for the Thought that she was possess’d by his
Grandfather. However, he lov’d her so well, that he was resolv’d to
believe what most favour’d his Hope, and to endeavour to learn from
_Imoinda’s_ own Mouth, what only she could satisfy him in, whether she
was robb’d of that Blessing which was only due to his Faith and Love.
But as it was very hard to get a Sight of the Women, (for no Men ever
enter’d into the _Otan_ but when the King went to entertain himself with
some one of his Wives or Mistresses; and ’twas Death, at any other Time,
for any other to go in) so he knew not how to contrive to get a Sight of
her.

While _Oroonoko_ felt all the Agonies of Love, and suffer’d under a
Torment the most painful in the World, the old King was not exempted
from his Share of Affliction. He was troubled, for having been forc’d,
by an irresistible Passion, to rob his Son of a Treasure, he knew, could
not but be extremely dear to him; since she was the most beautiful that
ever had been seen, and had besides, all the Sweetness and Innocence of
Youth and Modesty, with a Charm of Wit surpassing all. He found, that
however she was forc’d to expose her lovely Person to his wither’d Arms,
she could only sigh and weep there, and think of _Oroonoko_; and
oftentimes could not forbear speaking of him, tho’ her Life were, by
Custom, forfeited by owning her Passion. But she spoke not of a Lover
only, but of a Prince dear to him to whom she spoke; and of the Praises
of a Man, who, ’till now, fill’d the old Man’s Soul with Joy at every
Recital of his Bravery, or even his Name. And ’twas this Dotage on our
young Hero, that gave _Imoinda_ a thousand Privileges to speak of him
without offending; and this Condescension in the old King, that made her
take the Satisfaction of speaking of him so very often.

Besides, he many times enquir’d how the Prince bore himself: And those
of whom he ask’d, being entirely Slaves to the Merits and Virtues of the
Prince, still answer’d what they thought conduc’d best to his Service;
which was, to make the old King fancy that the Prince had no more
Interest in _Imoinda_, and had resign’d her willingly to the Pleasure of
the King; that he diverted himself with his Mathematicians, his
Fortifications, his Officers, and his Hunting.

This pleas’d the old Lover, who fail’d not to report these Things again
to _Imoinda_, that she might, by the Example of her young Lover,
withdraw her Heart, and rest better contented in his Arms. But, however
she was forc’d to receive this unwelcome News, in all Appearance, with
Unconcern and Content; her Heart was bursting within, and she was only
happy when she could get alone, to vent her Griefs and Moans with Sighs
and Tears.

What Reports of the Prince’s Conduct were made to the King, he thought
good to justify, as far as possibly he could, by his Actions; and when
he appear’d in the Presence of the King, he shew’d a Face not at all
betraying his Heart: so that in a little Time, the old Man, being
entirely convinc’d that he was no longer a Lover of _Imoinda_ he carry’d
him with him in his Train to the _Otan_, often to banquet with his
Mistresses. But as soon as he enter’d, one Day, into the Apartment of
_Imoinda_, with the King, at the first Glance from her Eyes,
notwithstanding all his determined Resolution, he was ready to sink in
the Place where he stood; and had certainly done so, but for the Support
of _Aboan_, a young Man who was next to him; which, with his Change of
Countenance, had betray’d him, had the King chanc’d to look that Way.
And I have observ’d, ’tis a very great Error in those who laugh when one
says, _A +Negro+ can change Colour_: for I have seen ’em as frequently
blush, and look pale, and that as visibly as ever I saw in the most
beautiful _White_. And ’tis certain, that both these Changes were
evident, this Day, in both these Lovers. And _Imoinda_, who saw with
some Joy the Change in the Prince’s Face, and found it in her own,
strove to divert the King from beholding either, by a forc’d Caress,
with which she met him; which was a new Wound in the Heart of the poor
dying Prince. But as soon as the King was busy’d in looking on some fine
Thing of _Imoinda’s_ making, she had Time to tell the Prince, with her
angry, but Love-darting Eyes, that she resented his Coldness, and
bemoan’d her own miserable Captivity. Nor were his Eyes silent, but
answer’d her’s again, as much as Eyes could do, instructed by the most
tender and most passionate Heart that ever lov’d: And they spoke so
well, and so effectually, as _Imoinda_ no longer doubted but she was the
only Delight and Darling of that Soul she found pleading in ’em its
Right of Love, which none was more willing to resign than she. And ’twas
this powerful Language alone that in an Instant convey’d all the
Thoughts of their Souls to each other; that they both found there wanted
but Opportunity to make them both entirely happy. But when he saw
another Door open’d by _Onahal_ (a former old Wife of the King’s, who
now had Charge of _Imoinda_) and saw the Prospect of a Bed of State made
ready, with Sweets and Flowers for the Dalliance of the King, who
immediately led the trembling Victim from his Sight, into that prepar’d
Repose; what Rage! what wild Frenzies seiz’d his Heart! which forcing to
keep within Bounds, and to suffer without Noise, it became the more
insupportable, and rent his Soul with ten thousand Pains. He was forc’d
to retire to vent his Groans, where he fell down on a Carpet, and lay
struggling a long Time, and only breathing now and then--Oh _Imoinda_!
When _Onahal_ had finished her necessary Affair within, shutting the
Door, she came forth, to wait till the King called; and hearing some one
sighing in the other Room, she pass’d on, and found the Prince in that
deplorable Condition, which she thought needed her Aid. She gave him
Cordials, but all in vain; till finding the Nature of his Disease, by
his Sighs, and naming _Imoinda_, she told him he had not so much Cause
as he imagined to afflict himself: for if he knew the King so well as
she did, he would not lose a Moment in Jealousy; and that she was
confident that _Imoinda_ bore, at this Minute, Part in his Affliction.
_Aboan_ was of the same Opinion, and both together persuaded him to
re-assume his Courage; and all sitting down on the Carpet, the Prince
said so many obliging Things to _Onahal_, that he half-persuaded her to
be of his Party: and she promised him, she would thus far comply with
his just Desires, that she would let _Imoinda_ know how faithful he was,
what he suffer’d, and what he said.

This Discourse lasted till the King called, which gave _Oroonoko_ a
certain Satisfaction; and with the Hope _Onahal_ had made him conceive,
he assumed a Look as gay as ’twas possible a Man in his Circumstances
could do: and presently after, he was call’d in with the rest who waited
without. The King commanded Musick to be brought, and several of his
young Wives and Mistresses came all together by his Command, to dance
before him; where _Imoinda_ perform’d her Part with an Air and Grace so
surpassing all the rest, as her Beauty was above ’em, and received the
Present ordained as a Prize. The Prince was every Moment more charmed
with the new Beauties and Graces he beheld in this Fair-One; and while
he gazed, and she danc’d, _Onahal_ was retired to a Window with _Aboan_.

This _Onahal_, as I said, was one of the Cast-Mistresses of the old
King; and ’twas these (now past their Beauty) that were made Guardians
or Governantees to the new and the young ones, and whose Business it was
to teach them all those wanton Arts of Love, with which they prevail’d
and charm’d heretofore in their Turn; and who now treated the triumphing
Happy-ones with all the Severity, as to Liberty and Freedom, that was
possible, in Revenge of the Honours they rob them of; envying them those
Satisfactions, those Gallantries and Presents, that were once made to
themselves, while Youth and Beauty lasted, and which they now saw pass,
as it were regardless by, and paid only to the Bloomings. And certainly,
nothing is more afflicting to a decay’d Beauty, than to behold in itself
declining Charms, that were once ador’d; and to find those Caresses paid
to new Beauties, to which once she laid Claim; to hear them whisper, as
she passes by, that once was a delicate Woman. Those abandon’d ladies
therefore endeavour to revenge all the Despights and Decays of Time, on
these flourishing Happy-ones. And ’twas this Severity that gave
_Oroonoko_ a thousand Fears he should never prevail with _Onahal_ to see
_Imoinda_. But, as I said, she was now retir’d to a Window with _Aboan_.

This young Man was not only one of the best Quality, but a Man extremely
well made, and beautiful; and coming often to attend the King to the
_Otan_, he had subdu’d the Heart of the antiquated _Onahal_, which had
not forgot how pleasant it was to be in love. And tho’ she had some
Decays in her Face, she had none in her Sense and Wit; she was there
agreeable still, even to _Aboan’s_ Youth: so that he took Pleasure in
entertaining her with Discourses of Love. He knew also, that to make his
Court to these She-favourites, was the Way to be great; these being the
Persons that do all Affairs and Business at Court. He had also observed,
that she had given him Glances more tender and inviting than she had
done to others of his Quality. And now, when he saw that her Favour
could so absolutely oblige the Prince, he fail’d not to sigh in her Ear,
and look with Eyes all soft upon her, and gave her Hope that she had
made some Impressions on his Heart. He found her pleas’d at this, and
making a thousand Advances to him: but the Ceremony ending, and the King
departing, broke up the Company for that Day, and his Conversation.

_Aboan_ fail’d not that Night to tell the Prince of his Success, and how
advantageous the Service of _Onahal_ might be to his Amour with
_Imoinda_. The Prince was overjoy’d with this good News, and besought
him, if it were possible, to caress her so, as to engage her entirely,
which he could not fail to do, if he comply’d with her Desires: _For
then_ (said the Prince) _her Life lying at your Mercy, she must grant
you the Request you make in my Behalf_. _Aboan_ understood him, and
assur’d him he would make Love so effectually, that he would defy the
most expert Mistress of the Art, to find out whether he dissembled it,
or had it really. And ’twas with Impatience they waited the next
Opportunity of going to the _Otan_.

The Wars came on, the Time of taking the Field approached; and ’twas
impossible for the Prince to delay his going at the Head of his Army to
encounter the Enemy; so that every Day seem’d a tedious Year, till he
saw his _Imoinda_: for he believed he could not live, if he were forced
away without being so happy. ’Twas with Impatience therefore that he
expected the next Visit the King would make; and, according to his Wish,
it was not long.

The Parley of the Eyes of these two Lovers had not pass’d so secretly,
but an old jealous Lover could spy it; or rather, he wanted not
Flatterers who told him they observ’d it: so that the Prince was
hasten’d to the Camp, and this was the last Visit he found he should
make to the _Otan_; he therefore urged _Aboan_ to make the best of this
last Effort, and to explain himself so to _Onahal_, that she deferring
her Enjoyment of her young Lover no longer, might make Way for the
Prince to speak to _Imoinda_.

The whole Affair being agreed on between the Prince and _Aboan_, they
attended the King, as the Custom was, to the _Otan_; where, while the
whole Company was taken up in beholding the Dancing, and Antick Postures
the Women-Royal made to divert the King, _Onahal_ singled out _Aboan_,
whom she found most pliable to her Wish. When she had him where she
believed she could not be heard, she sigh’d to him, and softly cry’d,
‘Ah, _Aboan!_ when will you be sensible of my Passion? I confess it with
my Mouth, because I would not give my Eyes the Lye; and you have but too
much already perceived they have confess’d my Flame: nor would I have
you believe, that because I am the abandon’d Mistress of a King,
I esteem myself altogether divested of Charms: No, _Aboan_; I have still
a Rest of Beauty enough engaging, and have learn’d to please too well,
not to be desirable. I can have Lovers still, but will have none but
_Aboan_. Madam, (_reply’d the half-feigning Youth_) you have already, by
my Eyes, found you can still conquer; and I believe ’tis in pity of me
you condescend to this kind Confession. But, Madam, Words are used to be
so small a Part of our Country-Courtship, that ’tis rare one can get so
happy an Opportunity as to tell one’s Heart; and those few Minutes we
have, are forced to be snatch’d for more certain Proofs of Love than
speaking and sighing: and such I languish for.’

He spoke this with such a Tone, that she hoped it true, and could not
forbear believing it; and being wholly transported with Joy for having
subdued the finest of all the King’s Subjects to her Desires, she took
from her Ears two large Pearls, and commanded him to wear ’em in his. He
would have refused ’em, crying, _Madam these are not the Proofs of our
Love that I expect; ’tis Opportunity, ’tis a Lone-Hour only, that can
make me happy._ But forcing the Pearls into his Hand, she whisper’d
softly to him; _Oh! do not fear a Woman’s Invention, when Love sets her
a thinking._ And pressing his Hand, she cry’d, _This Night you shall be
happy. Come to the Gate of the Orange-Grove, behind the +Otan+, and I
will be ready about midnight to receive you._ ’Twas thus agreed, and she
left him, that no Notice might be taken of their speaking together.

The Ladies were still dancing, and the King, laid on a Carpet, with a
great deal of Pleasure was beholding them, especially _Imoinda_, who
that Day appeared more lovely than ever, being enlivened with the good
Tidings _Onahal_ had brought her, of the constant Passion the Prince had
for her. The Prince was laid on another Carpet at the other End of the
Room, with his Eyes fixed on the Object of his Soul; and as she turned
or moved, so did they; and she alone gave his Eyes and Soul their
Motions. Nor did _Imoinda_ employ her Eyes to any other use, than in
beholding with infinite Pleasure the Joy she produced in those of the
Prince. But while she was more regarding him than the Steps she took,
she chanced to fall, and so near him, as that leaping with extreme Force
from the Carpet, he caught her in his Arms as she fell; and ’twas
visible to the whole Presence, the Joy wherewith he received her. He
clasped her close to his Bosom, and quite forgot that Reverence that was
due to the Mistress of a King, and that Punishment that is the Reward of
a Boldness of this Nature. And had not the Presence of Mind of _Imoinda_
(fonder of his Safety than her own) befriended him, in making her spring
from his Arms, and fall into her Dance again, he had at that Instant met
his Death; for the old King, jealous to the last Degree, rose up in
Rage, broke all the Diversion, and led _Imoinda_ to her Apartment, and
sent out Word to the Prince, to go immediately to the Camp; and that if
he were found another Night in Court, he should suffer the Death
ordained for disobedient Offenders.

You may imagine how welcome this News was to _Oroonoko_, whose
unseasonable Transport and Caress of _Imoinda_ was blamed by all Men
that loved him: and now he perceived his Fault, yet cry’d, _That for
such another Moment he would be content to die_.

All the _Otan_ was in Disorder about this Accident; and _Onahal_ was
particularly concern’d, because on the Prince’s Stay depended her
Happiness; for she could no longer expect that of _Aboan_: So that e’er
they departed, they contrived it so, that the Prince and he should both
come that Night to the Grove of the _Otan_, which was all of Oranges and
Citrons, and that there they would wait her Orders.

They parted thus with Grief enough ’till Night, leaving the King in
Possession of the lovely Maid. But nothing could appease the Jealousy of
the old Lover; he would not be imposed on, but would have it, that
_Imoinda_ made a false Step on Purpose to fall into _Oroonoko’s_ Bosom,
and that all things looked like a Design on both Sides; and ’twas in
vain she protested her Innocence: He was old and obstinate, and left
her, more than half assur’d that his Fear was true.

The King going to his Apartment, sent to know where the Prince was, and
if he intended to obey his Command. The Messenger return’d, and told
him, he found the Prince pensive, and altogether unprepar’d for the
Campaign; that he lay negligently on the Ground, and answer’d very
little. This confirmed the Jealousy of the King, and he commanded that
they should very narrowly and privately watch his Motions; and that he
should not stir from his Apartment, but one Spy or other should be
employ’d to watch him: So that the Hour approaching, wherein he was to
go to the Citron-Grove; and taking only _Aboan_ along with him, he
leaves his Apartment, and was watched to the very Gate of the _Otan_;
where he was seen to enter, and where they left him, to carry back the
Tidings to the King.

_Oroonoko_ and _Aboan_ were no sooner enter’d, but _Onahal_ led the
Prince to the Apartment of _Imoinda_; who, not knowing any thing of her
Happiness, was laid in Bed. But _Onahal_ only left him in her Chamber,
to make the best of his Opportunity, and took her dear _Aboan_ to her
own; where he shewed the Height of Complaisance for his Prince, when, to
give him an Opportunity, he suffered himself to be caressed in Bed by
_Onahal_.

The Prince softly waken’d _Imoinda_, who was not a little surpriz’d with
Joy to find him there; and yet she trembled with a thousand Fears.
I believe he omitted saying nothing to this young Maid, that might
persuade her to suffer him to seize his own, and take the Rights of
Love. And I believe she was not long resisting those Arms where she so
longed to be; and having Opportunity, Night, and Silence, Youth, Love,
and Desire, he soon prevail’d, and ravished in a Moment what his old
Grandfather had been endeavouring for so many Months.

’Tis not to be imagined the Satisfaction of these two young Lovers; nor
the Vows she made him, that she remained a spotless Maid till that
Night, and that what she did with his Grandfather had robb’d him of no
Part of her Virgin-Honour; the Gods, in Mercy and Justice, having
reserved that for her plighted Lord, to whom of Right it belonged. And
’tis impossible to express the Transports he suffer’d, while he listen’d
to a Discourse so charming from her loved Lips; and clasped that Body in
his Arms, for whom he had so long languished; and nothing now afflicted
him, but his sudden Departure from her; for he told her the Necessity,
and his Commands, but should depart satisfy’d in this, That since the
old King had hitherto not been able to deprive him of those Enjoyments
which only belonged to him, he believed for the future he would be less
able to injure him; so that, abating the Scandal of the Veil, which was
no otherwise so, than that she was Wife to another, he believed her
safe, even in the Arms of the King, and innocent; yet would he have
ventur’d at the Conquest of the World, and have given it all to have had
her avoided that Honour of receiving the _Royal Veil_. ’Twas thus,
between a thousand Caresses, that both bemoan’d the hard Fate of Youth
and Beauty, so liable to that cruel Promotion: ’Twas a Glory that could
well have been spared here, tho’ desired and aim’d at by all the young
Females of that Kingdom.

But while they were thus fondly employ’d, forgetting how Time ran on,
and that the Dawn must conduct him far away from his only Happiness,
they heard a great Noise in the _Otan_, and unusual Voices of Men; at
which the Prince, starting from the Arms of the frighted _Imoinda_, ran
to a little Battle-Ax he used to wear by his Side; and having not so
much Leisure as to put on his Habit, he opposed himself against some who
were already opening the Door: which they did with so much Violence,
that _Oroonoko_ was not able to defend it; but was forced to cry out
with a commanding Voice, ‘Whoever ye are that have the Boldness to
attempt to approach this Apartment thus rudely; know, that I, the Prince
_Oroonoko_, will revenge it with the certain Death of him that first
enters: Therefore stand back, and know, this Place is sacred to Love and
Me this Night; To-morrow ’tis the King’s.’

This he spoke with a Voice so resolv’d and assur’d, that they soon
retired from the Door; but cry’d, ‘’Tis by the King’s Command we are
come; and being satisfy’d by thy Voice, O Prince, as much as if we had
enter’d, we can report to the King the Truth of all his Fears, and leave
thee to provide for thy own Safety, as thou art advis’d by thy Friends.’

At these Words they departed, and left the Prince to take a short and
sad Leave of his _Imoinda_; who, trusting in the Strength of her Charms,
believed she should appease the Fury of a jealous King, by saying, she
was surprized, and that it was by Force of Arms he got into her
Apartment. All her Concern now was for his Life, and therefore she
hasten’d him to the Camp, and with much ado prevail’d on him to go. Nor
was it she alone that prevail’d; _Aboan_ and _Onahal_ both pleaded, and
both assured him of a Lye that should be well enough contrived to secure
_Imoinda_. So that at last, with a Heart sad as Death, dying Eyes, and
sighing Soul, _Oroonoko_ departed, and took his way to the Camp.

It was not long after, the King in Person came to the _Otan_; where
beholding _Imoinda_, with Rage in his Eyes, he upbraided her Wickedness,
and Perfidy; and threatning her Royal Lover, she fell on her Face at his
Feet, bedewing the Floor with her Tears, and imploring his Pardon for a
Fault which she had not with her Will committed; as _Onahal_, who was
also prostrate with her, could testify: That, unknown to her, he had
broke into her Apartment, and ravished her. She spoke this much against
her Conscience; but to save her own Life, ’twas absolutely necessary she
should feign this Falsity. She knew it could not injure the Prince, he
being fled to an Army that would stand by him, against any Injuries that
should assault him. However, this last Thought of _Imoinda’s_ being
ravished, changed the Measures of his Revenge; and whereas before he
designed to be himself her Executioner, he now resolved she should not
die. But as it is the greatest Crime in Nature amongst them, to touch a
Woman after having been possess’d by a Son, a Father, or a Brother, so
now he looked on _Imoinda_ as a polluted thing wholly unfit for his
Embrace; nor would he resign her to his Grandson, because she had
received the _Royal Veil_: He therefore removes her from the _Otan_,
with _Onahal_; whom he put into safe Hands, with Order they should be
both sold off as Slaves to another Country, either _Christian_ or
_Heathen_, ’twas no Matter where.

This cruel Sentence, worse than Death, they implor’d might be reversed;
but their Prayers were vain, and it was put in Execution accordingly,
and that with so much Secrecy, that none, either without or within the
_Otan_, knew any thing of their Absence, or their Destiny.

The old King nevertheless executed this with a great deal of Reluctancy;
but he believed he had made a very great Conquest over himself, when he
had once resolved, and had perform’d what he resolved. He believed now,
that his Love had been unjust; and that he could not expect the Gods, or
_Captain of the Clouds_ (as they call the unknown Power) would suffer a
better Consequence from so ill a Cause. He now begins to hold _Oroonoko_
excused; and to say, he had reason for what he did. And now every body
could assure the King how passionately _Imoinda_ was beloved by the
Prince; even those confess’d it now, who said the contrary before his
Flame was not abated. So that the King being old, and not able to defend
himself in War, and having no Sons of all his Race remaining alive, but
only this, to maintain him on his Throne; and looking on this as a man
disobliged, first by the Rape of his Mistress, or rather Wife, and now
by depriving him wholly of her, he fear’d, might make him desperate, and
do some cruel thing, either to himself or his old Grandfather the
Offender, he began to repent him extremely of the Contempt he had, in
his Rage, put on _Imoinda_. Besides, he consider’d he ought in Honour to
have killed her for this Offence, if it had been one. He ought to have
had so much Value and Consideration for a Maid of her Quality, as to
have nobly put her to Death, and not to have sold her like a common
Slave; the greatest Revenge, and the most disgraceful of any, and to
which they a thousand times prefer Death, and implore it; as _Imoinda_
did, but could not obtain that Honour. Seeing therefore it was certain
that _Oroonoko_ would highly resent this Affront, he thought good to
make some Excuse for his Rashness to him; and to that End, he sent a
Messenger to the Camp, with Orders to treat with him about the Matter,
to gain his Pardon, and endeavour to mitigate his Grief: but that by no
Means he should tell him she was sold, but secretly put to Death; for he
knew he should never obtain his Pardon for the other.

When the Messenger came, he found the Prince upon the Point of engaging
with the Enemy; but as soon as he heard of the Arrival of the Messenger,
he commanded him to his Tent, where he embraced him, and received him
with Joy; which was soon abated by the down-cast Looks of the Messenger,
who was instantly demanded the Cause by _Oroonoko_; who, impatient of
Delay, ask’d a thousand Questions in a Breath, and all concerning
_Imoinda_. But there needed little Return; for he could almost answer
himself of all he demanded, from his Sight and Eyes. At last the
Messenger casting himself at the Prince’s Feet, and kissing them with
all the Submission of a Man that had something to implore which he
dreaded to utter, besought him to hear with Calmness what he had to
deliver to him, and to call up all his noble and heroick Courage, to
encounter with his Words, and defend himself against the ungrateful
Things he had to relate. _Oroonoko_ reply’d, with a deep Sigh, and a
languishing Voice,--_I am armed against their worst Efforts--For I know
they will tell me, +Imoinda+ is no more--And after that, you may spare
the rest._ Then, commanding him to rise, he laid himself on a Carpet,
under a rich Pavilion, and remained a good while silent, and was hardly
heard to sigh. When he was come a little to himself, the Messenger asked
him Leave to deliver that Part of his Embassy which the Prince had not
yet divin’d: And the Prince cry’d, _I permit thee_--Then he told him the
Affliction the old King was in, for the Rashness he had committed in his
Cruelty to _Imoinda_; and how he deign’d to ask Pardon for his Offence,
and to implore the Prince would not suffer that Loss to touch his Heart
too sensibly, which now all the Gods could not restore him, but might
recompense him in Glory, which he begged he would pursue; and that
Death, that common Revenger of all Injuries, would soon even the Account
between him and a feeble old Man.

_Oroonoko_ bad him return his Duty to his Lord and Master; and to assure
him, there was no Account of Revenge to be adjudged between them; If
there was, he was the Aggressor, and that Death would be just, and,
maugre his Age, would see him righted; and he was contented to leave his
Share of Glory to Youths more fortunate and worthy of that Favour from
the Gods: That henceforth he would never lift a Weapon, or draw a Bow,
but abandon the small Remains of his Life to Sighs and Tears, and the
continual Thoughts of what his Lord and Grandfather had thought good to
send out of the World, with all that Youth, that Innocence and Beauty.

After having spoken this, whatever his greatest Officers and Men of the
best Rank could do, they could not raise him from the Carpet, or
persuade him to Action, and Resolutions of Life; but commanding all to
retire, he shut himself into his Pavilion all that Day, while the Enemy
was ready to engage: and wondring at the Delay, the whole Body of the
chief of the Army then address’d themselves to him, and to whom they had
much ado to get Admittance. They fell on their Faces at the Foot of his
Carpet, where they lay, and besought him with earnest Prayers and Tears
to lead them forth to Battle, and not let the Enemy take Advantages of
them; and implored him to have Regard to his Glory, and to the World,
that depended on his Courage and Conduct. But he made no other Reply to
all their Supplications than this, That he had now no more Business for
Glory; and for the World, it was a Trifle not worth his Care: _Go_,
(continued he, sighing) _and divide it amongst you, and reap with Joy
what you so vainly prize, and leave me to my more welcome Destiny._

They then demanded what they should do, and whom he would constitute in
his Room, that the Confusion of ambitious Youth and Power might not ruin
their Order, and make them a Prey to the Enemy. He reply’d, he would not
give himself that Trouble--but wished ’em to chuse the bravest Man
amongst ’em, let his Quality or Birth be what it would: ‘For, Oh my
Friends! (says he) it is not Titles make Men Brave or Good; or Birth
that bestows Courage and Generosity, or makes the Owner Happy. Believe
this, when you behold _Oroonoko_ the most wretched, and abandoned by
Fortune, of all the Creation of the Gods.’ So turning himself about, he
would make no more Reply to all they could urge or implore.

The Army beholding their Officers return unsuccessful, with sad Faces
and ominous Looks, that presaged no good Luck, suffer’d a thousand Fears
to take Possession of their Hearts, and the Enemy to come even upon them
before they could provide for their Safety by any Defence: and tho’ they
were assured by some who had a Mind to animate them, that they should be
immediately headed by the Prince; and that in the mean time _Aboan_ had
Orders to command as General; yet they were so dismay’d for want of that
great Example of Bravery, that they could make but a very feeble
Resistance; and, at last, down-right fled before the Enemy, who pursued
’em to the very Tents, killing ’em: Nor could all _Aboan’s_ Courage,
which that Day gained him immortal Glory, shame ’em into a manly Defence
of themselves. The Guards that were left behind about the Prince’s Tent,
seeing the Soldiers flee before the Enemy, and scatter themselves all
over the Plain, in great Disorder, made such Out-cries, as rouz’d the
Prince from his amorous Slumber, in which he had remained buried for two
Days, without permitting any Sustenance to approach him. But, in Spite
of all his Resolutions, he had not the Constancy of Grief to that
Degree, as to make him insensible of the Danger of his Army; and in that
Instant he leaped from his Couch, and cry’d--‘Come, if we must die, let
us meet Death the noblest Way; and ’twill be more like _Oroonoko_ to
encounter him at an Army’s Head, opposing the Torrent of a conquering
Foe, than lazily on a Couch, to wait his lingering Pleasure, and die
every Moment by a thousand racking Thoughts; or be tamely taken by an
Enemy, and led a whining, love-sick Slave to adorn the Triumphs of
_Jamoan_, that young Victor, who already is enter’d beyond the Limits I
have prescrib’d him.’

While he was speaking, he suffer’d his People to dress him for the
Field; and sallying out of his Pavilion, with more Life and Vigour in
his Countenance than ever he shew’d, he appear’d like some Divine Power
descended to save his Country from Destruction: And his People had
purposely put him on all Things that might make him shine with most
Splendor, to strike a reverend Awe into the Beholders. He flew into the
thickest of those that were pursuing his Men; and being animated with
Despair, he fought as if he came on Purpose to die, and did such Things
as will not be believed that human Strength could perform; and such, as
soon inspir’d all the rest with new Courage, and new Ardor. And now it
was that they began to fight indeed; and so, as if they would not be
out-done even by their ador’d Hero; who turning the Tide of the Victory,
changing absolutely the Fate of the Day, gain’d an entire Conquest: And
_Oroonoko_ having the good Fortune to single out _Jamoan_, he took him
Prisoner with his own Hand, having wounded him almost to Death.

This _Jamoan_ afterwards became very dear to him, being a Man very
Gallant, and of excellent Graces, and fine Parts; so that he never put
him amongst the Rank of Captives as they used to do, without
Distinction, for the common Sale, or Market, but kept him in his own
Court, where he retain’d nothing of the Prisoner but the Name, and
returned no more into his own Country; so great an Affection he took for
_Oroonoko_, and by a thousand Tales and Adventures of Love and
Gallantry, flatter’d his Disease of Melancholy and Languishment; which I
have often heard him say, had certainly kill’d him, but for the
Conversation of this Prince and _Aboan_, and the _French_ Governor he
had from his Childhood, of whom I have spoken before, and who was a Man
of admirable Wit, great Ingenuity and Learning; all which he had infused
into his young Pupil. This _Frenchman_ was banished out of his own
Country for some Heretical Notions he held; and tho’ he was a Man of
very little Religion, yet he had admirable Morals, and a brave Soul.

After the total Defeat of _Jamoan’s_ Army, which all fled, or were left
dead upon the Place, they spent some Time in the Camp; _Oroonoko_
chusing rather to remain a While there in his Tents, than to enter into
a Palace, or live in a Court where he had so lately suffer’d so great a
Loss, the Officers therefore, who saw and knew his Cause of Discontent,
invented all sorts of Diversions and Sports to entertain their Prince:
So that what with those Amusements abroad, and others at home, that is,
within their Tents, with the Persuasions, Arguments, and Care of his
Friends and Servants that he more peculiarly priz’d, he wore off in Time
a great Part of that Chagrin, and Torture of Despair, which the first
Efforts of _Imoinda’s_ Death had given him; insomuch, as having received
a thousand kind Embassies from the King, and Invitation to return to
Court, he obey’d, tho’ with no little Reluctancy; and when he did so,
there was a visible Change in him, and for a long Time he was much more
melancholy than before. But Time lessens all Extremes, and reduces ’em
to Mediums, and Unconcern; but no Motives of Beauties, tho’ all
endeavour’d it, could engage him in any sort of Amour, tho’ he had all
the Invitations to it, both from his own Youth, and other Ambitions and
Designs.

_Oroonoko_ was no sooner return’d from this last Conquest, and receiv’d
at Court with all the Joy and Magnificence that could be express’d to a
young Victor, who was not only return’d Triumphant, but belov’d like a
Deity, than there arriv’d in the Port an _English_ Ship.

The Master of it had often before been in these Countries, and was very
well known to _Oroonoko_, with whom he had traffick’d for Slaves, and
had us’d to do the same with his Predecessors.

This Commander was a Man of a finer sort of Address and Conversation,
better bred, and more engaging, than most of that sort of Men are; so
that he seem’d rather never to have been bred out of a Court, than
almost all his Life at Sea. This Captain therefore was always better
receiv’d at Court, than most of the Traders to those Countries were; and
especially by _Oroonoko_, who was more civiliz’d, according to the
_European_ Mode, than any other had been, and took more Delight in the
_White_ Nations; and, above all, Men of Parts and Wit. To this Captain
he sold abundance of his Slaves; and for the Favour and Esteem he had
for him, made him many Presents, and oblig’d him to stay at Court as
long as possibly he could. Which the Captain seem’d to take as a very
great Honour done him, entertaining the Prince every Day with Globes and
Maps, and Mathematical Discourses and Instruments; eating, drinking,
hunting, and living with him with so much Familiarity, that it was not
to be doubted but he had gain’d very greatly upon the Heart of this
gallant young Man. And the Captain, in Return of all these mighty
Favours, besought the Prince to honour his Vessel with his Presence some
Day or other at Dinner, before he should set sail; which he condescended
to accept, and appointed his Day. The Captain, on his Part, fail’d not
to have all Things in a Readiness, in the most magnificent Order he
could possibly: And the Day being come, the Captain, in his Boat, richly
adorn’d with Carpets and Velvet Cushions, rowed to the Shore, to receive
the Prince; with another Long-boat, where was plac’d all his Musick and
Trumpets, with which _Oroonoko_ was extremely delighted; who met him on
the Shore, attended by his _French_ Governor, _Jamoan_, _Aboan_, and
about an Hundred of the noblest of the Youths of the Court: And after
they had first carried the Prince on Board, the Boats fetch’d the rest
off; where they found a very splendid Treat, with all Sorts of fine
Wines; and were as well entertain’d, as ’twas possible in such a Place
to be.

The Prince having drank hard of Punch, and several Sorts of Wine, as did
all the rest, (for great Care was taken they should want nothing of that
Part of the Entertainment) was very merry, and in great Admiration of
the Ship, for he had never been in one before; so that he was curious of
beholding every Place where he decently might descend. The rest, no less
curious, who were not quite overcome with drinking, rambled at their
Pleasure _Fore_ and _Aft_, as their Fancies guided ’em: So that the
Captain, who had well laid his Design before, gave the Word, and seiz’d
on all his Guests; they clapping great Irons suddenly on the Prince,
when he was leap’d down into the Hold, to view that Part of the Vessel;
and locking him fast down, secur’d him. The same Treachery was used to
all the rest; and all in one Instant, in several Places of the Ship,
were lash’d fast in Irons, and betray’d to Slavery. That great Design
over, they set all Hands at Work to hoist Sail; and with as treacherous
as fair a Wind they made from the Shore with this innocent and glorious
Prize, who thought of nothing less than such an Entertainment.

Some have commended this Act, as brave in the Captain; but I will spare
my Sense of it, and leave it to my Reader to judge as he pleases. It may
be easily guess’d, in what Manner the Prince resented this Indignity,
who may be best resembled to a Lion taken in a Toil; so he raged, so he
struggled for Liberty, but all in vain: And they had so wisely managed
his Fetters, that he could not use a Hand in his Defence, to quit
himself of a Life that would by no Means endure Slavery; nor could he
move from the Place where he was ty’d, to any solid Part of the Ship,
against which he might have beat his Head, and have finish’d his
Disgrace that Way. So that being deprived of all other Means, he
resolv’d to perish for want of Food; and pleas’d at last with that
Thought, and toil’d and tir’d by Rage and Indignation, he laid himself
down, and sullenly resolv’d upon dying, and refused all Things that were
brought him.

This did not a little vex the Captain, and the more so, because he found
almost all of ’em of the same Humour; so that the Loss of so many brave
Slaves, so tall and goodly to behold, would have been very considerable:
He therefore order’d one to go from him (for he would not be seen
himself) to _Oroonoko_, and to assure him, he was afflicted for having
rashly done so unhospitable a Deed, and which could not be now remedied,
since they were far from Shore; but since he resented it in so high a
Nature, he assur’d him he would revoke his Resolution, and set both him
and his Friends ashore on the next Land they should touch at; and of
this the Messenger gave him his Oath, provided he would resolve to live.
And _Oroonoko_, whose Honour was such, as he never had violated a Word
in his Life himself, much less a solemn Asseveration, believ’d in an
Instant what this Man said; but reply’d, He expected, for a Confirmation
of this, to have his shameful Fetters dismis’d. This Demand was carried
to the Captain; who return’d him Answer, That the Offence had been so
great which he had put upon the Prince, that he durst not trust him with
Liberty while he remain’d in the Ship, for fear, lest by a Valour
natural to him, and a Revenge that would animate that Valour, he might
commit some Outrage fatal to himself, and the King his Master, to whom
the Vessel did belong. To this _Oroonoko_ reply’d, He would engage his
Honour to behave himself in all friendly Order and Manner, and obey the
Command of the Captain, as he was Lord of the King’s Vessel, and General
of those Men under his Command.

This was deliver’d to the still doubting Captain, who could not resolve
to trust a Heathen, he said, upon his Parole, a Man that had no Sense or
Notion of the God that he worshipp’d. _Oroonoko_ then reply’d, He was
very sorry to hear that the Captain pretended to the Knowledge and
Worship of any Gods, who had taught him no better Principles, than not
to credit as he would be credited. But they told him, the Difference of
their Faith occasion’d that Distrust: for the Captain had protested to
him upon the Word of a Christian, and sworn in the Name of a great GOD;
which if he should violate, he must expect eternal Torments in the World
to come. ‘Is that all the Obligations he has to be just to his Oath?
(reply’d _Oroonoko_) Let him know, I swear by my Honour; which to
violate, would not only render me contemptible and despised by all brave
and honest Men, and so give my self perpetual Pain, but it would be
eternally offending and displeasing all Mankind; harming, betraying,
circumventing, and outraging all Men. But Punishments hereafter are
suffer’d by one’s self; and the World takes no Cognizance whether this
GOD has reveng’d ’em or not, ’tis done so secretly, and deferr’d so
long; while the Man of no Honour suffers every Moment the Scorn and
Contempt of the honester World, and dies every Day ignominiously in his
Fame, which is more valuable than Life. I speak not this to move Belief,
but to shew you how you mistake, when you imagine, that he who will
violate his Honour, will keep his Word with his _Gods_.’ So, turning
from him with a disdainful Smile, he refused to answer him, when he
urged him to know what Answer he should carry back to his Captain; so
that he departed without saying any more.

The Captain pondering and consulting what to do, it was concluded, that
nothing but _Oroonoko’s_ Liberty would encourage any of the rest to eat,
except the _Frenchman_, whom the Captain could not pretend to keep
Prisoner, but only told him, he was secur’d, because he might act
something in Favour of the Prince; but that he should be freed as soon
as they came to Land. So that they concluded it wholly necessary to free
the Prince from his Irons, that he might shew himself to the rest; that
they might have an Eye upon him, and that they could not fear a single
Man.

This being resolved, to make the Obligation the greater, the Captain
himself went to _Oroonoko_; where, after many Compliments, and
Assurances of what he had already promis’d, he receiving from the Prince
his Parole, and his Hand, for his good Behaviour, dismiss’d his Irons,
and brought him to his own Cabin; where, after having treated and
repos’d him a While, (for he had neither eat nor slept in four Days
before) he besought him to visit those obstinate People in Chains, who
refused all manner of Sustenance; and intreated him to oblige ’em to
eat, and assure ’em of their Liberty the first Opportunity.

_Oroonoko_, who was too generous not to give Credit to his Words, shew’d
himself to his People, who were transported with Excess of Joy at the
Sight of their darling Prince; falling at his Feet, and kissing and
embracing ’em; believing, as some divine Oracle, all he assur’d ’em. But
he besought ’em to bear their Chains with that Bravery that became those
whom he had seen act so nobly in Arms; and that they could not give him
greater Proofs of their Love and Friendship, since ’twas all the
Security the Captain (his Friend) could have against the Revenge, he
said, they might possibly justly take for the Injuries sustained by him.
And they all, with one Accord, assur’d him, that they could not suffer
enough, when it was for his Repose and Safety.

After this, they no longer refus’d to eat, but took what was brought
’em, and were pleas’d with their Captivity, since by it they hoped to
redeem the Prince, who, all the rest of the Voyage, was treated with all
the Respect due to his Birth, tho’ nothing could divert his Melancholy;
and he would often sigh for _Imoinda_, and think this a Punishment due
to his Misfortune, in having left that noble Maid behind him, that fatal
Night, in the _Otan_, when he fled to the Camp.

Possess’d with a thousand Thoughts of past Joys with this fair young
Person, and a thousand Griefs for her eternal Loss, he endur’d a tedious
Voyage, and at last arriv’d at the Mouth of the River of _Surinam_, a
Colony belonging to the King of _England_, and where they were to
deliver some Part of their Slaves. There the Merchants and Gentlemen of
the Country going on Board, to demand those Lots of Slaves they had
already agreed on; and, amongst those, the Overseers of those
Plantations where I then chanc’d to be: The Captain, who had given the
Word, order’d his Men to bring up those noble Slaves in Fetters, whom I
have spoken of; and having put ’em, some in one, and some in other Lots,
with Women and Children, (which they call _Pickaninies_) they sold ’em
off, as Slaves to several Merchants and Gentlemen; not putting any two
in one Lot, because they would separate ’em far from each other; nor
daring to trust ’em together, lest Rage and Courage should put ’em upon
contriving some great Action, to the Ruin of the Colony.

_Oroonoko_ was first seiz’d on, and sold to our Overseer, who had the
first Lot, with seventeen more of all Sorts and Sizes, but not one of
Quality with him. When he saw this, he found what they meant; for, as I
said, he understood _English_ pretty well; and being wholly unarm’d and
defenceless, so as it was in vain to make any Resistance, he only beheld
the Captain with a Look all fierce and disdainful, upbraiding him with
Eyes that forc’d Blushes on his guilty Cheeks, he only cry’d in passing
over the Side of the Ship; _Farewel, Sir, ’tis worth my Sufferings to
gain so true a Knowledge, both of you, and of your Gods, by whom you
swear._ And desiring those that held him to forbear their Pains, and
telling ’em he would make no Resistance, he cry’d, _Come, my
Fellow-Slaves, let us descend, and see if we can meet with more Honour
and Honesty in the next World we shall touch upon._ So he nimbly leapt
into the Boat, and shewing no more Concern, suffer’d himself to be row’d
up the River, with his seventeen Companions.

The Gentleman that bought him, was a young _Cornish_ Gentleman, whose
Name was _Trefry_; a Man of great Wit, and fine Learning, and was
carried into those Parts by the Lord ---- Governor, to manage all his
Affairs. He reflecting on the last Words of _Oroonoko_ to the Captain,
and beholding the Richness of his Vest, no sooner came into the Boat,
but he fix’d his Eyes on him; and finding something so extraordinary in
his Face, his Shape and Mein, a Greatness of Look, and Haughtiness in
his Air, and finding he spoke _English_, had a great Mind to be
enquiring into his Quality and Fortune; which, though _Oroonoko_
endeavour’d to hide, by only confessing he was above the Rank of common
Slaves, _Trefry_ soon found he was yet something greater than he
confess’d; and from that Moment began to conceive so vast an Esteem for
him, that he ever after lov’d him as his dearest Brother, and shew’d him
all the Civilities due to so great a Man.

_Trefry_ was a very good Mathematician, and a Linguist; could speak
_French_ and _Spanish_; and in the three Days they remain’d in the Boat,
(for so long were they going from the Ship to the Plantation) he
entertain’d _Oroonoko_ so agreeably with his Art and Discourse, that he
was no less pleas’d with _Trefry_, than he was with the Prince; and he
thought himself, at least, fortunate in this, that since he was a Slave,
as long as he would suffer himself to remain so, he had a Man of so
excellent Wit and Parts for a Master. So that before they had finish’d
their Voyage up the River, he made no Scruple of declaring to _Trefry_
all his Fortunes, and most Part of what I have here related, and put
himself wholly into the Hands of his new Friend, who he found resented
all the Injuries were done him, and was charm’d with all the Greatnesses
of his Actions; which were recited with that Modesty, and delicate
Sense, as wholly vanquish’d him, and subdu’d him to his Interest. And he
promis’d him, on his Word and Honour, he would find the Means to
re-conduct him to his own Country again; assuring him, he had a perfect
Abhorrence of so dishonourable an Action; and that he would sooner have
dy’d, than have been the Author of such a Perfidy. He found the Prince
was very much concerned to know what became of his Friends, and how they
took their Slavery; and _Trefry_ promised to take Care about the
enquiring after their Condition, and that he should have an Account
of ’em.

Tho’, as _Oroonoko_ afterwards said, he had little Reason to credit the
Words of a _Backearary_; yet he knew not why, but he saw a kind of
Sincerity, and aweful Truth in the Face of _Trefry_; he saw Honesty in
his Eyes, and he found him wise and witty enough to understand Honour:
for it was one of his Maxims, _A Man of Wit could not be a Knave or
Villain_.

In their Passage up the River, they put in at several Houses for
Refreshment; and ever when they landed, Numbers of People would flock to
behold this Man: not but their Eyes were daily entertain’d with the
Sight of Slaves; but the Fame of _Oroonoko_ was gone before him, and all
People were in Admiration of his Beauty. Besides, he had a rich Habit
on, in which he was taken, so different from the rest, and which the
Captain could not strip him of, because he was forc’d to surprize his
Person in the Minute he sold him. When he found his Habit made him
liable, as he thought, to be gazed at the more, he begged _Trefry_ to
give him something more befitting a Slave, which he did, and took off
his Robes: Nevertheless, he shone thro’ all, and his _Osenbrigs_ (a sort
of brown _Holland_ Suit he had on) could not conceal the Graces of his
Looks and Mein; and he had no less Admirers than when he had his dazling
Habit on: The Royal Youth appear’d in spite of the Slave, and People
could not help treating him after a different Manner, without designing
it. As soon as they approached him, they venerated and esteemed him; his
Eyes insensibly commanded Respect, and his Behaviour insinuated it into
every Soul. So that there was nothing talked of but this young and
gallant Slave, even by those who yet knew not that he was a Prince.

I ought to tell you, that the Christians never buy any Slaves but they
give ’em some Name of their own, their native ones being likely very
barbarous, and hard to pronounce; so that Mr. _Trefry_ gave _Oroonoko_
that of _Cæsar_; which name will live in that Country as long as that
(scarce more) glorious one of the great _Roman_: for ’tis most evident
he wanted no Part of the personal Courage of that _Cæsar_, and acted
Things as memorable, had they been done in some Part of the World
replenished with People and Historians, that might have given him his
Due. But his Misfortune was, to fall in an obscure World, that afforded
only a Female Pen to celebrate his Fame; tho’ I doubt not but it had
lived from others Endeavours, if the _Dutch_, who immediately after his
Time took that Country, had not killed, banished and dispersed all those
that were capable of giving the World this great Man’s Life, much better
than I have done. And Mr. _Trefry_, who design’d it, died before he
began it, and bemoan’d himself for not having undertook it in Time.

For the future therefore I must call _Oroonoko Cæsar_; since by that
Name only he was known in our Western World, and by that Name he was
received on Shore at _Parham-House_, where he was destin’d a Slave. But
if the King himself (God bless him) had come ashore, there could not
have been greater Expectation by all the whole Plantation, and those
neighbouring ones, than was on ours at that Time; and he was received
more like a Governor than a Slave: Notwithstanding, as the Custom was,
they assigned him his Portion of Land, his House and his Business up in
the Plantation. But as it was more for Form, than any Design to put him
to his Task, he endured no more of the Slave but the Name, and remain’d
some Days in the House, receiving all Visits that were made him, without
stirring towards that Part of the Plantation where the _Negroes_ were.

At last, he would needs go view his Land, his House, and the Business
assign’d him. But he no sooner came to the Houses of the Slaves, which
are like a little Town by itself, the _Negroes_ all having left Work,
but they all came forth to behold him, and found he was that Prince who
had, at several Times, sold most of ’em to these Parts; and from a
Veneration they pay to great Men, especially if they know ’em, and from
the Surprize and Awe they had at the Sight of him, they all cast
themselves at his Feet, crying out, in their Language, _Live, O King!
Long live, O King!_ and kissing his Feet, paid him even Divine Homage.

Several _English_ Gentlemen were with him, and what Mr. _Trefry_ had
told ’em was here confirm’d; of which he himself before had no other
Witness than _Cæsar_ himself: But he was infinitely glad to find his
Grandeur confirmed by the Adoration of all the Slaves.

_Cæsar_, troubled with their Over-Joy, and Over-Ceremony, besought ’em
to rise, and to receive him as their Fellow-Slave; assuring them he was
no better. At which they set up with one Accord a most terrible and
hideous Mourning and Condoling, which he and the _English_ had much ado
to appease: but at last they prevailed with ’em, and they prepared all
their barbarous Musick, and every one kill’d and dress’d something of
his own Stock (for every Family has their Land apart, on which, at their
Leisure-times, they breed all eatable Things) and clubbing it together,
made a most magnificent Supper, inviting their _Grandee Captain_, their
_Prince_, to honour it with his Presence; which he did, and several
_English_ with him, where they all waited on him, some playing, others
dancing before him all the Time, according to the Manners of their
several Nations, and with unwearied Industry endeavouring to please and
delight him.

While they sat at Meat, Mr. _Trefry_ told _Cæsar_, that most of these
young Slaves were undone in Love with a fine She-Slave, whom they had
had about six Months on their Land; the Prince, who never heard the Name
of _Love_ without a Sigh, nor any Mention of it without the Curiosity of
examining further into that Tale, which of all Discourses was most
agreeable to him, asked, how they came to be so unhappy, as to be all
undone for one fair Slave? _Trefry_, who was naturally amorous, and
delighted to talk of Love as well as any Body, proceeded to tell him,
they had the most charming Black that ever was beheld on their
Plantation, about fifteen or sixteen Years old, as he guess’d; that for
his Part he had done nothing but sigh for her ever since she came; and
that all the White Beauties he had seen, never charm’d him so absolutely
as this fine Creature had done; and that no Man, of any Nation, ever
beheld her, that did not fall in love with her; and that she had all the
Slaves perpetually at her Feet; and the whole Country resounded with the
Fame of _Clemene_, for so (said he) we have christen’d her: but she
denies us all with such a noble Disdain, that ’tis a Miracle to see,
that she who can give such eternal Desires, should herself be all Ice
and all Unconcern. She is adorn’d with the most graceful Modesty that
ever beautify’d Youth; the softest Sigher--that, if she were capable of
Love, one would swear she languished for some absent happy Man; and so
retired, as if she fear’d a Rape even from the God of Day, or that the
Breezes would steal Kisses from her delicate Mouth. Her Task of Work,
some sighing Lover every Day makes it his Petition to perform for her;
which she accepts blushing, and with Reluctancy, for Fear he will ask
her a Look for a Recompence, which he dares not presume to hope; so
great an Awe she strikes into the Hearts of her Admirers. ‘I do not
wonder (_reply’d the Prince_) that _Clemene_ should refuse Slaves,
being, as you say, so beautiful; but wonder how she escapes those that
can entertain her as you can do: or why, being your Slave, you do not
oblige her to yield?’ ‘I confess (_said +Trefry+_) when I have, against
her Will, entertained her with Love so long, as to be transported with
my Passion even above Decency, I have been ready to make Use of those
Advantages of Strength and Force Nature has given me: But Oh! she
disarms me with that Modesty and Weeping, so tender and so moving, that
I retire, and thank my Stars she overcame me.’ The Company laugh’d at
his Civility to a Slave, and _Cæsar_ only applauded the Nobleness of
his Passion and Nature, since that Slave might be noble, or, what was
better, have true Notions of Honour and Virtue in her. Thus passed they
this Night, after having received from the Slaves all imaginable Respect
and Obedience.

The next Day, _Trefry_ ask’d _Cæsar_ to walk when the Heat was allay’d,
and designedly carried him by the Cottage of the fair Slave; and told
him she whom he spoke of last Night lived there retir’d: _But_ (says he)
_I would not wish you to approach; for I am sure you will be in Love as
soon as you behold her._ _Cæsar_ assured him, he was Proof against all
the Charms of that Sex; and that if he imagined his Heart could be so
perfidious to love again after _Imoinda_, he believed he should tear it
from his Bosom. They had no sooner spoke, but a little Shock-Dog, that
_Clemene_ had presented her, which she took great Delight in, ran out;
and she, not knowing any Body was there, ran to get it in again, and
bolted out on those who were just speaking of her: when seeing them, she
would have run in again, but _Trefry_ caught her by the Hand, and cry’d,
Clemene, _however you fly a Lover, you ought to pay some Respect to this
Stranger_, (pointing to _Cæsar_.) But she, as if she had resolved never
to raise her Eyes to the Face of a Man again, bent ’em the more to the
Earth, when he spoke, and gave the Prince the Leisure to look the more
at her. There needed no long gazing, or Consideration, to examine who
this fair Creature was; he soon saw _Imoinda_ all over her: in a Minute
he saw her Face, her Shape, her Air, her Modesty, and all that call’d
forth his Soul with Joy at his Eyes, and left his Body destitute of
almost Life: it stood without Motion, and for a Minute knew not that it
had a Being; and, I believe, he had never come to himself, so oppress’d
he was with Over-joy, if he had not met with this Allay, that he
perceived _Imoinda_ fall dead in the Hands of _Trefry_. This awaken’d
him, and he ran to her Aid, and caught her in his Arms, where by Degrees
she came to her self; and ’tis needless to tell with what Transports,
what Extasies of Joy, they both a While beheld each other, without
speaking; then snatched each other to their Arms; then gaze again, as if
they still doubted whether they possess’d the Blessing they grasped: but
when they recover’d their Speech, ’tis not to be imagined what tender
Things they express’d to each other; wondring what strange Fate had
brought them again together. They soon inform’d each other of their
Fortunes, and equally bewail’d their Fate; but at the same Time they
mutually protested, that even Fetters and Slavery were soft and easy,
and would be supported with Joy and Pleasure, while they could be so
happy to possess each other, and to be able to make good their Vows.
_Cæsar_ swore he disdained the Empire of the World, while he could
behold his _Imoinda_; and she despised Grandeur and Pomp, those Vanities
of her Sex, when she could gaze on _Oroonoko_. He ador’d the very
Cottage where she resided, and said, That little Inch of the World would
give him more Happiness than all the Universe could do; and she vow’d it
was a Palace, while adorned with the Presence of _Oroonoko_.

_Trefry_ was infinitely pleased with this Novel, and found this
_Clemene_ was the fair Mistress of whom _Cæsar_ had before spoke; and
was not a little satisfy’d, that Heaven was so kind to the Prince as to
sweeten his Misfortunes by so lucky an Accident; and leaving the Lovers
to themselves, was impatient to come down to _Parham-House_ (which was
on the same Plantation) to give me an Account of what had happened.
I was as impatient to make these Lovers a Visit, having already made
a Friendship with _Cæsar_, and from his own Mouth learned what I have
related; which was confirmed by his _Frenchman_, who was set on shore
to seek his Fortune, and of whom they could not make a Slave, because
a Christian; and he came daily to _Parham-Hill_ to see and pay his
Respects to his Pupil Prince. So that concerning and interesting myself
in all that related to _Cæsar_, whom I had assured of Liberty as soon
as the Governour arrived, I hasted presently to the Place where these
Lovers were, and was infinitely glad to find this beautiful young
Slave (who had already gain’d all our Esteems, for her Modesty and
extraordinary Prettiness) to be the same I had heard _Cæsar_ speak so
much of. One may imagine then we paid her a treble Respect; and tho’
from her being carved in fine Flowers and Birds all over her Body, we
took her to be of Quality before, yet when we knew _Clemene_ was
_Imoinda_, we could not enough admire her.

I had forgot to tell you, that those who are nobly born of that Country,
are so delicately cut and raised all over the Fore-part of the Trunk of
their Bodies, that it looks as if it were japan’d, the Works being
raised like high Point round the Edges of the Flowers. Some are only
carved with a little Flower, or Bird, at the Sides of the Temples, as
was _Cæsar_; and those who are so carved over the Body, resemble our
antient _Picts_ that are figur’d in the Chronicles, but these Carvings
are more delicate.

From that happy Day _Cæsar_ took _Clemene_ for his Wife, to the general
Joy of all People; and there was as much Magnificence as the Country
could afford at the Celebration of this Wedding: And in a very short
Time after she conceived with Child, which made _Cæsar_ even adore her,
knowing he was the last of his great Race. This new Accident made him
more impatient of Liberty, and he was every Day treating with _Trefrey_
for his and _Clemene’s_ Liberty, and offer’d either Gold, or a vast
Quantity of Slaves, which should be paid before they let him go,
provided he could have any Security that he should go when his Ransom
was paid. They fed him from Day to Day with Promises, and delay’d him
till the Lord-Governor should come; so that he began to suspect them of
Falshood, and that they would delay him till the Time of his Wife’s
Delivery, and make a Slave of the Child too; for all the Breed is theirs
to whom the Parents belong. This Thought made him very uneasy, and his
Sullenness gave them some Jealousies of him; so that I was obliged, by
some Persons who fear’d a Mutiny (which is very fatal sometimes in those
Colonies that abound so with Slaves, that they exceed the Whites in vast
Numbers) to discourse with _Cæsar_, and to give him all the Satisfaction
I possibly could: They knew he and _Clemene_ were scarce an Hour in a
Day from my Lodgings; that they eat with me, and that I oblig’d them in
all Things I was capable. I entertained them with the Lives of the
_Romans_, and great Men, which charmed him to my Company; and her, with
teaching her all the pretty Works that I was Mistress of, and telling
her Stories of Nuns, and endeavouring to bring her to the Knowledge of
the true God: But of all Discourses, _Cæsar_ liked that the worst, and
would never be reconciled to our Notions of the Trinity, of which he
ever made a Jest; it was a Riddle he said would turn his Brain to
conceive, and one could not make him understand what Faith was. However,
these Conversations fail’d not altogether so well to divert him, that he
liked the Company of us Women much above the Men, for he could not
drink, and he is but an ill Companion in that Country that cannot. So
that obliging him to love us very well, we had all the Liberty of Speech
with him, especially my self, whom he call’d his _Great Mistress_; and
indeed my Word would go a great Way with him. For these Reasons I had
Opportunity to take Notice to him, that he was not well pleased of late,
as he used to be; was more retired and thoughtful; and told him, I took
it ill he should suspect we would break our Words with him, and not
permit both him and _Clemene_ to return to his own Kingdom, which was
not so long a Way, but when he was once on his Voyage he would quickly
arrive there. He made me some Answers that shew’d a Doubt in him, which
made me ask, what Advantage it would be to doubt? It would but give us a
Fear of him, and possibly compel us to treat him so as I should be very
loth to behold; that is, it might occasion his Confinement. Perhaps this
was not so luckily spoke of me, for I perceiv’d he resented that Word,
which I strove to soften again in vain: However, he assur’d me, that
whatsoever Resolutions he should take, he would act nothing upon the
_White_ People; and as for myself, and those upon that _Plantation_
where he was, he would sooner forfeit his eternal Liberty, and Life
itself, than lift his Hand against his greatest Enemy on that Place. He
besought me to suffer no Fears upon his Account, for he could do nothing
that Honour should not dictate; but he accused himself for having
suffer’d Slavery so long; yet he charg’d that Weakness on Love alone,
who was capable of making him neglect even Glory itself; and, for which,
now he reproaches himself every Moment of the Day. Much more to this
Effect he spoke, with an Air impatient enough to make me know he would
not be long in Bondage; and tho’ he suffer’d only the Name of a Slave,
and had nothing of the Toil and Labour of one, yet that was sufficient
to render him uneasy; and he had been too long idle, who us’d to be
always in Action, and in Arms. He had a Spirit all rough and fierce, and
that could not be tam’d to lazy Rest: And tho’ all Endeavours were us’d
to exercise himself in such Actions and Sports as this World afforded,
as Running, Wrestling, Pitching the Bar, Hunting and Fishing, Chasing
and Killing _Tygers_ of a monstrous Size, which this Continent affords
in abundance; and wonderful _Snakes_, such as _Alexander_ is reported to
have encounter’d at the River of _Amazons_, and which _Cæsar_ took great
Delight to overcome; yet these were not Actions great enough for his
large Soul, which was still panting after more renown’d Actions.

Before I parted that Day with him, I got, with much ado, a Promise from
him to rest yet a little longer with Patience, and wait the Coming of
the Lord Governour, who was every Day expected on our Shore: He assur’d
me he would, and this Promise he desired me to know was given perfectly
in Complaisance to me, in whom he had an entire Confidence.

After this, I neither thought it convenient to trust him much out of our
View, nor did the Country, who fear’d him; but with one Accord it was
advis’d to treat him fairly, and oblige him to remain within such a
Compass, and that he should be permitted, as seldom as could be, to go
up to the Plantations of the _Negroes_; or, if he did, to be accompany’d
by some that should be rather, in Appearance, Attendants than Spies.
This Care was for some time taken, and _Cæsar_ look’d upon it as a Mark
of extraordinary Respect, and was glad his Discontent had oblig’d ’em to
be more observant to him; he received new Assurance from the Overseer,
which was confirmed to him by the Opinion of all the Gentlemen of the
Country, who made their Court to him. During this Time that we had his
Company more frequently than hitherto we had had, it may not be
unpleasant to relate to you the Diversions we entertain’d him with, or
rather he us.

My Stay was to be short in that Country; because my Father dy’d at Sea,
and never arriv’d to possess the Honour design’d him, (which was
Lieutenant-General of six and thirty Islands, besides the Continent of
_Surinam_) nor the Advantages he hop’d to reap by them: So that though
we were oblig’d to continue on our Voyage, we did not intend to stay
upon the Place. Though, in a Word, I must say thus much of it; That
certainly had his late Majesty, of sacred Memory, but seen and known
what a vast and charming World he had been Master of in that Continent,
he would never have parted so easily with it to the _Dutch_. ’Tis a
Continent, whose vast Extent was never yet known, and may contain more
noble Earth than all the Universe beside; for, they say, it reaches from
East to West one Way as far as _China_, and another to _Peru_: It
affords all Things, both for Beauty and Use; ’tis there eternal Spring,
always the very Months of _April_, _May_, and _June_; the Shades are
perpetual, the Trees bearing at once all Degrees of Leaves, and Fruit,
from blooming Buds to ripe Autumn: Groves of Oranges, Lemons, Citrons,
Figs, Nutmegs, and noble Aromaticks, continually bearing their
Fragrancies: The Trees appearing all like Nosegays, adorn’d with Flowers
of different Kinds; some are all White, some Purple, some Scarlet, some
Blue, some Yellow; bearing at the same Time ripe Fruit, and blooming
young, or producing every Day new. The very Wood of all these Trees has
an intrinsic Value, above common Timber; for they are, when cut, of
different Colours, glorious to behold, and bear a Price considerable, to
inlay withal. Besides this, they yield rich Balm, and Gums; so that we
make our Candles of such an aromatic Substance, as does not only give a
sufficient Light, but as they burn, they cast their Perfumes all about.
Cedar is the common Firing, and all the Houses are built with it. The
very Meat we eat, when set on the Table, if it be native, I mean of the
Country, perfumes the whole Room; especially a little Beast call’d an
_Armadillo_, a Thing which I can liken to nothing so well as a
_Rhinoceros_; ’tis all in white Armour, so jointed, that it moves as
well in it, as if it had nothing on: This Beast is about the Bigness of
a Pig of six Weeks old. But it were endless to give an Account of all
the divers wonderful and strange Things that Country affords, and which
we took a great Delight to go in Search of; tho’ those Adventures are
oftentimes fatal, and at least dangerous: But while we had _Cæsar_ in
our Company on these Designs, we fear’d no Harm, nor suffer’d any.

As soon as I came into the Country, the best House in it was presented
me, call’d _St. John’s Hill_: It stood on a vast Rock of white Marble,
at the Foot of which, the River ran a vast Depth down, and not to be
descended on that Side; the little Waves still dashing and washing the
Foot of this Rock, made the softest Murmurs and Purlings in the World;
and the opposite Bank was adorn’d with such vast Quantities of different
Flowers eternally blowing, and every Day and Hour new, fenc’d behind ’em
with lofty Trees of a thousand rare Forms and Colours, that the Prospect
was the most ravishing that Sands can create. On the Edge of this white
Rock, towards the River, was a Walk, or Grove, of Orange and
Lemon-Trees, about half the Length of the _Mall_ here, whose flowery and
Fruit-bearing Branches met at the Top, and hinder’d the Sun, whose Rays
are very fierce there, from entring a Beam into the Grove; and the cool
Air that came from the River, made it not only fit to entertain People
in, at all the hottest Hours of the Day, but refresh the sweet Blossoms,
and made it always sweet and charming; and sure, the whole Globe of the
World cannot shew so delightful a Place as this Grove was: Not all the
Gardens of boasted _Italy_ can produce a Shade to out-vie this, which
Nature had join’d with Art to render so exceeding fine; and ’tis a
Marvel to see how such vast Trees, as big as _English_ Oaks, could take
Footing on so solid a Rock, and in so little Earth as cover’d that Rock:
But all Things by Nature there are rare, delightful, and wonderful. But
to our Sports.

Sometimes we would go surprising, and in Search of young _Tygers_ in
their Dens, watching when the old ones went forth to forage for Prey;
and oftentimes we have been in great Danger, and have fled apace for our
Lives, when surpriz’d by the Dams. But once, above all other Times, we
went on this Design, and _Cæsar_ was with us; who had no sooner stoln a
young _Tyger_ from her Nest, but going off, we encounter’d the Dam,
bearing a Buttock of a Cow, which she had torn off with her mighty Paw,
and going with it towards her Den: We had only four Women, _Cæsar_, and
an _English_ Gentleman, Brother to _Harry Martin_ the great _Oliverian_;
we found there was no escaping this enraged and ravenous Beast. However,
we Women fled as fast as we could from it; but our Heels had not saved
our Lives, if _Cæsar_ had not laid down her _Cub_, when he found the
_Tyger_ quit her Prey to make the more Speed towards him; and taking Mr.
_Martin’s_ Sword, desired him to stand aside, or follow the Ladies. He
obey’d him; and _Cæsar_ met this monstrous Beast of mighty Size, and
vast Limbs, who came with open Jaws upon him; and fixing his aweful
stern Eyes full upon those of the Beast, and putting himself into a very
steady and good aiming Posture of Defence, ran his Sword quite through
his Breast, down to his very Heart, home to the Hilt of the Sword: The
dying Beast stretch’d forth her Paw, and going to grasp his Thigh,
surpriz’d with Death in that very Moment, did him no other Harm than
fixing her long Nails in his Flesh very deep, feebly wounded him, but
could not grasp the Flesh to tear off any. When he had done this, he
hallow’d to us to return; which, after some Assurance of his Victory, we
did, and found him lugging out the Sword from the Bosom of the _Tyger_,
who was laid in her Blood on the Ground. He took up the _Cub_, and with
an Unconcern that had nothing of the Joy or Gladness of Victory, he came
and laid the Whelp at my Feet. We all extremely wonder’d at his daring,
and at the Bigness of the Beast, which was about the Height of an
Heifer, but of mighty great and strong Limbs.

Another time, being in the Woods, he kill’d a _Tyger_, that had long
infested that Part, and borne away abundance of Sheep and Oxen, and
other Things, that were for the Support of those to whom they belong’d.
Abundance of People assail’d this Beast, some affirming they had shot
her with several Bullets quite through the Body at several times; and
some swearing they shot her through the very Heart; and they believed
she was a Devil, rather than a mortal Thing. _Cæsar_ had often said, he
had a Mind to encounter this Monster, and spoke with several Gentlemen
who had attempted her; one crying, I shot her with so many poison’d
Arrows, another with his Gun in this Part of her, and another in that;
so that he remarking all the Places where she was shot, fancy’d still he
should overcome her, by giving her another Sort of a Wound than any had
yet done; and one Day said (at the Table), ‘What Trophies and Garlands,
Ladies, will you make me, if I bring you home the Heart of this ravenous
Beast, that eats up all your Lambs and Pigs?’ We all promis’d he should
be rewarded at our Hands. So taking a Bow, which he chose out of a great
many, he went up into the Wood, with two Gentlemen, where he imagin’d
this Devourer to be. They had not pass’d very far into it, but they
heard her Voice, growling and grumbling, as if she were pleas’d with
something she was doing. When they came in View, they found her muzzling
in the Belly of a new ravish’d Sheep, which she had torn open; and
seeing herself approach’d, she took fast hold of her Prey with her fore
Paws, and set a very fierce raging Look on _Cæsar_, without offering to
approach him, for Fear at the same Time of loosing what she had in
Possession: So that _Cæsar_ remain’d a good while, only taking Aim, and
getting an Opportunity to shoot her where he design’d. ’Twas some Time
before he could accomplish it; and to wound her, and not kill her, would
but have enrag’d her the more, and endanger’d him. He had a Quiver of
Arrows at his Side, so that if one fail’d, he could be supply’d: At
last, retiring a little, he gave her Opportunity to eat, for he found
she was ravenous, and fell to as soon as she saw him retire, being more
eager of her Prey, than of doing new Mischiefs; when he going softly to
one Side of her, and hiding his Person behind certain Herbage, that grew
high and thick, he took so good Aim, that, as he intended, he shot her
just into the Eye, and the Arrow was sent with so good a Will, and so
sure a Hand, that it stuck in her Brain, and made her caper, and become
mad for a Moment or two; but being seconded by another Arrow, she fell
dead upon the Prey. _Cæsar_ cut her open with a Knife, to see where
those Wounds were that had been reported to him, and why she did not die
of ’em. But I shall now relate a Thing that, possibly, will find no
Credit among Men; because ’tis a Notion commonly receiv’d with us, That
nothing can receive a Wound in the Heart, and live: But when the Heart
of this courageous Animal was taken out, there were seven Bullets of
Lead in it, the Wound seam’d up with great Scars, and she liv’d with the
Bullets a great While, for it was long since they were shot: This Heart
the Conqueror brought up to us, and ’twas a very great Curiosity, which
all the Country came to see; and which gave _Cæsar_ Occasion of many
fine Discourses of Accidents in War, and strange Escapes.

At other times he would go a Fishing; and discoursing on that Diversion,
he found we had in that Country a very strange Fish, call’d a
_Numb-Eel_, (an _Eel_ of which I have eaten) that while it is alive, it
has a Quality so cold, that those who are angling, tho’ with a Line of
ever so great a Length, with a Rod at the End of it, it shall in the
same Minute the Bait is touch’d by this _Eel_, seize him or her that
holds the Rod with a Numbness, that shall deprive ’em of Sense for a
While; and some have fallen into the Water, and others drop’d, as dead,
on the Banks of the Rivers where they stood, as soon as this Fish
touches the Bait. _Cæsar_ us’d to laugh at this, and believ’d it
impossible a Man could lose his Force at the Touch of a Fish; and could
not understand that Philosophy, that a cold Quality should be of that
Nature; however, he had a great Curiosity to try whether it would have
the same Effect on him it had on others, and often try’d, but in vain.
At last, the sought-for Fish came to the Bait, as he stood angling on
the Bank; and instead of throwing away the Rod, or giving it a sudden
Twitch out of the Water, whereby he might have caught both the _Eel_,
and have dismiss’d the Rod, before it could have too much Power over
him; for Experiment-sake, he grasp’d it but the harder, and fainting,
fell into the River; and being still possess’d of the Rod, the Tide
carry’d him, senseless as he was, a great Way, till an _Indian_ Boat
took him up; and perceiv’d, when they touch’d him, a Numbness seize
them, and by that knew the Rod was in his Hand; which with a Paddle,
(that is a short Oar) they struck away, and snatch’d it into the Boat,
_Eel_ and all. If _Cæsar_ was almost dead, with the Effect of this Fish,
he was more so with that of the Water, where he had remain’d the Space
of going a League, and they found they had much ado to bring him back to
Life; but at last they did, and brought him home, where he was in a few
Hours well recover’d and refresh’d, and not a little asham’d to find he
should be overcome by an _Eel_, and that all the People, who heard his
Defiance, would laugh at him. But we chear’d him up; and he being
convinc’d, we had the _Eel_ at Supper, which was a quarter of an Ell
about, and most delicate Meat; and was of the more Value, since it cost
so dear as almost the Life of so gallant a Man.

About this Time we were in many mortal Fears, about some Disputes the
_English_ had with the _Indians_; so that we could scarce trust our
selves, without great Numbers, to go to any _Indian_ Towns, or Place
where they abode, for fear they should fall upon us, as they did
immediately after my coming away; and the Place being in the Possession
of the _Dutch_, they us’d them not so civilly as the _English_; so that
they cut in Pieces all they could take, getting into Houses and hanging
up the Mother, and all her Children about her; and cut a Footman, I left
behind me, all in Joints, and nail’d him to Trees.

This Feud began while I was there; so that I lost half the Satisfaction
I propos’d, in not seeing and visiting the _Indian_ Towns. But one Day,
bemoaning of our Misfortunes upon this Account, _Cæsar_ told us, we need
not fear, for if we had a Mind to go, he would undertake to be our
Guard. Some would, but most would not venture: About eighteen of us
resolv’d, and took Barge; and after eight Days, arriv’d near an _Indian_
Town: But approaching it, the Hearts of some of our Company fail’d, and
they would not venture on Shore; so we poll’d, who would, and who would
not. For my Part, I said, if _Cæsar_ would, I would go. He resolv’d; so
did my Brother, and my Woman, a Maid of good Courage. Now none of us
speaking the Language of the People, and imagining we should have a half
Diversion in gazing only; and not knowing what they said, we took a
Fisherman that liv’d at the Mouth of the River, who had been a long
Inhabitant there, and oblig’d him to go with us: But because he was
known to the _Indians_, as trading among ’em, and being, by long living
there, become a perfect _Indian_ in Colour, we, who had a Mind to
surprize ’em, by making them see something they never had seen, (that
is, _White_ People) resolv’d only my self, my Brother and Woman should
go: So _Cæsar_, the Fisherman, and the rest, hiding behind some thick
Reeds and Flowers that grew in the Banks, let us pass on towards the
Town, which was on the Bank of the River all along. A little distant
from the Houses, or Huts, we saw some dancing, others busy’d in fetching
and carrying of Water from the River. They had no sooner spy’d us, but
they set up a loud Cry, that frighted us at first; we thought it had
been for those that should kill us, but it seems it was of Wonder and
Amazement. They were all naked; and we were dress’d, so as is most
commode for the hot Countries, very glittering and rich; so that we
appear’d extremely fine; my own Hair was cut short, and I had a Taffety
Cap, with black Feathers on my Head; my Brother was in a Stuff-Suit,
with Silver Loops and Buttons, and abundance of green Ribbon. This was
all infinitely surprising to them; and because we saw them stand still
till we approach’d ’em, we took Heart and advanc’d, came up to ’em, and
offer’d ’em our Hands; which they took, and look’d on us round about,
calling still for more Company; who came swarming out, all wondering,
and crying out _Tepeeme_; taking their Hair up in their Hands, and
spreading it wide to those they call’d out to; as if they would say
(as indeed it signify’d) _Numberless Wonders_, or not to be recounted,
no more than to number the Hair of their Heads. By Degrees they grew
more bold, and from gazing upon us round, they touch’d us, laying their
Hands upon all the Features of our Faces, feeling our Breasts, and Arms,
taking up one Petticoat, then wondering to see another; admiring our
Shoes and Stockings, but more our Garters, which we gave ’em, and they
ty’d about their Legs, being lac’d with Silver Lace at the Ends; for
they much esteem any shining Things. In fine, we suffer’d ’em to survey
us as they pleas’d, and we thought they would never have done admiring
us. When _Cæsar_, and the rest, saw we were receiv’d with such Wonder,
they came up to us; and finding the _Indian_ Trader whom they knew, (for
’tis by these Fishermen, call’d _Indian_ Traders, we hold a Commerce
with ’em; for they love not to go far from home, and we never go to
them) when they saw him therefore, they set up a new Joy, and cry’d in
their Language, _Oh, here’s our +Tiguamy+, and we shall know whether
those Things can speak._ So advancing to him, some of ’em gave him their
Hands, and cry’d, _Amora Tiguamy_; which is as much as, _How do you do?_
or, _Welcome Friend_; and all, with one din, began to gabble to him, and
ask’d, if we had Sense and Wit? If we could talk of Affairs of Life and
War, as they could do? If we could hunt, swim, and do a thousand Things
they use? He answer’d ’em, We could. Then they invited us into their
Houses, and dress’d Venison and Buffalo for us; and going out, gather’d
a Leaf of a Tree, called a _Sarumbo_ Leaf, of six Yards long, and spread
it on the Ground for a Table-Cloth; and cutting another in Pieces,
instead of Plates, set us on little low _Indian_ Stools, which they cut
out of one entire Piece of Wood, and paint in a sort of Japan-Work. They
serve every one their Mess on these Pieces of Leaves; and it was very
good, but too high-season’d with Pepper. When we had eat, my Brother and
I took out our Flutes, and play’d to ’em, which gave ’em new Wonder; and
I soon perceiv’d, by an Admiration that is natural to these People, and
by the extreme Ignorance and Simplicity of ’em, it were not difficult to
establish any unknown or extravagant Religion among them, and to impose
any Notions or Fictions upon ’em. For seeing a Kinsman of mine set some
Paper on Fire with a Burning-Glass, a Trick they had never before seen,
they were like to have ador’d him for a God, and begg’d he would give
’em the Characters or Figures of his Name, that they might oppose it
against Winds and Storms: which he did, and they held it up in those
Seasons, and fancy’d it had a Charm to conquer them, and kept it like a
holy Relique. They are very superstitious, and call’d him the Great
_Peeie_, that is, _Prophet_. They shewed us their _Indian Peeie_, a
Youth of about sixteen Years old, as handsome as Nature could make a
Man. They consecrate a beautiful Youth from his Infancy, and all Arts
are used to compleat him in the finest Manner, both in Beauty and Shape:
He is bred to all the little Arts and Cunning they are capable of; to
all the legerdemain Tricks, and Slight of Hand, whereby he imposes on
the Rabble; and is both a Doctor in Physick and Divinity: And by these
Tricks makes the Sick believe he sometimes eases their Pains, by drawing
from the afflicted Part little Serpents, or odd Flies, or Worms, or any
strange Thing; and though they have besides undoubted good Remedies for
almost all their Diseases, they cure the Patient more by Fancy than by
Medicines, and make themselves feared, loved, and reverenced. This young
_Peeie_ had a very young Wife, who seeing my Brother kiss her, came
running and kiss’d me. After this they kiss’d one another, and made it a
very great Jest, it being so novel; and new Admiration and Laughing went
round the Multitude, that they never will forget that Ceremony, never
before us’d or known. _Cæsar_ had a Mind to see and talk with their
War-Captains, and we were conducted to one of their Houses, where we
beheld several of the great Captains, who had been at Council: But so
frightful a Vision it was to see ’em, no Fancy can create; no sad Dreams
can represent so dreadful a Spectacle. For my Part, I took ’em for
Hobgoblins, or Fiends, rather than Men; But however their Shapes
appear’d, their Souls were very humane and noble; but some wanted their
Noses, some their Lips, some both Noses and Lips, some their Ears, and
others cut through each Cheek, with long Slashes, through which their
Teeth appear’d: They had several other formidable Wounds and Scars, or
rather Dismembrings. They had _Comitias_, or little Aprons before them;
and Girdles of Cotton, with their Knives naked stuck in it; a Bow at
their Back, and a Quiver of Arrows on their Thighs; and most had
Feathers on their Heads of divers Colours. They cry’d _Amora Tiguamy_ to
us, at our Entrance, and were pleas’d we said as much to them: They
seated us, and gave us Drink of the best Sort, and wonder’d as much as
the others had done before to see us. _Cæsar_ was marvelling as much at
their Faces, wondring how they should be all so wounded in War; he was
impatient to know how they all came by those frightful Marks of Rage or
Malice, rather than Wounds got in noble Battle: They told us by our
Interpreter, That when any War was waging, two Men, chosen out by some
old Captain whose fighting was past, and who could only teach the Theory
of War, were to stand in Competition for the Generalship, or great
War-Captain; and being brought before the old Judges, now past Labour,
they are ask’d, What they dare do, to shew they are worthy to lead an
Army? When he who is first ask’d, making no Reply, cuts off his Nose,
and throws it contemptibly on the Ground; and the other does something
to himself that he thinks surpasses him, and perhaps deprives himself of
Lips and an Eye: So they slash on ’till one gives out, and many have
dy’d in this Debate. And it’s by a passive Valour they shew and prove
their Activity; a sort of Courage too brutal to be applauded by our
_Black_ Hero; nevertheless, he express’d his Esteem of ’em.

In this Voyage _Cæsar_ begat so good an Understanding between the
_Indians_ and the _English_, that there were no more Fears or
Heart-burnings during our Stay, but we had a perfect, open, and free
Trade with ’em. Many Things remarkable, and worthy reciting, we met with
in this short Voyage; because _Cæsar_ made it his Business to search out
and provide for our Entertainment, especially to please his dearly
ador’d _Imoinda_, who was a Sharer in all our Adventures; we being
resolv’d to make her Chains as easy as we could, and to compliment the
Prince in that Manner that most oblig’d him.

As we were coming up again, we met with some _Indians_ of strange
Aspects; that is, of a larger Size, and other sort of Features, than
those of our Country. Our _Indian Slaves_, that row’d us, ask’d ’em some
Questions; but they could not understand us, but shew’d us a long Cotton
String, with several Knots on it, and told us, they had been coming from
the Mountains so many Moons as there were Knots: they were habited in
Skins of a strange Beast, and brought along with ’em Bags of Gold-Dust;
which, as well as they could give as to understand, came streaming in
little small Channels down the high Mountains, when the Rains fell; and
offer’d to be the Convoy to any Body, or Persons, that would go to the
Mountains. We carry’d these Men up to _Parham_, where they were kept
till the Lord-Governor came: And because all the Country was mad to be
going on this Golden Adventure, the Governor, by his Letters, commanded
(for they sent some of the Gold to him) that a Guard should be set at
the Mouth of the River of _Amazons_ (a River so call’d, almost as broad
as the River of _Thames_) and prohibited all People from going up that
River, it conducting to those Mountains or Gold. But we going off for
_England_ before the Project was further prosecuted, and the Governor
being drown’d in a Hurricane, either the Design died, or the _Dutch_
have the Advantage of it: And ’tis to be bemoan’d what his Majesty lost,
by losing that Part of _America_.

Though this Digression is a little from my Story, however, since it
contains some Proofs of the Curiosity and Daring of this great Man,
I was content to omit nothing of his Character.

It was thus for some Time we diverted him; but now _Imoinda_ began to
shew she was with Child, and did nothing but sigh and weep for the
Captivity of her Lord, herself, and the Infant yet unborn; and believ’d,
if it were so hard to gain the Liberty of two, ’twould be more difficult
to get that for three. Her Griefs were so many Darts in the great Heart
of _Cæsar_, and taking his Opportunity, one _Sunday_, when all the
_Whites_ were overtaken in Drink, as there were abundance of several
Trades, and _Slaves_ for four Years, that inhabited among the _Negro_
Houses; and _Sunday_ being their Day of Debauch, (otherwise they were a
sort of Spies upon _Cæsar_) he went, pretending out of Goodness to ’em,
to feast among ’em, and sent all his Musick, and order’d a great Treat
for the whole Gang, about three hundred _Negroes_, and about an hundred
and fifty were able to bear Arms, such as they had, which were
sufficient to do Execution, with Spirits accordingly: For the _English_
had none but rusty Swords, that no Strength could draw from a Scabbard;
except the People of particular Quality, who took Care to oil ’em, and
keep ’em in good Order: The Guns also, unless here and there one, or
those newly carried from _England_, would do no Good or Harm; for ’tis
the Nature of that Country to rust and eat up Iron, or any Metals but
Gold and Silver. And they are very expert at the Bow, which the
_Negroes_ and _Indians_ are perfect Masters of.

_Cæsar_, having singled out these Men from the Women and Children, made
an Harangue to ’em, of the Miseries and Ignominies of Slavery; counting
up all their Toils and Sufferings, under such Loads, Burdens and
Drudgeries, as were fitter for Beasts than Men; senseless Brutes, than
human Souls. He told ’em, it was not for Days, Months or Years, but for
Eternity; there was no End to be of their Misfortunes: They suffer’d not
like Men, who might find a Glory and Fortitude in Oppression; but like
Dogs, that lov’d the Whip and Bell, and fawn’d the more they were
beaten: That they had lost the divine Quality of Men, and were become
insensible Asses, fit only to bear: Nay, worse; an Ass, or Dog, or
Horse, having done his Duty, could lie down in Retreat, and rise to work
again, and while he did his Duty, endur’d no Stripes; but Men,
villanous, senseless Men, such as they, toil’d on all the tedious Week
’till _Black Friday_; and then, whether they work’d or not, whether they
were faulty or meriting, they, promiscuously, the Innocent with the
Guilty, suffer’d the infamous Whip, the sordid Stripes, from their
Fellow-Slaves, ’till their Blood trickled from all Parts of their Body;
Blood, whose every Drop ought to be revenged with a Life of some of
those Tyrants that impose it. ‘And why (_said he_) my dear Friends and
Fellow-sufferers, should we be Slaves to an unknown People? Have they
vanquished us nobly in Fight? Have they won us in Honourable Battle? And
are we by the Chance of War become their Slaves? This would not anger a
noble Heart; this would not animate a Soldier’s Soul: No, but we are
bought and sold like Apes or Monkeys, to be the Sport of Women, Fools
and Cowards; and the Support of Rogues and Runagades, that have
abandoned their own Countries for Rapine, Murders, Theft and Villanies.
Do you not hear every Day how they upbraid each other with Infamy of
Life, below the wildest Salvages? And shall we render Obedience to such
a degenerate Race, who have no one human Virtue left, to distinguish
them from the vilest Creatures? Will you, I say, suffer the Lash from
such Hands?’ _They all reply’d with one Accord_, ‘No, No, No; _Cæsar_
has spoke like a great Captain, like a great King.’

After this he would have proceeded, but was interrupted by a tall
_Negro_, of some more Quality than the rest, his Name was _Tuscan_; who
bowing at the Feet of _Cæsar_, cry’d, ‘My Lord, we have listen’d with
Joy and Attention to what you have said; and, were we only Men, would
follow so great a Leader through the World: But O! consider we are
Husbands and Parents too, and have Things more dear to us than Life; our
Wives and Children, unfit for Travel in those unpassable Woods,
Mountains and Bogs. We have not only difficult Lands to overcome, but
Rivers to wade, and Mountains to encounter; ravenous Beasts of
Prey,’--_To this +Cæsar+ reply’d_, ‘That Honour was the first Principle
in Nature, that was to be obey’d; but as no Man would pretend to that,
without all the Acts of Virtue, Compassion, Charity, Love, Justice and
Reason, he found it not inconsistent with that, to take equal Care of
their Wives and Children as they would of themselves; and that he did
not design, when he led them to Freedom, and glorious Liberty, that they
should leave that better Part of themselves to perish by the Hand of the
Tyrant’s Whip: But if there were a Woman among them so degenerate from
Love and Virtue, to chuse Slavery before the Pursuit of her Husband, and
with the Hazard of her Life, to share with him in his Fortunes; that
such a one ought to be abandoned, and left as a Prey to the common
Enemy.’

To which they all agreed--and bowed. After this, he spoke of the
impassable Woods and Rivers; and convinced them, the more Danger the
more Glory. He told them, that he had heard of one _Hannibal_, a great
Captain, had cut his Way through Mountains of solid Rocks; and should a
few Shrubs oppose them, which they could fire before ’em? No, ’twas a
trifling Excuse to Men resolved to die, or overcome. As for Bogs, they
are with a little Labour filled and harden’d; and the Rivers could be no
Obstacle, since they swam by Nature, at least by Custom, from the first
Hour of their Birth: That when the Children were weary, they must carry
them by Turns, and the Woods and their own Industry would afford them
Food. To this they all assented with Joy.

_Tuscan_ then demanded, what he would do: He said he would travel
towards the Sea, plant a new Colony, and defend it by their Valour; and
when they could find a Ship, either driven by Stress of Weather, or
guided by Providence that Way, they would seize it, and make it a Prize,
till it had transported them to their own Countries: at least they
should be made free in his Kingdom, and be esteem’d as his
Fellow-Sufferers, and Men that had the Courage and the Bravery to
attempt, at least, for Liberty; and if they died in the Attempt, it
would be more brave, than to live in perpetual Slavery.

They bow’d and kiss’d his Feet at this Resolution, and with one Accord
vow’d to follow him to Death; and that Night was appointed to begin
their March. They made it known to their Wives, and directed them to tie
their Hamocks about their Shoulders, and under their Arms, like a Scarf
and to lead their Children that could go, and carry those that could
not. The Wives, who pay an entire Obedience to their Husbands, obey’d,
and stay’d for ’em where they were appointed: The Men stay’d but to
furnish themselves with what defensive Arms they could get; and all met
at the Rendezvouz, where _Cæsar_ made a new encouraging Speech to ’em
and led ’em out.

But as they could not march far that Night, on _Monday_ early, when the
Overseers went to call ’em all together, to go to work, they were
extremely surprized, to find not one upon the Place, but all fled with
what Baggage they had. You may imagine this News was not only suddenly
spread all over the Plantation, but soon reached the neighbouring ones;
and we had by Noon about 600 Men, they call the Militia of the Country,
that came to assist us in the Pursuit of the Fugitives: But never did
one see so comical an Army march forth to War. The Men of any Fashion
would not concern themselves, tho’ it were almost the Common Cause; for
such Revoltings are very ill Examples, and have very fatal Consequences
oftentimes, in many Colonies: But they had a Respect for _Cæsar_, and
all Hands were against the _Parhamites_ (as they called those of
_Parham-Plantation_) because they did not in the first Place love the
Lord-Governor; and secondly, they would have it that _Cæsar_ was ill
used, and baffled with: and ’tis not impossible but some of the best in
the Country was of his Council in this Flight, and depriving us of all
the Slaves; so that they of the better sort would not meddle in the
Matter. The Deputy-Governor, of whom I have had no great Occasion to
speak, and who was the most fawning fair-tongu’d Fellow in the World,
and one that pretended the most Friendship to _Cæsar_, was now the only
violent Man against him; and though he had nothing, and so need fear
nothing, yet talked and looked bigger than any Man. He was a Fellow,
whose Character is not fit to be mentioned with the worst of the Slaves:
This Fellow would lead his Army forth to meet _Cæsar_, or rather to
pursue him. Most of their Arms were of those Sort of cruel Whips they
call _Cat with nine Tails_; some had rusty useless Guns for Shew; others
old Basket Hilts, whose Blades had never seen the Light in this Age; and
others had long Staffs and Clubs. Mr. _Trefry_ went along, rather to be
a Mediator than a Conqueror in such a Battle; for he foresaw and knew,
if by fighting they put the _Negroes_ into Despair, they were a sort of
sullen Fellows, that would drown or kill themselves before they would
yield; and he advis’d that fair Means was best: But _Byam_ was one that
abounded in his own Wit, and would take his own Measures.

It was not hard to find these Fugitives; for as they fled, they were
forced to fire and cut the Woods before ’em: So that Night or Day they
pursu’d ’em by the Light they made, and by the Path they had cleared.
But as soon as _Cæsar_ found that he was pursu’d, he put himself in a
Posture of Defence, placing all the Woman and Children in the Rear; and
himself, with _Tuscan_ by his Side, or next to him, all promising to die
or conquer. Encouraged thus, they never stood to parley, but fell on
pell-mell upon the _English_, and killed some, and wounded a great many;
they having Recourse to their Whips, as the best of their Weapons. And
as they observed no Order, they perplexed the Enemy so sorely, with
lashing ’em in the Eyes; and the Women and Children seeing their
Husbands so treated, being of fearful and cowardly Dispositions, and
hearing the _English_ cry out, _Yield and Live! Yield, and be Pardon’d!_
they all ran in amongst their Husbands and Fathers, and hung about them,
crying out, _Yield! Yield, and leave +Cæsar+ to their Revenge_; that by
Degrees the Slaves abandon’d _Cæsar_, and left him only _Tuscan_ and his
Heroick _Imoinda_, who grown as big as she was, did nevertheless press
near her Lord, having a Bow and a Quiver full of poisoned Arrows, which
she managed with such Dexterity, that she wounded several, and shot the
Governor into the Shoulder; of which Wound he had like to have died, but
that an _Indian_ Woman, his Mistress, sucked the Wound, and cleans’d it
from the Venom: But however, he stir’d not from the Place till he had
parly’d with _Cæsar_, who he found was resolved to die fighting, and
would not be taken; no more would _Tuscan_ or _Imoinda_. But he, more
thirsting after Revenge of another Sort, than that of depriving him of
Life, now made use of all his Art of Talking and Dissembling, and
besought _Cæsar_ to yield himself upon Terms which he himself should
propose, and should be sacredly assented to, and kept by him. He told
him, It was not that he any longer fear’d him, or could believe the
Force of two Men, and a young Heroine, could overthrow all them, and
with all the Slaves now on their Side also; but it was the vast Esteem
he had for his Person, the Desire he had to serve so gallant a Man, and
to hinder himself from the Reproach hereafter, of having been the
Occasion of the Death of a Prince, whose Valour and Magnanimity deserved
the Empire of the World. He protested to him, he looked upon his Action
as gallant and brave, however tending to the Prejudice of his Lord and
Master, who would by it have lost so considerable a Number of Slaves;
that this Flight of his should be look’d on as a Heat of Youth, and a
Rashness of a too forward Courage, and an unconsider’d Impatience of
Liberty, and no more; and that he labour’d in vain to accomplish that
which they would effectually perform as soon as any Ship arrived that
would touch on his Coast: ‘So that if you will be pleased
(_continued he_) to surrender yourself, all imaginable Respect shall be
paid you; and your Self, your Wife and Child, if it be born here, shall
depart free out of our Land.’ But _Cæsar_ would hear of no Composition;
though _Byam_ urged, if he pursued and went on in his Design, he would
inevitably perish, either by great Snakes, wild Beasts or Hunger; and he
ought to have Regard to his Wife, whose Condition requir’d Ease, and not
the Fatigues of tedious Travel, where she could not be secured from
being devoured. But _Cæsar_ told him, there was no Faith in the White
men, or the Gods they ador’d; who instructed them in Principles so
false, that honest Men could not live amongst them; though no People
profess’d so much, none perform’d so little: That he knew what he had to
do when he dealt with Men of Honour; but with them a Man ought to be
eternally on his Guard, and never to eat and drink with Christians,
without his Weapon of Defence in his Hand; and, for his own Security,
never to credit one Word they spoke. As for the Rashness and
Inconsiderateness of his Action, he would confess the Governor is in the
right; and that he was ashamed of what he had done in endeavouring to
make those free, who were by Nature Slaves, poor wretched Rogues, fit to
be used as Christian Tools; Dogs, treacherous and cowardly, fit for such
Masters; and they wanted only but to be whipped into the Knowledge of
the Christian Gods, to be the vilest of all creeping Things; to learn to
worship such Deities as had not Power to make them just, brave, or
honest: In fine, after a thousand Things of this Nature, not fit here to
be recited, he told _Byam_, He had rather die, than live upon the same
Earth with such Dogs. But _Trefry_ and _Byam_ pleaded and protested
together so much, that _Trefry_ believing the Governor to mean what he
said, and speaking very cordially himself, generously put himself into
_Cæsar’s_ Hands, and took him aside, and persuaded him, even with Tears,
to live, by surrendring himself, and to name his Conditions. _Cæsar_ was
overcome by his Wit and Reasons, and in Consideration of _Imoinda_; and
demanding what he desired, and that it should be ratify’d by their Hands
in Writing, because he had perceived that was the common Way of Contract
between Man and Man amongst the Whites; all this was performed, and
_Tuscan’s_ Pardon was put in, and they surrender’d to the Governor, who
walked peaceably down into the Plantation with them, after giving Order
to bury their Dead. _Cæsar_ was very much toil’d with the Bustle of the
Day, for he had fought like a Fury; and what Mischief was done, he and
_Tuscan_ performed alone; and gave their Enemies a fatal Proof, that
they durst do any Thing, and fear’d no mortal Force.

But they were no sooner arrived at the Place where all the Slaves
receive their Punishments of Whipping, but they laid Hands on _Cæsar_
and _Tuscan_, faint with Heat and Toil; and surprizing them, bound them
to two several Stakes, and whipped them in a most deplorable and inhuman
Manner, rending the very Flesh from their Bones, especially _Cæsar_, who
was not perceived to make any Moan, or to alter his Face, only to roll
his Eyes on the faithless Governor, and those he believed Guilty, with
Fierceness and Indignation; and to complete his Rage, he saw every one
of those Slaves who but a few Days before ador’d him as something more
than Mortal, now had a Whip to give him some Lashes, while he strove not
to break his Fetters; tho’ if he had, it were impossible: but he
pronounced a Woe and Revenge from his Eyes, that darted Fire, which was
at once both aweful and terrible to behold.

When they thought they were sufficiently revenged on him, they unty’d
him, almost fainting with Loss of Blood, from a thousand Wounds all over
his Body; from which they had rent his Clothes, and led him bleeding and
naked as he was, and loaded him all over with Irons; and then rubb’d his
Wounds, to complete their Cruelty, with _Indian_ Pepper, which had like
to have made him raving mad; and, in this Condition made him so fast to
the Ground, that he could not stir, if his Pains and Wounds would have
given him Leave. They spared _Imoinda_, and did not let her see this
Barbarity committed towards her Lord, but carried her down to _Parham_,
and shut her up; which was not in Kindness to her, but for Fear she
should die with the Sight, or miscarry, and then they should lose a
young Slave, and perhaps the Mother.

You must know, that when the News was brought on _Monday_ Morning, that
_Cæsar_ had betaken himself to the Woods, and carry’d with him all the
_Negroes_, we were possess’d with extreme Fear, which no Persuasions
could dissipate, that he would secure himself till Night, and then would
come down and cut all our Throats. This Apprehension made all the
Females of us fly down the River, to be secured; and while we were away,
they acted this Cruelty; for I suppose I had Authority and Interest
enough there, had I suspected any such Thing, to have prevented it: but
we had not gone many Leagues, but the News overtook us, that _Cæsar_ was
taken and whipped liked a common Slave. We met on the River with Colonel
_Martin_, a Man of great Gallantry, Wit, and Goodness, and whom I have
celebrated in a Character of my new Comedy, by his own Name, in Memory
of so brave a Man: He was wise and eloquent, and, from the Fineness of
his Parts, bore a great Sway over the Hearts of all the Colony: He was a
Friend to _Cæsar_, and resented this false Dealing with him very much.
We carried him back to _Parham_, thinking to have made an Accommodation;
when he came, the first News we heard, was, That the Governor was dead
of a Wound _Imoinda_ had given him; but it was not so well. But it
seems, he would have the Pleasure of beholding the Revenge he took on
_Cæsar_; and before the cruel Ceremony was finished, he dropt down; and
then they perceived the Wound he had on his Shoulder was by a venom’d
Arrow, which, as I said, his _Indian_ Mistress healed by sucking the
Wound.

We were no sooner arrived, but we went up to the Plantation to see
_Cæsar_; whom we found in a very miserable and unexpressible Condition;
and I have a thousand Times admired how he lived in so much tormenting
Pain. We said all Things to him, that Trouble, Pity and Good-Nature
could suggest, protesting our Innocency of the Fact, and our Abhorrence
of such Cruelties; making a thousand Professions and Services to him,
and begging as many Pardons for the Offenders, till we said so much,
that he believed we had no Hand in his ill Treatment; but told us, He
could never pardon _Byam_; as for _Trefry_, he confess’d he saw his
Grief and Sorrow for his Suffering, which he could not hinder, but was
like to have been beaten down by the very Slaves, for speaking in his
Defence: But for _Byam_, who was their Leader, their Head--and should,
by his Justice and Honour, have been an Example to ’em--for him, he
wished to live to take a dire Revenge of him; and said, _It had been
well for him, if he had sacrificed me, instead of giving me the
comtemptible Whip._ He refused to talk much; but begging us to give him
our Hands, he took them, and protested never to lift up his to do us any
Harm. He had a great Respect for Colonel _Martin_, and always took his
Counsel like that of a Parent; and assured him, he would obey him in any
Thing but his Revenge on _Byam_: ‘Therefore (_said he_) for his own
Safety, let him speedly dispatch me; for if I could dispatch myself,
I would not, till that Justice were done to my injured Person, and the
Contempt of a Soldier: No, I would not kill myself, even after a
Whipping, but will be content to live with that Infamy, and be pointed
at by every grinning Slave, till I have completed my Revenge; and then
you shall see, that _Oroonoko_ scorns to live with the Indignity that
was put on _Cæsar_.’ All we could do, could get no more Words from him;
and we took Care to have him put immediately into a healing Bath, to rid
him of his Pepper, and ordered a Chirurgeon to anoint him with healing
Balm, which he suffer’d, and in some Time he began to be able to walk
and eat. We failed not to visit him every Day, and to that End had him
brought to an Apartment at _Parham_.

The Governor had no sooner recover’d, and had heard of the Menaces of
_Cæsar_, but he called his Council, who (not to disgrace them, or
burlesque the Government there) consisted of such notorious Villains as
_Newgate_ never transported; and, possibly, originally were such who
understood neither the Laws of God or Man, and had no sort of Principles
to make them worthy the Name of Men; but at the very Council-Table would
contradict and fight with one another, and swear so bloodily, that ’twas
terrible to hear and see ’em. (Some of ’em were afterwards hanged, when
the _Dutch_ took Possession of the Place, others sent off in Chains.)
But calling these special Rulers of the Nation together, and requiring
their Counsel in this weighty Affair, they all concluded, that (damn
’em) it might be their own Cases; and that _Cæsar_ ought to be made an
Example to all the _Negroes_, to fright ’em from daring to threaten
their Betters, their Lords and Masters; and at this Rate no Man was safe
from his own Slaves; and concluded, _nemine contradicente_, That _Cæsar_
should be hanged.

_Trefry_ then thought it Time to use his Authority, and told _Byam_, his
Command did not extend to his Lord’s Plantation; and that _Parham_ was
as much exempt from the Law as _White-Hall_; and that they ought no more
to touch the Servants of the Lord--(who there represented the King’s
Person) than they could those about the King himself; and that _Parham_
was a Sanctuary; and tho’ his Lord were absent in Person, his Power was
still in being there, which he had entrusted with him, as far as the
Dominions of his particular Plantations reached, and all that belonged
to it; the rest of the Country, as _Byam_ was Lieutenant to his Lord, he
might exercise his Tyranny upon. _Trefry_ had others as powerful, or
more, that interested themselves in _Cæsar’s_ Life, and absolutely said,
he should be defended. So turning the Governor, and his wise Council,
out of Doors, (for they sat at _Parham-House_) we set a Guard upon our
Lodging-Place, and would admit none but those we called Friends to us
and _Cæsar_.

The Governor having remain’d wounded at _Parham_, till his Recovery was
completed, _Cæsar_ did not know but he was still there, and indeed for
the most Part, his Time was spent there: for he was one that loved to
live at other Peoples Expence, and if he were a Day absent, he was ten
present there; and us’d to play, and walk, and hunt, and fish with
_Cæsar_: So that _Cæsar_ did not at all doubt, if he once recover’d
Strength, but he should find an Opportunity of being revenged on him;
though, after such a Revenge, he could not hope to live: for if he
escaped the Fury of the _English_ Mobile, who perhaps would have been
glad of the Occasion to have killed him, he was resolved not to survive
his Whipping; yet he had some tender Hours, a repenting Softness, which
he called his Fits of Cowardice, wherein he struggled with Love for the
Victory of his Heart, which took Part with his charming _Imoinda_ there;
but for the most Part, his Time was pass’d in melancholy Thoughts, and
black Designs. He consider’d, if he should do this Deed, and die either
in the Attempt, or after it, he left his lovely _Imoinda_ a Prey, or at
best a Slave to the enraged Multitude; his great Heart could not endure
that Thought: _Perhaps_ (said he) _she may be first ravish’d by every
Brute; expos’d first to their nasty Lusts, and then a shameful Death_:
No, he could not live a Moment under that Apprehension, too
insupportable to be borne. These were his Thoughts, and his silent
Arguments with his Heart, as he told us afterwards: So that now
resolving not only to kill _Byam_, but all those he thought had enraged
him; pleasing his great Heart with the fancy’d Slaughter he should make
over the whole Face of the Plantation; he first resolved on a Deed,
(that however horrid it first appear’d to us all) when we had heard his
Reasons, we thought it brave and just. Being able to walk, and, as he
believed, fit for the Execution of his great Design, he begg’d _Trefry_
to trust him into the Air, believing a Walk would do him good; which was
granted him; and taking _Imoinda_ with him, as he used to do in his more
happy and calmer Days, he led her up into a Wood, where (after with a
thousand Sighs, and long gazing silently on her Face, while Tears
gush’d, in spite of him, from his Eyes) he told her his Design, first of
killing her, and then his Enemies, and next himself, and the
Impossibility of escaping, and therefore he told her the Necessity of
dying. He found the heroick Wife faster pleading for Death, than he was
to propose it, when she found his fix’d Resolution; and, on her Knees,
besought him not to leave her a Prey to his Enemies. He (grieved to
Death) yet pleased at her noble Resolution, took her up, and embracing
of her with all the Passion and Languishment of a dying Lover, drew his
Knife to kill this Treasure of his Soul, this Pleasure of his Eyes;
while Tears trickled down his Cheeks, hers were smiling with Joy she
should die by so noble a Hand, and be sent into her own Country (for
that’s their Notion of the next World) by him she so tenderly loved, and
so truly ador’d in this: For Wives have a Respect for their Husbands
equal to what any other People pay a Deity; and when a Man finds any
Occasion to quit his Wife, if he love her, she dies by his Hand; if not,
he sells her, or suffers some other to kill her. It being thus, you may
believe the Deed was soon resolv’d on; and ’tis not to be doubted, but
the parting, the eternal Leave-taking of two such Lovers, so greatly
born, so sensible, so beautiful, so young, and so fond, must be very
moving, as the Relation of it was to me afterwards.

All that Love could say in such Cases, being ended, and all the
intermitting Irresolutions being adjusted, the lovely, young and ador’d
Victim lays herself down before the Sacrificer; while he, with a Hand
resolved, and a Heart-breaking within, gave the fatal Stroke, first
cutting her Throat, and then severing her yet smiling Face from that
delicate Body, pregnant as it was with the Fruits of tenderest Love. As
soon as he had done, he laid the Body decently on Leaves and Flowers, of
which he made a Bed, and conceal’d it under the same Cover-lid of
Nature; only her Face he left yet bare to look on: But when he found she
was dead, and past all Retrieve, never more to bless him with her Eyes,
and soft Language, his Grief swell’d up to Rage; he tore, he rav’d, he
roar’d like some Monster of the Wood, calling on the lov’d Name of
_Imoinda_. A thousand Times he turned the fatal Knife that did the Deed
towards his own Heart, with a Resolution to go immediately after her;
but dire Revenge, which was now a thousand Times more fierce in his Soul
than before, prevents him; and he would cry out, ‘No, since I have
sacrific’d _Imoinda_ to my Revenge, shall I lose that Glory which I have
purchased so dear, as at the Price of the fairest, dearest, softest
Creature that ever Nature made? No, no!’ Then at her Name Grief would
get the Ascendant of Rage, and he would lie down by her Side, and water
her Face with Showers of Tears, which never were wont to fall from those
Eyes; and however bent he was on his intended Slaughter, he had not
Power to stir from the Sight of this dear Object, now more beloved, and
more ador’d than ever.

He remained in this deplorable Condition for two Days, and never rose
from the Ground where he had made her sad Sacrifice; at last rouzing
from her Side, and accusing himself with living too long, now _Imoinda_
was dead, and that the Deaths of those barbarous Enemies were deferred
too long, he resolved now to finish the great Work: but offering to
rise, he found his Strength so decay’d, that he reeled to and fro, like
Boughs assailed by contrary Winds; so that he was forced to lie down
again, and try to summon all his Courage to his Aid. He found his Brains
turned round, and his Eyes were dizzy, and Objects appear’d not the same
to him they were wont to do; his Breath was short, and all his Limbs
surpriz’d with a Faintness he had never felt before. He had not eat in
two Days, which was one Occasion of his Feebleness, but Excess of Grief
was the greatest; yet still he hoped he should recover Vigour to act his
Design, and lay expecting it yet six Days longer; still mourning over
the dead Idol of his Heart, and striving every Day to rise, but could
not.

In all this time you may believe we were in no little Affliction for
_Cæsar_ and his Wife; some were of Opinion he was escaped, never to
return; others thought some Accident had happened to him: But however,
we fail’d not to send out a hundred People several Ways, to search for
him. A Party of about forty went that Way he took, among whom was
_Tuscan_, who was perfectly reconciled to _Byam_: They had not gone
very far into the Wood, but they smelt an unusual Smell, as of a dead
Body; for Stinks must be very noisom, that can be distinguish’d among
such a Quantity of natural Sweets, as every Inch of that Land produces:
so that they concluded they should find him dead, or some body that was
so; they pass’d on towards it, as loathsom as it was, and made such
rustling among the Leaves that lie thick on the Ground, by continual
falling, that _Cæsar_ heard he was approach’d; and though he had, during
the Space of these eight Days, endeavour’d to rise, but found he wanted
Strength, yet looking up, and seeing his Pursuers, he rose, and reel’d
to a neighbouring Tree, against which he fix’d his Back; and being
within a dozen Yards of those that advanc’d and saw him, he call’d out
to them, and bid them approach no nearer, if they would be safe. So that
they stood still, and hardly believing their Eyes, that would persuade
them that it was _Cæsar_ that spoke to them, so much he was alter’d;
they ask’d him, what he had done with his Wife, for they smelt a Stink
that almost struck them dead? He pointing to the dead Body, sighing,
cry’d, _Behold her there._ They put off the Flowers that cover’d her,
with their Sticks, and found she was kill’d, and cry’d out, _Oh,
Monster! that hast murder’d thy Wife._ Then asking him, why he did so
cruel a Deed? He reply’d, He had no Leisure to answer impertinent
Questions: ‘You may go back (_continued he_) and tell the faithless
Governor, he may thank Fortune that I am breathing my last; and that my
Arm is too feeble to obey my Heart, in what it had design’d him’: But
his Tongue faultering, and trembling, he could scarce end what he was
saying. The _English_ taking Advantage by his Weakness, cry’d, _Let us
take him alive by all Means._ He heard ’em; and, as if he had reviv’d
from a Fainting, or a Dream, he cried out, ‘No, Gentlemen, you are
deceived; you will find no more _Cæsars_ to be whipt; no more find a
Faith in me; Feeble as you think me, I have Strength yet left to secure
me from a second Indignity.’ They swore all anew; and he only shook his
Head, and beheld them with Scorn. Then they cry’d out, _Who will venture
on this single Man? Will nobody?_ They stood all silent, while _Cæsar_
replied, _Fatal will be the Attempt of the first Adventurer, let him
assure himself_, (and, at that Word, held up his Knife in a menacing
Posture:) _Look ye, ye faithless Crew_, said he, _’tis not Life I seek,
nor am I afraid of dying_, (and at that Word, cut a Piece of Flesh from
his own Throat, and threw it at ’em) _yet still I would live if I could,
till I had perfected my Revenge: But, oh! it cannot be; I feel Life
gliding from my Eyes and Heart; and if I make not haste, I shall fall a
Victim to the shameful Whip._ At that, he rip’d up his own Belly, and
took his Bowels and pull’d ’em out, with what Strength he could; while
some, on their Knees imploring, besought him to hold his Hand. But when
they saw him tottering, they cry’d out, _Will none venture on him?_ A
bold _Englishman_ cry’d, _Yes, if he were the Devil_, (taking Courage
when he saw him almost dead) and swearing a horrid Oath for his farewel
to the World, he rush’d on him. _Cæsar_ with his arm’d Hand, met him so
fairly, as stuck him to the Heart, and he Fell dead at his feet.
_Tuscan_ seeing that, cry’d out, _I love thee, O +Cæsar+! and therefore
will not let thee die, if possible_; and running to him, took him in his
Arms; but, at the same time, warding a Blow that _Cæsar_ made at his
Bosom, he receiv’d it quite through his Arm; and _Cæsar_ having not
Strength to pluck the Knife forth, tho’ he attempted it, _Tuscan_
neither pull’d it out himself, nor suffer’d it to be pull’d out, but
came down with it sticking in his Arm; and the Reason he gave for it,
was, because the Air should not get into the Wound. They put their Hands
a-cross, and carry’d _Cæsar_ between six of ’em, fainting as he was, and
they thought dead, or just dying; and they brought him to _Parham_, and
laid him on a Couch, and had the Chirurgeon immediately to him, who
dressed his Wounds, and sow’d up his Belly, and us’d Means to bring him
to Life, which they effected. We ran all to see him; and, if before we
thought him so beautiful a Sight, he was now so alter’d, that his Face
was like a Death’s-Head black’d over, nothing but Teeth and Eye-holes:
For some Days we suffer’d no Body to speak to him, but caused Cordials
to be poured down his Throat; which sustained his Life, and in six or
seven Days he recovered his Senses: For, you must know, that Wounds are
almost to a Miracle cur’d in the _Indies_; unless Wounds in the Legs,
which they rarely ever cure.

When he was well enough to speak, we talk’d to him, and ask’d him some
Questions about his Wife, and the Reasons why he kill’d her; and he then
told us what I have related of that Resolution, and of his Parting, and
he besought us we would let him die, and was extremely afflicted to
think it was possible he might live: He assur’d us, if we did not
dispatch him, he would prove very fatal to a great many. We said all we
could to make him live, and gave him new Assurances; but he begg’d we
would not think so poorly of him, or of his Love to _Imoinda_, to
imagine we could flatter him to Life again: But the Chirurgeon assur’d
him he could not live, and therefore he need not fear. We were all (but
_Cæsar_) afflicted at this News, and the Sight was ghastly: His
Discourse was sad; and the earthy Smell about him so strong, that I was
persuaded to leave the Place for some time, (being my self but sickly,
and very apt to fall into Fits of dangerous Illness upon any
extraordinary Melancholy.) The Servants, and _Trefry_, and the
Chirurgeons, promis’d all to take what possible Care they could of the
Life of _Cæsar_; and I, taking Boat, went with other Company to Colonel
_Martin’s_, about three Days Journey down the River. But I was no sooner
gone, than the Governor taking _Trefry_, about some pretended earnest
Business, a Day’s Journey up the River, having communicated his Design
to one _Banister_, a wild _Irish_ Man, one of the Council, a Fellow of
absolute Barbarity, and fit to execute any Villany, but rich; he came up
to _Parham_, and forcibly took _Cæsar_, and had him carried to the same
Post where he was whipp’d; and causing him to be ty’d to it, and a great
Fire made before him, he told him he should die like a Dog, as he was.
_Cæsar_ replied, This was the first piece of Bravery that ever
_Banister_ did, and he never spoke Sense till he pronounc’d that Word;
and if he would keep it, he would declare, in the other World, that he
was the only Man, of all the _Whites_, that ever he heard speak Truth.
And turning to the Men that had bound him, he said, _My Friends, am I to
die, or to be whipt?_ And they cry’d, _Whipt! no, you shall not escape
so well._ And then he reply’d, smiling, _A Blessing on thee_; and
assur’d them they need not tie him, for he would stand fix’d like a
Rock, and endure Death so as should encourage them to die: _But if you
whip me_ (said he) _be sure you tie me fast_.

He had learn’d to take Tobacco; and when he was assur’d he should die,
he desir’d they would give him a Pipe in his Mouth, ready lighted; which
they did: And the Executioner came, and first cut off his Members, and
threw them into the Fire; after that, with an ill-favour’d Knife, they
cut off his Ears and his Nose, and burn’d them; he still smoak’d on, as
if nothing had touch’d him; then they hack’d off one of his Arms, and
still he bore up and held his Pipe; but at the cutting off the other
Arm, his Head sunk, and his Pipe dropt, and he gave up the Ghost,
without a Groan, or a Reproach. My Mother and Sister were by him all the
While, but not suffer’d to save him; so rude and wild were the Rabble,
and so inhuman were the Justices who stood by to see the Execution, who
after paid dear enough for their Insolence. They cut _Cæsar_ into
Quarters, and sent them to several of the chief Plantations: One Quarter
was sent to Colonel _Martin_; who refus’d it, and swore, he had rather
see the Quarters of _Banister_, and the Governor himself, than those of
_Cæsar_, on his Plantations; and that he could govern his _Negroes_,
without terrifying and grieving them with frightful Spectacles of a
mangled King.


Thus died this great Man, worthy of a better Fate, and a more sublime
Wit than mine to write his Praise: Yet, I hope, the Reputation of my Pen
is considerable enough to make his glorious Name to survive to all Ages,
with that of the brave, the beautiful and the constant _Imoinda_.

