THE CURIOSITIES OF Common Water: OR The Advantages thereof in Preventing and
Curing many DISTEMPERS.

Gathered from the Writings of several Eminent PHYSICIANS, and also from more
than Forty Years Experience.

By JOHN SMITH, C. M.

To which are added, Some RULES for Preserving Health by Diet.

LONDON, Printed for J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane; A. DODD, without Temple Bar;
and J. Fox, in Westminster Hall. M.DCC.XXIII.

(Price One Shilling.)

THE CURIOSITIES OF Common Water.
FOR the Benefit of Mankind in general, I have taken pains to give the World an
Account of what I have found written in the Works of the most eminent
Physicians concerning the Good that Mankind may receive from the Use of Common
Water, and of the Informations I have had concerning the Benefits thereof from
others by word of mouth; and of what I have discovered by my own Experience
from frequent Trials during a time that has intervened from that of thirty to
seventy four Years of Age: which is sufficient to confirm the stupendous
Effects thereof in many Particulars, that shall be mentioned as my own
Discovery with respect to this excellent Remedy, which will perform Cures with
very little Trouble, and without any Charge, and is also to be had wherever
there are any Habitations, which is what can hardly be said of any other thing:
so that in some sense, Water may truly be styled An Universal Remedy, since the
Diseases it either prevents or cures may have this Remedy applied to all
Persons, and in all Places where Men do inhabit.

The first Commendation of Common Water that I shall mention, is that which is
written concerning it by Dr. Manwaring, in his Method and Means of enjoying
Health; wherein he says, that Water is a wholesome Drink, or rather the most
wholesome -- being appointed for Man in his best State: which does strongly
argue that Drink to be the most suitable for human Nature -- answering all the
Intentions of common Drinks, for it cools, moistens and quenches Thirst; it is
clear, thin, and fit to convey the Nourishment through the smallest Vessels of
the Body -- and is a Drink that is a Rule to itself, and requires little
Caution in the Use of it, since none will be tempted to drink of it more than
needs: And that in the Primitive Ages of the World, Water-Drinkers, he says,
were the longest Livers by some Hundreds of Years -- nor so often sick and
complaining, as we are.

Dr. Keill, when he treats concerning the Stomach, in his Abridgment of the
Anatomy of Human Bodies, says, that Water seems the fittest to promote
Digestion of the Food which we eat; all spirituous Liquors having a Property by
which they hurt, rather than help Digestion; the sad Effects of which they are
sensible of, he says, who by a long use thereof have lost their Appetite,
hardly ever to be restored without drinking Water, which seldom fails of
procuring a good Appetite and a strong Digestion.

Dr. Prat, in his Treatise of Mineral Water, shows it to be his Judgment, that
if People would accustom themselves to drink Water, they would be more free
from many Diseases; such as Tremblings, Palsies, Apoplexies, Giddiness, Pains
in the Head, Gout, Stone, Dropsy, Rheumatism, Piles, and such like: Which
Diseases are most common among them that drink strong Drinks, and which Water
generally would prevent. Moreover, he also says, that Water plentifully drank
strengthens the Stomach, causes an Appetite, preserves the Sight, makes the
Senses lively, and cleanses all the Passages of the Body, especially those of
the Kidneys and Bladder.

It Is said also by Dr. Duncan, in his Treatise of hot Liquors, that when Men
contented themselves with Water, they had more Health and Strength; and that at
this day those who drink nothing but Water, are more healthy, and live longer
than those who drink strong Liquors, which raises the Heat of the Stomach to
Excess, whereas Water keeps it in a due Temper. And he adds in another part of
the Book, that by hot Liquors the Blood is inflamed; and such whose Blood is
inflamed, live not so long as those who are of a cooler Temper: a hot Blood
being commonly the Cause of Fluxes, Rheums, ill Digestion, Pains in the Limbs,
Headache, Dimness of Sight, and especially of Hysteric Vapors. He also imputes
the Cause of Ulcers to a hot Blood, and declares, that if Men kept their Blood
cool and sweet, by a moderate cooling Diet, they would never be troubled with
Ulcers, or other Breakings out.

Sir John Floyer also, in the Preface to his Treatise of Cold Baths, does
affirm, that Vapors both in Men and Women are caused by hot things, and that
by leaving off strong Liquors and a hot Diet, and by drinking Water, he had
procured to himself a better Health, and more Hardiness, than he had enjoyed
for many Years. And in the Body of that Book he affirms, that drinking of
Water in the Morning, cools the Blood, prevents Defluxions, and washes off the
bilious and salt Recrements by Urine; and that drinking Water after Dinner,
cools and stops the too high Fermentation of the Stomach, which is the Cause of
breeding Wind or Belching after Meat: to the Truth of which, the Author of this
Account can bear a full Testimony, who being for many Years afflicted with this
belching up of Wind after Meat, did at length prevent the same, by drinking
Water after eating, instead of other Drink, which in time did cool that
Hypochondriack Heat, from whence those Belchings did proceed.

Having read over an old Book written by one Sir Tho. Eliot, entitled, The
Castle of Health, he there declared from his own Experience, that in the County
of Cornwall, tho it was a very cold Quarter, the Poorer Sort, which in his time
did never, or but very seldom drink any other Drinks but Water, were strong of
Body, and lived to a very great Age; to which Relation that of Sir Henry Blount
is very agreeable who affirmed, in his Book of Travels into the Levant, (where
under the Turkish Government the Use of Wine was forbid, and where the common
Drink is Water) that he then had a better Stomach to his Food, and digested it
more kindly than he ever did before or since.

And in the Treatise of the Vanity of Philosophy, written by Dr. Gideon Harvey,
it is affirmed by him, that it is not Heat that causes a good Digestion, but a
proper Ferment or Liquor provided by Nature, to dissolve the Food into a
Substance like unto Pap made with fine Flower: which Dissolvent, he says, is
much depraved by hot spirituous Liquors, and therefore he commends Water above
all other Drinks to promote Digestion.

Water-drinking is also said by Dr. Allen to be good to prevent two deplorable
Distempers, the Gout and the Hypochondriack Melancholy; for, says he, the Gout
is generally caused by the too great drinking of fermented Liquors, and is
never said to have assaulted any Drinker of Water; and he says also, that
Melancholy Hypochondriack is kept off longest by drinking Water instead of
strong Drink. To which let me add, that I once knew a gouty Gentleman, who, to
avoid his drinking Companions in London, retired to New Brentford, where I then
lived; in which Town, by a very temperate Diet of one Meal a day, and drinking
only Water, he lived two whole Years free from Pain: but being visited by one
who came that way, and invited to drink but one Bottle of Claret between them,
he fell next day into a terrible Fit of the Gout, which held above a Month
after; of which being recovered, he by the same Course continued well till I
left the Place, which was about a Year and a half after.

The good Properties of Water are further manifested in preventing the breeding
of Gravel in the Kidneys; for Zechias, in Consult. 17. as he is quoted by
Salmon, affirms, that nothing does so much abate the Heat of the Kidneys, and
free them from those Recrements which cause Pain in the Back, one great sign of
Gravel, as Water does: but he advises to drink it warm, by the Use of which,
he says, the unnatural Heat in time will be so extinguished, that no more of
that Matter causing Gravel will be produced in the Body. Which Assertion, by
Experience I have found to be true: for observing much Gravel to be voided by
me, as also abundance of Matter floating in the Urine like Bran, with a great
number of Recrements like Cuttings of Hair, some above an Inch long; which
Substances were found in all the Water I made in above twelve Months; for which
I could get no Remedy: I was advised to drink Water, which in about half a Year
did entirely free me from those Symptoms which some imputed to Witchcraft out
of Ignorance; so that from that time to this present I never have been troubled
with it.

Water also is commended as efficacious to prevent the breeding of the Stone in
the Bladder, for it has been observed, that in some who have been cut for the
Stone, that new Stones have been ingender'd, so that some young Persons have
been cut several times. Now to prevent this, the drinking Water has been
advised with Success; for by this that intemperate Heat in the Body was abated,
which did occasion the Distemper. Some have advised to drink it warm, and
others cold, and in particular Van Heydon, a Physician of Ghent in Flanders, in
his Book, entitled, Help for the Rich and Poor; which he says, in p. 49. is
sufficiently insinuated by Piso and Alexander, who do assure us, that the
taking a Draught of cold Water in the Morning, has done so much good, that
several after the voiding of a Stone never had any more Stones grow in them.

Which Experiment may give light to the Discovery of a way to cure the Stone
without cutting; for if the growing of new Stones can be prevented by drinking
Water, let it be hot or cold, it may prevent a Stone from growing bigger when
begun; and if the aiding Matter to increase a Stone new begun, can be
prevented, Nature in time may waste that which is begun, especially if some
Drops of sweet Spirit of Nitre be added to all the Water drank, which will
powerfully help to cool, and is known to be an admirable Mover or Provoker of
Urine, and will waste a Stone, and make it crumble like Fullers Earth, if
applied to a Stone taken from the Body. Or the Water may be sweetened with
Honey, which is now much in use among the Gentry, as I am informed by an
ingenious Apothecary; who told me, that among them at present Pump-Water and
Honey was in great repute to give ease in Gravel: and there is so near an
Affinity between Gravel and the Stone, that what is proper for one, will be
suitable to both, and will prevent the growing of both.

Water is also styled in Sennertus's Works the Balsam of Children, the drinking
of it by the Mother being one of those things whereby Children may be
strengthened in the Womb, and will prevent those Injuries that are done them by
drinking strong Liquors; which Sampson's Mother was not allowed to do, for she
was commanded not to drink Wine or strong Drink, Judge. 13.4. But I will not
say, if all Women should do this, their Children shall be as strong as Sampson
was; yet this I will say, if they would do this, they would find their Children
more free from Distemper and Frowardness, and so much more easy to nurse and
bring up, and be less liable to an immature Death; the want of which Abstinence
from strong Drinks is the Cause why so many rich People find it hard to bring
up Children, in comparison to what is done by the Poor: for these last are born
of Mothers, who not only are prevented from being Gluttons by their want of
Dainties, which are deceitful Meat, Prove. 23.3. but they seldom taste Wine or
strong Drink: whereas the Rich not only feed high, and so engender foul Blood,
but they also drink strong Drinks, which in most Constitutions do over-heat the
Humors of the Body, and that Blood by which their Children are nourished
during their Pregnancy. Which Injury to unborn Infants would be prevented, if
the Mother would be temperate in Diet, and drink Water, especially at Meals, by
which the Blood of the Mother would be kept cool and clean; which must needs
communicate a healthful Substance to the Child within her, and prevent all
those Distempers which Infants do bring with them into the World.

And here it may be proper to add, what by diverse Experiments has been found
to be true, that the drinking Water by Nurses while they give suck to Children,
will wonderfully increase Milk in those that want it, as every one will find,
who can be persuaded to make use thereof. I have advised many to make use of
it, who have found that by drinking a large Draught of Water at Bedtime, they
have been supplied with Milk sufficient for that Night, when before they wanted
it, and could not be supplied by any other means: And besides, they who have
found their Children restless by reason of too much Heat in their Milk, do find
them much more quiet after their Milk is cooled by Water-drinking.

By drinking Water also, the want of Food for a time may be suffered without
starving; for I have been informed by a credible Friend, who was an Officer at
Sea, that being sent down to Stafford to take care to see some Men conveyed on
Shipboard, that had deen pressed by Act of Parliament for the Sea-Service; he
found in the Prison, where they were kept, a lusty Fellow, who had declared he
would starve himself rather than go to Sea, and taking particular notice
thereof, he found upon due Enquiry, that for twenty days he had refused to eat
any manner of Food, only he drank each day about three Pints or two Quarts of
Water, hoping thereby to get himself discharged: but when he found his
Pretensions to be in vain, and that in about two days they should all march for
London, he condescended to eat some Food, beginning with a little, and in the
March he was observed to travel as well as the best Man. I find also an Account
in Dr. Car's Letters, of a certain crack-brain'd Man, who, at Leyden, when the
Doctor resided in that University, pretended he could fast as long as Christ
did; and it was found that he held out the time of forty Days without eating
any Food, only he drank Water and smoked Tobacco. And I once had a sad
Complaint from a poor old Woman of the Greatness of her Want, affirming that
oftentimes she had not eaten any Food for two or three days; upon which I asked
her, if she did not then suffer much Uneasiness in her Stomach: she said she
did, but found a way at last to assuage her Hunger, by drinking Water, which
did satisfy her Appetite.

Water is also of great use to strengthen weak Children, for we are informed by
Dr. Joseph Brown, in his Treatise of Cures performed by Cold Baths, that the
Welsh Women do preserve their Children from the Rickets, by washing them Night
and Morning in cold Water, till they are three quarters of a Year old, p. 79.
And it is said by Sir John Floyer, in his Treatise of Cold Baths, that a Lady in
Scotland, who had lost several Children through Weakness, did by the Advice of
a Highland Beggar-Woman preserve those she had afterward, by washing them
daily in cold Water. And I myself did advise a Neighbor, whose Child began to
be ricketty, to treat the Child in the same manner; but she, instead of
washing, dipped it over head and ears every Morning, it being then in the
Summertime: the Event of which was, the Child became strong, and had a good
Countenance, tho before it was in the Face very pale and wan. Which shows how
great the Power of Water is, when used outwardly, to invigorate the Spirits,
and strengthen Nature.

It is also a known Custom, to prevent the Swellings that follow Bruises in the
Faces of Children, by immediately applying thereunto a Linen Cloth four or six
times double, dipped in cold Water, and new dipping it as it begins to grow warm;
for the Cold repels or prevents the flowing of Humors to the Part, which
otherwise would cause great Swelling, and after turn blackish: and if upon
neglecting to do so, a Swelling should succeed, it may be discussed by
fomenting Night and Morning, for an hour at a time, with Water as hot as can be
endured; for that will give vent to the Humors to transpire through the Skin,
or dissolve them, so as to make them capable of returning back.

Moreover, by means of Water all Sickness at the Stomach may be cured, which is
done thus: Take four Quarts of Water, make it as hot over the Fire as you can
drink it; of which Water let a Quart be taken down at several Draughts; then
wrap a Rag round a small Piece of a Stick, till it is about the Bigness of a
Man's Thumb, tie it fast with some Thread; and with this, by endeavoring
gently to put it a little way down your Throat, provoke yourself to vomit up
again most of the Water: then drink another Quart, and vomit up that, and
repeat the same the third and fourth time. You may also provoke Vomiting by
tickling your Throat with your Finger, or the Feather-End of a Goose-Quill; but
the Cloth round a Skuer makes one vomit with most ease, which is done with no
Trouble when the Stomach is full. And by this way of Vomiting, which will be
all performed in an hour's time, that vicious and ropy Phlegm in the Stomach,
which causes the Sickness, will be cast up, so that the Party in that time
will be free from all that inward Disturbance, if you use the Remedy at the
first; but if the Sickness has continued for a time, it will require the same
Course once or twice more, which may be done in three or four Hours, one after
another, without any other Inconvenience, besides that of being a little sore
in the Breast the next Day, which will soon go off by the Force of Nature.
Which Remedy, by forty Years Experience, I look upon to be infallible in all
Sickness at the Stomach from what Cause soever, and for all Pains in the Belly
which seem to be above the Navel; for these are all in the Stomach, as by long
Experience I have found: which Pains are generally counted the Cholick; but it
is not so, for true Cholicks are always below the Navel, in the Gut, Colon. And
by this means I have eased very great Pains caused by eating Mussels that were
poisonous; and it is also a certain Cure for all Surfeits or Disorders that
follow after much eating; so that the Lives of Multitudes might be saved by
this means, who for want of expelling what offends, do often die in Misery: For
by thus cleansing the Stomach at the first, the Root of Diseases proceeding
from Surfeiting, unwholesome Food, or any viscous Humors from a bad Digestion,
are prevented; the Stomach being the Place in which all Distempers do at first
begin. No Man was more subject to Sickness than myself before thirty Years of
Age; but since I found out the way of vomiting with Water, which is now above
forty Years, I never have been sick for two Days together: for when I find
myself ill to any great degree, I betake myself to this way of vomiting, which
in an hour's time restores me to Ease, and perfectly removes my Illness; and
the same Benefit all my Family find in it, as do others also whom I can
persuade to try the Experiment; which is such, that no Physician whatever can
advise a better to the King himself, should he fall sick. For, in the first
place, it is not a nauseous Remedy, it does not make the Patient sick, as the
best of all other Vomits do; and then it is a Vomit which is at our own Command,
since we can leave off when we please: and it infallibly works a Cure to all
sick Stomachs.

Some few indeed pretend they are not able to vomit by this means; now if they
cannot vomit, let them take a Pint of Water when they find themselves ill from
eating, and do so every three or four Hours, eating no more till they are
hungry; and they will find the Water digest and carry off what was offensive.
The ingenious Dr. Cheyne, in his Treatise of the Gout, does affirm that warm
Water drank freely in a Morning fasting, and at Meals, ( and I say cold Water
is as good) has been a sovereign Remedy for restoring lost Appetites, and
strengthening weak Digestions, when other more pompous Medicines have failed.
And he advises Gouty Persons, after Excess either in Meat or Drink, to swill
down as much fair Water as their Stomach will bear, before they go to bed,
whereby they will reap these Advantages, either the Contents of the Stomach
will be thrown up, or both Meat and Drink will be much diluted, and the Labor
and Expense of Spirits in Digestion much saved. And indeed I have found by long
Experience, that nothing causes so good a Digestion as fair Water; but this
requires time to free us from the Uneasiness that an ill Digestion causes,
whereas Vomiting is an immediate Remedy, and frees a Man from it upon the spot.

We are told by Sir John Floyer, in his Treatise of Bath and Mineral Springs,
that Vomiting with Water is very useful in the Gout, Sciatica, Wind, Shortness
of Breath, Hypochondriack Melancholy, and Falling Sickness; which Distempers
are generally derived from evil Matter contained in the Stomach, as is likewise
Giddiness in the Head and Apoplexies, with which myself once seemed to be
threatened; for after eating a plentiful Dinner, I was seized with Giddiness,
and the Sight of my Eyes became so depraved, that things seemed double, which
was accompanied with a strange Consternation of Spirit; and having read, that
Apoplexies generally seize after eating, I immediately called for Water, and
not daring to stay till it was warmed, I drank it cold, and by the help of my
Finger provoked Vomiting: upon which I did immediately overcome the Evils I was
threatened with, the Symptoms before mentioned being the same as did precede the
Fit of an Apoplexy in another Person, as himself afterward told me, who died
of it the third Fit.

As for People who are troubled with Shortness of Breath, it is certain from
Experience, that Vomiting with warm Water three or four times will afford
certain Relief. And the same may be prevented by drinking nothing but Water
afterward, either cold, or warmed with a Toast: for upon doing this, the
Difficulty of Breathing will apparently abate; which Water, if you please, may
be boiled with Honey. And I knew one, who by this means, as he was advised by
me, lived comfortably in this City two or three Winters, but having undertaken
Business which did occasion drinking strong Drinks, was the next Winter carried
off by the Distemper: Wine, Ale, or Brandy, being as bad as Poison to People
troubled with Shortness of Breath.

Some People are taken with violent Vomiting, and the Excess thereof in some
has been so great, as to endanger their Lives, yea, cause Death: in which Case
Water will be very helpful; for if a Pint of it warmed be drank after every
Vomit, it will prevent that violent Straining, wherein lies the Danger of all
Vomiting, because to strain violently when but little will come up, does
endanger the breaking of some inward Vessel. And besides this, the offending
Matter will be sooner loosened from the internal Part of that Bowel, the
Stomach, and cast out, upon which the Vomiting will sooner cease: For after
this manner the famous Sydenham, a most honest Writer, did overcome the Cholera
Morbus, or Vomiting and Looseness, so common in his Time, and was found by the
weekly Bill to kill more than now die of Convulsions; for his way was to boil a
Chicken in four Gallons of Water, which made a Broth not much differing from
Water, of which he ordered large Draughts to be given, and some of it to be
taken by Clyster, till the whole Quantity was spent, if the Vomiting did not
stop before; which did so take off the Sharpness of the Matter offending, and
wash it out, that the Party in a little time became well. And the same was the
Practice of Sigismundus Grasius, who commends pure Water in a Vomiting and
Looseness to be drank in large Quantities; for thereby, he says, the corrosive
or sharp Humors will be so weakened, that they will no more offend: and he
faith it may be drank cold, if the Patient be strong, otherwise let it be
warmed.

And in Common Fluxes without Vomitings a Quart or more of warm Water drank,
will so weaken the Sharpness whereby the Distemper is caused, that it will soon
be overcome, and the Gripings eased; and in the Bloody Flux, which is the most
dangerous of all Fluxes, the ingenious Cornelius Celsus advises a large
Drinking of cold Water as the best of Remedies: but then no other Substance
must be taken till the Disease is cured. And another great Physician, by Name
Lusitanus, affirms, Cent. 1. Obser. 46. that he knew one, who, being in the
Summertime afflicted with this bloody Flux, did drink a large quantity of cold
Water, and did thereby recover. This large quantity therefore of Water in these
Fluxes, does so correct the Sharpness of the Humor offending, that it can have
no power to cause Pain, or corrode the Vessels, and cause bloody Digestions or
Stools.

Water also is a Drink that conduces above all things to cure Consumptive
People, for the Digestion being weakened, is the Cause of producing a hot,
fretting Nourishment; which is injurious to the tender Substance of the Lungs,
and which constringes and stops up the Lymphatick Vessels, through which the
Nourishment is to pass to all the Parts; so that by degrees the Body for want
of due Supplies consumes: which Obstructions, and that Acrimony that causes
them, will be opened and sweetened by the plentiful Use of Water; if taken
before the Lungs become ulcerous. Which Cure of Consumptions by Water is
recommended in the Writings of Dr. Couch, who in his Praxis Catholica tells us,
that he knew a Man cured very soon of a Consumption by drinking pure Water. And
it is said by another, that some have been cured of Consumptions by drinking no
other Drink but Water, avoiding all Malt Liquors and sharp Wines: for Wine or
any other strong Liquor is pernicious in this Distemper.

Some there are who are much troubled with flushing Heat in their Face, and
others with a Heat in the Back; in both which Cases, Water, used as common
Drink, is the best Remedy, with a spare cooling Diet: and it is also excellent
for such as have red Blotches in their Face, which proceeds from a hot fretting
Blood, which, by Water-drinking, and a moderate Diet, will be kept under: for
as Dr. Duncan, before quoted, does affirm, those who keep their Blood cool and
clean, are never troubled with Breakings out, like many others, who may be
known to be Drinkers of hot Drinks, and use a hot full Diet, by their Faces.

Water is also commended by the Learned for the Cholick; thus Riverius affirms,
that in the Cholick large drinking of Water has been found to be an excellent
Remedy; and it is said by Fortis, that when he practiced at Venice, he often
gave cold Water in the Cholick with good Success. With whom an English
Physician, Dr. Wainwright, in his Mechanical Account of the six Non-naturals,
concurs; for he says that Water-Drinkers are never troubled with the Cholick,
and that many thereby have been cured when all other Remedies failed.

And in the Smallpox, Water has also been proved to be an excellent Drink.
Salmon, in his Synopsis Medicinae, says, that in this Distemper you may safely
give the Sick fair Water, of which, says he, they may drink liberally to quench
Thirst; the want of which plenty of Drink has been the Death of many a
Patient. Which Opinion of his was right, as by Experience I have found in two
of my own Children, when sick of this Distemper; to whom, after I had given a
gentle Vomit of Emetick Tartar, I gave no other Drink but Water, and they both
recovered safely, and were not in the least lightheaded, as two others before
were in the same Distemper, when treated otherwise: and I remember that one Dr.
Betts being consulted in a Case where the Eruptions did not come out kindly,
did order two Quarts of cold Water to be drank as soon as could be, upon which
they came out according to expectation, and the Party did well.

It Is also certain, that in what we call burning Fevers, Water is found to be a
safe and effectual Remedy. It is said by Dr. Primrose, in his Popular Errors,
that many great Physicians have commended the drinking cold Water in Diseases,
and they attribute to it the chief Place in Fevers, where the Sick must drink
largely; for thus taken, it will quench all Heat, page 374. And Galen is said,
by an English Author, to reprove Crasistratus for denying cold Water in burning
Fevers; and says, that this is a Remedy for any Fever, provided it be drank in
great abundance: with which Opinion I find Dr. Oliver to agree, who, in his
Essay on Fevers, says, That in Fevers we must drink oftener than Thirst calls
for it, and such Draughts as are plentiful; and the Drink he prescribes, is
either cold Water or Barley-Water. Dr. Wainwright affirms also, that Water is
proper in Fevers, and that the Ancients gave as much of it as the Patient could
drink. And by another it is said, that if you give the Patient nothing but Water
for three Days, that in the third Day the Fever will be cured generally; but if
it is not, give for Food a little Barley-Broth, and the Fever will not exceed
the seventh Day. And by another we are informed, how one in a Fever, that was
past Hope, being forbidden to drink Water, which he greatly desired, did find
means, in the Absence of his Nurse, to get a large Pot-full, which he drank
off, and lay down again, being well cooled; after which he fell into a Sweat,
and so was cured. And I find that Dr. Cook of Warwick, in his Book of
Observations on English Bodies, does prescribe, for the Cure of Fevers, first a
Vomit, and afterward as much cold Water as the Patient can drink; and he
says, that if he sweat upon it, the Sweat must he continued as long as can be.
And it is said by another, that it is an excellent Remedy in Fevers to drink a
Quart of hot Water, and sweat upon it, being covered warm. There is also one
Dr. Quinton, who, in his Book of Observations, writes, That to one in a
malignant Fever, whose Pulse was so low it could scarcely be felt, there was
three Quarts of Water given, at several Draughts, to make him vomit; but it did
not operate that way, yet the Event was this, that it did refresh him, much
raised his Pulse, brought him into a breathing Sweat, and passed off by Urine:
which Lowness of the Pulse my own Experience has often found to be raised by
drinking Water plentifully. And I know a Woman, who though she in a Fever had the
Advice of two Doctors, yet became distracted: I bid the Nurse give her a Pint
of cold Water, which she drank up, and in three or four Minutes came to her
right Senses; and desiring to drink more, she recovered. And I have observed,
that when, in Fevers, the Patient can relish no other Drink, yet Water is
always drank with pleasure, as it also will always be after the eating sweet
things, that spoil the Relish of other Drinks; which is one Excellence peculiar
to Water, and shows it to be most agreeable to the Nature of Mankind, though now
so much slighted.

And as for the Gout, which Dr. Harris says, in his Anti-Empirice, is gotten
either by high feeding, or drinking much Wine, or other strong Drink; it may be
cured, as that Author does affirm, by a very spare Diet, and drinking Water:
according to what is said also by Sir Theodore Mayhern, who, in his Medicinal
Counsels, advises to leave off all strong Drinks in this Disease, and drink
only Water. And Van Heydon says also, in his Treatise of Help for the Rich and
Poor, that there is not any greater Remedy for the Gout than drinking Water,
not only by young but old Men; many of whom, he says, have drank cold Water
for many Weeks, which has succeeded so well, though they were far gone in
Years, that they found great Ease thereby, without that Offense to the Stomach,
or Hindrance of Digestion, which some did seem to fear. And he also commends
the large drinking of Water in the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout, he having often cured
this Distemper, by this means, in less time than could reasonably be expected;
and the same myself have found to be effectual in a like Pain in the Shoulder,
which had continued very bad for three Months. For, being taken with a Fever, I
drank in one Day about four Quarts of Water; which though it did not make me
sweat, because I lay not in my Bed, yet it cured me so that I slept well that
Night; and in the Morning, when I rose, I did find that the Pain in my Shoulder
was not felt, neither did it ever return. And the same Success I have had in
the Pains of other Parts, whereby I judge, that in all Pains whatever the
drinking of Water is proper, as well as in the Gout; and accordingly I find
cold Water advised to be drank largely for the Cure of the Headache from hard
Drinking; that Pain proceeding from the same Cause the Gout does, namely from
Heat, as all Pains do.

It is said also by Dr. Wainwright, that in the Itch, Scurvy, Leprosy, and in
all hot inflammatory Distempers, such as Pleurisies, Rheumatisms, and St.
Anthony's. Fire, Water is a proper Remedy; but he advises to drink it hot in
some Cases, as doubtless ought to be done in Pleurisies. He also says, that
Water is proper in Headaches, Catarrhs, Vapors, Falling Sickness, Dullness of
Sight, Melancholy, Shortness of Breath, Scurvey in the Mouth, and Windiness in
the Stomach: And, for Wind in the Stomach, I, by long Experience, have found it
the best Remedy, who, in the former part of my Life, through a disorderly Diet,
and drinking strong Drink like others, was never free from windy Belchings, and
sometimes very sickish Qualms after Meals; from which at length I was
delivered, by drinking only Water at Meals, so that for above forty Years I
have been seldom troubled: and if I find myself troubled, a Pint or more of
cold Water, in less than half an Hour, will set me free, by drinking of it.

And that Water is the best Remedy for the Mischiefs that come by Hard
Drinking, Experience teaches; there being nothing that so effectually frees
from those nauseating and reaching Qualms the next Morning, as the drinking a
Pint or more of fair Water; which effectually allays the Inflammation of the
Bowels, occasioned by strong or hot Drink, which spoils the Strength of the
Stomach, as it does the Strength of all other Parts; nothing being a greater
Enemy to the Vigor of the Nerves and Sinews, since by much drinking, Men make
themselves unable to stand or go: Which Effect would never follow, if Liquors,
that abound with Spirits, were strengthening; and if they were strengthening,
the Fibers of the Stomach would not be so weakened, after drinking strong
Drinks, as to make Men sick: which Sickness will soon be recovered by the
drinking cold Water, this being also the best Remedy, if taken largely, for
that Heat of Urine which is often occasioned by Hard-drinking.

In Colds, Water is the best of all Drinks to prevent Floods of Rheum from the
Nose and Mouth, as my long Experience testifies, and the drinking thereof will
prevent Coughs; for a Cough will seldom succeed a Cold, if Water is used from
the first as common Drink: and if, through Neglect, a Cough should become
troublesome, the Use of Water, avoiding all Wine and strong Drink, will
contribute much to the Cure. Some order the Water to be drank warm, but others
say that to drink it cold vastly excells the using of it hot in a Cough. It Is
said by Van Heydon, that some may think it strange to advise Water in such
Diseases, which most do account to proceed from Crudity or Indigestion; but, he
says, that in any Disease where the Case is dangerous, the Use of Water is the
only Friend to Nature; cold Water being a Preventer rather than a Cause of
Crudity, since, by all Experience, it is proved to be a Promoter of a good
Digestion: And at this time I know a Woman, 78 Years of Age, who for this ten
Years has had a great Cough, and spits much tough Phlegm, that has this
present Winter 1722, been persuaded to leave off all strong and small fermented
Liquor, and drink only Water at Meals, and sometimes a Dish or two of Tea; and
has found herself much less subject to cough than before, and scarce coughs at
all in Bed.

It is the general Opinion of most Physicians, that Wine and Strong-Drinks are
not proper for Children, and that the smaller and cooler their Drink is, the
better it will be with them; and that nothing conduces more to the Health of
Children than drinking Water, which will prevent the Foundation of those
Diseases that are caused in many by Strong-Drink, and do show themselves in
their more advanced Age, wherein many also do suffer much by the ill Custom of
making them Gluttons, by constantly cramming their Stomachs with Food, many
being thereby destroyed among the Children of the Rich before they come to the
Years of Maturity; when the Children of poor Country People, who fare hard, and
very often drink Water, stand their Ground till full grown: for fewer Children
die in the Country than in great Cities, where Luxury in Diet does more abound;
which is one Reason why so few Housekeepers in London were born in it, the
great Supply of Inhabitants being from the Country, Children being brought up
more hardy there than in London, where great Numbers are killed by
over-pleasing their Palates. Which Mischief would be, in a great measure,
prevented by their being accustomed to drink Water; which, by Experience, is
found to make young Children free from that Frowardness which is commonly
caused by a sharp, and hot, or feverish Blood, which ingendereth Wind, and
causes Pain and Gripes: for there is no Pain but is the Consequence of Heat,
if it is not caused by Blows and Bruises.

Water, I have found, by long Experience, to be of excellent use in Burns and
Scalds; for in all Burns and Scalds that are slight, if the Part is plunged
immediately into cold Water, the colder the better, the Pain will instantly be
taken off; and it will fetch out the Fire, if continued so long, as will be
required to do it by any other Remedy. And if the Burn be so considerable, that
other Remedies must be applied, none of which will take off the Smart of
themselves in less than two or three Hours; yet if you apply cold Water
presently, after other Applications are made to the Part, the Pain immediately
will cease, till the Remedy becomes effectual: so that the Ease Water will give
in such Cases, makes it of good Use. Which Remedy, as it has not been
discovered till now, appears to transcend all other Remedies in this Case;
because, in a moment, the great Smart will be eased, if the Water is cold, and
will be felt no more if the Part afflicted be kept immersed in it till the Fire
is extinguished, either by the Water, or the Medicine applied. Besides, it is a
Remedy every where ready at hand, which cannot be said of any other; which
generally requires so much time to get it ready, that much Pain will be
endured, if Blisters do not arise, which do much increase the Trouble. If the
Part burnt, or scalded, cannot be dipped in Water, you may apply Water to it,
with double Linen Cloths dipped therein, and new dipped as they grow warm; by
which means I have cured Burns and Scalds in the Face without blistering, when
applied immediately before Blisters did arise.

I once knew a large Ulcer in the Foot, made by the running of melted Brass
into the Shoe, that was kept in hand by a Surgeon nine Weeks, without any
probability of healing, because of the great Inflammation that attended it; but
the Party being a Lover of Angling, was persuaded to go with some others to
Hackney River: some of them went barelegg'd into the Water, to come at a
certain Hole where much Fish was sometimes found. The Sport was so good that
the lame Man, having pulled off his Stockings and Plasters, went in also,
where he staid above two Hours, and coming out again he found the Ulcer, which
appeared very red and angry when he went in, did look pale; he put on his
Dressings, and came home, and in lose than a Fortnight his Ulcer healed up:
which doubtless was occasioned by the abating of the Inflammation by the
Coldness of the Water. And I have had an Account also from an Acquaintance,
that was Surgeon to a Merchant Ship, that their Gunner, at a time when the
Captain treated some Friends on board, going to charge a Gun that just before
had been fired off, the Cartridge he was ramming down took fire, whereby he was
blown into the Water, and had some of his Fingers torn off, and it was about an
Hour before a Boat could be got to take him up: but they found that the
Coldness of the Water had almost stopped the Bleeding, and the Cure was effected
so speedily, that other Surgeons wondered at it; which he imputed to the Water,
which kept back the Humors, by its Coldness, from flowing to the Part at the
first: so that there was no Impediment, from Inflammation, to hinder healing;
for the chief Impediment to healing, is Inflammation in Wounds or Ulcers.

And as for Strains and Sprains in the Joints, cold Water affords the best and
most speedy Remedy, as Van Heydon affirms; who says, That by bathing in cold
Water all harm so received may, by this Remedy, be cured more safely and more
speedily than by any other, without Loss of Time, Cost, or Trouble; for no more
is to be done, than, as soon as can be, to put the Part into a Tub of cold
Water for about two Hours, which will prevent all Swelling and Pain, by
repelling or keeping back the Humors that otherwise would flow to the Part.
And if it should be the Shoulder, or any other Part, which is so hurt, that
cannot well be immersed in Water after this manner, Water may be applied, by
dipping Towels folded up into it, and laying them to the Part, as is done, in
effect, to the wrenched Joints of Horses; about which, if you wind oftentimes a
thick Rope made of Hairs, and then cast upon it diverse times a Pail of cold
Water, the Wrench will be cured; which Experiment is now commonly practiced by
those concerned about Horses.

Bathing in cold Water has also been found to be a good Remedy to strengthen
Weakness in the Joints, as Sir John Floyer, in his Treatise of Cold Bathing,
has showed; and which by Experience I found to be true in a certain Woman, who
complained of great Weakness and Pain in her Ankles: I advised her to dip the
Part in cold Water every Morning for about a quarter of an Hour, and to do the
same at Night; and in about twenty Days she became as strong in that Part as
she was in the other. And Sir John tells us of a Boy who could not stand, his
Limbs were so weak, that by bathing in cold Water, perfectly recovered his
Strength in a little time.

Great Pain in the Head has been also cured by this means; for we are told by
Van Heydon, that one Sir Toby Mathews had for twenty Years been troubled with
great Pain in one side of his Head, and a great Defluxion of Rheum from his
Nose; but he at last was cured, by applying cold Water to the Part every day
for about a quarter of an hour: upon reading of which, I tried the Experiment
upon myself, who for a long time had been trouble with the running of much
clear Water from my Nose, with great spitting of thin Rheum: for I let a
Water-Cock run upon the Mould of my Head every Morning, by which, in about six
Weeks time, I was eased of my Trouble. And since that I had a credible
Information of a certain Servant-Maid, who was afflicted greatly with a
Rheumatism and an intolerable Pain in the Head, who being put into St. Thomas's
Hospital, her Nurse was ordered by the Doctor to apply to her Head Towels four
times double, dipped in cold Water, changing them as they became warm, which she
was to continue doing four or five Hours; in which time she was freed from that
Pain in the Head, and was afterward cured of the Rheumatism by other Means.

The Want of Sleep in Fevers may be cured likewise by the Application of cold
Water: for to a near Relation, who could not sleep for three Days and three
Nights, I ordered a Towel to be several times folded up, then to be dipped in
Water, and a little wrung out an^ so laid upon her Forehead, and to be new dipped
as it grew hot; which in about two Hours time so cool^d her Head, that she fell
into a Sleep, and conti^^^^ in it five Hours: and I ordered the farce to be
done the next Night, with the some effect. And we find that Dr. Co^kbu^n, in
his Treatise of Sea Diseases, d^d order for the want of Sleep in Fevers, to dip
a Towel, four times doubled, in Oxycrat, which is six parts Water, and one part
Vinegar, to be bound about the Head and Temples; which, he says, will cause
Sleep with wonderful Success: but Water only will have the same effect, as I
often have proved.

And that the Use of cold Water in Swoonings is of great effect, common
Experience teaches; for if a Dish or Cup of cold Water is thrown strongly upon
the Face, the Person in an instant will recover his Senses, tho for a time he
seems dead, and perhaps might not have recovered in some cases, if cold Water
had not been so applied: such Faintings being sometimes deadly, which proceed
from possonous Vapors ascending up to the Brain from a foul Stomach; for such
Effects there are, as I have found by Experience, who, in my young Days, did
swoon away twice; at both which times I was sensible of a Collection of Wind in
my Stomach, from whence I plainly felt a Fume or Vapor ascend to the Head,
that in an instant deprived me of all Sense: but being both times in the
Company of a Person who had seen the thing tried, he dashed some cold Water
against my Face, which I remember made me start, as if I had been suddenly a
waked. And I am apt to think, that some die in such a Fit, when none are near
to help them; and especially when so taken in their Sleep, which, I believe,
none need fear who live temperately, or that eat no Suppers: none who have
refrained from Suppers, having been ever found to die in Sleep.

Dangerous Bleedings at the Nose have also been cured with cold Water largely
drank, syringing cold Water up their Nostrils, and applying Towels round their
Necks dipped in cold Water, changing them as they grow warm; for it is said by a
good Writer, that this will so cool the Heat of the Blood, and by the Coldness
of the Water syringed up the Nose, so contract the Mouths of the bursted Veins
which bleed, that it will put a stop to the Bleeding. Such Bleedings have also
been stopped by dashing cold Water often into the Face, as a French Writer has
affirmed, whose Name was Flamand; and the same also is affirmed by Cook, in his
Marrow of Surgery.

Cold Water is an absolute Cure for all small Cuts in the Fingers or other
Parts; for if when cut, you close the Cut up with the Thumb of your other Hand,
keeping it so closed for a quarter or half an Hour, this will infallibly stop
the Bleeding: after which, if you double up a Linen Rag five or six times, dip
it in cold Water, and apply it to the Part, binding it on fast. This, by
preventing Inflammation and a Flux of Humors, will give Nature time soon to
heal it without any other Application, as is seen in the common Practice of
Surgeons when they let a Man blood; for all the Application they make to the
Vein so cut, is a Pledget of Linen dipped in cold Water, and bound on with a
Fillet: for all Wounds without loss of Substance will heal of themselves, if
Inflammation is prevented, and the Lips of the Wound are kept close together.

We also are told by Van Heydon, that in his time some were of an opinion, that
a Person bit by a mad Dog might be preserved from that Symptom, called, The
Fear of Water, which generally follows and proves so mortal, by applying cold
Water to the Place bitten: And this, he says, they conceive to be no unlikely
thing, if there is any credit to be given to what Cornelius Celsus writes, who
says, that the only Remedy in this case is to throw the Party who is in this
Condition, or has the Fear of Water upon him, into a Pond or River, and when
plunged over Head and Ears, to keep him in the Water till filled with it,
whether he will or no; and by this means both his Thirst and Dread of Water
will be cured. For if this Immersion be of use when the Party is so far gone,
why should it not be of greater force in preserving from it, if speedily
applied and repeated? Now tho this is mentioned by him as a probable Opinion,
yet Experience in our days shows, That the plunging the Patient into the salt
Water either of the River of Thames, about Gravesend, or in the salt Springs in
Cheshire, is an infallible means to prevent any Evil succeeding the Bite of a
mad Dog; they must indeed be dipped so often, as to be almost drowned before the
Danger is over; but it is a question whether the Saltness of the Water
contributes any thing to this Cure, since Boer have, the present Professor at
Leyden, affirms, That when Men bitten by a mad Dog are arrived to the Fear of
Water, called an Hydrophobia, they may be cured, by blinding the Patient's
Eyes, and throwing of him into a Pond of Water often, till he seems not to be
afraid of it, or but very little, and then force him to drink large Quantities.

And we are told by Dr. Brown, that a Person troubled with the Falling
Sickness, by happening to fall into a cold Spring, (I suppose it was in the
time of his Fit) was freed from his Distemper all his Life after: and he says
there is no need of preparing the Body for it in this, as in some other Cases.
But the Patient, when plunged into a cold Bath, ought to continue in the Bath
each time about three or four Minutes: for in plunging over head and ears at
his first Entrance into a cold Bath, the Brain will be so sensibly affected, as
to be relieved from the Distemper, which is a kind of Convulsion proceeding
from an Inflammation, or some other Cause; but we want more Experiments to
confirm this Notion: Which Notion may be worth noting, that the thing may be
tried in others, to see whether it will succeed as it did in this Person. For
it is said by the ingenious Dr. Pitcairn, a Scotchman, some time Professor at
Leyden, that there is no such thing as the Art of Physic, but Remedies were
found out by chance, p. 264. of his Works; for if Physic were an Art as
certain in its Rules, as the Rules are that belong to Music, or to
Watch-making, Physicians would as seldom be mistaken in their Prescriptions, as
the others are in their Designs. But when Remedies happen to be discovered, and
prove often to be effectual, the remembering that Remedy, to apply it in a like
case, often brings Reputation to the Prescriber; and if it fails, some other
Experiment must be tried, which, were Physic an Art, need not be done.

It Is also said by the same Dr. Brown, that Madness and Melancholy, with all
their Retinue, may find better Effects from the Use of bathing in cold Water,
than from other violent Methods, with which People so afflicted are now
treated; for, says he, that which will make a drunken Man sober in a minute,
will certainly go a great way toward the Cure of a Madman in a month. Now it is
most certain, to my own Knowledge, that if a drunken Man be plunged over head
and ears in cold Water, he will come out of it perfectly sober: And some I have
known, that in such cases have been recovered by barely washing their Heads in
cold Water. And the forementioned Opinion of Dr. Brown is confirmed by the
Practice of Dr. Blair, who, in a Letter to Dr. Baynard, declares, That he cured
a Man raving mad, who being bound in a Cart, stripped of his Clothes, and
blindfolded, that the Surprise might be the greater; he on a sudden had a great
Fall of Water let down upon him from the height of twenty foot, under which he
continued so long as his Strength would permit: and after his Return home, he
fell into a Sleep, and slept twenty-nine Hours, and awaked in as quiet a State
of Mind as ever, and so had continued to the time of the writing that Letter,
which was twelve Months.

Which Relation seems to make that a more probable Truth, which was related in
a Letter from Sir John Floyer to Dr. Brown, and printed by that Doctor;
wherein it is said, that in Normandy they immerse Fools, or dip them in cold
Water, to cure them: a hot Brain being the Cause, perhaps, of several Disorders
in the Understanding, and is in great part found to be true, in the ridiculous
Behavior of some drunken Men, which, when their Heads are become cool, abhor
what they before did do or say. Now if such Dipping would cure Fools among us,
great Numbers might be made more happy than they are.

Dr. Brown, in his Discourse of Cold Baths, affirms likewise, that to bathe in
cold Water has been found to be the quickest, safest, and pleasantest Cure for
the King's Evil; and he tells us, in p. 85. of a Yorkshire Gentleman, who was
grievously afflicted with this Distemper, having great Ulcers in the Glands of
his Neck, which were so much inflamed, as to bring him very low; but being
advised by Dr. Baynard to bathe in the Cold Bath, he in a Month's time was
perfectly cured, his Ulcers being healed up, contrary to the Opinion of the
most learned Physicians.

We also find mention, in the Description of the Scottish Islands, of an odd
Remedy commonly made use of there for the Cure of the Jaundice; which is this:
They strip the Party naked, lay him upon the Ground on his Belly, and pour
unawares upon his Back a Pail of cold Water. And also Pains in the Joints, as
Dr. Curtis tells us, will be cured, by holding the Part under the Stream of a
Pump or Cock; and fomenting with cold Water is commended as good to assuage hot
Swellings. And I know a Person who had often been subject to blood-shot or
inflamed Eyes, who afterward, upon the beginning of the same Distemper, took,
by Advice, a Ball of linen Rags, dipped them in cold Water, and applied them to
the Part, cooling them by new dipping as often as they grew hot: which
Application was continued three Hours, in which time the Humor was so
repelled, as to be troublesome no more; for the Party, to my knowledge, has
had no sign of that Distemper since, tho the same had been very troublesome
many times before.

It is also advised by Dr. Gideon Harvey, to wash the Eyes well twice a day in
cold Water, as the best Remedy to prevent Defluxions on them, and preserve the
Eyesight, which it greatly comforts. And this I have found true for many
Years, my Eyes being often apt to be dim and stiff on a sudden, so that I could
scarce open my Eyelids; which, upon washing for a minute with fair Water, has
been felt no more till a good while after. Besides which Benefit to the Eyes,
Authors say it is also good to preserve the Memory, if the whole Forehead be
washed twice a day; which is a certain Cure for itching in the Eyes, as Authors
tell us.

Some People are troubled with a Callosity, or Hardness of the Bottoms of their
Feet, which is so troublesome, as to be a hindrance to their easy walking; for
which a Cure is prescribed by Dr. Cook, that is, to soak them well in warm
Water, till the Hardness is softened, and then scrape it off with the Edge of a
Knife: and if the Feet burn with any unnatural Heat, the bathing often in hot
Water will cool them, by giving vent to what offends.

And the plentiful drinking of Water is commended in the Scurvey, by Dr.
Pitcairn, to dissolve the Scorbutic Salts, and carry them out by Urine,
whether they are Acids or Alkalies; and myself having formerly been extremely
troubled with the Scurvey, which often made me faint and weak, and my Pulse so
low as scarcely to be felt, I found at last that the Pulse would infallibly
rise upon drinking a Pint or more of cold Water, and in a little time I should
become brisk and strong: For I have often found that upon a Disorder of the
Stomach, the Strength of the bodily Members soon would fail, and would easily
be recovered when the Disorder of the Stomach was removed; and have, by long
Experience, found that nothing conduces so much to bodily Strength as a
Stomach in right Order, which requires Temperance and cooling Drink.

To what has been already said, I will add an Account, taken from a credible
Person, of a Man in the Parish of Shoreditch, who was desperately ill of an
Asthma, or Shortness of Breath, and deep Consumption, for which he had tried
many Remedies to no purpose. At length he was advised by a Physician, being
poor, to drink no other Drink but Water, and eat no other Food but Water Gruel,
without Salt or Sugar; which Course of Diet he continued for three Months,
finding himself at first to be somewhat better, and at the three Months end he
was perfectly cured; but, for Security-sake, he continued in that Diet a Month
longer, and grew strong and fat upon it. But his Diet he had no mind to, till
he was thoroughly hungry, and then he eat with pleasure; in which perhaps
consisted the best part of his Cure, it being an Advantage to Health never to
eat till Hunger calls for Food.

And I remember a young Woman, who was a Burnisher of Silver, who had a
desperate Cough, for which she had taken many things of an Apothecary to no
purpose; at length the Journey man told her, his Master said, he could do more:
but, said the Fellow, I would advise you every Morning to wash about and behind
your Ears, and upon your Temples, and on the Mould of your Head with cold
Water; which she told me she did, and in about a Week's time was perfectly
cured of her Cough.

There are diverse other Cases where in the Use of Water has done much good. I
knew an ancient Practiser in Physic, who told me, That in many Difficulties of
making water, he had advised the Party to put his Yard into Water as hot as he
could endure it, which, in a Minute, did cause him to make water; and that
Women have had the same Benefit by sitting over hot Water. And he often had
advised them who were costive, and went to Stool with great difficulty, to set
over a Pot with hot Water in it; which soon was attended with an easy
Digestion, the Body drawing up the Vapor, which did provoke Expulsion without
much straining.

And it has been observed, that froward Children have been made much more
quiet, by washing their lower Parts every Morning with Water, to wash off the
fretting Salts of their Urine, which usually stick in the Pores of the Skin,
and are fretful and uneasy, and nothing cures their Soreness about those Parts
like it. Nor is there are any thing more effectual to cure Men, who are gauled
with Riding, than to wash themselves well, when they go to bed, with cold
Water; and washing the bare Breast and Neck every Morning with cold Water, will
make those hardy who before were apt at every turn to take Cold.

In short, Water, when rightly made use of, does appear, from the Accounts
beforementioned, very effectual to prevent and cure many Diseases, but more
especially the inward Use thereof: for to use the words of the ingenious Dr.
Curtis, in his Essay for the Preservation and Recovery of Health; The habitual
Use of Water for common Drink preserves the native Ferment of the Stomach in
due Order, keeps the Blood temperate, and helps to spin out the Thread of Life
to the longest Extent of Nature; it makes the Rest at Night more quiet and
refreshing, the Reason and Understanding more clear, the Passions less
disorderly; and, in case of eating too much, a large Draught of cold Water
vastly exceeds any other Cordial to cause Digestion; Water being not so cold
and lifeless, he says, as many do imagine. Besides which Commendation of it by
this Doctor, it is certainly a Drink that will not ferment in the Stomach, nor
turn sour, as Wine and strong Malt Drinks will do, to the hindering of a good
Digestion, which all Acidity in the Stomach certainly does, when it abounds
there; and is best corrected by weakening or making it less sour, by drinking
good Store of Water, as the Experience of above forty Years Practice has
assured myself and many others. For tho Water is counted a contemptible Drink,
yet by beginning to make use of it at about thirty years of Age, before which I
was often out of Order, and continuing the Use of it ever since, drinking very
little Wine or strong Drink, I have attained to the Age of seventy-four Years;
when Thousands, in the mean time, who delight only in drinking strong Beer,
Wine, and Brandy, have not lived half so long: which makes good that Saying in
the Scriptures, That Wine is a Mocker, and strong Drink is Raging, and he who
is deceived thereby is not wise; Prove. 20.1. since it no ways contributes to
long Life; for it is certain that Thousands in the World live as long who drink
no strong Drink, as any Drinkers of it do. Some indeed, from an extraordinary
Strength of Nature, have been hard Drinkers, and yet die old; but for one who
does this, perhaps an hundred are destroyed by it before they come to half the
time of Life: and generally we shall find that very strong and healthy
Constitutions, at the long Run, are ruined by Riot and Excess, there being no
certain Safety in any way of Living but that of Temperance and Moderation.
Nature in some may, a long time, withstand the Abuses offered to it, but at
last it will yield to its Enemies; and those who live the longest in an
intemperate Course, might, from the Strength of their Constitution, have lived
much longer, had they eat less, and used themselves to drink more Water; which
Drink, as it is most friendly, and longest will preserve the Life of a strong
Constitution, so it is absolutely necessary for those that are weak and sickly,
and are naturally subject to the Gout, the Stone, Shortness of Breath, Wind,
Ill Digestion, and such like.

But the chief Use of Water in preserving of Health, is by using of it as a
Vomit, as before was shown, which is the most infallible Remedy that ever was
found out for any Stomach-Sickness, or Pain there; for to vomit with warm Water
will effectually remove it, and be a means to prevent great Fits of Sickness,
and preserve the Lives of many Thousands to Old Age, by cleansing the Stomach
from that tough, slimy, or corrupt Matter that offends, and is the Cause of all
mortal Diseases; especially of an Apoplexy, which though counted a Disease of the
Head, yet has its Original from a foul Stomach, which nothing does so
effectually cleanse as Vomits: according to that of Dr. Curtis, who says, That
Vomiting, with warm Water, or Carduus Tea, is very beneficial to bring up that
which fluctuates in the Stomach, and that tough ropy Phlegm which sticks fast
to the Wrinkles and Foulds of that Bowel, and which Purges do often pass over,
and cannot remove. Which way of Vomiting, with warm Water, is ten times more
easy and pleasant than that which is effected by the Use of a nauseous Tea made
of Carduus, which Physicians do sometimes advise; and it is also such as can do
no harm by Violence, as other Vomits made from Antimony sometimes do.

And here it may not be amiss to relate what I some Years ago discovered, in
order to Men's freeing themselves from Sickness that may happen after eating;
for being invited to dine at a certain Table, where there were several good
Dishes of Meat, I was over-persuaded to eat more than I should do, and in a
little time after Dinner found myself begin to be sick. I went out, and in a
private Place attempted to vomit, by tickling my Throat with my Finger, but
could not vomit as I designed to do; only by this means I raised up two or
three mouthfuls of thick tough Phlegm, upon which I found myself better, and my
sick Qualm went off. I took the Hint it gave me, and have done the same several
times since, and find that the getting up the Phlegm, which like Yest upon Beer
works up to the Mouth of the Stomach, a Man may free himself from some kinds of
Sickness after eating. And I remember it is an Advice given by one Vaughan, in
a Book long since printed, entitled, Directions for Health, for Men who feed
high, to put their Finger in their Throat when they rise in the Morning, to
make themselves puke, or avoid the Phlegm which can be raised, as an excellent
way to preserve Health; and it is said also to be an absolute Preservative from
the Gout.

I will conclude with this Note, That in such Distempers where Water-drinking
will be available for a Cure, the same must not be drank sparingly, but
plentifully, as to ease the Gripings in a Looseness or Flux: for if but a Pint
of Water should be drank, Ease would hardly succeed; but drinking in about an
hour's time a Quart or three Pints, the Sharpness and evil Quality of the
Humor offending will be so far diluted or weakened, that immediate Ease will
follow. If the Season be too cold to drink cold Water, you may warm it a little
upon the Fire, or put a hot Toast of Bread into every Pint; and the same is
true in Fevers, or in Pains from Gravel or the Cholick; for a small Quantity
will not be effectual in these Cases: which ought carefully to be noted, for in
a Fever a little Water will rather increase the Burning, which large Draughts;
often drank, will soon take off. Rest, Fasting, and drinking much Water, after
a Vomit or two, is a Course that never yet has failed to Cure Fevers, by
clearing the Stomach of that sordid Filthiness which causes the Distemper; for
a happy Issue will certainly follow such a Course, if the Fever is simple, and
not complicated with other Distempers, which will resist all Remedies: and in
many Cases nothing can prevent Mortality, as is evident by the Death of the
best Physicians as well as others.

I will add to what has been said, one Experiment more, that is very material:
And that is, being very hypochondriacal, and of a melancholy Temper, I have
often been strangely dejected in Mind when under Grief, for some Misfortunes,
which sometimes has been so great, as to threaten Danger to Life; in which
Fits of Grief I always found the Parts within my Breast uneasy, and sometimes
they have continued long: but now I have found a good Remedy, for upon drinking
a Pint of cold Water, I find ease in two or three Minutes, so that no Grief
seems to afflict. Which Experience I discover for the sake of others in the
same Circumstances, being verily persuaded that the Seat of Grief is in the
Stomach, which sympathizeth with the Mind, and thereby becomes the Cause of
that uneasy Sensation and Pain perceived there; for which, cold Water I have
found to be the best Remedy in myself, and I believe others may find the same
Benefit, who will make use thereof upon the like Occasion.

There is also another Experiment that I have often seen of good effect; and
that is, that if Persons subject to what is called Vapors, or that are
afflicted with Fits, commonly called The Fits of the Mother, will but drink
Water when they find their Fits approach, it will immediately yield Relief.
There is in this case a mealy Julep prescribed by Dr. Bates, which is to take a
Spoonful of fine Wheat Flower, an Ounce of fine Sugar, and a Pint of Water,
brew them together, and drink it off: This is pleasanter than Water alone; but
Water of itself will be as effectual, or rather better.

Some perhaps may desire to know how to distinguish good from bad Water; and
the way to do this, is by the Taste and Scent: for if it have no Taste nor
Smell, being purely fresh, not salt, nor sweetish, nor ill-scented, it is good,
provided it be pure and clear; of which kind is the common Water used in
London, when well settled, or in fair Weather. As for those who are curious,
and will be at the Charge, they may procure the best Water for Drink by
Distillation, either in an Alembick, or in a cold Still used in drawing any
cold Water from Herbs, for no earthy or metallic Substance, nor any kind of
Salt, will rise in Distillation: so that the Water so distilled will be pure
and admirable to drink when cold, and will keep as long from stinking as any of
the cold-distilled Water in the Apothecaries Shops; according to what Dr.
Quincy has affirmed about it in his Dispensatory.

Those who have not the Convenience of Distillation, may boil it a little as
they do for Tea; for then, when kept a while after it is cold, in will become
more fine, by suffering any Mixture contained in it to settle to the bottom of
the Vessel wherein it is contained, and that will render it still more pure.

Since the collecting together the forementioned Accounts, I have met with a
Book written by Dr. Boerhave, the present Professor of Physic at Leyden in
Holland, who affirms, that drinking Water made very warm is a good Remedy to
pacify griping Pains in the Stomach; and that it is proper to bathe Wounds in
the Face with it, when they come to be just healed, so that the Place be kept
continually wet, which I conceive is best done by applying often linen Cloths
wet; and binding them on till they begin to be dry, will prevent Scars: And he
says, that warm Water is better to attenuate or thin the Blood than cold Water.

There is also published a Book of Experiments made with Water, by Dr. Hancock,
a Divine, called Febrisugum Magnum; wherein he says, that drinking a Pint or a
Quart of cold Water in Bed, will raise a copious Sweat, and cure all burning
Fevers, which at once taking has done the business: it will raise a Sweat
without much more Covering than ordinary. And he further affirms, that the same
taken at the beginning of the cold Fit of an Ague, and sweating upon it, at two
or three times, taking will cure that Distemper. A large Quantity of hot Water,
I know, has been advised to hinder the cold Fit, but the Party was not ordered
to sweat.

And he says he has had long Experience of curing common Colds with cold
Water; and this is done by drinking a large Draught of Water at going to bed,
another in the Night, and another in the Morning: which, he says, will soon
thicken and sweeten, and digest that thin sharp Rheum, that provokes Coughing
to no purpose; for the Rheum, when thin, is hard to be brought up, but when
thickened, it will come up easily, and the Cough will soon go off. Which agrees
with what I before affirmed from my own long Experience.

He also affirms from his own Experience, that using sometimes to take a Walk
of eight or ten Miles in a Morning, he found that Water gave twice as good
Breath for that purpose as Wine or Ale; and if it would do this for a Man who
had no Asthma, he doubts not but it would do the same in one troubled with one.
And he also affirms Water to be the best Remedy for a Surfeit, to the truth of
which I can testify by long Experience.

He also affirms, that drinking cold Water has been found good in Rheumatisms,
and that to one so afflicted he had advised to drink it as he lay in his Bed,
and it took off the Fit; but if hot Water attenuates the Blood most, as
Boerhave affirms, it is then best to drink of it warm daily to a good quantity:
for, as Pitcairn observes, it is then the best Dissolver of all kinds of Salts
in the Body, which it will carry off in the Urine, if drank plentifully; for by
Urine all Salts are evacuated.

And it is his Opinion, from the long Experience he has had of the Effect of
Water in keeping the Stomach in order, and making it tight and strong to
perform its Operations, and digest all Humors, that it will cure the Gout in
the Stomach; and perhaps it may do it better than Wine, which I have known to
fail. And I do not wonder that the same Liquor which is the principal Cause of
the Gout in other Parts, should not be a help in that Part, but rather kill, as
it often is found to do.

In short, he affirms, and that with great reason, that Sweating in Fevers by
drinking cold Water, is more natural than to do it with hot Sudorificks, which
often do harm in the beginning of Fevers, except good store of cooling
moistening Liquors are drank with them, they being more apt to inflame, than
cool and quench Heat in the Body; and for that reason it has not been often
advised by Physicians, because they were ignorant of this cold way of Sweating
to cure Fevers.

Which Cure, he said, did succeed in one who was his Relation, at the fifth Day
after his falling sick; to whom he gave a Dose of Water after he was in bed,
and he sweated profusely for 24 Hours, and thereby was cured. Half a Pint, he
says, is enough for a grown Child: a Pint to a Man or Woman, tho if they drink
a Quart, it will be better. In Scarlet-Fevers, Smallpox, Measles, tho the
Water will not cause Sweat, yet it will so quell and keep under the Fever, that
the Eruptions will come out more kindly, which is a Confirmation of what before
was said about Dr. Betts's prescribing two Quarts of Water when the Smallpox
did not come out kindly.

And he sets down an Account of the Author of the Free-Thinker, concerning a
Woman, who in the last great Plague fell ill of that Distemper, who got her
Husband to fetch her a Pitcher of Water from Lamb's-Conduit; she drank
plentifully of it, but did not avoid the Cold, and so did not sweat, however
she was cured. And he gives us another Relation of an Englishman formerly
Resident at Morocco, that fell ill of the Plague at that Place, and getting
Water to drink, fell into a violent Sweat, and recovered: from whence he
concludes that Water is good in the Plague.

I will here add to what the Doctor has said concerning the Cure of Fevers,
That if the Fever be accompanied in the beginning with any Illness at the
Stomach nauseating or vomiting, it will be the surest and safest Practice to
clear the Stomach first, by vomiting with warm Water, as before has been
prescribed; for I cannot believe it possible for the Stomach to be cleared from
foul Humors by sweating: it may do, if no great sense of Disorder is perceived
there, but it will certainly be safest to cleanse the Stomach first, which is
the Place where all Diseases are originally begun; for then sweating with cold
Water afterward may turn to good account. Indeed I have not made any trial of
it since the Doctor's Book was published, but I have a very good opinion of his
Experience upon all the Accounts therein given concerning the Benefit of Water,
having had so much Experience thereof in my own Practice for above forty Years;
for so long it is since I first began to collect those Accounts, and make those
Experiments, which are herein made public for the Benefit of all.

And thus, for the common Good of Mankind of all Ranks and Degrees, I have
collected together all the Accounts I have observed in Physick-Books relating
to the Use of common Water in preventing and curing Diseases; to which I have
added some Experiments, which by numerous Trials I can warrant as sure and
certain, especially that of curing any Sickness in the Stomach upon the Spot,
by vomiting with warm Water: which is an Experiment, that, if put into common
Practice, would prevent many thousand Fits of Sickness in a year among Mankind,
and a great number of untimely Deaths; for it takes away the Cause of all
Stomach-Sickness, which is the Root of, or first Beginning of most of the Evils
that afflict the Body.

I shall conclude all with this Advertisement, That if this finds a kind
Acceptance, the Author intends to publish a Collection he has made out of the
best Writings relating to Physic, of such Receipts as are most commended in
all Distempers, and made up of the fewest Ingredients, and easiest to be had,
all reduced under their proper Heads; which, I doubt not, will prove very
useful on many accounts, beyond any Collection of that nature. The Collection
was begun above forty Years since for my own use, without any design originally
to make them public; but since we are not born for ourselves only, I am
persuaded to let others partake of the Benefit of my Labor, if I can do it
with the Prospect of any suitable Encouragement, from the kind Reception this
may meet with among those who desire Health, which is best attained to by the
most uncompounded Remedies in times of Sickness.

Some RULES for preserving Health by Diet, collected from Physical Authors.
IN a little Treatise, entitled, Kitchin-Physick, written by Dr. Cook, the
Author declares, he can hardly be told of any Disease which he cannot relieve
or cure, by a proper Diet, p. 3^. And in the same Book we find his Opinion to
be this, That all tender sickly People, and all aged and decrepid Persons,
ought to eat often, and but a little at a time, because weak and wasted Bodies
are to be restored by little and little; and by moist and liquid Food also,
rather than by solid, because moist and liquid Diet does nourish soonest, and
digest easiest.

Those, he says, that eat much, and get little Strength by eating, show, that
they have used themselves to too full a Diet; and the more you cramb such
Bodies, the less they thrive by it, but rather grow worse and worse: because by
much feeding you do but add to the bad Humors wherewith the Body is already
filled, which should rather be wasted by purging a little, and using a spare
Diet.

And a spare Diet he describes to be this, That we never eat at once till the
Appetite is fully satisfied, and never to eat till you have an Appetite; and
Men never have a true Appetite till they have a Desire to eat any ordinary
Food, or that a Piece of Bread will please the Relish of the Tongue: And he
advises to keep constantly to a plain Diet; for those, he says, enjoy most
Health, and live longest, that avoid Curiosity and Variety of Meats and Drinks,
which only serve to entice to Gluttony, and so work our Ruin.

Another says, that liquid Meats are better for weakly People than solid, and
the less Food the sick Person eats, the sooner he will recover; for it is a true
Saying, The more you fill foul Bodies, the more you hurt them. The Stomach
being the Place where Diseases begin, when that Part therefore is weak, and out
of order, and cannot make a good Digestion, raw or crude Humors must needs be
bred, and bad Humors cannot produce good Blood.

All Men do find by Experience, that in the Morning before they have eaten,
they are light and pleasantly easy in their Bodies; but after they have
indulged their Appetites with Plenty of Food, they find themselves heavy and
dull, and often sleepy: which sufficiently shows that those full Meals are
prejudicial to the Welfare of the Body; for a moderate Meal would have
continued the Ease and Lightsomness they before found in themselves, and would
have refreshed any Faintness that Emptiness might occasion. And he certainly,
who uses the most simple Meats and Drinks, avoideth the Snare of provoking his
Appetite beyond the Necessities of Nature; whereas Variety enticeth to a fresh
Desire of every Dainty, till at last the Stomach is gorged, and made incapable
of performing a good Digestion; and this produces those Crudities, which are
the Cause of all Diseases.

It Is generally observed, that the most unhealthy among the Gentry are those
who feed high upon the most delicious Dainties, and drink nothing but the
strongest and most spirituous Liquors; whereas the Poor, who want this delicate
Fare, and never eat of their own plain Diet to Excess, are seldom sick, except
they have such unsatiable Appetites as to eat too much, which a Man may do of
the plainest Diet, whose Belly is his God.

Dr. Pratt advises to sup sparingly; for to sup sparingly, he says, is most
healthful, because of the Experience of an infinite Number of Persons who have
received the greatest Benefit from light Suppers. For the Stomach being not
overburdened, the Sleep is more pleasant; and from sparing Suppers the breeding
of those Humors are prevented, which cause Defluxions, Rheumatisms, Gouts,
Dropsies, Giddiness, and Corruption in the Mouth from the Scurvey is prevented;
and from light Suppers a Freedom from Sickness and Reaching in the Morning is
obtained, and Concoction is made perfect, which prevent Obstructions.

Another says, It is well known, that many Indispositions are cured by
Fasting, or a very spare Diet; for what is taken into the Stomach being no more
than can be well digested, the chylous Juice, so prepared, is conveyed into the
Lacteal Vessels, and from thence into the Blood: so that Nature being duly
supplied with well-prepared Nourishment, the corrupted Blood will get free from
that Corruption in time, by throwing it out, through the Pores of the Skin, by
Perspiration, and supply itself with the purer Juices; and in this way
Consumptions and Scurveys, and other Chronical Distempers, will be overcome.

That Men in Health may prevent Diseases, 'twas advised, that one Meal should
not be eaten, till the other, which was eaten before, was passed off clean out
of the Stomach; which never is done till the Appetite of Hunger is found to
call for another Supply: by means of which constant Observation, the Food will
be converted into good Chyle, and from good Chyle, which is a milky Substance,
good Blood will be bred, and from good Blood generous Spirits will be produced,
out of which a healthy Constitution will ensue; but, on the contrary, too great
a Quantity of Food being taken for pleasure only, which the Stomach cannot well
digest, the Chyle will be raw and corrupt, which will foul the Blood, and
render the Body disorderly and unhealthful.

Others say, that Abstinence and Sobriety free from most Dieases, especially
Catarrhs, Coughs, Wheesings, Giddiness, Pain in the Head and Stomach, sudden
Death, Lethargies, Gout, and Sciatica, an ill Digestion being the Cause of all
these; it also prevents Pain in the Spleen, Stone, and Gravel, and a dry Itch;
it makes the Body vigorous and nimble, maintains the five Senses in a good
State, preserves the Memory, quickens the Wit, and quenches all undue Lust in
Mankind.

Two Meals a day is sufficient for all Persons after fifty Years of Age, and
all weak People; for the omitting of Suppers, does always conduce much to the
Health of the Weak and Aged: since if no Supper be eaten, the Stomach will soon
free itself from all tough slimy Humors wherewith it is slabbered over on the
Inside, and thereby the Appetite will be renewed, and Digestion made more
strong and vigorous. Moreover, all that are troubled with Sweating in the
Night, any ill Taste in their Mouths, belching, and troublesome Dreams, must
avoid Suppers; for in Sleep the Fibers of the Stomach relax, and are not able
to contract themselves so strongly, as when awake, to embrace the Food, and by
Trituration reduce it into a Pap fit to pass out into the other Bowels, called
the Guts, out of which the Nourishment is sent to other Parts.

'Twas said by Dr. Curtis, that though those, who use a spare Diet, cannot well
bear long Labor; yet such People, when their Exercise is suitable to their
Strength, do live longer than those of a robust Constitution, that think large
feeding adds Strength; especially such as being strong, use no Exercise
proportionable to it, to consume the Superfluities which a full Feeding does
occasion; which is the Case of Men of great Estates, who live longest to enjoy
them, and do good with them, the more temperate they live.

This Temperance does consist in not letting the common Custom of Meals invite
you to eat, except your Appetite concur with those Times. We must not indulge
the Cravings of a depraved Appetite, as those do who eat to please their Fancy,
and not the Necessities of Nature; and when we do eat, we must not think that
the more plentifully we eat, we shall be more strengthened, for it will not
prove so: a little well digested will make the Body stronger, than the being
glutted with Superfluity, most of which will be turned into a corrupt Juice,
and must be cast out, or else Sickness will ensue.

It is the Opinion of learned Men, that the early Distemper of the Body, called
the Rickets, proceeds from the Fault of their Mothers, in making them Gluttons
from their Cradles, gorging them with Food till they loath it, out of a
mistaken Opinion, that this is the way to make them thrive and grow strong:
which Excess is not only the Cause of this Disease, but of the immature Death
of many; and in others it lays the Foundation of many Distempers, which afflict
them afterward who live to Years of Maturity; and as they gorge them with
Food, so they vainly think to cherish them with strong Drink, than which
nothing can be more pernicious to the Health of Children; whose Diet should be
little and often, and their Drink cooling: As it also should be when they
arrive at the time of becoming new Children in Old Age; that is, in an helpless
State, which should be prevented as much as can be, by a cooling moistening
Diet, in opposition to the hot, and dry, and withered State of their second
Childhood; for it is then Heat and Dryness that are the Cause of most of their
Miseries, and the wasting of the Substance that fills the Parts with Moisture,
and keeps the Body plump.

It was the Opinion of Dr. Pit, who was formerly Physician to St.
Bartholomew's Hospital, that Fasting, Rest, and drinking Water would cure most
Diseases; and there seems to be a great deal of Reason in what he asserted.
For Fasting will give time to the Stomach to unload itself of the Cause of
Distempers, the Cause of all Diseases being begun in that Bowel only; to which
cleansing, the drinking of Water plentifully will much contribute, which also
will keep the Action of the Stomach upon the Hinges, by filling of it when
empty, at which time there will be need of Rest, for thereby the Body will be
less fit for Business: tho the mere drinking of Water, which affords
Nourishment sufficient for the Growth and Support of all Vegetables, will, in
some measure, supply the want of Food, as has been shown in the Example of
two, who were supported a long time by nothing else. In short, the best way for
a sick Man to recover, is to eat no Food till he finds an Appetite, according
to that Saying,

Spare Diet will the most Diseases cure,
If a due Time you can the same endure.
And fasting from Food may be continued long enough to be a Remedy for many
Diseases, by the Assistance of common Water; by the drinking of which hot, in a
due Quantity, without a total Fasting, two Persons, I am informed, were
recovered out of Consumptions, by which they were extremely weakened, and that
in about six Weeks time; as was another by drinking Milk and Whey, equal Parts,
made blood hot, without using any other Diet, which is thought to be far more
effectual than Asses Milk.

But besides a spare Diet, good cool dry Air is also very helpful to preserve
Men in Health, for it mixes with the Blood, and without it the Motion of the
Blood and Spirits can never be preserved, as appears by Diving-Vessels, in
which Men cannot live when the Air therein is made hot by their own Body and
Breath: And is proved also by an Experiment of Dr. Crone's, who stifled a
Chicken, till it seemed quite dead; and yet by blowing cool Air into the Lungs,
with a small Pair of Bellows, it revived. Hence it appears, that the common
Custom of managing sick People is very pernicious, and so far from helping them
to recover, that it is sufficient to make a healthy Person sick; for were a
Person, who was not sick, confined for three or four Weeks in a Room, made hot
like a Stove, and confined to his Bed, with the Curtains drawn, and all the
Windows close shut, and perfumed with the nauseous Fumes of Physic, which will
almost make a fresh Man sick when he just enters into it; we can never think
that this is the way to recover one that really is sick, and wants the fresh
Air to cherish his Blood; a fresh open Air being the principal means to
strengthen the Body, make a good Appetite and Digestion, and render the Spirits
brisk and lively: which Advantage should be allowed to all but Childbed Women,
and those who are afflicted with the Smallpox; for the fresh Air can be
prejudicial to no other, whose Bodies are clothed warm, either in Bed, or
sitting up.

FINIS.

