MEDICAL IMPROVEMENT: AN ADDRESS READ TO THE MEDICAL SOCIETY, BY JOHN AITKEN,
Fellow of the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, A Surgeon of the Royal
Infirmary; And a President of the Medical Society.

Nequid falsi dicere audeat, nequid very non audeat. Mobilitate viget et vires
acquirit eundo. EDINBURGH: Printed for and Sold by JOHN BELL.

M,DCC,LXXVII.

THE FOLLOWING PAGES ARE MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED TO THE PRESIDENTS AND
OTHER MEMBERS OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY.

AN ADDRESS, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is with much diffidence that I officially presume to deliver a few detached
thoughts, chiefly respecting MEDICAL IMPROVEMENT; as an address introductory to
the commencement of our literary business in this place. Your indulgent candor
which I have so often experienced, I flatter myself, will, on this occasion,
impute the faults which you will doubtless discover, not to intention, but
inability or misconception.

I cheerfully embrace this opportunity to express the most grateful impressions
I entertain of the great and unsollicited honor you have been pleased to
confer upon me, by twice calling me to the office of PRESIDENT. Had my powers
been equal to my wishes, no part of my conduct in that elevated character, had
been unworthy of you, or of this chair. Although indispensible avocation permits
me no longer to hold any office among you; yet will I lose no opportunity of
being present, and, as far as I may be able, of assisting in your instructive
speculations; and of promoting to the utmost of my power, the general
prosperity of a Society to which I ever have been so much attached.

In the commercial world, it is allowed by all, that the comparative rate of
exchange, is a just index of the prosperous or adverse state of trade in
different countries individually, or relatively considered. With no less truth,
in my opnion, the comparative degree of cultivation to which Belles Lettres and
philosophy, or the fine and useful arts, arrive in different kingdoms may be
regarded as demonstrative of their relative civilization.

Judging by this criterion, although in this respect CALEDONIA may not justly
boast of being the first, she is by no means the last of the European nations:
Her progress in the walk of general science and liberality is rapid, and I hope
will long continue so. Justice, however, constrains me to confess, that long,
too long, in a great degree, she had neglected the MEDICAL PHILOSOPHY. In an
Era not beyond the recollection of some present, the immortal honor of
planting a medical school in this Metropolis; now indeed second in fame and
erudition to none in Europe, was reserved to a distinguished, a fortunate
MONRO. To his memory consenting nations pay that just tribute of applause,
which his country in general, but this City and its University in particular,
ought to perpetuate by a statue.

By a WORTHY SELECT BAND of the numerous students, who flocked from all
quarters, allured by the rising fame of the Edinburgh University; this MEDICAL
SOCIETY in 1737, was happily instituted. Of its various progress and present
flourishing independent state, I presume you to be well informed; and therefore
avoid attempting any particular historical narration of these circumstances at
present.

THE BUILDING The MEDICAL HALL, -- A handsome Edifice of various elegant
appartments with a Cupola and Spire, ornamented with the Insignia of
Aesculapius, erected chiefly by the liberal contributions of the Members.
in which we are now assembled is a grand phenomenon of medical ardor,
unparallelled in any country; and may justly be regarded as a temple sacred to
AESCULAPIUS, reared by the virtuous zeal of his youthful votaries, for purposes
the most liberal and praiseworthy. The FRIENDS OF SCIENCE, not of your number,
Many Gentlemen, applauding the noble intentions of the Society, have been
generously pleased to contribute toward defraying the expense of building the
Hall, -- Lists of whom are suspended in the principal appartment.
who have generously contributed toward its structure; are entitled to our
most grateful thanks.

Contemplating this FABRIC, and the many other aids which the present
advantageous state of our society affords to facilitate study; you must have
anticipated me in this reflection, that, while our minds are gratefully
affected to our MERITORIOUS PREDECESSORS, our every power ought to be exerted,
if not to advance, at least, to maintain our extended reputation: that, the
verdant laurels they have transmitted may not wither in our hands, overwhelming
us with indelible ignominy and disgrace.

It Is with the highest pleasure, I perceive, without being chargeable with
adulation, I can fairly aver, that this Society at no period of its existence
has been more secure of progress than at present: the learning, genius and
manly liberality of sentiment, which I know you possess, and which, with much
satisfaction and instruction, I have so often observed animating your debates;
constitute the foundation on which this assertion rests.

You are not to be informed that the combined powers of GENIUS and INDUSTRY
must perseveringly operate through the course of several years, that a tolerably
complete knowledge of even the elementary parts of the science of medicine, as
already ascertained and taught, may be acquired. To have proceeded so far in
medical study, is indeed to have made no despicable progress: But I trust your
ardent ambition is more aspiring than to remain satisfied with the acquisition
of a bare acquaintance of the dogmata of this, or the other MEDICAL SECT or
PROFESSOR, i. e. of the present state of the healing art. It would be offering
an undeserved insult to your sagacity, were I but once to imagine, that you
could entertain a belief, that the Medical Philosophy had already attained the
utmost perfection of which it is susceptible. You well know, that the
unexplored regions of the terra incognita Medicinalis, so to speak, still
afford abundant scope for your most protracted labors; so just is the
observation, ars longa, vita brevis.

ANATOMY, as being the grand basis of the Medical Fabric, from the earliest
periods of society, in every civilized country, has been cultivated with the
most unrelenting ardor of investigation, which many most material improvements
have from time to time rewarded. Are there not still, however, many very
interesting parts and circumstances of the structure of the ANIMAL AUTOMATON
which we but little know? and many others of great importance, of which we are
totally ignorant? What anatomist has hitherto been able successfully to evolve
the texture of the SPLEEN; an organ of considerable size, and probably of
proportional importance in the animal economy? Very lately it has been
supposed the sole fabricator of the globular part of the blood The late
ingenious Mr Hewson of London, endeavored to establish this opinion.
. The same question may be put with respect to the structure of the MUSCULAR
FIBER, or LIVING SOLID; and that SPECIFIC CONFIGURATION of the several orders
of the SECRETORY ORGANS, upon which such a wonderful variety and opposition of
secreted liquors probably depends. But, above all, it may be put with respect
to the BRAIN, and ITS APPENDAGES; parts essential to life, often the seat of
disease, evidently variously organized, of great volume and surprizingly
diversified in their external form.

I will be pardoned for expressing my fears, that few anatomical improvements
are to be expected from you while residing in this country; at least, while its
present TONE continues, however great your ability and ardor: because an
insuperable barrier is opposed to your progress; I mean the WANT OF PRIVATE
DISSECTION. In the end of the eightteenth century, when philosophical
liberality is diffused from Pole to Pole, what a pity, or rather what a shame,
that, even in the Metropolis of a kingdom, not uncivilized, and in its
principal University too, where the circle of education is otherwise tolerably
complete; this GRAND and almost ONLY AVENUE to the AESCULAPIAN Temple, should
remain most barbarously blocked up!

A public course of anatomical demonstration, exceeded by none, and equalled by
few, is, I confess, annually made here; by a learned, discerning, accurate,
indefatigable Professor: whom none of you can more respect than I do. I,
notwithstanding, hesitate not to declare it as my positive opinion, and I will
venture to say it is not solitary, that, no public anatomical exhibitions,
where the student is merely a PASSIVE SPECTATOR, are sufficient to convey and
impress those precise and multifarious ideas of this important branch of
natural knowledge, absolutely requisite to complete the medical character;
throwing discovery altogether out of the question.

To acquire a tolerable knowledge of even the great outlines of anatomy, it is
indispensibly necessary to take the knife in hand, and, with the most
unremitting attention, dissect a variety of bodies of different sizes, ages,
and sexes, properly chosen, and prepared for the purpose: Much more must this
plan be followed, if it be proposed to soar in the regions of discovery and
improvement. I can experimentally assert, that more anatomical information will
be reaped from the well conducted dissection of one body, than from repeated
public courses.

If this opinion be well founded, it is a self-evident consequence, that
attending one or two public courses of anatomy, must be much inadequate to
accomplish the medical philosopher; especially, if the practice of surgery, the
most evidently useful part of the healing art, be his destination. Humanity
revolts at the idea of the many unavoidable, and, I fear, too often fatal
blunders that must result from this capital defect of the medical education to
be obtained in this country. It is abundantly mortifying indeed, to observe
those who wish to attain a proper degree of anatomical knowledge, after
spending several years at our Universities, and probably attaining their
highest honors, reduced to the alternative of either undertaking expensive
expeditions into foreign countries, in this respect more civilized than ours;
or of remaining dangerously uninformed.

If one should attempt to adjust the wheels and springs of a nice and delicate
mechanism, he, perhaps, had never before seen, or, at least, never minutely
considered; with what indignant contempt would we treat the rude audacious
pretender? Thousands, alas! are daily subjected to the unpractised knife of
operators of necessity awkward, I had almost said unskilled; because they never
could enjoy the requisite opportunity, of either acquiring proper dexterity to
perform any proposed operation with due address; or full knowledge of the parts
concerned: from the want of access to the dead human body.

This alarming consideration is surely of sufficient force to conquer the
vulgar prejudices against private dissection, whether the offspring of
superstition or ignorance. The violation of the sepulcher or the clandestine
robbery of the tomb, is most justly regarded as a crime of a deep dye; but
certainly private dissection, under proper regulations, is compatible with the
most absolute security in this respect. Of this the practice of most of the
European countries is an irrefragable proof; viz. of these countries to which
our students are compelled to resort, to obtain opportunities of diffecting
which might so easily be afforded at home. Were a proportional number of dead
human bodies annually furnished by authority, to the medical Students in the
different towns of Scotland in general, and to those attending our
Universities, in particular, for private dissection: the salutary consequences
would soon surpass conception. It is truly astonishing, that a matter of such
endless importance had not, long ever now, challenged the notice, and roused
the attention of the HONORABLE SUPERINTENDANTS of our Police, or even of the
LEGISLATURE itself.

The Criminal and Flagitious, whether they expire under the hands of the
executioner, or by disease; ought always to be consigned to the anatomical
knife: that thus, in some degree, when dead, they may atone to society for
their depredation and turbulence when alive. Public utility seems likewise to
have a good title to the use of the dead bodies of those who by idleness and
dissipation, have rendered themselves objects of public charity; and
consequently, perhaps for many years, have been clothed and fed at the public
expense.

Humanity, Patriotism, and even self-interest conspire, to stimulate every
individual to promote, at least, not to oppose the establishment of a measure
so pregnant with the most solid advantages to mankind. The advancing liberality
of this country, affords the strongest reasons to hope that the auspicious Era
is not very distant, when medical improvement shall be no more retarded by the
impossibility of acquiring anatomical information in the only way that it can
be acquired; a mischief hitherto so opprobrious, fatal, and gigantic.

If Anatomy be defective, PHISIOLOGY which teaches the functions of the various
organs and parts detected by anatomy, must necessarily be proportionally
defective. Not only is this the fact, but the uses even of many parts which the
anatomist has described with tolerable accuracy, are far, very far, from being
sufficiently explained by the phisiologist; e. g. Of several of the GENERATIVE
ORGANS, of the DIFFERENT SUBSTANCES and PROTUBERANCES of the BRAIN, of the
GANGLIONS, etc.

In like manner, many of the general laws and principles of the living system
are not illustrated with satisfactory precision; while one physiologist affirms
that MENSTRUATION depends on TOPICAL, another refers it to GENERAL PLETHORA.
Some contend that NUTRITION is effected by the NERVES, others by the VESSELS:
and a variety of facts are artfully adduced, to establish these opposite
doctrines. With respect to many other physiological disquisitions the same
contrariety of opinion exists.

If the question be put, "What shall be said when Doctors disagree?" I reply,
recur to nature, collect useful facts, from them draw manly, liberal, chaste
conclusions; disregard ideal, cobweb, flimsy theories, the baseless fabric of a
vision. GENERAL PRINCIPLES, rationally deduced as corrollaries from established
facts, only, in my opinion, can justly claim the dignified appellation of
THEORY.

PATHOLOGY, you know, treats of the MORBID STATES of animal nature, with a view
to effect their PREVENTION, ALLEVIATION or CURE. Many anatomical and
physiological speculations are more curious than useful, and may, therefore,
although not strictly just, have the merit of being innocent. Pathological
disquisitions, on the contrary, must always produce the most serious
consequences; because they influence the medical conduct of disease. Our small
knowledge, or rather our great ignorance, of this department, affords but a
melancholy theme to the anxious philosophic inquirer. The variety and
opposition, the absurdity and confusion of numberless futile conceits, wild
imaginations, fanciful opinions, dignified forsooth with the name of DOCTRINES,
are the opprobrium of the medical profession: and present to the contemplative
mind, the idea of primaeval Chaos, when darkness brooded over the great abyss.

Although I possessed ability, neither your time nor patience permit me to
attempt a particular enumeration of the striking absurdities, which have, in a
great degree, hitherto overwhelmed pathology, depressing medicine far beneath
the rank of her sister arts; because these arts are established in the evolved
unalterable laws of nature.

One class of pathologists have recourse to the SENSIBLE QUALITIES of the
ATMOSPHERE, as chiefly contributing to create the numerous and important tribe
of febrile disorders; and endeavor to support their reasonings by
meteorological registers and observations without end. With equal confidence,
another tribe, disregarding in a great measure, this opinion, muster up
INVISIBLE MIASMATA and FLOATING POISONS, to untie every gordian knot; either as
principal agents, or complete efficients. In like manner, while the favorite
system of one period, refers us, with much plausibility, to the FLUIDS, and
MORBIFIC MATTER there existing, for the SEAT and CAUSES of many diseases; that
of another, with at least equal probability, directs our attention almost
solely to SPASM and other AFFECTIONS of the SOLIDS.

I cannot avoid here to remark, that were the science of medicine like
fluxions, infinitesimals, the quadrature of the circle, etc. i. e. purely a
matter of curious uninteresting speculation; we might view the FLUCTUATING
INSTABILITY of its DOGMATA or DOCTRINES, as they are called; with the same Tone
of mind with which we contemplate the fantastic shiftings of the aurora
borealis, or visions of the night. But how diametrically opposite must be the
feelings of humanity, reflecting that these successive doctrines have
respectively, during their fashionable periods of domination, greatly
influenced the medical management of disease; compelling the passive
entramelled, bewildered practitioner, to employ the most opposite curative
means, in the same morbid states: the consequent havoc, devastation, and
massacre of mankind is more easily imagined than described.

The ancient maxim "in medio tutissimus ibis," should perhaps never be entirely
neglected. It seems exceedingly probable a priori, that, the fluids being made
or elaborated by the solids; and these, on the other hand, supported by the
fluids; their affections will not long remain distinct, but rather always be
reciprocal: However, "Non nostrum tantas componere lites."

Moreover, how little we do know with tolerable certainty, respecting the
IMPRESSIONS made on the SENTIENT PARTS of our bodies, by what are named the
potentiae nocentes; or of the DERANGEMENT of ORGANIZATION; or of the NUMBER and
NATURE of the MORBID ALTERATIONS thence consequent! yet it seems absolutely
necessary that these particulars be marked with the utmost possible precision.
For instance, we are told, that there are two species of FEBRILE DELIRIUM,
requiring the most opposite treatment; but who has hitherto pointed out, with
sufficient accuracy, the symptoms ascertaining their important discrimination?
If, therefore, in such a perilous predicament the GENIUS of blunder should but
for a moment overcloud the practitioner's discernment, which is a very
supposable, but I hope, a rare occurence; conclamatum est.

'Till pathology, therefore, is more determined and complete, don't cases beset
with dubiety and peril, seem justly to demand a suspension of hostilities (so
to speak) or of our therapeutic efforts; which, permit me to say, may often
with justice be termed the impertinence of art? These daring practitioners, who
in the advanced critical febrile states, which they by no means understand,
exhibit FEBRIFUGE NOSTRUMS, Such as James's Powders.
with a temerity that equally shocks our feelings, and alarms our fears; may
not ineptly be compared to the nonplus'd statesman; who, to smother dissension
and broil, of which his mal-administration is probably the cause, risks the
very existence of the state itself, by plunging it headlong into general
combustion, and foreign war.

It is with much pleasure I acknowledge, that, in this most essential
department of the medical philosophy, light and order happily begin to diffuse
their genial influence over darkness and confusion. The GENIUS and LABORS of
some whom this Society can reckon among her honorary sons, have already
contributed, in no small degree, to this most desirable purpose. I am confident
I speak your sentiments, and most assuredly my own, when I mention with the
most particular gratitude, the great advantages we have so often and so happily
reaped in our inquiries, from the CULLENIAN NOSOLOGY: a work perspicuous though
concise, elaborate yet not voluminous, in every part demonstrative of the
liberal views, and extensive medical erudition of its very respectable and
accomplished author, who with truth may say, "Exegi monumentum aere perennius."

Supposing just indications of cure to be formed, in consequence of an advanced
and chaste pathology, to be then provided with proper and active AGENTS or
REMEDIES to fulfill these indications; becomes a matter of most important
concern. The jarring opinions of authors respecting the nature, activity, dose
and mode of exhibition, of almost every article of the MATERIA MEDICA; present
a most extensive field for useful experiment and investigation.

With respect to medical improvement, I shall only in general add, that, your
expectations, in my opinion, are less likely to be frustrated, if you look for
it to result more from anatomical physiological and pathological progress, than
from the discovery of any addition to the Materia Medica. This part of the
medical science is by no means to be neglected, although it be probable, that
advancing but a single step in any of the other walks, may be productive of
more real and solid improvement and utility, than the acquisition of a thousand
simples; if it be true, that it is an easier business to fulfill, than institute
proper curative indications.

Be assured that the PHYSICIAN towers above the Empiric, the nurse and old
woman almost only in proportion to his superior information respecting the
PARTS, the LAWS, and MORBID STATES of animal nature; the more perfect his
acquirements in these particulars, the higher his pre-eminence among the sons
of Aesculapius. No mode of inauguration however solemn, no academic rites or
authority however great or ancient, can elevate to the honorable rank of
Physician, a person of an opposite description. Such a one could only be
regarded as an EMPTY DIGNIFIED FORM, around whose blighting temples, the VENAL,
the SURREPTITIOUS, the PROSTITUTED LAURELS of APOLLO must basely fade to the
utter discredit of all concerned; a more melancholy consequence still would be,
that his practice could not fail to prove the bane of society, operating the
destruction of such individuals as might become the unfortunate subjects of his
temerity.

If therefore to become a Physician, ( i. e. to be qualified to mark with
precision, the almost infinitely various affections of animated matter, so as
to direct, as far as may be, its movements to the blissful abode of longaevity
and health,) be a task only terminating with life, to be exhausted by no
labor, and to which the most discriminating mental powers are not superior;
the folly, not to say criminality of attempts Such as those of TISSOT, etc.
to incite vulgar vanity to tamper with the most precious interests of mankind,
needs no illustration.

In every species of philosophical investigation, particularly those of a
medical nature, where certainty is so difficultly attained; to guard against
CREDULITY, is a counsel, I deem of such infinite importance, that, before I put
an end to this address, I cannot help tendering it in the most earnest manner
to the particular notice of my YOUNGER SOCII. In all cases, where there is not
absolute demonstration, or at least as high a degree of evidence, as the nature
of the argument admits; to suspend belief or to exercise a proper degree of
skepticism, till mature examination and reflection shall compel assent: I
regard as a measure prudent, rational and philosophic. The unsupported ipse
dixit of any man, however great his name in science, I always consider as a
very weak argument: Recantation at best is exceedingly disagreeable.

The constitution of our Society, or its present system of laws, I am far from
reckoning perfect; many meliorations, I doubt not will be made from time to
time. No good reason can be assigned why our meetings should be suspended
during half the year: In summer indeed they might probably be thin; but it does
not follow, that your speculations on that account would be less instructive,
or your essays more imperfect.

I conclude by congratulating you upon your affairs being now happily in such a
prosperous train, as to afford the most flattering prospects. I contemplate the
rising glory, and future greatness of the Medical Society, with no small degree
of pleasurable ecstasy and expectation: Methinks, I hear its TOWERING GENIUS
with the most complacent exultation exclaim "sublimi feriam sidera vertice."

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 27. l. 15. for we do read do we.


