Philas Trans. Vol. LXVIII. Tab. 1. p

Fig: 1.

Fig: 2.



THE FORCE OF FIRED GUNPOWDER, AND THE INITIAL VELOCITIES OF CANNON BALLS,
DETERMINED BY EXPERIMENTS; From which is also deduced The Relation of the
Initial Velocity to the Weight of the Shot and the Quantity of Powder.

By CHARLES HUTTON, F.R.S. PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN THE ROYAL MILITARY
ACADEMY.

Read at the ROYAL SOCIETY, Jan. 8, 1778.

LONDON: Printed by J. NICHOLS (Successor to Mr. BOWYER). MDCCLXXVIII.

The Force of fired Gunpowder, etc.
THESE experiments I made at Woolwich in the summer of the year 1775, assisted
by several able officers of the royal artillery at that place, and other
ingenious gentlemen. The object of them was the determination of the actual
velocities with which balls are impelled from given pieces of cannon, when
fired with given charges of powder. These experiments were made according to
the method invented by Mr. ROBINS, and described in his treatise, entitled, New
Principles of Gunnery, of which an account was printed in the Philosophical
Transactions for the year 1743. Before the discoveries of that ingenious
gentleman very little progress had been made in the true theory of military
projectiles. His book, however, contained such important discoveries, that it
was soon translated into several of the languages on the continent, and the
famous Mr. L. EULER honored it with a very extensive commentary in his
translation of it into the German language. That part of it has always been
particularly admired which relates to the experimental method of ascertaining
the actual velocities of shot, and in imitation of which were made the
experiments related in this paper. Experiments in the manner of Mr. ROBINS were
generally repeated by his commentators and others, with universal satisfaction,
the method being so just in theory, so simple in practice, and altogether so
ingenious, that it immediately gave the fullest conviction of its excellence,
and of the abilities of its author. The use which that gentleman made of this
invention was, to obtain the actual velocities of bullets experimentally, in
order to compare them with those which he computed a priori from his new
theory, and thereby to verify the principles on which it is founded. The
success was fully answerable to his expectations, and left no doubt of the
truth of his theory, when applied to such pieces and bullets as he had used:
but these were very small, being only musket balls of about one ounce weight;
for, on account of the great size of the machinery necessary for such
experiments, Mr. ROBINS and other ingenious gentlemen had not ventured to
extend their practice beyond bullets of that kind, and satisfied themselves
with earnestly wishing for experiments to be made in a similar manner with
balls of a larger sort. By the experiments in this paper I have endeavored, in
some degree, to supply this defect, having made them with small cannon balls of
above twenty times the size, or from one pound to near three pounds weight.
These are the only experiments that I know of which have been made with cannon
balls for this purpose, although the conclusions to be deduced from such are of
the greatest importance to those parts of natural philosophy which are
dependent on the effects of fired gunpowder; nor do I know of any other
practical method of ascertaining the initial velocities of military projectiles
within any tolerable degree of the truth. The knowledge of this velocity is of
the utmost consequence in gunnery: by means of it, together with the law of the
resistance of the medium, every thing is determinable relative to that
business; for, besides its being an excellent method of trying the strength of
different sorts of powder, it gives us the law relative to the different
quantities of powder, to the different weights of shot, and to the different
lengths and sizes of guns. Besides these, there does not seem to be any thing
wanting to determine any inquiry that can be made concerning the flight and
ranges of shot, except the effects arising from the resistance of the medium.

Of the nature of the experiment, and of the machinery used in it.
The intention of the experiment is to discover the actual velocity with which
a ball issues from a piece, in the usual practice of artillery. This velocity
is very great; from one thousand to two thousand feet in a second of time. For
conveniently estimating so great a velocity, the first thing necessary is to
reduce it, in some known proportion, to a small one. This we may conceive to be
effected thus: suppose the ball, with a great velocity, to strike some very
heavy body, as a large block of wood, from which it will not rebound, so that
they may proceed forward together after the stroke. By this means it is
obvious, that the original velocity of the ball may be reduced in any
proportion, or to any slow velocity which may conveniently be measured, by
making the body struck to be sufficiently large; for it is well known, that the
common velocity, with which the ball and block of wood would move forward after
the stroke, bears to the original velocity of the ball only, the same ratio
which the weight of the ball has to that of the ball and block together. Thus
then velocities of one thousand feet in a second are easily reduced to those of
two or three feet only; which small velocity being measured by any convenient
means, let the number denoting it be increased in the proportion of the weight
of the ball to the weight of the ball and block together, and the original
velocity of the ball itself will thereby be obtained. In these experiments,
this reduced velocity is rendered very easy to be measured by a very simple and
curious contrivance, which is this: the block of wood, which is struck by the
ball, is not left at liberty to move straight forward in the direction of the
motion of the ball, but it is suspended, as the weight or ball of a pendulum,
by a strong iron stem, having a horizontal axis at top, on the ends of which it
vibrates freely when struck by the ball. The consequence of this simple
contrivance is evident: This large ballistic pendulum, after being struck by
the ball, will be penetrated by it to a small depth, and it will then swing
round its axis and describe an arch, which will be greater or less according to
the force of the blow struck; and from the size of the arch described by the
vibrating pendulum, the velocity of any point of the pendulum itself can be
easily computed; for a body acquires the same velocity by falling from the same
height, whether it descend perpendicularly down, or otherwise; therefore, the
length of the arch described, and of its radius, being given, its versed sine
becomes known, which is the height perpendicularly descended by the
corresponding point of the pendulum. The height descended being thus known, the
velocity acquired in falling through that height becomes known from the common
rules for the descent of bodies by the force of gravity; and this is the
velocity of that point of the pendulum: this velocity of any known point
whatever is then to be reduced to the velocity at the center of oscillation, by
the proportion of their radii or distances from the axis of motion; and the
velocity of this center, thus obtained, is to be esteemed the velocity of the
whole pendulum itself; which being now given, that of the ball before the
stroke becomes known from the given weights of the ball and pendulum. Thus then
the mensuration of the very great velocity of the ball is reduced to the
observation of the magnitude of the arch described by the pendulum, in
consequence of the blow struck. This arch may be measured after various ways:
in the following experiments it was ascertained by measuring the length of its
chord by means of a piece of tape or small ribband, the one end of which was
fastened to the bottom of the pendulum, and the rest of it made to slide
through a small machine contrived for the purpose, which will be hereafter
described; for thus the length of the tape drawn out, was equal to the length
of the chord of the arch described by the bottom of the pendulum.

This description may convey a general idea of the nature and principle of the
experiment; but besides the center of oscillation and the weights of the ball
and pendulum, the effect of the blow depends also on the place of the center of
gravity and the point of impact: it will, therefore, be now necessary to give a
more particular description of the machine, and of the methods of finding the
abovementioned requisites, and then investigate our general rule for
determining the velocity of the ball, in all cases, from them and the chord of
the arch of vibration.

Of the particular description of the machine, and of the determination of the
centers of gravity and oscillation.
Tab. 1. Fig. 1. is a representation of the machine used in the first three
courses of experiments; and fig. 2. of that which was used in the other two. I
shall here describe the former of these, and afterward take notice of the few
particulars in which the other differs from it when I come to treat of the use
of the latter.

The first pendulum consisted of a block of sound and dry elm, being nearly a
cube of twenty inches long, which was fastened to a strong iron stem on the
back part of it by screw-bolts, having a thick iron axis at the top, whose ends
were turned truly cylindrical, to roll pretty freely in sockets made to receive
them; the whole being supported by a four-legged stand of very strong timber,
which was firmly fixed in the ground. A is the face of the cube into which the
balls were fired; by means of the blow it is made to swing round the axis BC,
and the chord of the arch thereby described is measured by the tape DEF
fastened to the bottom of the wood at D, and sliding with some slight friction
through a little machine of brass, fixed at E for that purpose, the tape being
marked with inches and tenths, for the more easily measuring of the chord or
part of it drawn through by the pendulum. The whole length of this pendulum,
from the middle of the axis to the ribband at D, was 102 inches. The weight and
the other dimensions were taken each day when the experiments were made, and
then registered; and the manner of discovering the places of the centers of
gravity and oscillation was as follows:

To find the center of oscillation, the pendulum was hung up, and made to
vibrate in small arcs, and the time of making two or three hundred vibrations
was observed by a half-second pendulum. Having thus obtained the time answering
to a certain number of vibrations, the finding of the center of oscillation is
easy: for if v denote the number of vibrations made in s seconds, then it is
well known, that as vv ss 39.2 39.2 ss/ vv = the distance in inches from the
axis of motion to the center of oscillation; and by this rule the place of that
center was found for each day.

The center of gravity was ascertained by one or both of the two following
methods. First, a triangular prism of iron AB, being placed upon the ground
with an edge upwards, the pendulum was laid across it, and moved forward or
backward on the stem or block as the case required, till the two ends exactly
balanced each other; then, as it lay, the distance was measured from the middle
of the axis to the part which rested on the edge of the prism, or the center of
gravity of the pendulum. The other method was as in the latter of the two
annexed figures, where the ends of the axis being supported on fixed uprights,
and a chord fastened to the lower end of the pendulum, was passed over a pulley
at P, different weights W were fastened to the other end of it, till the
pendulum was brought to a horizontal position. Then, taking also the whole
weight of the pendulum, and its length from the axis to the bottom where the
chord was fixed, the place of the center of gravity is found by this
proportion, as p the weight of the pendulum w the appended weight d the whole
length from the axis to the bottom: dw/ p = the distance from the axis to the
center of gravity. Either of these two methods gave the place of the center of
gravity sufficiently exact; but the coincidence of the results of both of them
was still more satisfactory.

Of the rule for computing the Velocity of the ball.
Having described the methods of obtaining the necessary dimensions, I proceed
now to the investigation of the theorem by which the velocity of the ball is to
be computed. The several weights and measures being found, let then b denote
the weight of the ball, p the whole weight of the pendulum, g the distance of
the center of gravity below the axis, h the distance to the center of
oscillation, k the distance to the point struck by the ball, z the velocity of
this point struck after the blow, v the original velocity of the ball, c the
chord of the arch measured by the tape, and r its radius, or the distance from
the axis to the bottom of the pendulum.
Then the effect of the blow struck by the ball is as ^ or, as ^ the weight of
a body, which, being placed at the point struck, would acquire the same
velocity from the blow as the pendulum does at the same point. Here then are
two bodies, b and ^, the former of which, with the velocity v, strikes the
latter at rest, so that after the blow they both proceed uniformly forward
together with the velocity z; in which case it is well known, that ^; and
therefore the velocity z is ^. But because of the accession of the ball to the
pendulum, the place of the center of oscillation will be changed; and from the
known property of that point we find ^ to its distance from the axis. Call this
distance of the center of oscillation, of the mass compounded of the ball and
pendulum, H. Then, since z is the velocity of the point whose distance is k, we
have this proportion, as ^ the velocity of this compound center of oscillation.

Again, since ^ is the versed sine of the described arc c, its radius being r;
therefore as ^ the versed sine to the radius H, or the versed sine of the arc
described by the center of oscillation, which call V; then is V the
perpendicular height descended by this center, and the velocity it acquires by
the descent through this space is thus easily found, viz. as ^ the velocity of
the center of oscillation deduced from the chord of the arc which is actually
described.

Having thus obtained two different expressions for the velocity of this
center, independent of each other, let an equation be made of them, and it will
express the relation of the several quantities in the question; thus then we
have ^ from which we obtain ^ the true expression for the original velocity of
the ball the moment before it strikes the pendulum.

COROLLARY. But this theorem may be reduced to a form much more simple and fit
for use, and yet be sufficiently near the truth. Thus, let the root of the
compound factor ^ be extracted, and it will be equal to ^ within the 100000th
part of the truth in such cases as generally happen. But since ^ is usually but
about the 300th or 400th part of pg, and that bk differs from ^ but by about
the 80th or 100th part of itself, therefore pg + bk is within about the 20000th
or 30000th part of ^. Consequently v is ^ very nearly. Or, farther, if g be
written for k in the last term bk, then finally v is ^, or ^, which is an easy
theorem to be used on all occasions; and being within about the 3000th part of
the truth, it is sufficiently exact for all practical purposes whatever. Where
it must be observed, that c, g, k, r, may be taken in any measures, either feet
or inches, etc. provided they be but all of the same kind; but h must be in
feet, because the theorem is adapted to feet.

SCHOLIUM. As the balls remain in the pendulum during the time of making one
whole set of experiments, by the addition of their weight to it, both its
weight and the centers of gravity and oscillation will be changed by the
addition of each ball which is lodged in the wood, and therefore p, g, and h,
must be corrected after every shot in the theorem for determining the velocity
v. Now the succeeding value of p is always p + b; or p must be corrected by the
continual addition of b: and g is corrected by taking always ^, or ^ nearly for
each successive value of g; or g is corrected by adding always ^ to the next
preceding value of g: and lastly, h is corrected by taking for its new values
successively ^, or by adding always ^, or ^ nearly, to the preceding value of
h; so that the three corrections are made by adding always, b to the value of
p, ^ to the value of g, ^ to the value of h.


Before we proceed to the experiments it may not be improper to take notice of
three seeming causes of error, which have not been brought to account in our
theorem for determining the velocity of the shot; and to examine here whether
their effects can sensibly affect the conclusion. These are the penetration of
the ball into the wood of the pendulum, the resistance of the air to the back
of it, and the friction on the axis: by each of these three causes the motion
of the pendulum seems to be retarded. The principle on which our rule is
founded supposes the momentum of the ball to be communicated to the pendulum in
an instant; but this is not accurately the case, because that this force is
communicated during the small time in which the ball makes the penetration; but
as this is generally effected before the pendulum has moved one-tenth of an
inch out of its vertical position, and usually amounts to scarcely more than
the 200th part of a second, its effect will be quite imperceptible, and
therefore it may safely be neglected in these experiments. As to the second
retarding force, or the resistance of the air to the back of the pendulum, it
is manifest that it will be quite insensible, when it is considered that its
velocity is not more than three feet in a second, that its surface is but about
twenty inches square, and that its weight is four or five hundred pounds.
Neither can the effect of the last cause, or the friction on the axis, ever
amount to a quantity considerable enough to be brought into account in these
experiments: for, besides that care was taken to render this friction as small
as possible, the effect of the little part which does remain is nearly balanced
by the effect it has on the distance of the center of oscillation; for as this
center was determined from the actual vibrations of the pendulum, the friction
on the axis would a little retard its motion, and cause its vibrations to be
slower, and the consequent distance of this center to be greater; so that the
other parts of our theorem being multiplied by h, or the root of this distance,
which is as the time of a vibration, it is evident that the friction in the one
case operates against that in the other; and that the difference of the two is
the real efficacious cause of resistance, and which therefore is either equal
to nothing, or very nearly so.

These general causes of error in the principles of the experiments are
therefore safely omitted in the theorem: and our only care must be to guard
against accidental errors in the actual execution of the business.

Of the experiments.
The gun, with which the experiments were made, was of brass; the diameter of
the bore or cylinder at the muzzle was 2 4/25, or 2.16 inches; but its diameter
next the breech was a small matter less, being there only 2 2/25, or 2.08
inches; so that the greatest cast-iron ball it would admit was just 19 ounces
avoirdupois, or 1 pound wanting half an ounce; but sometimes leaden balls were
used, which weighed above 1 pound, and sometimes long or cylindrical shot which
weighed near three pounds; the length of the bore was 42, or 42.6 inches, so
that it was nearly 20 calibers long.

The powder used was of the sort which is commonly made for government; the
quantity was two, four, or eight ounces to a charge, which was always put into
a light flannel bag, and rammed more or less, as expressed in each day's
experiments, but without ever using any wad before it.

The distance of the gun from the pendulum was 29 or 30 feet; which distance
was found by firing the piece, with eight ounces of powder without a ball, at
different distances, till the force of the elastic fluid was found not to move
the pendulum.

The penetrations of the balls into the wood were attempted to be taken, but
were soon neglected on account of their uncertainty, because of so many balls
striking in or near the same part of the wood. The depth of the penetration
seemed to be near about three inches in solid wood when two ounces of powder
was used.

The first course of experiments was on the 13th of May, 1775, it being a
clear, dry day. The weights and measures then taken were thus, viz. p = 328
pounds, the weight of the pendulum, g = 72 inches, the distance of the center
of gravity, h = 88 inches = 7 feet, the distance of the center of oscillation,
r = 102 inches, the distance to the bottom or tape.
The value of h = 88 was determined from the number of forty vibrations being
made in a minute; for as 402 602 4 9 39.2 88. The number of shot was eight, and
the circumstances and results as exhibited in the following table.

Number. Weight of powder. Diam. of the ball. Height of the charge. Struck
below the axis, k. Weight of the ball. Weight of the ball, b. Values of p.
Values of g. Chord of the arc, c. Veloc. per second. Oz. In. Inches. Inches.
Oz. Pounds Pounds Inches. Inches. Feet. 1 2 1.98 92.5 17 1.094 328.0 72.0 13.0
458 2 2 1.98 92.5 17 1.094 329.1 72.1 17.8 631 3 2 1.98 3.15 91.6 17 1.094
330.2 72.2 18.1 650 4 2 1.97 3.15 91. 17 1.078 331.3 72.3 17.6 646 5 2 1.97
3.15 90.5 17 1.078 332.3 72.3 16.3 604 6 2 1.96 3.15 92.4 17 1.063 333.4 72.4
16.2 598 7 4 1.97 4.5 92. 17 1.078 334.4 72.5 24.0 881 8 4 1.96 4.5 90.5 17
1.063 335.5 72.5 25.0 950

By computing the velocities from our theorem investigated in the corollary,
they come out as they are here registered in the last column of the table, and
they are all pretty regular excepting the first one, which is about one-fourth
part less than the rest with the same weight of powder, and which irregularity
must have been caused by some unperceived accident. The values of p and g were
each corrected by their respective theorems; but the value of h was kept the
same (7 feet) throughout, because that its correction was so small as not to
make a difference of above a foot or two at most in the velocity: and for the
same reason this correction is neglected, as quite unnecessary, in the rest of
the experiments of the other days following.

The mean velocity of the second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth numbers is
626, and of the seventh and eighth it is 915; that is, the velocity with two
ounces of powder was 626 feet per second, and that with four ounces was 915
feet; and these two velocities are in the ratio of 1 to 1.46. But the mean
weight of the balls in the former case was 17 ounces, and in the latter it was
17 ounces; and the ratio of the quantities of powder was that of 1 to 2. But
the direct sub-duplicate ratio of the powder, compounded with the inverse
sub-duplicate ratio of the weights of the shot, forms the ratio of 1 to 1.42,
which is nearly equal to the ratio (1 to 1.46) of the velocities; that is, in
this instance the velocities are very nearly as the square roots of the
quantities of powder directly, and the square roots of the weights of the balls
inversely. The powder was forced up with only one stroke of the rammer.

The second course was performed on the 3d of June, 1775, which was a clear,
dry day, but windy. Some of the experiments of this day are doubtful, as indeed
is evident from their irregularity, on account of the wind blowing the tape,
which was not very properly secured by the little brazen machine through which
it was made to slide.

The powder was taken from the bottom of a barrel, and the charges rammed a
little closer than those of the former day; and so tight did the shots fit
toward the breech, that many strokes of the rammer were necessary to drive
them home.

The fourth and fifth shots were of a long form, which may be called
spherico-cylindrical, as they were cylinders terminated by hemispherical ends,
so that their section through the axis was of this form, and the length of the
axis was near double the diameter of the shot.

The fourth shot, or first of the long sort, struck sideways, making a hole of
the shape of the above section, only its length or axis was not horizontal but
vertical, thus.

The last shot lay obliquely in the wood; it appeared to have struck with its
end foremost, or nearly so, as the oblique position in which it lay seemed to
be caused by its striking against a former shot lodged in the wood, with the
hance of its end, so as to flatten it in that part.

Of the pendulum, the weight, length, and centers of gravity and of oscillation
were the same as when taken the former day before the experiments were made;
the former balls having been extracted, and the holes filled up with wood.

Number. Weight of powder. Diam. of the ball. Height of the charge. Struck
below the axis, k. Weight of the ball. Weight of the ball, b. Values of p.
Values of g. Chord of the arc, c. Veloc. per second. Oz. In. Inches. Inches.
Oz. Pounds Pounds Inches. Inches Feet. 1 2 2.08 2.85 88 19 1.219 328.0 72.0
24.3 800 2 2 2.08 2.85 89 19 1.219 329.2 72.1 30.5 1003 3 2 2.08 2.85 93 19
1.219 330.4 72.1 30.0 943 4 2 2.08 3.35 92 46 2.906 331.6 72.2 57.0 767 5 2
2.08 3.35 93 46 2.906 334.5 72.4 54.0 731

Here the first shot is again so much smaller than the two following ones, that
some irregularity must have attended it, on which account we cannot make any
use of it. The mean between the second and third is 973; and between the fourth
and fifth the mean is 749; that is, the velocity of the 19 ounce ball is 973,
and that of the 46 ounce shot 749 feet per second, which two numbers are in the
ratio of 1.3 to 1. But the reciprocal subduplicate ratio of the weights (19 and
46) is the ratio of 1.54 to 1: therefore, in this instance, the velocity of the
heavier shot is a little less than would arise from the inverse ratio of the
square roots of the weights of the shot. But the accurate ratio cannot
certainly be drawn from these numbers, on account of the doubtfulness of some
of them, as was before observed.

It is very remarkable, that in the experiments of this day, the mean velocity
with two ounces of powder is 973, whereas it was no more than 626 in the former
day with the same quantity of powder, notwithstanding the balls were heavier
with the greater velocity in the proportion of 19 to 17 nearly. This remarkable
difference must be chiefly owing to the windage in the first course: and from
hence we may perceive the great advantage to be gained by the use of balls
approaching in proportion nearer to the diameter of the bore of the gun than
what is prescribed in the present establishment. Possibly, however, some part
of this difference might be owing to some small inequality in the powder, as
that which was used this day was taken from the bottom of a barrel. Perhaps
also some part of the effect may be owing to the greater degree of ramming
which the powder had in this course.

The third course was made on the 12th of June, 1775, it being a clear, dry,
and calm day. The powder in the experiments of this day was rammed in the same
degree as in the last one. It was also nearly the same in the succeeding days,
as may be perceived by inspecting the fourth column of each course, which,
denoting the height of the charge, shows the degree of compactness with which
the powder was lodged in the piece. The dimensions, as taken this day, were
thus: p = 324 pounds, the weight of the pendulum. g = 71.4 inches, the distance
of the center of gravity. h = 88 inches = 7 feet, the distance of the center of
oscillation. r = 102 inches, the whole length to the tape.


Number. Weight of powder. Diam. of the ball. Height of the charge. Struck
below the axis, k. Weight of the ball. Weight of the ball, b. Values of p.
Values of g. Chord of the arc, c. Veloc. per second. Oz. Inches. Inches.
Inches. Oz. Pounds Pounds Inches. Inches. Feet 1 2 2.080 2.85 94 19 1.219 324.0
71.4 23.0 700 2 2 2.036 2.85 94 18 1.141 325.2 71.5 24.5 799 3 2 2.045 2.85 93
18 1.156 326.4 71.6 22.0 715 4 4 2.062 4. 92 19 1.188 327.5 71.7 27.3 880 5 4
2.036 4. 93 18 1.141 328.7 71.7 35.0 1163 6 4 2.045 4. 93 18 1.156 329.9 71.8
33.0 1087

Here the common mean weight of the ball is 18 ounces, the mean velocity with
two ounces of powder is 738, and that with four ounces of powder is 1043 feet
per second. The ratio of these two velocities is that of 1 to 1.414; that is,
accurately the ratio of the square roots of the quantities of powder.

Of the experiments made with the other pendulum, which is represented in fig.
2.
The first pendulum was gradually more and more rent and shattered by the
firing of so many balls into it, till at the end of the last course of
experiments it had become quite useless. Another was then fitted up, and with
it were performed the two following courses.

This second pendulum consisted of a cubical block of sound elm, of near two
feet long, fixed to the iron stem, but not exactly in the manner of the former;
for in this the stem was placed vertically over the center of the top-end, to
which point it continued whole, but there divided in two, each passing to right
and left over the top down the sides, and returning along the bottom, and being
at proper intervals fastened to the wood with iron pins. A thick sheet of lead
was fastened over each of the two upright faces into which the shot were to be
fired, both to guard them from splintering very much, and to add to the weight
of the pendulum. The whole was then firmly secured by two very thick iron bands
or hoops, passed horizontally quite around the wood, and firmly fixed to it,
the one next the upper end, and the other near the lower, so as strongly to
resist the endeavors of the shot to split the wood.

The whole weight of the pendulum, thus fitted up, was 552 pounds; its whole
length, from the middle of the axis to the tape at the bottom, was 101 inches;
the distance to the center of gravity was 78 inches; and the distance to the
center of oscillation was 88 inches equal to 7 feet, which was exactly the same
as that of the former pendulum, their numbers of vibrations being alike in the
same time.

Instead of suspending this pendulum, after the manner of the former, by the
ends of its axis in grooves turned to fit them, they were only placed on flat,
level pieces of wood, on which this pendulum vibrated much freer than the other
did; but a small nail was driven into the supporting wood, just behind each end
of the axis, to prevent the stroke of the shot from throwing it off the stand.

To this pendulum was adapted a better machine for the tape to slide through
than the former one was, the inconvenience of which had often been experienced
by its catching and entangling the tape, so as to interrupt its free motion,
and once indeed to break it. This new one, however, is at once very simple, and
perfectly free from every inconvenience, giving just the necessary degree of
friction to the tape, without ever stopping its motion; so that of the real
quantity drawn out by the vibration of the pendulum there could not possibly be
the least doubt. This simple contrivance consisted barely of about fix or eight
inches of the list of woollen cloth fastened upon the arch of a small piece of
wood, which was shaped into the form of the segment of a circle thus, the tape
being made to pass through between the curved side and the list, which was
moderately stretched and fastened by its two ends to those of the little arch.

Upon the whole, the machinery was all so perfect, and every circumstance
attending the experiments of the two ensuing days so carefully observed, that I
can with great safety rely on the conclusions resulting from them. And as those
of the one day were made with leaden balls, and those of the other with iron
ones, which differ greatly in weight, every other circumstance being the same,
they afford very good means for discovering the law of the different weights of
shot, while the variations in the powder from two to four and eight ounces
furnish us with the rule for the different quantities of it.

The fourth course was on the 20th of July, a fine clear day. The powder was a
mixture of several of the sorts made for government, and the balls were of
lead. The quantities of powder were two, four, and eight ounces alternately;
and the dimensions at first were thus: p = 552 pounds, the whole weight of the
pendulum. r = 101 inches, its whole length. g = 78 inches, the distance of the
center of gravity. h = 88 inches = 7 feet, that of the center of oscillation.


Number. Weight of powder. Diam. of the ball. Height of the charge. Struck
below the axis, k. Weight of the ball. Weight of the ball, b. Values of p.
Values of g. Chord of the arc c. Veloc. per second. Oz. Inches. Inches. Inches.
Oz. Pounds Pounds Inches. Inches. Feet 1 2 2.021 2.85 90. 28 1.766 552.0 78.0
14.8 612 2 4 2.021 4.4 87. 28 1.766 553.8 78.0 20.5 879 3 8 2.032 7.1 87. 28
1.797 555.5 78.1 27.5 1164 4 2 2.026 2.85 90. 28 1.781 557.3 78.1 15.0 622 5 4
2.026 4.4 88. 28 1.781 559.1 78.1 20.5 871 6 8 2.032 7.1 92. 28 1.797 560.9
78.2 28.5 1154 7 2 2.021 2.85 89.8 28 1.766 562.7 78.2 14.3 605 8 4 2.026 4.4
91.3 28 1.781 564.5 78.2 21.0 870 9 8 2.026 7.1 87. 28 1.781 566.2 78.3 26.8
1169

Let us now collect together the several velocities belonging to the same
quantity of powder, in order to take their means, thus: Veloc. with 2 ounces.
Veloc. with 4 ounces. Veloc. with 8 ounces. 612 879 1164 622 871 1154 605 870
1169 3)1839 3)2620 3)3487 The means, 613 873 1162

The uniformity of these velocities is very striking, and the means with two,
four, and eight ounces of powder are 613, 873, and 1162, which are in the ratio
of 1, 1.424, and 1.9; these numbers are nearly in the ratio of the square roots
of the quantities (2, 4, and 8) of powder, the numbers in this latter ratio
being 1, 1.414, and 2, where the small difference lies chiefly in the last
number. A small part of this defect in the greatest velocity is to be
attributed to the mean weight of the balls used with it being greater than in
the others; for the mean weight of the balls used with eight ounces of powder
is 28 ounces, while that with the two and four ounces is only 28; the
reciprocal sub-duplicate ratio of these is that of 1 to 1.006, in which
proportion, increasing 1.9 the number for the greater velocity, it becomes
1.91, which still falls short of 2 by.09, which is about the 1/22d part too
small for the sub-duplicate ratio of the powder. This defect of a 22d part is
owing to three evident causes, viz. 1. The less length of cylinder through
which the ball was impelled; for by inspecting the fourth column, denoting the
height of the charge, it appears, that the balls lay three or four inches
nearer to the muzzle of the piece with the eight ounce charge than with the
others. 2. The greater quantity of elastic fluid which escaped in this case
than in the others by the windage; this happens from its moving with a greater
velocity, in consequence of which a greater quantity escapes by the vent and
windage than with the smaller velocities. 3. The third cause is the greater
quantity of powder blown out unfired in this case than in that of the less
velocities; for the ball which was impelled with the greater velocity would be
sooner out of the piece than the others, and the more so as it had a less
length of the bore to move through; and if powder fire in time, which cannot be
denied, although indeed that time is manifestly very short, a greater quantity
of it must remain unfired when the ball with the greater velocity issues from
the piece, than when that which has the less velocity goes out, and still the
more so as the bulk of powder which was at first to be inflamed in the one case
so much exceeded that in the others. The effect, however, will arise chiefly
from the first and last of these three causes, as that of the second will
amount to very little; because that the effect arising from the greater
velocity with which the fluid escapes at the vent and windage, is partly
balanced by the shorter time in which it acts.

From the above reflections we may also perceive, how small the quantity of
powder is which is blown out unfired in any of these cases, and the amazing
quickness with which it fires in all cases: for although the time in which the
ball passed through the barrel, when impelled by the eight ounces of powder,
was not greatly different from the half only of the time in which it was
impelled by the two ounces, it is evident that in half the time there was
nearly four times the quantity of powder fired.

The fifth or last course was on the 21st of September, 1775, fine clear
weather, but a little windy.

The machinery and the balls were of iron, but powder the same as in the last
course, and the dimensions as follows: p = 553 pounds, the weight of the
pendulum. r = 101 inches, its length. g = 78 1/^ inches, the distance of the
center of gravity. b = 84.775 inches = 7.065 feet, that of the center of
oscillation, the pendulum making 68 vibrations in 100 seconds.


Number. Weight of powder. Diam. of the ball. Height of the charge. Struck
below the axis, k. Weight of the ball. Weight of the ball, b. Values of p.
Values of g. Chord of the arc, c. Veloc. per second. Oz. Inches Inches Inches.
Oz. Dr. Pounds Pounds Inches. Inch. Feet. 1 2 2.062 3. 88.3 19 0 1.188 553.0
78.1 11.4 702 2 4 2.062 4.3 88.3 19 0 1.188 554.2 78.1 17.3 1068 3 8 2.062 6.7
91.0 19 0 1.188 555.5 78.2 23.6 1419 4 2 2.070 3. 90.7 19 3 1.201 556.8 78.2
11.4 682 5 4 2.080 4.3 90.7 19 8 1.221 558.1 78.2 17.3 1020 6 8 2.064 6.7 90.7
19 0 1.190 559.4 78.2 22*3 1352 7 2 2.060 3. 91. 18 15 1.184 560.6 78.3 11.4
695 8 4 2.058 4.3 90. 18 14 1.180 561.9 78.3 15.3 948 9 8 2.049 6.7 90. 18 9
1.163 563.1 78.3 22.9 1443 10 2 2.047 3. 88.3 18 9 1.160 564.3 78.3 10.9 703 11
4 2.037 4.3 88.3 18 4 1.142 565.5 78.4 14.8 973 12 8 2.036 6.7 88.3 18 3 1.140
566.6 78.4 20.6 1360 13 2 2.034 3. 92. 18 3 1.137 567.8 78.4 11.4 725 14 4
2.034 4.3 92. 18 3 1.137 569.0 78.4 15.0 957 15 8 2.031 6.7 94.3 18 1 1.131
570.1 78.5 22.5 1412

Let us now take the means among those of the same quantity of powder, thus:
Veloc. with 2 ounces. Veloc. with 4 ounces. Veloc. with 8 ounces. 702 1068 1419
682 1020 1352 695 948 1443 703 973 1360 725 957 1412 5)3507 5)4966 5)6986 The
means, 701 993 1397 And these mean velocities with two, four, and eight ounces
of powder, are as the numbers 1, 1.416, and 1.993; but the sub-duplicate ratio
of the weights (two, four, and eight) of powder gives the numbers 1, 1.414, and
2, to which the others are sufficiently near. It is obvious, however, that the
greatest difference lies in the last number which answers to the greatest
velocity, and which is again in defect. It will still be a little more in
defect if we make the allowance for the weights of the balls; for the mean
weight of the balls with the two and four ounces is 18 ounces, but of the eight
ounces it is 18; diminishing therefore the number 1.993 in the reciprocal
sub-duplicate ratio of 18 to 18, it becomes 1.985, which falls short of the
number 2 by.015 or the 133d part of itself; which defect is to be attributed to
the same causes as it was in the last course of experiments before explained.

Let us now compare the corresponding velocities in this course and the last.
In this course they are 701, 993, 1397; In the last they were 613, 873, 1162.
Now the ratio of the first two numbers, or the velocities with two ounces of
powder, is that of 1 to 1.1436; the ratio of the next two, is that of 1 to
1.1375; and the ratio of the last is that of 1 to 1.2022. But the mean weight
of the shot was, for two and four ounces of powder 28 ounces in the last
course, and 18 ounces in this; and for eight ounces of powder, it was 28 in the
last, and 18 in this: taking now the reciprocal subduplicate ratios of these
weights of shot, we obtain the ratio of 1 to 1.224 for that of the balls which
were fired with two ounces and four ounces of powder, and the ratio of 1 to
1.241 for the balls which were fired with eight ounces. But the real ratios
above found are not greatly different from these. And the variation of the
actual velocities from this law of the weights of shot incline the same way in
this course, as they appeared to do in the second course of these experiments.

We may now collect into one view the principal inferences that have resulted
from these experiments.

1. And first, it is made evident by them, that powder fires almost
instantaneously, seeing that almost the whole of the charge fires though the
time be much diminished.

2. The velocities communicated to balls, or shot of the same weight, with
different quantities of powder, are nearly in the sub-duplicate ratio of those
quantities. A very small variation, in defect, taking place when the quantities
of powder become great.

3. And when shot of different weights are fired with the same quantity of
powder, the velocities communicated to them are nearly in the reciprocal
sub-duplicate ratio of their weights.

4. So that, universally, shot which are of different weights, and impelled by
the firing of different quantities of powder, acquire velocities which are
directly as the square roots of the quantities of powder, and inversely as the
square roots of the weights of the shot, nearly.

5. It would therefore be a great improvement in artillery to make use of shot
of a long form, or of heavier matter; for thus the momentum of a shot, when
fired with the same weight of powder, would be increased in the ratio of the
square root of the weight of the shot.

6. It would also be an improvement to diminish the windage; for by so doing,
one-third or more of the quantity of powder might be saved.

7. When the improvements mentioned in the last two articles are considered as
both taking place, it is evident that about half the quantity of powder might
be saved, which is a very considerable object. But important as this saving may
be, it seems to be still exceeded by that of the article of the guns; for thus
a small gun may be made to have the effect and execution of one of two or three
times its size in the present mode, by discharging a shot of two or three times
the weight of its natural ball or round shot. And thus a small ship might
discharge shot as heavy as those of the greatest now made use of.

Finally, as the above experiments exhibit the regulations with regard to the
weights of powder and balls, when fired from the same piece of ordnance, etc.;
so by making similar experiments with a gun, varied in its length, by cutting
off from it a certain part before each course of experiments, the effects and
general rules for the different lengths of guns may be certainly determined by
them. In short, the principles on which these experiments were made, are so
fruitful in consequences, that, in conjunction with the effects resulting from
the resistance of the medium, they seem to be sufficient for answering all the
enquiries of the speculative philosopher, as well as those of the practical
artillerist.


