AN EASY WAY TO PROLONG LIFE.

By a Little ATTENTION to Our way of LIVING.

[Price Eighteen Pence.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE rapid sale of the first part of this work, and the general approbation the
Public has bestowed upon it, has induced the author to complete his subject;
and he persuades himself the observations in the following pages, will be found
no less important that those in the preceding ones.

AN EASY WAY TO PROLONG LIFE, By a Little ATTENTION to Our Manner of LIVING.

Containing many salutary observations, on Exercise, Rest, Sleep, Evacuations,
etc.

Together with an Enquiry into the following points.

Why some, who are very hungry and have good appetites, eat little, while
others, having little appetites, eat much?

Whence is it, that the accustomed hour of eating being passed, we often lose
our appetite?

Whether the losing of blood in the spring, be necessary for the preservation
of health?

Whether the occasional use of cordials; be prejudicial to the constitution?

AND Some remarks on Drunkenness, Smoking, and on the utility of taking physic
in the spring.

The SECOND PART.

By a MEDICAL GENTLEMAM, Author of the First Part.

The Fourth EDITION improved.

LONDON.

Printed for the Author, and Sold by J. BELL, near Exeter-Change, in the Strand.

Fifteen Rules necessary to be observed, in order to preserve Health.
1. Aerem purum suavesque odores spirare. 2. Cibum adversante stomacho non
ingerere. 3. Cibaria ingrati and extranei saporis vitare. 4. Cruda, aut non
been cocta non gustare. 5. Cibos natura et coctione multum discrepantes eadem
mensa non assumere. 6. Ad saturitatem nunquam edere et bibere. 7. Cibos boni
succi et facilis coctionis comedere. 8. Cibis naturae et constitutioni
convenientibus uti. 9. Somnum moderatum and tempestivum capere. 10. Motum
corporis moderatum non negligere. 11. Ventrem modice laxum habere. 12. Veneris
illecebras ejusque usum tanquam pestem fugere. 13. Melancholicos aliosque
enormes animi affectus fugere. 14. Corpus veris initio pharmaco convenienti
purgare. 15. Vitam probem et in corruptam degere.
Haec qui servabit corpus juvenile tenebit:

Hae qui not servat, vitiosum corpus habebit.

AN EASY WAY TO PROLONG LIFE.
HAVING, in the first part of this work, gone through the several properties of
the various kinds of food, and shown how far they agree or disagree with
different constitutions, we proceed now, according to our promise, in order to
complete this treatise upon health, to consider Exercise, Rest, Excretions,
etc. for let us ever be so observant of the former, unless we pay a careful
attention to these, we shall not be able to keep ourselves well. We shall treat
of them, therefore in their turns, and we will begin with,

EXERCISE.
Now, in the human System, there is a certain quantity only of living power
that can be produced for the health of the body; so that if we exhaust that
power, we debilitate or weaken the body. A man, for example, may walk, till he
can walk no longer: it is, therefore, necessary to know how far Exercise is
salutary; but let us first consider the great benefits procured by it.

Exercise increases the natural heat of the body, and thus excites and dilates
the spirits, making them far more vigorous and active.

It empties the stomach and promotes the appetite for the next meal; for, as in
sedentary habits, digestion does not quite clear the stomach, but leaves part
of the food, which often clogs and disturbs it; exercise will excite this to
pass away, and the stomach being thus discharged of those relicts, the appetite
sharpens and craves food very strongly. This naturally strengthens the powers
of the stomach, and we digest our next meal better.

It also excites an expulsion of excrements, not suffering any superfluous
matter to lodge in the body.

It likewise opens the pores, and gives a free perspiration, which too much
rest will shut up. Nature has appointed these vents, and secret ways of
evacuation, to cleanse the habit of the body; which in a little time would be
clogged and become very foul and impure, by an accumulation of superfluous
humors.

It, in the last place, promotes and adds greatly to the nutrition of the body.
We find by experience, that active, stirring people, have a fresher
countenance, a greater flow of spirits; nay their flesh is firmer and their
limbs stronger, than what is generally met with in persons that lead a
sedentary, idle and sluggish life; for it is a maxim universally known and
received, that a frequent exertion of the original powers, in any one part of
the body, tends to strengthen that part. For example, the legs of a dancer
shall be strong and lusty, when his arms shall be weak and small, and the arms
of a blacksmith or waterman shall be muscular and powerful, while their legs
shall fall away. The reason of this is very evident: exercise circulates the
blood and nutritive juices, gives them a free passage to all parts of the limbs
so exercised, and drives off all superfluous humors, that, without it, would
be destructive. But,

Such exercise is to be chosen, as suits best with the nature of each person's
body, some requiring exercise of the upper parts most, others of the lower
parts, and some equally of both; but that is generally most advantageous, that
exercises every part, as dancing, fencing, riding, tennis, ringing, etc.

Now, whatever be our exercise, those whom good fortune has enabled to take it
or not, would do well to attend to the following observations.

Exercise should be daily in the morning; always with an empty stomach; and, if
possible, after excremental evacuation; for the heat of the body, opening the
vessels, may otherwise draw foul humors into the blood and occasion very
dangerous obstructions. For this reason, it is not so well to take any
extraordinary exercise upon a full stomach, or till the intestines are clear.
Though any great exercise after meals is injurious, to walk gently is
exceedingly wholesome, for, bo this means, our food will descend to the bottom
of the stomach, the natural heat of the body will be increased, and digestion
will go on the better. Where persons can retire after meals into the sweet air,
and such delightful places as exhilerate the spirits, it is right to do it. If
the state of the body be such, as that we cannot walk after meals, it will be
right to stand up, at least, according to the old verse, "Post pastum stabis,
passu mollive meabis."That is, stand up after meals, or walk gently.


Exercise should be varied according to your constitution and the season of the
year. Young, strong, robust persons, in cold weather, admit of greater
exercise; old, weak and thin persons, in hot weather, of less; for the fatter
and grosser the body is, so much the more is the natural heat diminished, and
exercise more necessary to dissolve the superfluous moisture of the body, which
occasions grossness, and to increase the circulation of the blood. Circulation
being naturally brisker in the summer, exercise is less needful, but more so in
the winter, as the moisture of the season will sometimes occasion obstructions
in the lungs and breast, which strong and laborious motion will often remove.

Exercise, opening the pores, we should be careful not to use it in a damp air,
lest we take in some of its noxious qualities, that may do us harm; neither
should we expose the body, after it, lest we catch cold, but these things are
so well known, that they need not be further explained.

Another necessary caution to be observed, is, that exercise be not too
violent, nor continued longer than it is a pleasure; but that we desist before
we be weary, or sweat too much.

Those, who from age or infirmities are unable to take exercise, should rub
their bodies, morning and evening, with flannel or coarse linen gloves. All
parts may be rubbed, except the stomach and belly; rubbing these will disturb
digestion and offend the head. We may apply a warm cloth to them in the room of
it. The loins of the back likewise should not be rubbed, unless we feel them
cold, and then but gently, lest they should be overheated and obstructions in
the urinary passages should ensue. In this operation we should begin softly and
easily, increasing the motion and weight of our hand, as the tenderness of the
skin will permit, till the flesh, as it were, swell and be somewhat ruddy, and
then desist; for too much rubbing will bring on an inflammation. Was every
person, well or ill, to rub themselves in this manner, once or twice a day, for
a little while, they would never omit it; for they would find themselves glow
with a natural warmth, their limbs would be active and their joints supple. It
is for this reason, that children are rubbed, who can take no exercise; and
experience teaches us, that the currying and rubbing a horse, notwithstanding
his exercise, is a great addition to his health. In cold and moist seasons the
head also should be rubbed with a coarse linen cloth, warmed.

Thus having set out the times for exercise and motion, let us proceed to
consider

REST.
Rest is as necessary to preserve health, and continue us in strength and
vigor, as exercise. When the body is fatigued, rest is refreshing, and renews
its strength; but when satiated with rest it thirsts again for motion and
agreeable exercise. Rest is a burden, if forced upon nature longer than it
requires. Interdum quies, inquieta est, says Seneca, even rest sometimes is
irksome. For if exercise is necessary for the preservation of health, too much
inactivity must be prejudicial. Ignavia corpus hebetat, labor firmat.
Sluggishness makes the mind and body dull and heavy, whereas frequent motion
strengthens and invigorates them.

The life of man, conversant in change, spends its whole course in sleep and
watching; the one appointed for rest and ease, the other for action and labor.
If he was constant in the first, his life would be only the shadow of death; if
in the last, he would soon be exhausted. Nature therefore has wisely
contrived, that man should not long continue in either, but wear out his life
between the two.

Sleep is a placid state of body and mind, giving refreshment and ease to both;
for as an exertion of the faculties either of mind or body exhausts our powers,
rest will restore those powers. The powers of the mind are like a small
current, which is sufficient to keep up a continual motion. If we want to give
this water greater power, we dam it up, and when the water is run from the dam,
if we wish to produce a fresh power, equal to the first, we shut the sluices,
and collect the water again: so it is with the mind, in sleep. In perfect
sleep, both the body and mind are at rest, excepting in those particulars,
where an exertion is necessary to life; and in sleep, it is that the body
receives a greater degree of nutrition; it is then digestion takes place in an
extraordinary degree, and recruits those spirits that were exhausted in the
course of the preceding day.

Now that sleep may prove advantageous, answering the intentions and designs of
nature; let us consider four things concerning it. The time when it should be
taken; the necessary limits, or quantity of sleep required; the salubrity of
the place, and the position of the body.

The time most proper for sleep, is, according to the appointment of nature,
the night, when creation, in general, take its rest. At the shutting up of the
day, when the sun gets below the horizon; the spirits are not so active and
lively, but incline to a cessation. It Is then they return to the center of the
body and apply themselves to what is called concoction; that is they return to
perform their vital operations, to nourish and refresh the system. For during
the heat of the day, they are dilated and extended to the external or
circumferent parts. Hence, we find, that, toward midnight, unless we are in
exercise, put on another garment, or increase the heat of the room, we always
find ourselves chilly. In the morning again, at the rising of the sun, our
spirits are naturally fresh, brisk and active. If we therefore, prevert the
order of nature, turn day into night, by keeping late hours, and laying in bed,
all the morning, we do that which is greatly destructive to our constitution.
For as sleep naturally draws the animal heat inwards, and the heat of the sun
counteracts this power, by drawing it outward; sleeping in the day is a
resisting of nature, which must be prejudicial to the health of the body.
Sleeping in the day, therefore, is a bad custom, particularly for fat,
corpulent people; but if the spirits be fatigued with care or business, or by
reason of old age, weakness of nature, extreme hot weather, labor, or the
like; then moderate day-sleep is a good refreshment, but take it rather sitting
than lying down, because the head will be less offended with the rising
vapors. Neither should it be taken immediately after dinner, but an hour or
half an hour after, at least; and between dinner and our nap, it would be
prudent to walk a little. Thus will our food descend better into the stomach
and be less liable to affect the head. Neither should this afternoon's nap be
longer than half an hour, or an hour at most, lest the animal heat should be so
collected from the outward parts, as to cause a heaviness in the head: neither
should it be taken in a hot place, but in one cool rather, especially in summer
time, as shall hereafter be shown.

Sitting up late is one of the great destroyers of the constitution; it tires
and wastes the animal spirits, by keeping them too long upon duty; weakens
nature, hastens on the effects of old age, changes a fresh, florid countenance
into a sallow one; heats and dries the body, breeds rheums and bad humors and
is particularly injurious to thin people.

By going early to asleep and early from it, we rise refreshed, lively and
active. Sleeping late in the morning, keeps that excrementitious matter in the
intestines which ought to be evacuated and thus occasions obstructions and
noisome vapors, which greatly offend the head, dull the senses and are very
pernicious to the whole body. If our necessities indeed oblige us to sit up
late, our supper should be little, and we may make amends for it by laying an
hour or two longer in the morning; but let what will happen, we should always
be up by nine o'clock.

In order that sleep may be peaceable and refreshing, we should be careful to
go to bed with a free and quiet mind, and banish the thoughts of all manner of
care and business. How often has a train of thinking disturbed a man's rest,
and kept him awake the whole night! The body and the mind is recruited in
proportion to the soundness also of sleep. The more we dream the less are we
refreshed. Although rest is not complete at the beginning, it has a tendency to
become so, during this state of the body; that is to a quiet mind, sleep
becomes sounder and sounder. When a man first falls a-sleep, he dreams, tosses
and tumbles about; gradually he becomes more quiet, and were we awake him, he
would not recollect that he had been dreaming at all, or he would tell us, he
dreamed, but in a small degree. During sleep the original power appears to be
so much accumulated, as to give a disposition to action, both to the mind and
body, from the slightest cause; sleep then leaves us and we awake: that is,
when the powers are recruited, the organs begin to be affected, and the man
dreams afresh; at last, outward objects sensibly affect him and he awakes. It Is
then the mind is fittest for action; the judgment is then stronger, the
imagination more lively and as the evening comes on, these powers are gradually
diminished, and require fresh sleep to recruit them.

The next thing that falls under our consideration, is the quantity of sleep we
take. This has been in some measure noticed; but it may not be unnecessary to
be a little more particular. It cannot indeed be determined how long we may
sleep; as in all other things, a mediocrity is best. Our sleep should be
proportioned to our health, our age, the complexion and emptiness or fullness of
the stomach.

As the nutrition of the body is particularly assisted by sleep, we should
sleep, in general, till the food we take has performed its office; that is,
till what physicians call concoction is completed. This may be discerned on our
awaking by the sensible lightness of the body, especially the head; the
emptiness of the stomach, and a certain desire of evacuation, provided it is
not unnaturally occasioned. Heaviness of the head and eyes, or a taste of our
last meal, signify that we have not slept a sufficient length of time. In
short, six, seven or eight hours is long enough for young persons in health,
but such as are sickly and weak require longer rest, nine, ten or eleven hours.
Children and old men require more sleep, in general, than young or middle-aged
persons; children, that their growth may the better be promoted, and old men,
because it lessens the dryness of their constitution. The same reason holds
good with lean people, to whom more sleep is necessary than to such as are fat;
for sleep moistens and refreshes the whole system. In a word, as immoderate
sleep, or sleep taken at improper times weakens the natural heat, loads the
head with vapors, detains the excrements longer than is wholesome, makes men
sluggish and heavyheaded, destroys the memory and subjects them to the palsy,
lethargy, etc. so too little sleep dries up the constitution, dims the sight,
wastes the spirits and destroys all the powers and faculties both of mind and
body. It must be observed, that we should not go to bed upon a full stomach;
that is, not go to rest too soon after supper; but continue up an hour or two,
till our food be half digested; if we are obliged to sup late, we should eat
the less: for, on account of the natural heat of the body retiring inwards
during the time of sleep, a full stomach will occasion a superfluity of
vapors, and greatly offend the head. Besides, great suppers are very apt to
occasion heart-burn, which will of course deprive us of our rest.

A matter occurs here; whether it be beneficial or not to have our bed warmed?
Persons in years, such as are weak and those who lead a tender and delicate
course of life, do right to warm their beds, in cold and moist seasons of the
year; and that for two reasons; that the body, on putting off our clothes, may
not be suddenly affected with the external cold; and as the inward heat of the
body is much assisted by the warmth of the bed, concoction will be forwarded
and the superfluous moisture of the body be the better consumed. But this
custom is unwholesome to those persons who are healthful and strong, because it
will very much weaken them.

When we arise in the morning we should find it amply compensate for our
trouble, were we gently to rub our breasts and sides downward with our hands,
and the rest of our body more strongly with flannel or a hot linen cloth,
particularly our joints. Doing this will quicken the blood, strengthen the
parts and excite the natural heat. When risen, we should stretch ourselves out,
that the animal spirits may be dilated to the exterior parts of the body, walk
a little up and down, that the remaining contents of the stomach may more
speedily descend; this done, we should proceed to cleanse our nose, by blowing
it; to clear our breast, by expectoration, and to make every other necessary
evacuation. We should wash and and plunge our eyes in cold water, for this not
only clears away the filth, but strengthens and preserves the sight. The mouth
should be well cleansed with the same, and the teeth rubbed with a dry coarse
cloth, after first scouring them with a sage leaf, dipped in vinegar. This will
purify the breath, and preserve the teeth from foulness and decay: and last of
all the head should be combed, that the pores may be opened to expel such
vapors, as were not consumed by sleep.

The next thing to be mentioned is the salubriety of the place we sleep in. A
high room, dry, sweet and well-aired, free from smoke and remote from noise, is
the most wholesome: neither should our chamber be hot, for the spirits and
natural heat of the body, which is drawn inwardly by sleep, as
beforementioned, will be counteracted by any extraordinary heat in the room;
but it should be moderately warm, and free from damps, either natural or
artificial, arising from new plaistered walls, washing the floor or otherwise.
It may not be amiss here to mention the danger of sleeping in the open air or
on the ground, as many in the summer season do. Those whose stations in life
oblige them to it, as soldiers, though for the present they escape the
mischief, are frequently afterward made sensible of the injury, by aches,
stiffness or weakness of limbs, and many other infirmities that proceed from it.

Our beds may be soft, but should not sink in, as that will suck from the body,
exhaust and impair our strength. A mattrass upon a feather-bed is both easy and
wholesome. As bedding receives the vapors, and sweaty moisture of the body, we
should be careful that it is always clean, sweet and well-aired; for if it is
not purified by air or fire, it will contract an ill scent and become
unwholesome. If every one ought to be thus careful of the beds they constantly
lie in themselves, we may see how necessary it is that travelers should be
cautious how and where they sleep. No bedchamber should be washed in cold, wet
or foggy weather; sweeping and brushing is sufficient to keep it decent, and
airing it in clear, dry days, by opening the windows, will prevent its becoming
offensive.

As to the nature of our covering at night, it should be according to the
season of the year. The head should be covered sufficiently to prevent its
taking cold, but not too warm, lest it weaken it and hasten gray hairs; for if
the vapors issuing from the brain are impeded in their passage, it will cause
the hair to turn gray, much sooner than it otherwise would.

With respect to our manner of laying; we may in a great measure consult our
own ease. The head should be higher than any other part of the body; the bed
from head to feet, should be smooth and even, without any fall below the
pillow, or hollow under the shoulders. Sleeping generally on the back is
unwholesome, as the humors of the head naturally fall by this means into the
hinder part of the brain and may disorder it, and the loins are thus more
heated than they would otherwise be, and of course the urinary passages more
subject to obstructions. Persons afflicted with the stone should by no means
sleep on their backs. Sleeping with the back upwards may be occasionally good
for such persons as are troubled with wind and have a weak digestion, the
bowels being thus kept so much the warmer; but to those who have weak eyes it
is pernicious, as a defluxion of humors may thus fall into them. The most
wholesome method of sleeping, is on the side, first on the left side,
especially to those who go to bed before they have digested their supper, as
the food will in this case better descend to the bottom of the stomach; and
then on the right, that the motion of the heart may be freest from pressure.
But the principal thing to render sleep comfortable, is, as was hinted before,
to compose the mind. If we lie down with roving, troubled thoughts, they will
commonly calls us up, before it is fit to rise, and our sleep will not be
piacid or refreshing. When we lay by our clothes, therefore, let us not lay
aside our business, care and thoughts, and let not a wandering fancy break our
rest.

It has been often doubted, whether it be good to sleep with the mouth a little
open. Some there are, that altogether deny it; but to sleep with the mouth open
is certainly beneficial, and that, for these three reasons: because the breath
passes more freely and the fuliginous fumes are better sent forth than
discussed. Hence it is that such as sleep with the mouth open, have a sweet
breath, whereas those that sleep with it shut, have generally an offensive
breath and foul teeth. The second is, because some bad moisture may in sleep
pass forth at the mouth, which if shut, would fall upon the lungs and be
prejudicial. The third reason is, because owing to the descent of rheumes from
the head, the free passage of the breath through the nose may be impeded, and
snorings, and offensive routings ensue, that may disturb us of our rest, and
awaken us.

But because the tongue, palate and gums of such as sleep with their mouth
open, are commonly afterward very dry and covered with slimy matter, though in
fact, those who sleep with their mouth shut are most subject to it, all persons
in the morning, should wash their mouths and teeth well and gargle their
throats, and then every inconvenience is removed.

The only thing further to be enquired into, upon this subject, is whether
sweating at night be destructive to the constitution or not. Great sweats are
undoubtedly weakening, but light sweats are a great benefit, for gross humors
are thereby dissolved, wind is discussed, the blood is purified, the spirits
are refreshed, the cramp, palsy, gout, swelling of the joints and other parts,
achs, numbness and heaviness of the limbs are prevented, and consequently the
whole body better preserved, lively, and in health. But, this caution must be
observed, and the body be not suddenly after it exposed to the cold air. We
will proceed now to.

EXCRETIONS or EVACUATIONS.
All that the stomach receives is not fit to be retained; our food, though
studiously chosen and temperately used, is not all converted into the substance
of the body; but some part of it is, to be separated and sent forth; the rest
is to supply and nourish. This regular course being continued, the body thrives
and is in good order; but if that which should be evacuated, be retained, or
that which ought to be retained, be injuriosly passed off, the regular economy
is subverted and the constitution suffers and decays.

The general excretions of the body are the stool or faeces and the urine, and
for ease and health they ought to be daily evacuated. If our habit be naturally
lax, it is a happiness, provided that laxity be not immoderate; for such
persons as are continually costive, and have seldom the benefit of nature, in
the respect we are now talking of, are liable to many disorders. The faeces
retained longer than they ought, too often affect the head, dim the sight,
occasion heaviness, dullness, and a degree of fever. It Is necessary therefore
they should be daily evacuated. If this cannot naturally be obtained, the
occasional taking of a little lenitive electuary will be very necessary.

Seminal evacuations ought also to be moderate. The sperm is a substance full
of spirit, and if wilfully wasted, will hurt the constitution more than the
loss of forty times the quantity of blood. Immoderate venery is known to impair
the strength, hurt the sight, consume the spirits, and hasten old age and death.

Cibo vel potus repletis, superflue evacuatis, sive exercitatis, coitus
interdicitur.
Tempus optimnm est mane and post dormias.
Hyeme and vere frequentius permittitur; aestate parcius.
Juvenes, sanguinei and pituitosi liberalius, parcius melancholici; parcissime
biliosi, senes emaciati.
Although it has been an old saying, as foolish as common, Qui medice vivit,
misere vivit; he that lives by rule, lives miserably; yet experience teaches us
the contrary, and grounded upon pure reason and the contents of these pages:
that he who pays no regard to the injunctions of nature, both shortens his life
and destroys the comforts of it. In short, would you see without spectacles, go
without crutches, or the help of a stick; would you lie easy in your bed, not
telling the clock or wishing for day; would you eat with an appetite and be
yonng in strength when you are old in years: in fact, would you enjoy yourself,
and every thing about you, and lengthen your life to the latest period;
exercise your reason and attend to the advice here given, for Qui medice vivit,
sine medicis diu vivet. He that lives by rule and wholesome precepts, is a
physician to himself, and needs not the help of others

Whence it is that some who are very hungry and have good appetites, eat
little; while others, hav-little appetites, each much?
THIS proceeds from the difference of stomachs. A man, with a small stomach,
that will hold but little, will be satisfied with a small quantity of food;
whereas one, with a large stomach, though he seems not hungry, yet when he
comes to his meal, will eat plentifully.

A stomach naturally cold, will crave more than it can digest. On the contrary,
a hot stomach has but little appetite, for heat destroys it. Hence it appears,
that a person, with a large capacious stomach, naturally cold, will devour an
immoderate quantity of food: while one, with a small stomach, naturally hot,
will at his meals eat little or nothing.

Whence it is, that the accustomed hour of eating being passed, we often lose
our appetite.
BECAUSE the stomach being empty and hungry, draws up from the intestines
putrid vapors, which destroy the appetite. And as these vapors not only annoy
the stomach, but the head and spirits, such as are desirous of health, should
at their usual hours of meals, if they find a craving for food, always indulge
it by eating a little.

Cautions to be observed in the use of drinking.
THE necessity and use of drink is to preserve natural moisture, and to make
good a mixture and distribution of meat, that it may digest the better. For
these reasons it should be moderately taken at meals. Sundry little draughts
are more wholesome than two or three large ones. Large draughts at meals makes
the food fluctuate in the stomach. This with its weakening and relaxing the
coats of the stomach, destroys digestion. Great draughts also lessen the
natural heat of the stomach, drives the food down too hastily, and corrups the
whole body with too great moisture and crudity.

It will not be improper to mention here, that such persons as accustom
themselves to taking soup the first thing at a meal, would do well to take it
as hot as they can, as the heat will be very comfortable to the stomach. Taken
lukewarm it would soon prove nauseous, though never so good. The drinking cold
beer after hot soup or broth is an absurd and hurtful custom, for it
counteracts the heat of the soup, destroys the tone of the stomach, and does
mischief.

Drinking after meals, unless we are dry, is a pernicious custom, especially if
we drink during digestion is taking place, as it destroys the natural heat that
is working in the stomach. But after the food is passed off from the stomach,
that is, three or four hours after the meal, a few glasses of wine, to a person
in years, or of a cold constitution is beneficial; as it will cleanse the
stomach of the relics of the food, and create a readier distribution of the
nutritive part of it, to the different parts of the body.

The utility of taking physic in the spring.
THE winter by its moisture naturally fills the body with crude and
excrementitious humors, and by its coldness thickens and stagnates the same;
and the approaching spring working on those humors, rarifying and dissolving
them, they are apt to fluctuate and putrify in the body, which, unless by the
force of nature, or the assistance of medicine, are often the cause of sickness.

Besides the uncertainty of the weather in spring, its sudden alterations from
hot to cold, and from dry to moist, will frequently produce feverish disorders,
according to the disposition of the matter congealed as it were in the body
during the preceding winter. Hence it happens, that people die more frequently
in the spring than in any other season of the year.

Such persons, therefore, as are desirous to prevent these ill effects, should
take a dose or two of purging physic; especially those who lead a sedentary
life: and the beginning of the spring is generally, the best time for this
salutary precaution.

It is not necessary in general to take physic, by way of prevention, in the
fall or autumn of the year.

Whether the losing of blood in the spring, be necessary for the preservation
of the health?
FOR such as are of a sanguine constitution, phlethoric and full of blood, it
is benefical, to prevent such dangers as a too great fullness of blood may
occasion; but it is far better to lessen their blood by a sparing and cooling
diet, than by opening a vein. For blood being the very essence of our life,
diminishing its quantity frequently, weakens the spirits and the constitution,
and hastens death.

Whether the occasional use of cordials be prejudicial to the constitution?
WHEN used medicinally, in case of necessity, as when the stomach is weak, or
lapsed by cold, a cordial may comfort and refresh it. But the immoderate,
daily, or unseasonable use of strong liquors must be pernicious. Although they
may please the palate, and sometimes not offend, but warm and refresh the
stomach; yet, in length of time, from daily use, and perhaps in an improper
season, they must destroy the temperature of the body, burn up the blood, and
produce very dangerous symptoms.

Some observations upon drunkenness.
IT is a maxim established upon good reason, that every thing exceeding its
just bounds, is hurtful to nature. The best of things are not excepted in this
general rule. Even the necessary supports of life, if not qualified and made
wholesome by this corrective, may prove the procurers of death.

Drink, when carried to excess, is no longer a refreshment, to moisten or water
the thirsty body; nor a preservative; but becomes an inundation, to drown and
suffocate the vital powers, and is the cause of sickness. It puts a man out of
a state of health, and disorders him so much, that we may consider him as going
to die.

It has been said by some ancient physicians, that to be drunk, once a month,
is good physic and wholesome, as by overcharging the stomach it provokes
vomiting and so carries off what may be there lodged, that would otherwise
breed disease; but this a poor plea for drunkenness; that for the gaining one
supposed benefit, (which might be obtained by other means) we should run the
risk of bringing on twenty disorders.

Drunkenness is certainly a disease, for it has all the requisites to
constitute a disease, and is far distant from a state of health. For if health
be the free and regular discharge of the functions of the body and mind, and
sickness a weak and imperfect discharge of those functions; then ebriety may
properly be said to be a disease or sickness; it having the symptoms of an
acute disease; for, during the time of drunkenness and some time after, few of
the faculties perform their office righly.

If we examine the intellectual faculties, we shall find the reason gone, the
memory lost or bewildered, and the will strangely perverted.

If we look into the sensitive faculties they are also disordered; their
functions impeded, or very defectively performed. The eyes do not see well, the
ears hear well, nor the palate relish, etc. The speech falters and is
imperfect; the stomach throws up its contents, or nauseates; the legs fail, and
the whole man is out of order.

Now, according to these symptoms in other diseases, we should judge the
patient not likely to live, or we should deem his recovery very difficult.
Surely then drunkenness, for the time it lasts, must be a very great disease.
But because it does not in general prove mortal, or continue long, it is
thought little or nothing of, and is considered as a trival matter, that will
cure itself.

But it may be asked, why drunkenness is not usually mortal, since the same
symptoms in other diseases would be accounted so?

To this we answer; all the hopes we have that a drunken man should live; is
first, because common experience shows that drunkenness is not mortal;
secondly, from the nature of the cause, (strong drink) which though it rage and
strangely discompose the man for a time, yet it lasts not long, nor is it
commonly mortal. The inebriating spirits of the liquor, flowing in so fast and
joining with the natural spirits of the man, occasions a tide, so high as to
overflow all the banks and bounds of order; but these adventitious spirits are
so amicable and friendly to our bodies, in their own nature, as not to be
equally deadly injurious, with that which is not so familiar. Besides, their
being so very volatile, light, and active nature, much sooner recovers herself,
than if the morbific matter were more solid, ponderous, and fixed. And, further,

Those bad symptoms in other diseases are more to be feared, because they
depend, perhaps, upon malignant causes; such as, by time, may be rooted in the
constitution, or from the defection of some principal part; but the storm
arising from drunkenness, as it is suddenly raised, so commonly it soon abates.

But though drunkenness be not mortal, nor the danger, perhaps, great for the
present; yet drunken bouts frequently repeated, their relicts will accumulate,
weaken nature, and lay the foundation of many chronic diseases. Nor can it be
expected otherwise; so that we may justly conclude, from the manifest irregular
actions which appear to us externally, that the internal functions and their
motions are strangely disordered: for outward madness proceeds from inward
impulses and disordered motions of the faculties; which general disturbance
must of course overturn the economy of nature, and consequently ruin the whole
system.

The ill effects arising from intoxication, are a changing of the natural tone
of the stomach, a destruction of its digestive powers, and degeneration of the
nutritive part of our food. Common experience tells us, that, after a drunken
debauch, the stomach loses its appetite, and readiness of digestion, and, of
course, nausea, belching, and thirst ensue.

Great drinkers generally acquire an unwholesome corpulency of body, or a lean
confumptive constitution; few of them escape. So great a dependence is there
upon the stomach, that other parts cannot perform their duty, if this leading
principal part be perverted and debauched.

Now that different habits of body should arise from the same cause, is owing
to the different disposition of parts: for in some persons, although the
stomach be vitiated, yet the strength of the subsequent digestions is so great,
from the vigor of those parts destined to such offices, that they act
strenously, though the matter on which they act be transmitted to them
imperfect and degenerate, and do therefore keep the body plump and full,
although the juices be foul and of a depraved nature.

Others, on the contrary; whose parts are not so strong, lose the benefit of
nutrition, and fall away. Hence it is that by excessive drinking one man shall
puff up, fill, and grow dropsical; while another pines away, and becomes
consumptive.

A third injury, and a common one arising from intemperate drinking, is a
weakness of the nerves, brought on by disorderly motions of the animal spirits.
Thus we see the inconveniences and mischiefs attendant upon intemperance.

Drinking together is the pledge of friendship, and to be made drunk is the
characteristic of a generous and hearty entertainment: for, most commonly,
drinking concludes the feast. When nature has been tempted with varieties, and
perhaps overcharged with them; the next folly is to disturb and inebriate the
spirits, vitiate the fermentation, and precipitate the food out of the stomach
by a flood of liquor, before digestion be finished; that if you have escaped a
surfeit by eating, you shall not go away without a mischief by drinking; thus
your good dinner is spoiled, and instead of being benefited by it, you are
injured, and your friends civility becomes your destruction.

But to the necessary uses of drink appointed by nature, we have invented
others, and made it serve for pleasure, for profit, for wantonness, and
debauchery. So that drink, which should help to support, nourish, and maintain
the strength and vigor of nature, is made an unhappy instrument to abuse and
injure the constitution.

However, as of drinking and drunkenness we have enumerated the evils, let us
not be so partial as to smother the benefits.

Drinking advances the revenue of excise and custom. Makes barley bear a good
price, and helps the farmer to pay his rent. It keeps the physician and
apothecary in employ, and doubtless adds considerably to their business; and is
the support of many a publican. But whether drinking ought to be promoted, to
forward these advantages, with the destruction of health, the shortening of
life, and the debauchery of the people: we leave the reader to judge.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE SMOKING of TOBACCO.
TOBACCO is an herb of great antiquity and reputation among the Indians of
America. It is also called Nicotian; but the name, Tobacco, was given it by the
Spaniards, from an island on which it plentifully grew, and that of Nicotian,
by the French, from one Nicot who first made them acquainted with it. The
Indians call it Petun or Petum, which is indeed the best general name to give
it, deriving it from the Latin word Peto, it being far fetched and much sought
after.

It is an herb, hot and dry in its nature, and, we believe of a destructive or
venomous quality, for being taken any way into the body, it causes such a
disturbance as to occasion violent vomiting and purging, stupefying the senses
and benumbing every part. These effects do not proceed from the temperature of
the herb, but from the very essence of it. Common experience convinces us of
its stupefying quality; for smoking to such as are not used to it, will bring
on a drunen-like lightness of the head and, if persisted in for any length of
time, will occasion a sleepiness of the whole system. Now as the benumbing
effect of a plant generally arises from the coldness of its quality, and as
Tobacco is of a hot nature, it is evident that its sleepy quality is not owing
to its temperature but its very substance. However, there is in the juice of
this herb a cleansing and healing property, and it is very effectual in the
cure of any fresh wound, or old sore.

If it be objected by those who accustom themselves to smoke or chew tobacco,
that they find none of these injurious qualities I have mentioned, let it be
considered, that it is owing to habit, for by a constant use of it, they in
time render themselves insensible to its effects, in the same manner as the
Turks do, with respect to their chewing opium.

The Indians, from whom we learned the manner of smoking, accustomed
themselves to use tobacco, only when they were much fatigued with labor or
exercise, or when the wished to foretell things to come. For the smoke's
lulling them to sleep and creating sundry dreams; on their awaking, they found
themselves refreshed, and from their wandering thoughts during their
insensibility, they fondly conceived, they could prognosticate the event of any
business they took in hand or any matter of importance they wished to know.

Their method of using it was this. Having dried the leaves, they cast them on
the coals, and with a cane received the smoke of them by the mouth and
nostrills till they fell into a drunken trance or sleep, in which they
continued three or four hours, according to the quantity of smoke they had
taken in. After which they found themselves lightened and refreshed, and were
able to return to their labor or exercise as before.

But we smoke tobacco for no such purpose; where one person takes a pipe
medicinally, a hundred do it for pleasure to pass away the time. And as this is
done indiscriminately at all times and by all ages and constitutions, very
often to the injury of health, a few observations upon this subject, can be no
less profitable than pleasing.

Notwithanding there is something injurious in the nature of tobacco, and it
leaves a disagreeable smell and savor behind it; yet it is beneficial to such
persons as are of a cold, moist constitution, and troubled with rheums,
especially in cold, damp weather, and when used moderately; for it will expel
wind, dissolve and dissipate cold humors, raise the spirits, ease pains in the
teeth, swellings of the gums and aches of the joints; and if the smoke be
swallowed, it will speedily cure a surfeit, by causing a sudden evacuation both
upwards and downwards. But to such as are not of a cold and moist constitution,
nor affected with rheums, though it be only taken in at the mouth and immediately
ejected, it is unwholesome, as its heat will greatly affect the brain and
disturb the animal spirits. As to swallowing the smoke, unless medicinally, or
by way of physic, it is absolutely pernicious both to the stomach and the
lungs, for it disturbs digestion and tends to dry up the soft and spungy
substance of the lungs. If any one therefore has habituated himself to this
idle practice, let him instantly leave it off, for though he may find no great
inconveniences arising from it, while he is young and strong, yet he may be
assured, when it is too late to repair the injury, he will discover that it has
ruined his constitution.

There are two or three cautions to be observed by those who accustom
themselves to smoking, which shall conclude the whole; one is, that in drawing
the smoke, they take care that they suck it not suddenly into their throat or
windpipe, as in such case it will much offend and disturb both the lungs and
the mouh of the stomach. Another caution is in returning the smoke from the
mouth, to take care it does not outwardly affect the eyes, for it will do them
a great deal of injury. A third caution, not to go abroad into the air for half
an hour after they quit their pipe, especially if the season be cold or damp,
for the tobacco will open the pores of the head, and the sudden access of the
cold air may do a great deal of mischief. Hence we may see how idle and foolish
such persons act, who walk or travel with a pipe in their mouths. In the last
place, such as are of a dry, lean constitution, should shun the use of tobacco
totally, for its drying nature must be destructive to such habits.

FINIS.
This Day is published by J. BELL, in the Strand. Price 1s. 6d. with a
beautiful Frontispiece, and with very considerable Additions and Improvements,
a new Edidition, being the Seventh, of
TRUSLER's Chronology; or the HISTORIAN's VADE MECUM: wherein every remark the
Occurrence in our own History, from the Descent of Julius Caesar, to the
present time; as well as mort of the principal Events of ancient History, are
accurately and alphabetically recorded, with the Dates affixed.

For there with a full and exact Chronology of the most eminent Men, in all Ages
of the World: with several useful Lists; such as the Kings of every Country,
the Roman Emperors, and when they reigned, the Lord Lieutenants of Ireland, the
Chancellors of Oxford and Cambridge, and all the Bishops, etc etc. for many
Years back.

This Book is printed in such Manner as to lie in a Pecker Book, being designed
to set People right in Conversation, when talking of historical Matters, and is
of such use, that when we are in doubt of the time when any Occurrence
happened, or when any celebrated Person was born, or died, the percise Day may
instantly be found. Though of so small a Size, it contains upwards of five
thousand Articles.

N. B. It answers all the Purposes of Blair's Chronology, a Book that sills for
five Pounds. -- It is done in the Manner of the Bries Chonology, that may be
seen in every common Sheet Almanac.

A Specimen of the Work.
African Company established 1695.

Alderman first appointed 882.

Baronets first created 1611.

Benefices, Church, came in Use, about 500.

Chess, the game of, invented 608 before Christ.

Doctor, the degree of, first given in England 1207.

Episcopacy abolished in Scotland 1638.

N. B. As there are some incorrect, similar publications, please to ask for
Truster's Chronology, that with Dr. Trusier's name on the frontispiece.


