



(...)

OBSERVATIONS UPON Mr. POTT'S General Remarks on FRACTURES, etc.

IN Three LETTERS to a young SURGEON intending to settle in the Country.

With a POSTSCRIPT, Concerning the CURE of COMPOUND DISLOCATIONS; in which the
usual Method of treating WOUNDS of the TENDONS and LIGAMENTS is briefly
considered.

I hope that I shall never hesitate to differ from any, and every authority,
when I think that I have truth on my side, and the good of mankind in my view.
POTT. By THOMAS KIRKLAND, SURGEON.

LONDON, Printed for T. BECKET and P. A. DE HONDT, in the Strand.

MDCCLXX.

[ Price Eighteen-pence. ]

INTRODUCTION.
TO THE STUDENTS in SURGERY.
GENTLEMEN,
I Beg leave to lay before you the following Letters, which contain a short
view of the improvements made in England in the cure of simple fractures,
within these last twenty years; a dissuasive against speedy amputation (except
in some particular cases) in compound fractures; and some practical
observations added to Mr. POTT'S theory on dislocations; though perhaps that
letter which relates to the treatment of compound fractures, and the Postscript
on compound dislocations, may chiefly merit your attention.

I have always heard of speedy amputation in such accidents with astonishment
and concern, especially in these days, in which it is said Surgery had made
such great strides toward perfection; and was glad to see that Mr. BOUCHER See
Mem. Royal. Acad. Surg. vol. ii. Mem. 9.
and Mr. BILGUER Dissert. on the inutility of the amputat. of limbs.
had resolution enough to make a protest against this practice, which appears
to me most frequently precipitate and unnecessary; though upon reading Mr.
BILGUER'S book, I was sorry to observe, that he had taken off from the weight
of his arguments, by indiscriminately and almost totally forbidding this
operation.

However, what Mr. POTT has now said about amputation in compound fractures,
seems to demand a further enquiry into this matter; and the request of the
young Gentleman, to whom these letters where written, has drawn me to undertake
a task, which I should have been glad to have seen done by some other person;
for publicly dissenting from the opinion of men truly eminent in their
profession is extremely disagreeable; and yet it is absolutely necessary, when
there is sufficient ground to think what they have advanced may happen to prove
injurious; for whatever comes from such hands, commonly makes deep impression
upon the minds of those, who have not had experience enough to judge for
themselves. Nor can an ingenuous disquisition be displeasing to a generous mind.

Instead, therefore, of confining to private use, what occurred to me while I
was writing upon this subject, I also offer it to your notice; and if what I
have asserted, upon proper enquiry is found to be true; it will, I hope, be
thought a sufficient apology for this publication.

Lately published, Price 2 s.
A REPLY to Mr. MAXWELL'S Answer to Mr. KIRKLAND'S ESSAY on FEVERS; wherein the
Utility of the Practice of suppressing them, is further exemplified,
vindicated, and enforced.

By THOMAS KIRKLAND, SURGEON.

Printed for T. BECKET and Co. in the Strand.

Of whom may be had, Mr. MAXWELL'S ANSWER. Price 1s. 6d.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
LETTER I.
Ashby, Feb. 1, 1769. Dear SIR,
I TAKE the first opportunity that business will permit, of answering your
Letter, dated the beginning of last month, by informing you, that I have read
Mr. POTT'S book upon Fractures, which contains many valuable directions; and I
know, that putting the muscles, as he advises, in a state of relaxation, both
at the time of reduction, and during the remainder of the cure, will, on many
accounts, be attended with great ease, and great advantage to the patient.

I imagine the rigid discipline of keeping fractured legs in a state of
extension, has not been so steadily adhered to, since Mr. PUGH Treatise of
Midwifery, p. 150.
in 1754, proposed, by the use of his splints, to move the patient from his
back to his side, in order to give him relief in his situation; and wherever
this method was practiced, the leg must frequently be laid on one side with the
knee bent, though, probably, often without being aware of all the advantages
arising from this posture. Ever since the first of May 1758 One Osbourne, of
Donnington on the Heath, at this time broke his thigh somewhere, near
Leicester, and was brought home several miles in a coal wagon, over a very
rough stony road, by which means his thigh was violently shaken, and it
afterward swelled to an enormous size. To reduce this swelling, I applied a
stale beer poultice, and placed the muscles in a state of relaxation, by laying
the thigh on one side, with the knee bent, which answered my expectation; for
the patient soon became very easy, and a complete cure followed, with less
trouble than I had ever before seen; and left no room for me to doubt, which
was the best method of placing simple fractures of the thigh.
, I have constantly laid fractured thighs in the manner Mr. POTT directs, and
believe it has been practiced by others, to whom I pointed out the advantages
of this situation; in particular, it seems impossible to make a good cure,
where the neck of the thigh bone is fractured, without putting the limb in a
state of flexion It must be observed, that Mr. PUGH recommended the placing the
thigh in a state of flexion when fractured at the neck, though he did not lay it
on one side, but in a box contrived for this purpose.
; but by this method I have seen this accident cured without lameness.

The old method of violent extension to reduce fractured limbs, I do believe
has been long disused, because quite unnecessary, and evidently, to every
capacity, injurious; nor do I remember ever seeing it practiced, the bones
being always capable of being laid strait by gentle extension; and Mr. GOOCH
See page 298.
, ten years since, recommended this kind of treatment, in his Cases and Remarks
in Surgery.

I imagine the limb, in simple fractures, has not frequently been disturbed,
after being properly placed, except by those, who use no other than liquid
discutients. We never unwrap or move it, till it will bear moving, unless great
swelling has made the use of poultices necessary; for by applying a cerate,
that, without irritating, is capable of attenuating the obstructed fluids, and
of preserving the vessels in a state of acting upon their contents, we keep the
part in a continual state of perspiration; so that we have nothing to do, but
to see that the limb lies easy, and is not displaced; or, where a moderate
swelling has taken place before this application is used, we gradually draw our
bandage and splints a little tighter as the swelling subsides. Whereas, those
who use embrocations, etc. only, are daily disturbing their bandage, and, after
all, neglect that principal point of preserving the natural elasticity of the
fibers, to which, where the parts are neither much bruised nor swelled, a
proper degree of pressure, by bandage may greatly contribute, by not suffering
the vessels to be distended beyond their natural state; whence less
inflammation, less pain, and consequently less disturbance will follow. This
may be accomplished by the eighteen tail bandage, which has been long used in
simple fractures: and Mr. GOOCH publicly took notice of the advantages that
would arise from its supplying the place of the common roller, in the Cases and
Remarks we have referred to; but it must be observed, that Mr. POTT'S
contrivance, of making the tails fold over each other in an oblique direction,
is a considerable improvement.

Mr. PUGH'S long splints were made to secure both ends of the fractured bone.
Mr. GOOCH Cases and Remarks in Surgery, vol. ii. p. 300.
, some years after, advised the same practice; and both Mr. WATHEN and Mr.
SHARP have since made an improvement, by adapting long splints to the shape of
the leg.

So that you see the practice recommended has been gradually taking place: though
putting the limb in a state of flexion to assist reduction is entirely new,
except that Mr. SHARP, of Mincing-lane, assistant Surgeon of the same Hospital,
has got the start of Mr. POTT, by laying, in November, 1766, a paper before the
Royal Society, wherein he advises,

when a Surgeon is called to a fractured leg, at the place where the accident
happens, let him lay the patient on the injured side, on a flat surface, and
raise the knee of the limb toward the abdomen, bending at the same time the
knee-joint, so as to put the extensor muscles of the foot (which are the
strongest) into a state of relaxation. He will then be enabled to replace the
ends of the fractured bones, and restore them to their proper situation,
without the customary strong extension of the lim, which is troublesome to the
Surgeon, painful to the patient, and apt to bring on tension, spasms, and
inflammation of the stretched muscles.

The fracture being reduced, and the patient laid on a bed, upon which there is
a mattress; the proper remedies, with the many tail bandage, which has been
used many years in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, and his long splints are
applied; the patient is kept on his side, with the broken leg undermost, the
knee bent, and the thigh drawn up, instead of laying him on his back, with the
injured limb extended. -- These splints (he says) were first applied, with
great success, in an oblique fracture of the Tibia (which could not be kept in
a proper situation by the usual methods) and afterward as happily in a
dislocation of the lower extremity of the same bone, accompanied with a
fracture of the Fibula. In this latter case it is often difficult to reduce the
dislocation, even with a strong extension, and more so to retain the bones in
their proper situation, whilst the limb is laid in the usual extended posture,
both which difficulties are absolutely avoided by the means above described.

-- Nevertheless, in justice to Mr. POTT, it must be observed, that he is the
first writer who has scientifically proved, that putting the muscles in a state
of relaxation, and non-resistance, is the most proper method both of reducing
and curing fractures; and he has further demonstrably shown, that this part of
Surgery, as well as the rest, can only be regularly practiced by those who
understand the structure and use of the several parts of the body:
notwithstanding many bonesetters have acquired reputation by pretending to have
cured fractured limbs, which were never broken.

I shall take the first opportunity of resuming this subject; and the next
Letter I send you, may, perhaps, be of a more interesting nature.

I am, etc.

LETTER II.
Feb. 20, 1769. Dear SIR,
NOtwithstanding I so much approve of the directions Mr. POTT has given about
treating simple fractures, and pay the greatest deference to his opinion, yet I
think what he has said about the necessity of immediate amputation in very bad
compound fractures, is too general; for though the practice he recommends may be
right in the Hospital, to which he is Surgeon, it does not follow, that the
same steps should be taken in the situation, in which you intend to place
yourself.

Indeed, if amputation is to take place whenever the probable chance of
destruction, from the nature and circumstances of the accident, is greater than
it would be from this operation, every limb must be cut off, where the bones
are shattered, and the muscles considerably torn, as I Imagine, in general, in
sound habits amputation would be attended with much less trouble and more
absolute certainty of recovery, than even a compound fracture, where the bone
has made its way out in such a manner, as to give free admission to the air,
without causing any violent laceration of the muscles. And yet fractures, thus
circumstanced, so frequently admit of cure, as to justify every attempt to
preserve the limb. Nor can I think, in private practice, the consideration of
amputation (where it is not fully evident, that the limb cannot hereafter be
useful) often requires immediate determination; that a minute's delay will,
many times, be to the patient's disadvantage; or that a small space of time
will frequently make all the difference between probable safety and fatality;
if, according to Mr. POTT, immediate amputation is only to prevent gangrene, or
a large suppuration, with formation and lodgment of matter; for gangrenes
following injuries must be either local, from the violence of the injury, or
succeeding inflammation, or they must arise from a bad habit of body, or both
causes joined.

If a gangrene is only local, we need not be precipitate in our determination;
because, by proper management, it will certainly stop, when it comes to the
parts which are not injured. If it is likely to arise from a bad habit of body,
amputation will not prevent it, as the wound following the operation will most
likely mortify; for in a gangrenous disposition of the fluids, this disease as
frequently manifests itself in simple, as in more complex wounds; and surely
there are other methods to remedy large suppuration or lodgement of matter; or
at least we ought not to amputate, till we see the discharge is greater than
the patient can bear. So that you see, there will always be time for
deliberation; whence we shall act with a certaintly that cannot be known,
except in particular cases, when we are first called to the patient, and if
necessary we shall have opportunities of performing the operation, before he
becomes incapable of undergoing its consequences.

But Mr. POTT is of a very different opinion; he says,

when gangrene and mortification are the mere consequence of the time of, or by
the fracture, it generally makes its appearance very eaerly; in which case
also, its progress is generally too rapid for art to check. For these reasons,
when the mischief seems to be of such a nature, as that gangrene and
mortification are most likely to ensue, no time can be spared, and the
impending mischief must either be submitted to, or prevented by early
amputation. I have already said, that a very few hours make all the difference
between probable safety and destruction. If we wait till the disease has taken
possession of the limb, even in the smallest degree, the operation will answer
no purpose, but that of accelerating the patient's death. If we wait for an
apparent alteration in the part, we shall have waited until all opportunity of
being really serviceable is past. The disease takes possession of the cellular
membrane surrounding the large blood vessels and nerves, some time before it
makes any appearance in the integuments, and will always be found to extend
much higher in the former, than its appearance in the latter seems to indicate.
I have more than once seen the experiment made of amputating, after a gangrene
has begun, but I never saw it succeed; it has always hastened the patient's
destruction.

I would therefore advise, that such attempt should never be made; but the
first opportunity having been neglected, or not embraced, all the power of the
chirurgical art is to be employed in assisting nature to separate the diseased
part from the sound; an attempt which, now and then, under partiuclar
circumstances, has proved successful, but is so rarely so, as not to be much
depended upon.

If the parts are so bruised and torn, that the circulation through them is
rendered impracticable; or if the gangrene is the immediate effect of such
mischief; the consequence of omitting amputation, and of attempting to save the
limb, is, as I have already observed, most frequently very early destruction:
But if the gangrenous mischief be not merely and immediately the effect of the
wounded state of the parts, but of high inflammation, badness of general habit,
improper disposition of the limb, etc. it is sometimes in our power so to
alleviate, correct, and alter these causes, as to obtain a truce with the
disease, and a separation of the unsound parts from the sound.

Now, I have not any doubt, but, in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, what is here
said about the rapidity and untractableness of mortifications, arising merely
from injury done to the limb, is exactly true; for I can readily conceive, in
this situation, local, will often be converted into the most malignant
spreading gangrenes, in opposition to the utmost care and good management.
Otherwise it has always been thought, that gangrenes from a bad habit of body
are more difficult of cure, than those which arise from the wounded state of
the parts; for from the days of HIPPOCRATES, down to RUSHWORTH, gangrenes, from
a bad habit of body, were always, by the ablest Surgeons, deemed to be
incurable; whereas instances abound of mortifications from the violence of the
injury alone being cured by amputation The success which attended amputation in
local gangrenes inclining to spread, probably for want of proper distinction,
brought it indiscriminately into use in spreading gangrenes arising from a
diseased habit; where it would always prove insufficient to answer any good
end. And though we do not recommend amputation in any kind of gangrene, will it
is stopped; yet, from this state of the matter, we see the reason why it has,
in this case, both been advised and rejected.
, cauterization, caustics, etc. and though since the use of the bark in this
disease has been known, we can often cure gangrenes arising from an internal
cause, yet in the country, I have constantly found, that those, which arise
simply from the injury, are with more certainty relieved.

Perhaps there is not any thing which contributes more to a true method of
treating mortifications, than making a proper distinction betwixt one
mortification and another; and my practice several years ago led me to discover
the difference in them already mentioned; which distinctions have ever since
been of great use to me in the management of this disorder: But as I cannot
find, that what I said about this matter, in my treatise of Gangrenes, is
attended to, I shall here describe separately the symptoms accompanying a
mortification, arising from a gangrenous disposition of the juices; and a local
mortification, when merely the consequence of external injury.

When a mortification in compound fractures arises from a gangrenous
disposition of the juices; soon after the injury is received, whether a large
wound is made by external violence, or a small wound by protrusion of the
broken bone, the lymph, which stagnates about the wound, immediately inflames
and corrodes the vessels which contain it; when air bubbles in the membrana
adiposa, and other membranes, are instantly formed; which air bubbles, by
increasing the inflammation, are increased, and extended immediately, upon the
smallest degree of obstruction taking place, all over the limb, etc. an
Emphysema often first discovering the tragedy that is acting under the skin,
not yet apparently diseased. A fever at this time frequently comes on,
accompanied with a delirium, great dejection of spirits, and often a particular
wildness in the looks; the pulse is either quick, low, weak, and fluttering, or
quick, unequal, and hard, and the scene is frequently closed with a rapidity
that will not admit of assistance.

If an incision is made into the affected part, when the air bubbles are first
formed, it is sensible, and blood is discharged from the arteries in a florid
state, as free as usual; the membrana adiposa is of a darkish yellow color,
and the muscles only appear browner than common. Afterward the skin becomes
inflated, and the muscles, not yet having lost their shape, frequently force
themselves out immediately upon making an incision, with a large discharge of
wind, and a quantity of frothy matter; the blood in the vessels is now turned
to a black, coagulated mass, the membrana adiposa and the membranes in the
interstices of the muscles and fibers, and the muscles themselves putrify; and
lastly, the skin also becomes livid, and putrid; from all which it seems
evident, that a gangrene brings on a sphacelus, while the blood is yet
circulating in the vessels.

On the contrary, when the mortification arises simply from injury done to the
limb, it is not preceded by a gangrene, but comes on in consequence of an
absolute stagnation of the blood and juices alone; and accordingly the skin and
all the injured parts become dead and putrid at the same time, without any
previous Emphysema A mortification, arising from a weakness and deficiency of
native heat, comes on in the same manner, only more gradual, with the same
appearances; and should a compound fracture happen to a person in years, in a
weak state of health, this kind of mortification may seize him; but the state
of the patient will discover the nature of his disease.
. If an incision is early made, the part is insensible; no other than
extravasated blood is discharged; nor do I ever remember seeing a mortification
arise from this cause, except in gunshot wounds, without the skin suffering
equally with the subjacent parts; for if the muscles are only lacerated by the
ends of the broken bone, suppuration, instead of mortification, as in other
lacerated wounds, is always the common consequence, if no other cause
interferes; because the circulation, except in the divided parts, is not
entirely interrupted.

In this kind of mortification, the countenance continues serene; nor does any
other fever supervene, but such as is common to contused wounds; and unless the
affected part is very near the body, the disease slowly extends itself (not by
air bubbles taking possession of the cellular membrane surrounding the large
blood vessels and nerves, some times before it makes its appearance in the
integuments, as when it arises from a bad habit of body, but) by the acrid
fluids corroding the neighboring parts, in the manner of a caustic, till
matter enough is absorbed to contaminate, unless prevented, the whole mass of
blood. But so far as I can judge about this matter, a stop may always be put to
a local sphacelus; for I have never seen a mortification arising merely from
the injury done to the part, which did not give way to proper management. The
same kind of success probably induced Mr. GOOCH, after forty years experience,
to say, that a mortification, attending a compound fracture, should not alarm
the Surgeon to a hasty determination of the loss of the limb; and I am
apprehensive, you will often commit mistakes, greatly injurious to your
patient, if you suppose every local mortification as fatal as those in the
Hospitals.

However, the chief reason which induces me to differ in opinion from Mr. POTT,
is the success of the country Surgeons; who, unless the parts are so destroyed
as to be evidently irrecoverable, seldom amputate, and as seldom fail in their
attempts to cure. From the best information I can procure, I do believe the
country Practitioners, who have been really bred Surgeons, do not take off more
than one limb in twenty, which has received a compound fracture; nor do they,
upon an average, lose more than one in ten of those they attempt to cure
without amputation. And surely, if matter of fact is of any consequence, though
Mr. BILGUER is far from having proved the inutility of amputation; yet he
certainly has given proof enough to show, that immediate amputation is not
often necessary.

These circumstances may seem to call in question the judgment of Mr. POTT, in
so strenuously recommending immediate amputation; but their success in the
Hospital, I dare say, fully justifies all he has said; for I do verily believe,
in very bad compound fractures, their attempts to preserve limbs have most
frequently been frustrated by the death of the patients, and that the escapes
are much too rare to be made precedents. It therefore is certainly from a
principle of humanity, that he recommends a remedy, from which, in his
situation, it has been found, that the chance of death is by no means equal to
that arising from such kind of fracture; which leads us to examine, how it
comes to pass, that the country Surgeons are more successful in the cure of
compound fractures, than those Gentlemen who have the care of great and crowded
Hospitals.

For this purpose, it will be necessary to enquire, what is the immediate cause
of death in compound fractures; and, if we except a loss of blood from the
principal arteries beihg divided, (which, I believe, is very seldom fatal,) it
will probably appear owing to a putrid state of the fluids; for this is
manifestly the case, when death is brought on by a gangrene, arising from a bad
habit of body; and when, by a mortification, brought on simply by injury done
to the parts, the patient is chiefly destroyed by an absorption of putrid
matter. If he perishes by a putrid fever, it is also inconsequence of an
absorption of putrid blood, or putrid matter arising from bruised flesh; if, by
a colliquative fever, the putrid matter which is absorbed, being less active,
produces its effects more slowly. But it sometimes gives rise to internal
abscesses, always weakens the fibers, and destroys the crasis of the blood;
whence the discharge from the sore, and other evacuations, become too great,
and the patient is exhausted.

It is no wonder, then, that rapid mortifications, and great discharges of
matter, should frustrate their attempts to cure bad compound fractures in a
large Hospital, in the midst of a great and populous city, where the air the
patient breathes, notwithstanding the greatest care, combines with the cause of
these disorders in his destruction; for it is well known, where a great number
of people breathe constantly in the same room, the air is not only destitute of
its vivifying spirit, so necessary for the preservation of life, but it really
becomes putrid from being confined, and repeatedly inspired, and from being
loaded with the putrid exhalations arising from mortifications, different kinds
of sores, diseased bodies, etc. etc. etc. And perhaps, too, the general methods
used here, may contribute to the dispatch of many of these unfortunate people;
for porters, and those who have been used to drink plentifully of drams, beer,
and the like, will sink even under the full diet of the Hospital, and die for
want of some indulgence in these bad habits, which are now, from custom, become
necessary assistants in supporting the strength of the body; so that the
Gentlemen of the Hospital labor under the greatest disadvantages, and we may
wonder, that any recover, rather than that most die. Whereas, in the country,
the patient has every possible advantage from purity of air: nor are we tied
down to set rules; but from learning the former manner, in which the patient
has lived, we supply him properly with those things to which he has been
accustomed; and I have repeatedly seen the most salutary effects follow a due
allowance of ale, wine, or brandy; where a few days low diet has brought on
want of sleep, delirium, loss of appetite, and an ill state of the wound.

Perhaps it may be worth while to enquire, too, whether free and frequent
bleeding, to prevent or remove inflammation in every compound fracture, may not
sometimes hasten the dissolution of the patient; for, notwithstanding it may
seem proper during the state of inflammation, yet by thinning the blood,
emptying the vessels, and reducing the strength, a greatel absorption of matter
follows after the inflammation is gone off, and produces more violent effects.

I have constantly observed, whenever the patient has lost much blood at the
time of the accident, or whenever I have been called where there has been a
free use of the lancet, that colliquative sweats, looseness, and a greater
discharge from the ulcer is sooner the consequence of the absorption of matter,
and with much more violence, than when the patient was less reduced; and it is
very probable, if these people had lived upon spare diet, and breathed the air
of an hospital, their complaints had still been aggravated, till death had been
the consequence.

I well remember, that the Gentleman I served my apprenticeship with, very
seldom bled in compound fractures; and, what may seem strange to those, who are
fond of bleeding, it was impossible for any man living to have better success;
and many accidents of this kind fell under our care. Nor was this treatment
confined to his practice alone; for, upon enquiring, I have been informed by
others of long experience, who have also had remarkable good success in the
cure of these accidents, that, like him, they always hastened the digestion of
the wound without much bleeding.

For my own part, I have always been cautious in reducing the patient's
strength; yet in strong plethoric habits, where much blood has not been lost at
the time of the accident, especially if heated by liquor, which is not
infrequent, I commonly take blood away, to prevent great inflammation, etc.
But, on the other hand, where the haemorrhage has been considerable, or where
the patient is rather of a weak constitution, I defer the operation, and only
afterward bleed, if the symptoms of inflammation peremptorily demand this
evacuation: But this rarely or never happens; and I have seldom found the
tumor, pain, and inflammation or fever, rise so high, as to make repeated
bleeding necessary, if proper care has been taken of the limb; not only by
placing it in a proper position, and then leaving nature to accomplish her own
work; but by using such applications, as are capable of giving her assistance.
And even where improper applications have been used, or the injury for some
hours entirely neglected, etc. so that great tumor and inflammation have come
on, even till blisters have arisen upon the part, yet so much bleeding is not
here necessary, as theory may lead us to think; for the discharge from these
blisters, when properly promoted, assists in taking off the tension by
unloading the lymphatic vessels; and if to the topical remedies, moderate
bleeding, antiphlogistic sudorifics, and medicines which purge, are joined, the
tumor commonly declines in a few days; for I find, when these symptoms arise
from simple inflammation, they are not so formidable, as their appearance might
lead us to think. Repeated bleeding, in these cases, is only required to
prevent an increase of inflammation, by lessening the impulse of the blood
against the obstructed vessels, when too violent, for which purpose the loss of
a moderate quantity is sufficient; and if you will have a little patience, the
discharge from the sore will most effectually remove every disagreeable
symptom; for wherever the obstructed fluids can be outwardly discharged, it
makes a material difference in the treatment from those inflammations where no
evacuation can be made from the affected part.

There is not any doubt, but antiphlogistic medicines, a spare, cooling diet,
and an open belly, are, in general, proper, while the limb is in a state of
inflammation; but where this treatment has been carried much farther, I do
think, with Mr. POTT, that it has not unfrequently been the cause of the loss
both of limbs and lives. We therefore do not wait till the appetite begins to
fail, and the patient sweats and purges without assignable cause, or in
consequence of a large discharge of matter from the limb, before we alter our
proceedings; for when things are come to this pass, it may often be impossible
to find remedies sufficient to cure the disease. These symptoms, therefore,
must be guarded against, rather than suffered to take place; for which purpose,
as soon as digestion appears, and the pulse becomes quieter, the bark should
immediately be given, which may be done with the utmost safety, and a more
generous diet gradually allowed, as the appetite returns; for though excess
should be carefully avoided, yet entirely altering the way of living of the
patient, certainly leads to destruction; and I believe the best way of treating
him, is only to abridge him a little of his usual diet, when it has been of
that kind which has a tendency to inflame, or greatly enrich the blood,
remembering the aphorism of HIPPOCRATES, that a slender and strict diet is, in
lingering diseases, always dangerous. So much for the general method of
treating the patient; now let us more particularly consider the injured limb.

What Mr. POTT says about the reduction of the limb, carries conviction along
with it; but much of your future good success depends upon removing loosened,
and detached, or sharp pointed bones, extraneous bodies, etc. at the first
dressing, by the practice of freely dilating the wound where it is too small
for this purpose; by which means, you reduce the wound nearer to a simple
state, and not only prevent irritation, pain, and their consequences; but
render future probing and examining into the sore unnecessary; and thus avoid
many inconveniences that might arise from that indiscreet practice.

This operation should always be done without violence; but I am fearful you
will scarce always be able to remove loosened or sharp pointed bones, which
ought to be taken away, without giving pain; but the patient will suffer much
less, if they are removed just after the accident has happened, while the parts
are rather insensible, than after inflammation has taken place. Indeed it
appears to me, that we should not, if it can be done without great violence, or
lacerating any large blood vessel, omit removing, at the first dressing,
whatever may cause irritation; for I have constantly found, when these, along
with the coagulated blood, are instantly taken away, the patient always
recovers with much more ease both to himself and his Surgeon.

But though what is said about the reduction of the leg appears to be perfectly
right; yet there are some other things which require consideration; for if the
wound happens to be on the out, or under side, must not the leg be moved every
dressing? -- This circumstance has escaped Mr. POTT'S notice; but Mr. SHARP New
method of treating fractured legs.
says, the leg may be supported by a steady hand against the upper splint, and
put into any posture that may be necessary to dress a sore on the fibula, or
under part. But I am very apprehensive, let the hand be ever so steady, this
moving will overbalance all advantages from situation. Again, if the wound
happens to be on the inward or upper side, the matter will lodge till the wound
is full enough to run over; and part being absorbed, produce those evils so
loudly complained of in the hospitals To remedy this inconvenience, I have
lately placed a fractured leg, where the wound was on the upper side, so, that
there was a declivity from the shin to the calf; by which means the matter did
not lodge; for I would not, if possible, give up the advantages arising from
the relaxed state of the muscles.
. On the other hand, if the wound is on the shin, or on the back part of the
leg, the side position is most favorable for the discharge of matter; so that
it may be well worth considering, whether the wound ought not to direct us in
what manner to place the leg. If it should be thought prudent, under some
circumstances, still to place it after reduction in the old posture, the
practice of sawing off the protruding bone must sometimes take place, which
operation is done without much trouble, or any hazard, and always with great
advantage to the patient. Whereas the lodging of matter is always capable of
producing mischievous, and frequently fatal effects, and should be guarded
against, not only by an enlargement of the wound, when too small, but by every
other step that can be taken.

Dry lint is very properly advised, as the best application, where the fracture
is likely to heal by the first intention; for in order to promote a reunion of
the parts, we should avoid every step that usually brings on digestion; and dry
lint, in itself, has no property of promoting digestion. Mr. SHARP says, by
this new position, if the fracture be compound, the wound generally heals by
the first intention, the great impediment (irritation) being prevented; and
there is no doubt but this practice may contribute much to a reunion. But on
the contrary Mr. POTT says, the cure by the first intention is the case of some
of the lucky few. And from what I have seen of this matter, the cure by this
method can only take place, when the bone is simply broken, and comes through the
skin, without causing great laceration; for when the wound is so large as to
give a free admission to the air, suppuration follows. Therefore, when from
this circumstance it appears, that the cure by suppuration must be pursued, the
wound should be dressed with a digestive balsam suited to the degree of
irritability of the patient, instead of dry lint; by which treatment you will
find ease and digestion much sooner procured; for the inflammation will not
rise so high as when dry lint is used Mr. MONRO, to avoid the inconveniences
which attended the application of astringents, etc. usually applied after
operations to suppress the bleeding of the small vessels, judiciously says,
there is occasion for no other application to the wound than the threads of
soft half-worn linen, which the French call charpie, the English lint, and we
caddiss, which is a gentle absorbent, is soft and easy to the wound, and by the
corrupting liquors it imbibes, proves one of the strongest, most mild, and safe
suppuratives. Ed. Med. Ess. vol. iv. p. 267. This doctrine Mr. SAMUEL SHARP
afterward applied to wounds in general, without considering that the encomium
Mr. MONRO bestowed upon dry lint, was to show its preference to the
astringents, which used to hinder digestion, by constringing the mouths of the
small vessels, or that in accidental wounds, it is seldom wanted to suppress
bleeding; and that notwithstanding in the end by collecting the corrupting
liquors it proves a suppurative, yet certainly nature may be better assisted in
promoting digestion; for when dry lint only is applied, the divided vessels
inflame, and the obstruction continues till the confined juices become acrid
enough to give themselves liberty. Whereas, when a mild balsam, of a proper
consistence, is applied, the vessels are preserved in a state capable of giving
way to the impulse of the fluids, less tension will of course follow, and more
ease to the patient. But (reasoning apart,) if dry lint is applied, a week or
more elapses before digestion is complete, during which time, the part remains
hot, swelled, and painful. If a digestive balsam is used, a good digestion
follows in two or three days, and the patient complains of much less soreness
and pain, than when contrary steps have been taken.


; and it is most certainly not only your duty to avoid doing mischief, but also
to assist nature, by removing every thing injurious, and by supplying her with
what is wanting to perform a cure; in which the whole art of Surgery consists.

However, this dressing must be continued no longer than till the tumor and
inflammation are entirely gone, digestion is complete, and the sore becomes
clean; lest too great a discharge should be procured, when dry lint, or lint
dipped in simple tincture of myrrh, may be applied; for though these spirituous
dressings manifestly do injury till the state of inflammation is over; yet
afterward, where the discharge is great, I think they do service, by bracing
up the relaxed fibers.

What Mr. POTT says about relaxing cataplasms, well deserves your attention;
for though great inflammation requires great relaxation, yet by over relaxing
parts, which are not much swelled, the juices stagnate, and abscesses, or large
suppuration, is the consequence: and I make not any doubt, but many have fallen
victims to this practice.

But, on the other hand, I do not think the form of the applications used to
keep off inflammation, where poultices are improper, immaterial: for though some
of the liquid discutients generally applied, are powerfully capable of
attenuating obstructed fluids, yet they are destitute of the other properties,
which are necessary to prevent inflammation; for, as I take it, the topical
remedies, calculated for this intention, should both attenuate obstructed
fluids, and at the same time preserve the vessels in a state capable of acting
upon their contents; whence the circulation and perspiration are carried on
regularly in the neighboring parts about the wound, and great inflammation is
thereby prevented. Whereas, when embrocations alone are used, a stagnation of
the juices does, in a greater or less degree, ensue, from the skin becoming
hard and dry betwixt the times of dressing.

This I do not assert from the nature of things only, but from experience;
having frequently been called to people, where lotions, dry lint, a pledget of
digestive, and the eighteen tail bandage were the only applications that came
in contact with the limb, which I always found remarkably tense and painful;
sometimes the swelling and inflammation were risen to a very great height, and
abscesses, which might have been prevented, were the consequence. It would be
well, therefore, for those who pursue this method of practice, to consider
whether it is not owing to this kind of treatment that they are obliged to have
recourse to large and repeated doses of opium to ease pain; for I do aver, that
we who follow a different method of cure, are seldom or never under any sort of
necessity of having recourse to that remedy. Indeed, if our applications are
not compounded with a view both of attenuating obstructed fluids, and of
preserving the vessels as near their natural state as possible, we fall very
short of the true intentions of cure. And I am very certain, if this
circumstance is duly attended to, and these lacerated wounds, which cannot be
cured by the first intention, are brought speedily to digestion by the method
already recommended, even in bad habits, and where the case is not fortunately
circumstanced, the inflammation will, for the most part, be kept within due
bounds, without hazarding the consequences of losing a great deal of blood by
venesection.

From what I have already said, you see I entirely agree with Mr. POTT, that
perfect quietude is absolutely necessary in the cure of compound fractures; but
we have at the same time shown, when the leg is laid on one side, this
injunction cannot always be complied with; and I imagine, as soon as the
fractured bones acquire some degree of firmness (but not before) the knee-joint
should be gently moved See SHARP'S new Method of treating Fractures, p. 12.
, to prevent that contraction of the tendons of the ham, which might probably
take place, if the knee was suffered to remain bent eight or ten weeks without
stirring.

The chief reason, which has ever induced Surgeons to remove compound
fractures, has been to keep them clean. But to defend the bandage from matter,
and to prevent us from being under any necessity of changing it often, Mr.
GOOCH Cases, p. 102. or second edit. p. 293. vol. i.
recommended the green oil-case cloth to be placed on the outside of the
compresses; to which I have found it necessary to add pieces of sponge, both
above and below the wound, to prevent the matter from running out at each end;
by which means, I have frequently kept the bandage clean enough, six weeks or
two months, without once moving the limb, where the discharge has been
considerable.

JUNKS, you know, have commonly been used in compound fractures, to keep the
limb steady, which purpose they answer very well, when properly made, and
properly applied; nevertheless they cannot be used in the side-position of the
limb; and Mr. POTT, you see, advises the long splints, which supply their
place, and lie very commodiously upon the part in this situation. However, it
is worth considering, whether they are not liable to one of the principal
objections against the use of short splints, in the cure of compound fractures,
which is confining the matter, that ought to be discharged, as they lie flat
upon the leg. The fracture box kept the leg steady; but by pressing up the
sides of the pillow, it often confined the matter; whence I soon laid aside
this piece of trumpery, and always succeeded with the most ease, when my
apparatus was most simple. Indeed there is simplicity in these long splints,
and when the wound is conveniently situated for the purpose, they may often be
very useful, if bolsters to prevent their pressing upon the sore are at the
same time applied. I have often used long splints toward the close of the
cure, in compound fractures, with advantage; and, I imagine, Mr. POTT can only
mean to recommend them under particular circumstances; for you will certainly
meet with accidents of this sort, in which splints at first, either long or
short, would be improper, on account of the violence of the injury.

Strengthening the injured limb, when it is become soft and flabby, by relaxing
cataplasms, is another material circumstance: But this, I am apprehensive,
cannot be well effected by the application of corroborating medicines alone;
and I shall therefore just observe, that amongst all the remedies, no one can
contribute more to the cure of compound fractures, than a due degree of
pressure by the eighteen tail bandage properly timed. And, I imagine, it can
only be owing to a general disuse in the hospitals, that so many Surgeons have
not attended to the advantages arising from this valuable branch of Surgery. We
were before told by Mr. SHARP Pref. to Crit. Enquiry.
, that the chief purpose of bandage was to maintain the due situation of a
dressing, or to make a compress on particular parts; and I cannot find that Mr.
POTT uses it in fractures for any other purpose, than keeping the dressings in
their proper place; and yet, where a compound fracture will admit of cure by
the first intention, it certainly promotes a reunion; and in every case, where
it can first be applied, it prevents inflammation and pain, and forwards a
regular suppuration; for, if by the assistance of a due degree of pressure, a
distension of the vessels and fibers is not suffered to take place, nor their
sides drawn nearer together than usual, the nerves will be put less upon the
stretch, the vessels will be less loaded, and more capable of acting upon their
contents; of course the circulation will be more regular, and the fluids will
be transmitted properly into the sore.

But these advantages cannot be expected where the parts are much bruised or
lacerated, or where inflammation has already taken place, because the vessels
are become impervious. And, pressure, where the fluids are incapable of moving,
must be injurious, by confirming the obstruction, and by increasing pain, where
sensation, from the nerves being in a state of tension, is become acute.

Nevertheless, when in consequence of the discharge, and by the assistance of
proper remedies, the obstruction and inflammation are removed, no application
is so capable, as bandage, of preventing a large discharge, by strengthening
the vessels and fibers, and restoring them to their pristine state. And
notwithstanding sinus's and abscesses are freely opened, and counter openings
made, which I would always recommend, matter will lodge, if bandage is not
applied, and be productive of much mischief; and indeed, when the use of this
assistant is omitted, sinus's will often be formed, which it is impossible to
open with any great advantage; for where the eighteen tail bandage, after being
sprinkled with an embrocation, had only been applied, with a view to keep on
the dressings, or to make a compress on a particular part; I have found, at the
end of ten or twelve weeks, or sometimes longer, sinus's penetrating deep
amongst the muscles, and running, in different directions, almost all over the
limb. Besides, the fleshy fibers had more the appearance of a jelly, than
flesh; and the patients were sinking under a hectic fever, and a deluge of
matter, which I take to be owing to the height of bad Surgery; because when the
dressings and bandage have been from time to time properly adapted, and the
patient's strength preserved from the beginning, this violent relaxation never
happens, fewer sinus's are formed, and the discharge is seldom or never Perhaps
this assertion may seem strange to those, who have had the mortification of
seeing their patients die, or of being obliged to amputate in consequence of a
great discharge: But I have never yet seen the discharge in compound fractures
productive of either of these consequences; and I have been also assured by
several Surgeons of long experience, that they have never lost a patient, or
taken off a limb on this account.
so great as to exhaust the patient, who is almost always out of danger, by
proper management, in ten or twelve weeks time. Nor do I believe there ever was
a compound fracture which would not bear pressure with advantage, if properly
managed, and properly timed; and I am fully persuaded, a clever recovery in a
bad case, without it, must be merely accidental. But, on the other hand, no
remedy is capable of doing more mischief, if injudiciously used; for if the
pressure is not made with the nicest judgment, it retards digestion, confines
matter, brings on inflammation, with pain, and all their consequences. It can,
therefore, only be made with advantage by those, who are become handy in this
business by use, and are capable of distinguishing, from the state of the
affected part, when pressure, and what degree, is necessary; for it is as much
impossible to apply it with propriety, from description, as to play upon the
HARPSICHORD without ever having learnt upon that instrument.

Upon the whole, so far as I can judge of this matter, immediate amputation in
compound fractures ought not to take place, where the joints have not suffered
violently by the injury, unless the muscles and tendons are so crushed, or
otherways destroyed, as to make putrefaction not a probable, but an inevitable
consequence: And it evidently appears from the anatomy of the part, that when
the mortified flesh, etc. is digested off, the limb cannot be made useful; and
even when the joints have received considerable injury, the necessity of
immediate amputation will depend upon particular circumstances; for if only
part of the ligaments are torn, and the fractured head of the bone can be taken
away, the patient may often be cured, so as to have a tolerable good limb: But
if the greatest part of the ligaments connecting the joint are spoiled, there
cannot be any hopes of making a good cure; and, in such cases, by deferring
amputation, we lose time, omit a good opportunity of performing it, while the
parts are uninflamed, and suffer the patient to undergo unnecessary pain from
the subsequent inflammation, without any prospect of future advantage Mr. FAURE
is of a different opinion, which see, with the arguments of Mr. BOUCHER. NEAL'S
Translat. Mem. Royal Academy of Surgery, vol. iii. p. 158.
.

But my connections with those of my profession have not only led me to know
the success of many Surgeons, whose situation affords them only common
accidents; but also of several, who, as well as myself, have had the care of
the workmen in Collieries, Lime-kilns, Lead-mines, and the like, where the most
violent injuries of this kind frequently happen. In these places, the bones
are, for the most part, not only broken into many pieces, and their
extremities, now and then, separated, so as to come away; but they are also
often forced into the ground, the principal arteries sometimes divided, and the
muscles, etc. are frequently lacerated, and crushed with immense weights, even
so much, that coal sleck, etc. in great quantities, is driven into the very
substance of the flesh, so as to render the accident as formidable as possible;
and yet, it is a notorious fact, that, where the part is not absolutely
destroyed, these desperate cases seldom fail of being cured, without the loss
of the limb: From all which I am induced to think, that notwithstanding speedy
amputation may be necessary and right in great hospitals, yet this ought to be
no precedent for country practice, which certainly points out, that much more
may be expected from the resources of nature, than some imagine; because the
escapes with life and limb are not very rare, but most frequently happen. You
see Mr. GOOCH, who has wrote well on this subject, is not in general for speedy
amputation; and I am certain you will have much more satisfaction, and acquire
more reputation by the discerning part of mankind, in preserving a limb, than
in taking it off.

I know, indeed, Operations often make a great noise, and prejudice people in
favor of the abilities of the Operator; and some, with very little knowledge
in Surgery, have raised themselves great reputation by this mechanical part of
the profession, which requires no great genius, as it depends only upon a
knowledge of anatomy, and a practical dexterity of the hand: For do not young
Surgeons, of no great abilities, after some trials upon dead bodies, perform
operations with the greatest success? And you see, the nicest operations are
daily performed by illiterate men upon brute animals, with a dexterity that
cannot be excelled by those, who unthinkingly dress themselves in a most
formidable habit, when they perform operations on the human subject. And yet
there have been men weak enough to lessen themselves, and their profession, in
thinking, that a dextrous application of the knife characterizes a good Surgeon.

Nevertheless, notwithstanding this part of practice is so readily acquired, it
has of late years been more attended to by the student, and cultivated with
more assiduity, than the treatment of Fractures, Luxations, Wounds, Abscesses,
Ulcers, etc. Mr. POTT, in the Preface to his Treatise on the Fistula
Lachrymalis, observes, That the operative part of Surgery is the great, and
almost only object, which they who come to the Hospital have in view, because
it is what they have seen the least of. And it may be added, that above half
the young fellows that have attended during Mr. POTT'S time, were bred
Apothecaries, and had seen little or nothing of Surgery, when they arrived in
London. So that it is easy to imagine, what will be the consequence of advising
speedy amputation to these Gentlemen, who are not conversant with any other
method of cure. It is true, indeed, Mr. POTT has, in the same place, very
properly recommended greater attention to the common practice of Surgery; and
he has done much, in his several writings, toward bringing this part of the
art to perfection: But, if I am well informed, operations still engross chiefly
the minds of many of those, who attend the Hospital for improvement.
; and an able writer upon Operations, some years since, overlooked these
articles, because he thought the method of treating them was settled. The book
Mr. POTT has now wrote, shows there was still room for improvement in the cure
of fractures, and dislocations; and a little reflection would have discovered,
that the treatment of Ulcers was not arrived at its ne plus ultra: And indeed,
I am fearful the study of that part of Surgery, which is most common, has been
neglected, since the spirit of performing capital operations has so much taken
place.

These things I mention to you, with an intent to stimulate you to apply your
mind to the common By the common practice of Surgery, I would be understood to
mean that part which cures without the assistance of the knife, except the
opening of abscesses, sinus's, and the like.
practice of Surgery; and I make not any doubt, if this part of the profession
is duly attended to, there will soon be a decrease in the number of capital
operations. And when an operation is performed, you will better know how to
treat the patient; for a true knowledge in the cure of ulcers is required,
wherever there is a solution of continuity, which comes to digestion. And not
only Ulcers, but the cure of Obstruction, Inflammation, and Abscess, etc. will
still admit of improvement. You will here find an ample field for the exercise
of your genius; and an enlarged mind will always have infinite pleasure in
learning from nature, what methods are best to assist her. And the knowledge
you acquire will soon distinguish you from those, whose chief enquiries are
confined to the narrow limits of handling a knife.

Not that I would have you neglect instructing yourself properly about the
manner of performing Operations, it being a very useful, and necessary part of
the art; but when the nature of diseases, and the consequence of wounding
particular parts are understood, so that you know when to cut, and when to let
it alone, this knowledge will easily be attained; for there are few
difficulties that occur in Operations, but what you will be able to surmount,
if you can preserve a calmness and a presence of mind; for which purpose I
would advise you not foolishly to imitate those, who value themselves upon
being quick; for if any accident happens, you will be disconcerted; but go on
without too much haste; nor be unnecessarily slow: and if I can judge from
experience, you will not only always be guarded against any thing that may
happen to frustrate your proceeding, but you will also be less liable to commit
any error that may be injurious; for I am very apprehensive that great
quickness in chirurgical operations, often ends quickly in the death of the
patient. But I am running from my subject; and as nothing but matter of fact
can be depended upon in these cases, shall only add, that I desire you will
inquire amongst the country Surgeons, who have been regularly trained up to
practice, whether I have not farly stated their success in the accidents under
consideration; i. e. whether they do not cure nearly eighteen compound
fractures out of twenty, without amputation; and if it appears, that you have
not been misinformed, I hope you will think I have done right, in pointing out
to you a method, by which the country folks, at least, who have the misfortune
to meet with very bad compound fractures, may, by proper management, end their
days, for the most part, with two legs, instead of one.

I am, and c.

LETTER III.
March 10, 1769. Dear SIR,
NOTHING is of greater use in Surgery, than ascertaining the principles upon
which we are to act, as it leads us out of uncertainty, and directs us to
proceed with every advantage to the patient. What Mr. POTT, therefore, says on
Dislocations, deserves your greatest attention; as it is designedly wrote to
ascertain the principles upon which their reduction depends. An improvement
much wanted, as they seem not hitherto to have been generally understood, or
fully considered, by any writer.

Indeed, it cannot be said, that he is the first who pointed out, that great
extension was wrong, and that the muscles ought to be put into a state of
non-resistance, in order to reduce a dislocated bone, with propriety and ease;
as you will see, if you examine Mr. THOMPSON'S Paper, in the second volume of
the London Medical Observations and Inquiries; but he is the first, who has
considered the non-resistant state of the muscles as a general principle, and
has endeavored to prove, that the difficulty attending the reduction of every
kind of dislocation, is wholly owing to the resistance of the muscles, and
tendons, attached to, and connected with the bones composing the joint. Whereas
Mr. THOMPSON imagines, that one cause of difficulty is from the head of the
bone not being able to get readily back through the opening, which, he thinks, it
always makes in the Capsular Ligament; for, in dissecting the arm of a man, who
had a dislocated shoulder at the time he died, it was found, on the second day
of enquiry, that this ligament was torn off from the neck of the humerus; in
which notion, he has the sanction of PETIT, who forty years ago was of the same
opinion He advises to make the dislocated bone re-enter its cavity by the way
it was forced out, because it leads to the opening in the Sacculus
Ligamentosus, which has been made by the eruption of the head of the bone.
Otherwise, coming to its cavity by a new way, and finding no aperture in the
ligamentary Tunicle, it carries it along with it into its socket, which hinders
the reduction being exact, etc. Des Malad. des Of. p. 46. tom. i. or Med. Obs.
and Inq. vol. ii. See Note to p. 356.
; and from considering the anatomy of the joints, and from experiments made
upon dead bodies, we find the same sentiments since adopted by Dr. HUNTER Med.
Comment. p. 60.
.

This doctrine, you see, Mr. POTT has considered; his arguments about it have
weight; and, so far as I can judge from experience, I believe, if the advice of
GALEN, which has been copied by almost every writer, of returning the
dislocated bone the same way in which it was displaced, is followed, you will,
in recent dislocations, never meet with any obstacle from the Ligament, if care
is taken, that the muscles do not make resistance to the reduction.

If you look back into the writers on Surgery, you will find the best of them
advise, if possible, the practice of reducing dislocated bones by the hand,
without much extension; and where extension is necessary, when it is properly
made, they direct the bone to be conducted into its place in the same manner.
They must mean, when it is not instantly replaced by the muscles upon coming
near to the cavity into which it is to enter: And it will be worth your while
to consider, whether this part of practice should not occasionally be
continued, even when we proceed upon Mr. POTT'S principles.

Mr. Sergeant WISEMAN copied the practice of reducing dislocations of the
thigh, in young patients, of tender constitutions, by laying one hand upon the
thigh, and the other on the leg, and having somewhat extended it toward the
sound leg, the knee must be suddenly forced up toward the belly, and the head
of the femur pressed into its acetabulum and it will knap in. For (he says)
there is no need of so great extension in this kind of luxation, for the most
considerable muscles being upon the stretch, the bowing of the knee as
aforesaid reduces it.

You will readily recollect, that Mr. TRAVIS of Scarborough, about twelve years
ago, reduced a thigh which was dislocated inwards toward the foramen ovale of
the pubis, by fixing his patient upon his back upon a bed, with his heel
against a high raised bedstead, where he had sufficient foot-hold, and the
extension was made by three men, with a towel fixed above the knee upon a
napkin folded and rolled on to prevent the skin from being chafed. The
patient's, right knee was bent so as the leg made about a right angle with the
thigh; and an assistant was placed on his knees upon the floor, holding the
ancle, with directions, on a certain signal, to push the leg outward; by
which, as with a lever, the head of the thigh bone would be twisted inwards and
downwards. Mr. TRAVIS placed himself on the patient's right side at the bed
foot, with the palm of his left hand on the head of the luxated bone, and his
right near the patella. The extension being made gradually and steadily by the
towel-men, until Mr. TRAVIS thought the bone might be moved, the signal was
given to the assistant who held the ancle, which he punctually obeyed; at the
same instant, with a smart jerk, Mr. TRAVIS pushed the head of the bone
downwards and outward, and the patella inwards; and immediately the bone
rushed into its proper place with a snap, that was perceived by all present.

About twenty-eight years ago I saw Mr. HOLBROOKE reduce a dislocated thigh in
a hearty young fellow, about twenty-one or twenty-two years of age, much in the
same manner, except that the extension was made by pulling at the ancle, as
well as at a cloth fixed above the knee. -- A Gentleman, bred up to Surgery,
living in the same town, was first called in; who soon discovered the nature of
the accident; but having declined every part of the profession, except
midwifery, and not having before seen a dislocated thigh, he directly sent for
Mr. HOLBROOKE, in whose absence it fell to my share to attend; but before I set
out, I thought proper to look what had been said about an accident I had never
seen, and had the misfortune to take down TURNER, who seems to have copied from
WISEMAN; but has omitted the material circumstance of making his extension
toward the sound leg, and pushing the knee up in the same direction. When I
came to the patient, the round head of the bone in the groin near to the
foramen ovale, and a cavity where the great trochanter ought to have been, at
once discovered what was the matter; and we therefore set about reducing the
dislocation in the manner Dr. TURNER directs Surgery, vol. ii. p. 343.
: But after repeated attempts without success, we tried whether the strap would
assist, by one pulling on the outside the thigh, while the other pushed upon
the head of the bone; but this did not help us; and seeing we were not likely
to accomplish the work we had undertaken, I dispatched a messenger away for my
master.

Being come, he made the extension in the manner we had already done; but he
placed himself betwixt the patient's legs, with both his hands upon the outside
of the man's knee, and one of his own knees was fixed against the upper part of
the thigh bone; and when he thought the extension was sufficiently made, he at
the same instant (as the patient lay upon a bed rather below him) pushed the
femur downward, and outward, and pulled the knee inward; by which means the
head of the bone went directly, with a considerable snap, into its place: -- So
that in all these cases the reduction was finally accomplished by making a
lever of the thigh bone.

Some years since, a child, about six years of age, was brought into my
Surgery, on account of its having received by a fall, an injury in its hip; and
upon inquiry, I found the upper part of the thigh bone entirely at liberty, and
under the edge of the gluteus muscle. Upon which, I of course set about
examining, whether the head of the bone was dislocated, or broken off at its
neck; for which purpose, I directed (as the child lay upon a woman's lap) the
thigh to be put into a state of flexion, then extended by pulling gently at the
knee, and moved from side to side, keeping my own hand upon the greater
trochanter, which I could plainly perceive; but luckily, at the very first of
our making these motions, while I was pressing upon the bone, it slipped from
under my hand into its place; so that we cured the patient, and learnt the
nature of the accident, both at the same time.

A similar case lately fell under my notice. A lad, about twelve or fourteen
years of age, was thrown from a horse, and some bags of flour fell upon his
hip; from which accident that leg and thigh were rendered useless. The Surgeon,
who was first called, attended him several days; and the hip being swelled from
the bruise, he honestly told the friends of the boy, that he could not tell
with certainty, what was the matter: Upon which I was called in. I first saw
him in bed, and observed, as soon as the bed-cloaths were removed, that the
knee of the injured thigh lay over the middle of the sound thigh, in a loose,
awkward manner; and upon taking hold of the knee, I plainly discovered, that
the upper part of the bone was at liberty under the gluteus muscles; but
whether it was dislocated, or broken, we could not yet tell. We therefore
placed him upon a table, to make our proper inquiries; but in moving the thigh,
as in the last case, I felt the bone slip from under my hand, the hip and thigh
became perfectly right, and the patient from this time began to recover the
complete use of his leg, etc.

Hence it is plain, that a dislocated thigh may most easily be reduced in a
state of flexion; and though these were only young people, yet it is probable,
that those farther advanced in years may be cured in the same manner, by only
making a stronger extension. CELSUS, PAREY, WISEMAN, and many others, reduced
thighs in this state, notwithstanding their extension was made in a strait
line; but unless they took great care to keep down the head of the bone, when
they pushed up the knee, the bone would return to the place from whence it was
drawn, and prevent the reduction; which inconvenience will be avoided, if the
thigh is bent at the time extension is made. May not we, therefore, from these
circumstances, from the cases we have mentioned, and from what Mr. POTT has
said upon this subject, select a practice that will effectually serve our
purpose, whenever the accident immediately under consideration requires our
assistance?

When a thigh is dislocated, inward, or outward, perhaps it will be best to
follow the advice of CELSUS, in laying the patient on one side, so that the
part into which the bone has slipped, be always uppermost, and that from which
it has receded, lowermost; by which means the extension may be made in any
direction you have a mind, and your own invention will point out to you twenty
ways of securing the patient upon a bed, (for a table will be too high,) so
that a proper resistance may be made to the extension.

This being done, the knee bent, and a towel fixed properly above it, you must
place yourself on that side of the thigh, to which the bone is dislocated, with
your knee near to the head of the bone, and both hands on the opposite side of
the knee of the patient, an assistant being fixed at the ancle. The extension
may then gradually be begun, by three or four men, with the thigh rather in a
state of flexion; and when there is reason to think, that the head of the bone
is drawn upon a level with the socket, the extension being steadily continued,
the knee may be bent nearer to the abdomen, and at the same instant, while your
knee pushes the bone toward its place, the ancle must be moved in the same,
but the knee of the patient in a contrary direction; by which means, I imagine,
the bone will, in general, be replaced, provided the extension is sufficiently
made, before we attempt to return it into its socket.

I think it is generally allowed, that dislocations of the thigh rarely happen
otherwise than inward or outward, though writers also talk of its being
dislocated upwards and downwards; but when we call to mind, how seldom this
accident in any way is met with, it will appear, that our assistance may
perhaps never once be required to reduce dislocations of the thigh, thus
circumstanced; and it may be much questioned, whether Surgeons have not copied
this account from one another, without ever once having seen this accident; for
HIPPOCRATES first started the opinion, perhaps, from imagining there was a
possibility of its happening in these different directions: And I see it has
been handed down, by almost every writer, in his very words.

However, if the dislocation upwards or downwards does ever happen, I imagine
you will not be at any great loss about the reduction, if the same plan as we
have just laid down is pursued; except that extension must at first be made
with the thigh in a strait line; and it seems most proper to place the patient,
as PAREY advises HIPPOCRATES advised the patient, in these cases, to be laid
either prone or supine; and most of the writers, except PAREY, have copied him,
from one another, very exactly. But by placing the patient in the side
position, you have not only the advantage of using your knee, but the extension
can be continued, while the thigh is brought into a state of flexion; and the
person at the ancle can assist you much, by pulling backward, or pushing
forward, the bent knee, and turning the ancle as the case requires.
, "on his sound side," and of a convenient height, that the pressure with your
knee may be made in a strait direction.

When the shoulder is dislocated, the head of the bone, you know, often rushes
into its place, when it approaches the cup of the scapula, even when the
extension has been made with the muscles in a state of resistance; and it is
reasonable to believe, that it will more readily happen, when this impediment
is removed, by their being relaxed. Nevertheless, further art will sometimes, I
think, be required, to conduct the bone into its place, even under this
advantage. Mr. THOMPSON, you see, proposes, that the arm should be raised
upwards, and a little inwards, to bring it in a line of direction, centering
between the tendons of the subscapularis, and teres minor muscles; both of
which, and the flap of the capsular ligament, will be relaxed by that means;
the arm is to be held in that position by one hand of the Surgeon; the inferior
angle of the scapula must then be carried backwards toward the spine, and the
acromion depressed downwards by an assistant. These motions will bring the head
of the humerus to the outside of the brim of the glenoide cavity; and the
Surgeon, who has hold of the patient's arm, making a gentle extension upwards,
and passing the thumb or fingers of his other hand into the axilla, and there
pressing upon the head of the humerus, by way of fulcrum, depresses the arm
with a quick motion, in a line of direction, as before mentioned. Thus the
reduction, I apprehend, will most likely take place, by the head slipping over
the flap of the capsular ligament, and between the two tendons into its socket.

I have never tried this method, because, in the space of twenty years, though
I have used nothing but the napkin and ball, I have not, in recent dislocations
of the humerus, been once disappointed in my first attempt to reduce them, when
the head of the bone has lodged in the axilla: though ever since I read Mr.
THOMPSON'S Paper, I have made my extension with the fore arm bent, which is
supported either by the patient himself, or a stander-by. I place the patient
upon a cushion on the floor, and fix him, by proper assistance, that his body
cannot give way to the extension. Having put the arm through a napkin tied
together in the common manner, and betwixt my thighs; I put the napkin over my
neck, and fix a linen or a woollen ball in the middle of the napkin, so that it
cannot move. This ball is three times as large as those commonly used, of
sufficient hardness to make a resistance to the head of the bone, and yet soft
enough to press into the axilla. The processus acromium is left entirely at
liberty, and when three or four men (who, by sitting upon the bare floor, are
rather lower than the patient) have by a towel, tied, with the usual cautions,
above the elbow, drawn the head of the bone forward enough, in a direction that
keeps it about the middle of the axilla; I press the ball in behind it, and by
leaning backwards, instead of forcing the head of the bone against the neck of
the scapula, I push it outward, so as to assist those, who make the extension,
till I find it arrived at the edge of the glenoide cavity, when I direct the
elbow to be brought nearer to the side, and at the same time raise myself more
perpendicular, by which means the head of the humerus raises the processus
acromium a little, and slips up; immediately upon which I push the acromium
down again, if necessary, though it is seldom required. Afterward I move the
arm in all directions, that the long tendon of the biceps, etc. may again
return to their usual place.

You will readily see, from this account, that the arm is drawn rather
downwards; which, according to the opinion of some, is an improper position;
for they say, if the extension is made in an horizontal direction, or
downwards, as the head of the humerus will press upon one or other of the
tendons of the subscapularis or teres minor muscles, if the extension be
forwards or backwards; and if it be in the middle, it will be opposed by the
united force of both tendons, and of the stretched capsular ligament, so as to
render the reduction impracticable without a further laceration.

Indeed, in regard to an horizontal position of the arm, I can easily believe
it improper, when the bone is dislocated downwards; but I assure you; the
method of reduction just mentioned, has always been attended with the greatest
ease both to myself and patient, besides a complete recovery; and believe me,
one grain of matter of fact, to a practical Surgeon, is worth a pound of
reasoning.

I have some few times seen the head of the humerus under the pectoral muscle;
but in making the extension, and moving the arm inward, it slipped into the
axilla, and was then reduced in the common manner. I have oftener seen the head
of the bone dislocated backwards toward the scapula. I remember being called
to a case of this kind in a hard working fellow, betwixt twenty and thirty
years of age, many years ago. After discovering the nature of the accident, I
placed the patient in a chair, and ordered the extension to be made with the
arm in an horizontal posture, which I assisted by pushing with my own hand the
head of the bone toward its place: but though we brought it near to the
glenoide cavity of the scapula, yet these steps alone could not replace it. I
therefore kept my hand fixed upon the head of the bone, that it should not
recede, in which I was assisted by a steady extension at the elbow, which I
directed to be bent, and to be pulled backward at the same instant that the
hand was turned a little upwards; upon which the bone was immediately reduced.
And I have since had the same success, under the same circumstances; but I took
the management of the fore arm to myself, and got an assistant to push at the
head of the bone.

If you call to mind, you will remember that a dislocation of the under jaw is
put to rights by extending the jaw forward, pressing down the posterior part of
it, and at the same time pushing the anterior part upward. The elbow, when
dislocated, is reduced by making an extension, till the fore-arm can be put
into a state of flexion, and then it is easily accomplished, by bearing upon
the lower end of the humerus with one hand, and by taking hold of the wrist,
and bending the elbow with the other: and if it is on either side, the hand of
the patient must be turned inward or outward, at the same instant, as the case
requires. Nearly the same steps are taken with the knee or ancle, when out of
joint, etc. From all which we may conclude, with CELSUS, that whatever be the
species of dislocation the method of reduction is the same.

In dislocations of long standing, we find the head of the bone forms for
itself a new socket See Med. Obs. and Inq. vol. ii. p. 351. Case 2.
; which, with the growing together of the lacerated with the neighboring
parts, in some cases, and the contraction of the tendons, etc. in others, is
probably the reason why they are reduced with difficulty, or that reduction is
impracticable See Dr. HUNTER'S Med. Comment, part i. page 60. Note.
.

The method of reduction Mr. WHITE recommends, of suspending the body by the
arm, seems the most likely to overcome this obstacle: Though myself, and
another Surgeon of much experience, used it without effect, with every other
method we could think of, in an old dislocation, where the os humeri had
slipped backwards toward the scapula. Perhaps the case was incurable; for the
same Gentleman tried it where the bone had been a month under the pectoral
muscle with success; and another Surgeon has since informed me of his moving
the head of the humerus, by this method, from under the pectoral muscle, where
it had lain some time, into the axilla.

It was a common practice, both with HIPPOCRATES and GALEN, to reduce
dislocated thighs by tying ligatures about the ancles and knees, and suspending
the patient with his heels toward the top of the room; but remember, whenever
this mode of reduction in the shoulder is pursued, above the elbow is the part
upon which the suspending ligature should alone be fixed.

By this time, I imagine, you heartily repent asking my opinion about these
matters; but as one link of a chain draws on another; so I have been led to say
more upon this subject than I first intended; though I imagine joining practice
to theory will always be acceptable to a young Surgeon. If the method of
reducing a dislocated thigh had been clearly laid down, the Surgeons at the Sea
Ed. Ess. and Observe. vol. ii. p. 317.
Worcester Infirmary could not have been at a loss, in what manner to have
relieved this accident; and you see, at last, they were forced to have recourse
to the vis percussionis, which I would choose to translate, "Reduction at
random."

If you take a view of the chirurgical writers in regard to dislocations, you
will find they have chiefly copied what HIPPOCRATES has said upon this subject,
and that much the greatest part of the improvements which have been made, till
within these few years, has been in an alteration of, or an addition to, the
machines he sometimes used in reducing them, which was certainly improving the
worst part of his practice. He gave us the different methods, that were
employed in his time, some of which have been copied by one writer, and some by
another; and they have been handed down to us, as the work of different men, by
the idle custom of every one implicitly copying a favorite author: Whereas,
had they collected only the most eligible practice from HIPPOCRATES, together
with the few real improvements made by other writers, I think they might have
deduced a rational method of cure. For they might have learned, that the
dislocation should be reduced as soon as possible, that the extension should be
gentle, gradual, and continued till the dislocated bone is upon a level with
the cavity from whence it receded, at which time, if it did not return of
itself, it should be reduced the same way, in which it was displaced; or, as
CELSUS has it, from that side in which it was prolapsed, to the contrary, by
pressing upon the head, and making a lever of the dislocated bone. PAREY
expressly says, you should not fasten the ligature to the wrist in a
dislocation of the shoulder, or to the ancle in a dislocation of the thigh
bone; but above the elbow, or above the knee; otherwise the joint of the elbow,
or of the knee, will be more extended than the shoulder or hip. The extension
in dislocations of these parts, was, in the days of HIPPOCRATES and GALEN,
often made with the fore arm, and knee bent; and it evidently appears, from the
practice of every writer, (and, I should imagine, from every man's own
experience,) that, whenever a dislocated limb was reduced, both with ease to
the patient and his Surgeon, the muscles were in a state of flexion. But the
reason these were not selected from the injudicious parts of practice, seems to
be, because the principles, upon which we ought to proceed, were not
ascertained. But from observing Mr. POTT'S doctrine in preserving the muscles
in a state of non-resistance, by the position of the limb, and by retaining the
practice of conducting the head of the dislocated bone into its place, I
apprehend we shall make choice of that method which will relieve our patients
with certainty and ease.

I am, dear SIR, Your affectionate humble servant.

POSTSCRIPT.
September, 1769.
I Designedly omitted saying any thing on the use of Fomentations, Cataplasms,
and the like, previous to reduction, where the part is much swelled; and on the
treatment necessary after the joint is replaced; because these are sufficiently
taken notice of by almost every writer upon this subject. But it may not,
perhaps, be improper to add something to what Mr. POTT has said upon compound
dislocations; for he only tells us, (speaking of the dislocation of the Tibia
at the ancle Page 62.
, that when this accident is accompanied, as it sometimes is, with a wound of
the integuments of the inner ancle, and that made by the protrusion of the
bone, it not infrequently ends in a fatal gangrene, unless prevented by timely
amputation; though I have several times seen it do well without. Whence, as you
have not yet acquired equal knowledge with this writer, you may perhaps be at a
loss to know, whether, in such a case, you ought immediately to take off the
ancle, or to attempt the cure, without this operation.

Now, a Gangrene may more frequently follow a laceration of the Ligaments, etc.
connecting the joints, than other parts: because the inflammation attending
these accidents often rises higher, is more obstinate, and of longer
continuance; but this is only local; and what we have already said about
amputation, on account of gangrenes, holds equally good here, except, that it
will be more frequently necessary, in local mortifications of the joints, on
account of the ligaments being destroyed. But if I may judge from what I have
seen, I do believe, if the inflammation is properly treated, it will, for the
most part, be prevented from terminating in what is properly called a Gangrene.

Nevertheless, I am clearly of opinion, with Mr. GOOCH, that compound
dislocations are, in general, of worse consequence than compound fractures, if
the cure is attempted by replacing the dislocated bone; not only on account of
the obstinate obstruction and inflammation, owing to the compact structure of
the injured parts, and to the dissolution of the ligaments, which of course
follows; but also, because the air, having admittance into the joint, renders
the Synovia acrid, which, where it is not freely discharged, inflames and
corrupts the ligaments, produces abscesses about the joint, a caries of the
ends of the bone, intolerable pain, a great discharge, and a colliquative fever
in consequence of an absorption of matter: and when things are coming to this
pass, life can often only be preserved by a timely amputation. Or if the
symptoms are not so violent as to require immediate amputation, a fistula of
the joint is commonly the consequence, and the patient afterward drags on, for
a long time at least, a miserable life.

But I observe, when the wound is so fortunately circumstanced that the ichor
and matter do not lodge in the joint, but readily drain away, the symptoms are
much less severe, and a cure happily ensues: and less disturbance, and a cure
still more readily follows, if the protruding bone can be taken away; for by
this means the matter has a free exit, new flesh more easily rises in the sore;
and the new callus takes upon it the form of a joint, from the impression made
by the head of that bone which remains entire.

Instead, therefore, of hastily taking off the limb, when the head of the
dislocated bone protrudes through a wound, I would advise the practice Mr.
GOOCH recommends, of sawing the bone off, which may be easily done, as it is
rather spongy. -- A tall, boney, muscular man, forty-nine years of age, was, on
the 21st day of July last, thrown off from a wagon load of hay, and great part
of the load falling upon him, he was almost crushed double, at the same time
that the Fibula of his left leg was broken, and the Tibia dislocated, and
forced out more than two inches, through a large wound of the teguments of the
inner ancle.

He was immediately bled by those present; but the protruding bone remained
unaltered, till I saw him, which was three hours afterward, when I readily
took it off with a small saw. The knee was then bent, and the leg laid on one
side with a declivity, that the matter, which was hereafter to be formed, might
be readily discharged. The wound was dressed with a mild digestive balsam, and
the other applications and bandage used in compound fractures, and an ounce of
Glauber salts were immediately given, on account of the bruise in his breast.
Next day I found the patient easy, and the wound in a good state, digestion
soon afterward appeared, the discharge has since been inconsiderable, the void
space filled up with new flesh, which has already acquired a boney consistence,
and, in short, the cure has gone on without interruption, and with very little
trouble to the patient, further than what was occasioned by his leg being once
moved (from our being unprovided with a proper apparatus at the beginning;) and
there is not any doubt but he will have as useful a leg, as he had before the
accident happened.

Indeed the ease, with which this patient has recovered, and the good success I
have seen, where the head of the bone has been broken off, so as to come away;
together with the cases Mr. GOOCH has given us, induces me warmly to recommend
this practice. And I have not any doubt, but, upon trial, it will be found to
be one of those experiments, that will recommend itself.

Perhaps it may seem strange to you, that I so freely used greasy applications
in wounds of the ligaments; as they have in this case been decried by almost
every writer, since CELSUS: And more especially, as the Oil of Turpentine is
still used and recommended by very eminent men, both in this and other nations,
as a specific in wounds of the Tendons and Ligmanets, because it is an old
practice.

But I am apprehensive the use of Oil of Turpentine in these cases is very
pernicious; for I do believe, it has not infrequently, by irritating and
inflaming, brought on abscesses, and mortifications, which were thought to be
in consequence of the accident alone. I know an eminent writer says, Oil of
Turpentine has the virtue of allaying pain, arising from wounds of the tendons
and nerves, as is confirmed by the practice of PAREY, by the opinion of all
authors, and his own continual experience DE HAEN'S Difficulties in the modern
System of Physic.
. And yet there is not a lad, that has played tricks with a mountebank's horse,
who does not know, that it has directly a contrary effect; and only reflect one
moment upon the application of this remedy to an inflamed nerve! But I cannot
any way so effectually explode this practice, as by giving you a short view of
the principles, upon which it was first introduced; and I hope you will give me
the hearing a little longer, as the getting clear of this remedy, in this case,
seems to be a matter of consequence.

HIPPOCRATES, who used the word Nerve to signify a glutinous (such as the
Tendons, Ligaments, and the like After telling us how the nerves are formed of
glutinous matter, (De locis in bomine, sect. 1.) and exactly, in different
places, describing the Tendons and Ligaments by the name of Nerve; and after
informing us that the spinal marrow which descends from the brain is neither
fat, nor much glutinous, he says, The Nerves may be distinguished by broiling
them along with other parts; for that part, which is neither nervous nor
glutinous, will soon be broiled; whereas the nervous and glutinous parts will
not broil, because they contain but little fat; for fat and oily parts are soon
consumed. -- A distinction it is impossible for any to mistake, who have ever
taken notice of a roasted leg of mutton. Nerve was the general name for both
Tendon and Ligament, and these particular names were also used to describe
their office. For (...) was the name given to those nerves which are the
instruments of flexion, contraction, and extension; and (...) to those which
tied any part together; so that HIPPOCRATES did not make the distinction
betwixt nerve, tendon, and ligament, that later writers have done; but often
more properly called the tendons, nervous tendons, (...): A Ligament, nervous
ligament, (...): And where he thought a ligament was composed of both a nerve
and cartilage, he called it (...), a cartilaginous and nervous ligament.
Several other nerves had particular names, which see in ARIST. De hist. animal.
lib. iii. cap. 5.
;) instead of a medullary substance, says, that cold is injurious to the
nerves, and a moderate warmth, which does not exceed the third degree, useful.
Wherefore, he orders them to be dressed, when wounded, with myrtle roots
powdered, sifted, and kneaded with oil; and with five-leaved grass, rubbed in
oil, which are to be removed the the third day; which applications, he says,
had better be used in winter, than summer. And CESLUS, who used the word nerve
in the same classical sense In his anatomical description of the spine, (lib.
viii. cap. 1.) he says, the vertebrae send out two processes on each side; in
the middle they are perforated, where the spinal marrow connected with the
brain descends. The sides also, between the two processes, are perforated by
small holes, through which, from the membranes of the brain, similar small
membranes proceed. Now certainly, had these been known by the name of nerves in
his time, he would not have called them membranes: And I think it is hence
pretty evident, that he was unacquainted with what HEROPHILUS and ERASISTRATUS
had said about this matter. Nor does CAELIUS AURELIANUS or PLINY call any
substance by the name of nerve, but the nerves described by HIPPOCRATES. See
next note.
, says, with HIPPOCRATES, that they are injured by cold, recommends the
application of agglutinants to heal recent wounds of them that would admit of
cure by the first intention; but where the wound was severe, emollient
cataplasms were outwardly applied; in ulcers where the nerves were laid bare,
he first covered them with linen to prevent their being injured by remedies
which might be necessary to cleanse the sore; and mild digestives were also
used in ulcers amongst the nerves When wounds would not unite by the first
intention, CELSUS often immediately gave them the name of ulcer; and it is
probable he used this practice whether in recent or old ulcers. He no where
treats distinctly of wounds of the nerves, i. e. tendons, except when he copies
from HIPPOCRATES about wounds of the joints; but what he says about them lies
dispersed throughout his works.
. But this practice GALEN overturned.

He had learnt the improvements made in anatomy by HEROPHILUS and ERASISTRATUS
These writers, who lived long after HIPPOCRATES, were the first discoverers of
the use of the nerves arising from the brain, and they first very improperly
gave these organs of sense the name of nerves; probably because they appeared
to be white cords something resembling the tendons, and had really a nervous
coat, though in every other respect destitute of any properties that should have
thus characterized them; and from the idea which was immediately affixed to
this appellation, much perplexity has arisen amongst succeeding writers of
Neurology. HEROPHILUS said, that some nerves obedient to the will arose from
the brain and spinal marrow; others took their rise from the bones, and were
inserted into bones; and some passed from one muscle into another, which also
tie together the joints. (See RUFI EPHESII Opera, cap. De Ven. et Arter. p.
65.) Which distinctions GALEN at first adopted; for in his book De Ossibus, ad
Tyrones, he tells us, there are three sorts of nerves; those which arise from
the brain, and spinal marrow, are called the voluntary nerves; those arising
from the muscles; tendons; and those which arise from the bones, ligaments: But
he afterward changed his sentiments. See next note. ARETAEUS made the same
distinctions.
, and after making a new distinction He made the distinctions betwixt Nerve,
Tendon, and Ligament, now in use; but it is worth observing, that he says, ( De
usu part. lib. 1.) The tendons are inserted into each joint; wherefore they are
formed of Ligaments, and Nerves, which were dispersed amongst the muscles,
being afterward collected together, etc. And in explaining this matter in
another place, ( De motu muscul. lib. 1.) he says, A Tendon is of a mixed
nature, betwixt a Ligament and a Nerve; it is as much harder than a Nerve, as
it is softer than a Ligament; but it is such a kind of body, because it is made
of both of them. A Ligament indeed is insensible; a Nerve is endowed with all
sense. But a Tendon is not insensible, because it is part of a Nerve. Nor is it
so sensible as a Nerve, because it is not wholly a Nerve. Therefore, so much as
it partakes of the nature of a Ligament, so much its seeling is blunted. Whence
he durst not venture to unite divided tendons by suture, because of their
connection and sympathy with the brain; so that he did not only contradict
ASCLEPIADES, who said that the nerves, i. e. tendons, were insensible; and
RUFUS EPHESIUS, who told us they had only an obtuse feeling whilst they were
cut; (cap. De Venis et Arteriis, page 65.) But you will find, upon examining,
that all the mistakes in practice, about the sensibility of the tendons in an
uninflamed state, arose from this imaginary structure, the mere offspring of a
fertile genius.
betwixt nerve and tendon, and then again, confounding these different
substances under one name It is from hence that the word (...) was used by
after writers, without distinction, not only to signity what we now call a
Nerve, but a Tendon likewise, and a Ligament; and, what is really curious,
after the plain distinction GALEN had made, he copied the symptoms following
the wounded nerves so called by HIPPOCRATES, and applied them to injuries both
of these, and of the nerves arising from the brain; by which he made them both
productive of the same consequences; and this mistake, in opposition of the
lights, which modern Anatomy has afforded, and to facts which frequently
present themselves, is handed down to this very day. Even BOERHAAVE has fallen
into these errors; and his learned Commentator has, in consequence, with great
ingenuity, accounted for symptoms and diseases following wounds of the nerves,
which, from the nature of the parts, could never possibly happen. So little,
indeed, have people been aware of this mistake committed by GALEN, that a very
late writer, after telling us the consequence of pricking or wounding a nerve
arising from the brain, refers back to HIPPOCRATES for further proof of this
matter; and yet it is certain he never said one word about them. It would give
me pleasure to explain this point farther; for a dissertation on wounds of the
nerves, and wounds of the tendons (beginning de novo) is much wanted; but as I
am fearful of tiring you, shall at present omit what has occurred to me on this
head.
, we are informed, that his principal aim in the cure of wounded nerves, was to
guard against putrefaction. -- Seeing, says he, ( De comp. med. secund. gener.
lib. 3.) that putrefaction in all things is produced by heat and moisture, I
always think the cure, in wounds liable to putrefaction, should be attempted by
cold, and drying applications. -- Again: I agree with HIPPOCRATES, that cold is
an enemy to the nerves, and imagine, that that medicine is the properest for
wounded nerves, which dries and is of a middle nature betwixt heat and cold, or
rather inclining to heat; for heat without humidity cannot moisten. -- In
punctures, therefore, of the nerves, after opening the external wound,
medicines of thin consistence, vehemently drying, which will excite a moderate
warmth, penetrate to the bottom, and draw from afar, without giving pain, or
injuring the interjacent parts, should be applied. -- But warm water, though it
mitigates other inflammations, yet it is very prejudicial in wounded nerves
What inflammation could happen in which the nerves arising from the brain were
not concerned? even according to GALEN'S own description of them, who says,
they spread like the branches from the trunk of a tree, all over the body, ( De
usu part. lib. 1.) But this doctrine was applicable to wounds of the tendons.
, etc. For the same reasons, relaxing cataplasms should not be applied; nor are
things of thick consistence of service. It is better to foment with old thin
oil made warm, for cold obstructs the small opening, etc. and the nerves Here
he is manifestly speaking of what we now call the nerves; but what he says, of
their being of a cold nature, is copied from HIPPOCRATES, who knew nothing of
these nerves; at least not under that name.
are the most sensible parts, being a continuation of the brain, of a cold
nature, and easily affected by cold. Or with oil, in which the seeds of the
fir tree and poplar flowers have been boiled; or the oil of savin, which is
void of astringency There is a strange inconsistency in this doctrine. Just
above he has recommended things vehemently drying; here, with more reason, they
are to be void of astringency. Now things vehemently drying would certainly
stop the discharge, and in that sense be astringents.
and of thin part.

Compound medicines for the same purpose were made of Resin, Turpentine,
Euphorbium, Sagapenum, Opopanax, and the like. But when the nerves were laid
bare, he advised milder applications, that would dry without irritating; for he
says they will not bear the force of Euphorbium, etc. as when the skin
interferes; he therefore in this case used washed Lime, or Pomphylyx mixed in a
large quantity of oil, etc. but when the wound was accompanied with pain, he
applied a cataplasm made of bean flour, and the Lixivium stillatitium called
Stacte.

Now, though it is true, that heating and drying substances prevent
putrefaction in dead bodies; yet in living bodies, and especially in tendinous
parts, they produce exactly a contrary effect, by hardening and inflaming the
vessels and fibers. However, this theory and practice, with very little
variation, was implicitly copied by the Greeks, Arabians, and Latins, except
that, by some unlucky mistake, instead of the Lixivium stillatitium, which is a
liquor that sweats from the myrrh tree, before it is lanced See PLINY, lib.
xii. cap. 15.
, they used common Ley I cannot tell whom to charge with this mistake; but I
rather think it was owing to the Arabians; because I find the aqua cineris
advised by AVICENNA, from whom it was copied by GUIDO CAULIACO, etc. etc. etc.
But in justice to AQUA PENDENTE, it must be observed, that he was careful
enough to make an exact copy from GALEN, but unfortunately this was overlooked.
, which, I dare say, you will easily conceive, could not afford much ease, when
the injured parts were inflamed and painful. And yet, upon no better authority
than this blunder, a soap suds poultice was applied by PAREY to the King's arm,
CHARLES the IXth of France, when he was pricked in a nerve Lib. x. cap. 38.
After all that has been said about this case, and its being so frequently
instanced to show the method of curing pricked Tendons; it does not appear,
from any of the symptoms which followed, that the tendon in the King's arm was
injured by the lancet. The instant pain which made him cry out, must be owing
to a nerve being pricked; for pain does not immediately come on upon pricking a
tendon, as the copiers from PAREY have asserted; but slowly afterward; which I
do not only know from my own practice, but JOB A MEEK'REN also says, (Obs. med.
chirurg.) in describing the symptoms which follow a pricked tendon, Non mox ab
incisione, sed lento pede molestarunt. SYDENHAM affirmed the same thing; and
Dr. HUNTER, in his Medical Commentaries, is of the same opinion. -- Now the
King's arm was instantly dressed, before they could possibly tell whether the
tendon was hurt, or not; and there is every reason to suspect, that the chief
sufferings this royal patient bore, were owing to the hot oils and soap suds
poultice.


, instead of a vein. -- Oil of turpentine However, this was a very different
application from old thin oil, oil of savin, or oil in which fir seeds and
poplar flowers bad been boiled.
so perfectly agreed with the remedy described by GALEN for pricked nerves,
that it immediately came into use, when, the method of making it was known;
and, perhaps, more especially, as GALEN himself had used oil in which the seeds
of the fir tree had been boiled. And to the oil of turpentine, some aqua vitae,
you see, was added, to make it still more capable of exhausting and drying up
the serous and virulent humor, which sweats from the substance of the pricked
nerve; of preventing bad symptoms, and of mitigating pain by its actual heat!

Now the oil of turpentine, etc. was applied before any serous humor could be
discharged, provided the tendon had been pricked; therefore it must be used by
way of prevention. But is not this serous humor the natural discharge from a
wounded tendon The books since GALEN tell us, that it is also the consequence
of pricking or wounding a nerve arising from the brain; but this, no where,
that I know of, appears rightly upon record; and seems to be one of those
mistakes which GALEN made, by copying what was wrote before his time, about
wounds of the nerves; (See Note, page 78.) for it had been said, that a
discharge of ichor was the consequence of wounding a nerve, i. e. tendon.
? and therefore would not stopping it by drying remedies increase inflammation
and pain? It is highly probable the ease the King enjoyed was from the Oxycrate
and Nutritum; but these gave way to the poultice above mentioned, which was
thought to be a better remedy for dissolving and drying Two very different
intentions.
virulent humors occasioning pain. But I dare say, from the nature of this
application, you will think the King had a narrow escape from torture, as he
was to have been cauterized with scalding oil, if the pain had not luckily
ceased; and the cure took up three months, which is a much longer time than is
usually required for the recovery of accidents of this kind.

This case I have particularly taken notice of, because it is copied by
HEISTER, and many others, as a standard for practice. If you urge the authority
of PAREY himself, I will go a little further, to show you how far his great
good sense was imposed on by a specious theory: He dressed pricked tendons in
the manner of GALEN, with applications made of Old Oil, Resin, Galbanum,
Opopanax, Euphorbium, Pitch, and the like; and says, If the pain yield not to
these remedies, but rather increase, with inflammation of the affected part, a
swelling of the lips of the wound, and a sweating forth of a serous thin
virulent matter or filth, then you shall cauterize the part with scalding oil,
for this will take away the sense from the nerve, tendon, or membrane, like as
if they were burnt with a cautery, and so the pain will be ceased.

Now could any thing more effectually produce a swelling of the lips of the
wound, and a discharge of serous matter, etc. especially in irritable habits,
than the applications PAREY used? And might not the patient often be tortured
with scalding oil, in consequence of symptoms brought on by improper treatment?
-- But I will give you one other instance to show how far a pleasing theory may
mislead men of sense.

WISEMAN had copied the theory about remedies of hot, dry, and subtle parts
being proper for wounded nerves, or tendons, to consume that ichorous water
which first affects them, and causes the putrefaction; and therefore he, in
the beginning, used scalding oil of roses, with a little bay sait dissolved in
it, and dropped into the injured part! And to mend the matter, if tumor and
inflammation came on, he advised the cataplasm made with common lixivium or
wine, before taken notice of. -- A procedure that cannot be reflected on
without horror. And yet he afterward relates a case, to show the bad effects
of the over use of hot oils, which he says, in these cases, have been very
mischievous to many; and he cures the patient by a simple and rational method,
directly contrary to that which he himself had proposed A young woman was
pricked in a Tendon, by being bled in the foot, and in consequence of using hot
oil of turpentine the lips of the wound became turgid, dry, and inflamed.
WISEMAN being called, showed the Surgeon his error; dressed with Basilicon, an
Embrocation of Oil of Roses, and with Diachylon softened with oil, which lying
on two or three days, cured the patient. (Book v. cap. 3.)
. Notwithstanding he immediately afterward mentions two cases, where he
applied a balsam (composed of Euphorbium, Turpentine, Cloves, Sagapenum, etc.)
equally hot with Oil of Turpentine, and which manifestly did injury to both the
patients on whom it was used; there being a necessity of applying fomentations,
and emollient cataplasms, to subdue the inflammation it had caused. From all
which, his own knowledge, and his paying too great a regard to authority, are
at once both evident.

The same may be said of PAREY; for when he thought for himself It is
remarkable, that those who did not embarrass themselves with the prevailing
theory, pointed out a much better method of cure. MARCHETTI dressed a tendon
laid bare with dry lint; and SYDENHAM advised an emollient cataplasin to
pricked tendons.
, no man shone more in his profession: but when he suffered himself to be
fettered with theory, we see his practice was horrible. But we have a recent
instance in DE HAEN, how far a preconceived prejudice may biass the mind in
favor of a bad remedy, in opposition to matter of fact. We have already
observed, that he used Oil of Turpentine, in imitation of PAREY, to ease pain:
but he happened to meet with some cases in SCHLICHTING, which fairly prove,
that this oil applied to the skin caused great pains, and dreadful
inflammations: but as the same untoward symptoms did not appear in the same
persons from the use of Hungary water, he, instead of concluding, that the oil
was more irritating than Hungary water, curiously observes, that all the
mischief was owing to an Idiosyncrasy, or peculiar temper of the skin.

TURNER also embarrassed himself with the same theory and practice; and after
bringing on inflammation with Oil of Turpentine, and then reducing it by
emollient cataplasms; he fays, Indeed, through mistake it may so happen, that
all these fiery exsiccating medicines may be pernicious, and hasten those very
accidents, they were intended to avert. As where the injury has been slight, or
glancing only on the aponeurosis, when I have frequently seen a small pledget
of the common digestive, even a little Basilicon applied to the festering
orifice, has made way for some unhappy symptoms to go off, without farther
disturbance; which had undoubtedly been aggravated by either of the foregoing
dressings.

Nevertheless, one of the best practical Surgeons in this kingdom, in a late
useful publication, has adopted the old theory; for he cautions us against
using oleaginous, or cold applications, to wounds of the nerves and tendons;
and says, the most suitable applications to the nervous, or tendinous part
itself, are those of a subtle, spirituous nature; such as Sp. Terebinth.
dressing the other parts of the wound with vulnerary balsams, etc.

Now if Oil of Turpentine gives pain to the flesh, it cannot be proper to the
nerves themselves; because they are the organs of sensation I cannot conceive,
that this able Surgeon ever uses Oil of Turpentine to inflamed or wounded
nerves. And I wish he had not, like WISEMAN, copied the mistakes of former
writers.
. And how unnecessary its use is in wounds of the nerves, the common method of
dressing a limb, after amputation, where the great nerves are wounded, fully
proves. It is true, indeed, it cannot give equal pain to the tendons, when
uninflamed, because they are then nearly insensible: but it will most certainly
crisp up and harden their fibers; and a slough, thicker or thinner, will be
superinduced. Whereas, if a tendon is only laid bare by a simple wound, and dry
lint is applied, its blood vessels will first: look inflamed, (like an inflamed
eye,) from whence new flesh will arise, and a cure will ensue, without any
separation; provided the moisture which drains from the lips of the wound, be
artfully kept from interfering by pieces of sine sponge. But if the nature of
the accident be such, that the tendinous parts will unavoidably suppurate, they
may be dressed like other wounds; and, in this respect will terminate equally
well, allowing only a longer time for them to separate, which they always
require, on account of their compact structure. So that, you see, I am
recommending you back to the practice of CELSUS, who no other way guarded
against the effects of cold, than by keeping off cold air. And is it not
amazing, that this treatment, which would procure ease, should be overlooked,
and preference given to the fiery remedies of the followers of GALEN?

Examine thoroughly, therefore, commonly received opinions, before you adopt
them; whence you will be led to think for yourself; which is the high road
toward knowledge. In particular, you will find, brought down to our own times,
as much absurd reasoning about the nature and cure of Ulcers, and some as bad
practice in consequence of this reasoning, as any we have described. But I hope
the mistakes I have already pointed out in this Postscript, will put you upon
your guard against plausible and pleasing Theories. And if you are desirous of
being esteemed in your profession, remember, that Wisdom lists up the head of
him that is of low degree, and makes him to sit among great men.

FINIS.

