OBSERVATIONS On the BILLS of MORTALITY, In CARLISLE, for the YEAR 1779.
THE advantages which may be derived from accurate registers of Mortality, are
thus illustrated by an ingenious Philosopher and Physician; "The establishment
of a judicious and accurate register of the births and burials, in every town
and parish, would be attended with the most important advantages, medical,
political, and moral. By such an institution, the increase or decrease of
certain diseases; the comparative healthiness of different situations,
climates, and seasons; the influence of particular trades and manufactures on
longevity; with many other curious circumstances, not more interesting to
Physicians, than beneficial to mankind, would be ascertained with tolerable
precision. In a political view, exact registers of human Mortality are of still
greater consequence, as the number of people and progress of population in the
kingdom, may in the most easy and unexceptionable manner, be deduced from them.
They are the foundation likewise of all calculations concerning the values of
assurances on lives, reversionary payments, and of every scheme for providing
annuities for widows, and persons in old age. In a moral light also such Tables
are of evident utility, as the increase of vice or virtue may be determined, by
observing the proportion which the diseases arising from luxury, intemperance,
and other similar causes bear to the rest; and in what particular places
distempers of this class are found to be most fatal." Percival's Essays, vol.
2d.

CARLISLE is situated in Latitude 54.55 North, and is surrounded by a wall
about a mile and a quarter in circumference. The situation is rendered
exceedingly pleasant by its vicinity to three beautiful Rivers, with which it
is almost surrounded. viz. The Eden on the north east side, Peterel on the
south east, and Caldew on the north west. CARLISLE contains two Parish
Churches, viz. St. Mary's and St. Cuthbert's, beside two Presbyterian, and a
Quaker's Meeting House. A very considerable Linen Manufactory is carried on in
this City, and the Printing of Calicoes is still more extensive. The air about
CARLISLE is pure and dry, the soil chiefly sand and clay. No marshes or
stagnant waters corrupt the the atmosphere; its neighborhood to a branch of
the sea, and its due distance from the mountains on all sides render the air
temperate and moderate.

In July 1763, at the request of the late Lord Bishop of CARLISLE, the
inhabitants were numbered with great care and attention by the Rev. Mr
Richardson, the Rev. Mr Simpson, and Mr Alderman Hodgson. There were at that
time in the City and Suburbs, 1059 families, and 4158 inhabitants.

In January 1780, a very careful and accurate survey was made by Mr Stanger and
Mr Howard, under my own inspection. When there were in the district before
surveyed, 891 houses, 1605 families, and 6299 inhabitants. For a more
particular account of the survey see Tables I. II. III.

This astonishing increase of 2141 inhabitants, which is above half of the
original number, in the small space of seventeen years, may in some measure be
attributed to the establishment of manufactories for the Printing of Calicoes.
About the year 1761, Mr Brummel introduced this kind of manufactory; and
notwithstanding the many difficulties, which naturally attend any new
institution, by his activity, perseverance, and abilities he surmounted them
all, and the art is now brought to great perfection. Soon after, several other
gentlemen followed his example. There are at present four companies who daily
employ about eight hundred industrious poor, in this Manufactory.

This increase of population too has taken place, during that very period, in
which Dr Price asserts the depopulation of Great Eritain to have been rapid and
progressive. And what makes this increase more remarkable, CARLISLE has during
the whole period alluded to, been constantly supplying the army, the navy, the
metropolis, and even the distant regions of India with her hardy, active, and
enterprizing sons.

From Tables No. II. and IV. we can with pleasure demonstrate the extreme
salubrity of CARLISLE even in a very unhealthy year; a year in which no less
than 129 persons were cut off by two epidemic disorders, viz. the Small Pox and
Scarlet Fever. By the Bills of Mortality published in different towns in
England, as well as the Continent it appears on an average, that in Vienna
about 1 in 19 and a half of the inhabitants die annually; in London 1 in 20 and
three quarters; in Edinburgh 1 in 20 and four fifths; in Leeds 1 in 21 and
three fifths; in Dublin 1 in 22; in Rome 1 in 23; in Amsterdam 1 in 24; in
Breslaw, 1 in 25; in Berlin 1 in 26 and a half; in Northampton and Shrewsbury 1
in 26 and a half; in Liverpool 1 in 27 and a half; in Manchester 1 in 28; in
Chester 1 in 40; but in the year 1774 when the Small Pox were very general and
fatal 1 in 27; and in the Parish of Sedburgh in the County of York 1 in 37 and
a half; and in Blandford Forum in Dorset, 1 in 39; in CARLISLE this year 1 in
30 and three ninths.

Tables No. III. and V. are of the utmost importance to the Physician, the
Politician, and the Calculator of Annuities, and to every one who has the
health and happiness of himself and family at heart. They at one view show what
diseases are most incident and fatal to particular periods of life. They
clearly demonstrate as far as one year's observation can have weight, what
periods of life are the most healthy, what are the most obnoxions to disease.

Thus we see in CARLISLE one in 6 and nine tenths nearly, of all the
inhabitants under 5 years old, die annually; betwixt 5 and 10 years old 1 in 64
and six sevenths; 10-15, 1 in 119 and one sixth; 15-20, 1 in 168 and three
fourths; 20-30, 1 in 132 and four fifths; 30-40, 1 in 146 and one sixth; 40-50,
1 in 95 and one third; 50-60, 1 in 58 and four fifths; 60-70, 1 in 24 and one
third; 70-80, 1 in 13 and three fifths nearly; 80-90 1 in 4 and five sixths;
and between 90 and 100 years exactly 1 in 5. As no particular epidemic disease
occurred last year which had any considerable effect on the lives of adult
persons, it is apprehended these calculations for the periods above 10 years
old, will not be attended with much variation in other years.

That women in general live longer than men, is almost universally agreed, and
the following observations tend much to confirm the truth of this opinion.
During the last year 12 persons died between 30 and 90 years old, 8 of these
were females, and between 90 and 100, 2 died, both females. See Table IV. In
Table III. we see two people are above 100 years old and these likewise are
semales.

Table II. which contains the number of Husbands, Wives, etc. Shows how
inferior in number Widowers are to Widows. There are above four Widows to one
Widower, an astonishing disproportion, in what manner is it to be accounted
for? The following causes are conceived to operate considerably.

I. Men are in general more intemperate than women. II. They are exposed to
greater hardships and dangers. III. Widowers perhaps in general have greater
opportunities of getting wives, than widows have of getting husbands. IV.
Widows have a greater propensity to live in towns than widowers. V. and lastly,
The constitutions of males, as sitted for more violent and laborious exertions,
are firmer and more robust than those of females; their muscular and nervous
sibres, may therefore be supposed to become stiff, rigid, and incapable of
performing the functions necessary to health and life sooner than those of
females, both on account of their original texture, and the friction which must
necessarily occur from laborious exercise. But from whatever causes the
difference of longevity betwixt males and females may arise, the fact itself is
sufficiently ascertained by Table IV. where we find that between the ages of 60
and 70, although there are a greater number of wives than husbands, yet 11
husbands and only four wives have died, and of all different ages 29 husbands
and 16 wives.

The Table of Deaths and Diseases No V. is as accurate as circumstances and the
situation of things would possibly admit. With respect to the Small Pox, and
Searlet Fever, their symptoms and marks are sufficiently evident to prevent any
ambiguity. 24 have died of unknown diseases, which is a great number, but which
must ever be the ease at CARLISLE where many of the lower class (although they
may have advice gratis) never call in medical assistance.

Only seventeen have fallen victims to Consumptions, a number but small, when
compared with the number, which usually die of that disorder in other towns,
and still smaller when we consider how many are employed in the manufactories
of weaving and Calicoe printing Notwithstanding the impurity of the air
breathed by Calicoe Printers, and the sudden changes of heat and cold which
they are subject to, yet men following that business, are observed to be very
healthy. May not this be owing to the acid steams continually exhaling in a
Print Shop?
, where they continually breathe air by no means the most pure; and where they
are subject to sudden alterations of heat and cold. 5 persons have died of this
disease between 20 and 30 (see Table No V.) which consirms the general
observation, that during that period of life people are most liable to
Consumptions. It therefore behooves such to be very cautious upon catching cold,
least by neglect and delay, a complaint which at the beginning might have been
easily removed, should gather strength, and at last terminate in a fatal
disease.

Three died of Dropsy (viz. Anasarca) which in all was evidently occasioned by
excessive intemperance. Nervous and putrid fevers are not very frequent; no
more than five have suffered by both these diseases, which must appear somewhat
astonishing to one who knows how many inhabitants there are of the lowest rank,
who are crowded in close and small apartments where they sleep, eat, and
prepare their victuals; whose food can not be the most nutritive; who seldom
change their clothes; and who pay but little attention to cleanliness. May not
the streams of water, which fortunately run near the most crowded parts of the
town, tend to purify the air and prevent putrid fevers.

Agues or intermittent fevers are scarce ever known, a strong proof that the
effluvia arising from marshes is the principle source of that disease.

In February, a poor girl either for some real, or imaginary complaint, was
advised by an acquaintance as ignorant as herself, to take a large quantity of
steel filings, which had been procured from a White Smith, or Watch-Maker. Not
long after she had taken them, she was seized with pains in her stomach and
bowels, which soon increased to a most violent degree. Every remedy which could
be supposed useful either in a severe cholic, or inflammation of the stomach,
was fried, but in vain. She continued in the greatest agony for two days and
then expired.

During her sickness she was repeatedly asked, if she coud assign any cause for
her disorder, but she always answered in the negative. Soon after her death,
however, some steel silings were found in her room, and another servant in the
house, on being examined, confessed that the deceased had taken three tea
spoonfuls mixed with treacle, a few hours before she began to be ill. Three tea
spoonfuls of the filings which were found, weighed six drams and a half, and
upon examining them with a magnet, I found a quantity of lead and some copper
filings. Had the steel been pure, the quantity alone was sufficient to have
produced fatal effects, but here no doubt the lead and the copper would add
considerably to its acrimony.

Let the death of this unfortunate young woman be a caution to others; and let
Watch-Makers and White Smiths be careful to whom they sell steel filings,
especially till they are separated from every impurity by the loadstone or some
other method.

During this year two epidemics raged with uncommon violence, and swept off a
great number of children, viz. the Small Pox and a species of the Scarlet
Fever. As the Scarlatina Angiursa or Scarlet Fever and Sore Throat is rather an
uncommon disease, and not perfectly un^erstood, it will not be improper to take
notice of it in this place. The limits, however, of this sheet, will by no
means admit a thorough discussion of a disease, which has within these two
years been so general and so fatal to children. I shall content myself with
defining the Scarlet Fever and Sore Throat as it occurred at CARLISLE;
afterward attempt to point out its nature; the symptoms by which it is to be
distinguished from other diseases; its terminations; and lastly its method of
cure. This epidemic made its appearance in July, was at its acme during
September and October, and gradually abated till the latter end of December,
when it almost entirely dissappeared.

DEFINITION.
The Scarlet Fever and Sore Throat, is a contagious inflammatory fever. On the
second day of the fever, the throat becomes stiff and sore, attended with some
difficulty of swallowing; on the third, sometimes not till the fourth, the face
begins to swell and grows florid; this swelling and redness, soon become so
universal, as to make the whole body resemble a boiled lobster in color. On
the seventh, or eighth day, the swelling and scarlet color gradually abate,
and the scarf shin becomes rough, and peels off in small branny scales.

DIAGNOSTIC SYMPTOMS.
To an inaccurate observer, this disease may seem to bear a very near
resemblance to many eruptive fevers; the intelligent and attentive
practitioner, will however, find no difficulty in discriminating it from all,
but the Cynanche Maligna or Putrid Sore Throat, which especially at the
commencement of the Epidemic will be no easy matter. The distinction however,
is extremely necessary, as the method of cure is almost diametrically opposite.
We shall therefore attempt it. Both diseases are highly contagious; both
attended with a fever; both with an affection of the throat; and both with an
eruption of the skin. Yet each disease has its peculiar fever; peculiar sore
throat; and peculiar eruption. In the Cynanche (both for the sake of brevity
and perspecuity we shall make use of the Generic term) the fever is constantly
accompanied with a weak, quick, small and unsteady pulse. In the Scarlatina the
pulse is quick, full, but seldom hard. In the Cynanche the throat and fauces
are full of creeping ulcers, covered with brownish ash colored sloughs. In the
Scarlatina there are seldom any ulcers, but often whitish mucous sloughs
sometimes extending over the whole tongue and inside of the mouth, which may be
easily washed off with a little wine and water. The eruption in the Scarlatina
is florid, universal, smooth, seldom prominent, and always dry. In the
Cynanche, neither so florid, nor so universal, and in general rough, prominent,
and often moist. The Cynanche chiefly affects the weak and delicate; females,
more frequently than males; whereas robust, and plethoric children are more
subject to the Scarlatina. The Cynanche is almost constantly accompanied with a
fetid breath, and an acrid corrosive humor is discharged from the mouth, nose,
and anus, which excoriates the skin. These disagreeable symptoms rarely occur
in the Scarlatina. In the Cynanche, the color of the blood is florid, its
texture loose and tender. In the Scarlatina it is firm and covered with a buffy
coat. The Cynanche is cured by tonics and antiseptics; bleeding, purging, and
emetics, are universally hurtful. The principal remedies to be depended upon in
the cure of the Scarlatina, are blood letting, emetics and the antiphlogistic
regimen. Lastly the Cynanche is highly putrid. The Scarlatina is inflammatory,
as may be easily deduced from the following circumstances, 1st. The robust and
plethoric are more subject to it than the weak and delicate. 2d, There is a
manifest swelling, redness and inflammation of the skin. 3d, The pulse is full,
and generally rises after the first bleeding. 4th, The surface of the blood is
covered with a firm buffy coat. 5th, In cases, where the lancet was not freely
used, suppurations sometimes occurred in the throat. 6th, and lastly, evident
advantages were derived from bleeding.

TERMINATIONS.
The Scarlet Fever and Sore Throat sometimes terminates in Dropsies, Deafness,
Tumors and Suppurations in the Neck.

METHOD OF CURE.
From the definition already delivered, we learn that the Scarlet Fever and
Sore Throat is a contagious disorder. The occasional or immediate cause must
therefore necessarily be a peculiar kind of poison, of a volatile nature,
readily mixing with the air. And many circumstances render it probable that it
is first applied to the mucus membrane which lines the mouth, nose, fauces,
stomach, etc. Emetics therefore are indicated, as remedies the most likely, to
expel either the whole or a part of this poisonous matter; and if they were
used soon after the application of the poison, it is probable the disease might
in many cases be prevented. It is a certain fact, they have been employed with
great advantage, and ought never to be omitted. The efficacy of Emetics does
not however, by any means solely depend on their expelling the contagious
virus; they unload the stomach, often gently move the belly, and have
considerable effect in producing a copious sweat, and in removing a spasm of
the small vessels on the surface of the body, which is a part of the proximate
cause of all Fevers. Emetic Tartar dissolved in water appears to be the best
vomit.

Of all the remedies made use of in this Epidemic, none were of more real
advantage than bleeding, which was sometimes repeated three or four times; so
great was its efficacy, that I believe not one patient died, who lost a
sufficient quantity of blood early in the disease. Many cases however occurred
where the mildness of the complaint rendered bleeding and almost every other
remedy unnecessary.

The Saline Mixture with a small addition of Tartar Emetic, was of signal
service. It acted as a diuretic, sudorific and gentle laxative. Immersion of
the feet and legs in warm water, often promoted perspiration and a tendency to
sleep. A Gargle of red wine and water was useful in washing off any mucous
sloughs. The judicious application of these remedies, with plenty of diluents,
and the antiphlogistic regimen seldom or never failed to produce the most happy
effects.

Nearly about the same time, the Small Pox (see table No V.) began to rage with
great violence. As the persons affected with this disease were chiefly of the
lower class, who seldom called in medical assistance, it is impossible to
ascertain the precise number: from the information however which I have had, it
appears, that about 300, were during the last six months of the year, seized
with the Small Pox in the natural way. Of these no less than 90 fell victims to
its virulence. Hence near one in three died of all that were affected with the
natural Small Pox, which while at the same time it serves as a melancholy proof
of its fatal effects, points out the great and salutary advantages which are
derived from inoculation. During the same period several hundreds were
inoculated in the neighborhood of CARLISLE, and it is a pleasing truth, that
not one of them died. Had those 300 been inoculated it is more than probable
that of the 90 not above 6 would have died, and even these not of inoculation
but of other disorders. Hence we see 84 persons might have been saved to their
parents and the public. Yet so great is the prejudice against the salutary
practice of inoculation amongst the vulgar, that few, very few, can be
prevailed upon either by promises, rewards, or entreaties to submit to the
operation. No wonder that in rude, ignorant, and barbarous times, superstition
hurried men into the grossest absurdities; when in a polished and enlightened
age; in an age too, when the experience of full twenty years has clearly
demonstrated the utility of inoculation, we see the bulk of mankind ready to
sacrifice their children and all that is dear to them, to a foolish prejudice.

TABLE I.
houses fami. males fema. Total of both sexes English-Street 208 319 639 732
1371 Total within the walls houses 549 families 870 inhabit. 3504 Scotch-Street
122 197 354 437 791 Fisher-Street 53 82 130 194 324 Castle-Street 81 143 220
307 527 Abbey and Annet-Well Street 77 121 173 270 443 The Abbey 8 8 17 31 48
Botchard-Gate 95 202 385 457 842 total without the walls 342 735 2795
Richard-Gate 82 177 307 356 663 Caldew-Gate 165 356 592 698 1290 New-Town 16 19
40 52 92 total in the villages Harraby 9 10 31 41 72 Carleton 30 30 66 67 133
Wreay 17 18 56 58 114 Brisco 32 34 107 85 192 257 267 1378 Botchardby 21 22 46
52 98 Uprightby 20 21 35 54 89 1148 1872 7677 Bleck-hill 63 64 176 178 354
Cummersdale 22 22 60 50 110 Morton-Head and Newby 27 27 57 67 124 Total in the
two Parishes 1148 1872 3591 4186 7677 Females exceed Males 595 Males to Females
as 1 is to 1 and 1 sixth nearly. TABLE II. Of the Number of Husbands, Wives,
etc.
Husbands Wives Widowers Widows Within the walls 531 569 46 248 Total of
persons who are or have been married 3073 Without the walls 488 522 45 160
Total of persons who are married 2489 In the villages 188 191 17 68 Total of
persons who never were married 4604 1207 1282 108 476 Total of umarried persons
5188 Widows exceed Widowers 368 Widowers to Widows, as 1 is to 4 and 3 sevenths
nearly. TABLE III. Of the number of Inhabitants of different ages.
under 5 years betw. 5 and 10 years 10 and 15 15 and 20 20 and 30 30 and 40 40
and 50 50 and 60 60 and 70 70 and 80 80 and 90 90 and 100 100 and 105 total
Within the City and Sub^rbs 859 731 587 543 1030 733 729 498 375 164 44 5 1
6299 In the Villages 170 177 128 132 298 144 129 90 63 27 14 5 1 1378 Total
1029 908 715 675 1328 877 858 588 438 191 58 10 2 7677 TABLE IV. Of Deaths,
Ages, and Conditions.
Ages males fema. Under 1 month 6 7 Betw. 1-2 mon. 2 2-3 2 3-6 5 6-9 2 4 9-12
10 9 1-2 years old 21 12 2-3 17 19 3-4 10 8 4-5 6 10 5-10 7 7 10-15 4 3 15-20 2
2 Total of the above Ages 92 83 Ages. Batch. Husb. widors. maids wives wids.
Total 20-30 2 3 3 3 1 12 30-40 3 3 6 40-50 4 2 2 1 9 50-60 1 4 2 2 1 10 60-70
11 1 1 4 1 18 70-80 3 3 1 7 14 80-90 1 3 1 1 0 12 90-100 1 1 2 total of ages
and cords 3 29 9 9 16 17 83 Total of ages under 20 years Males 92 Total of ages
under 20 years Females 83 175 Total of all Ages and Conditions 258 Looseness
(57) 3 1 4 Insanity (63) 1 1 III. DISEASES of the HABIT. Weakness of Infancy
(65) 9 9 Decay of Age (66) 4 6 11 2 23 Dropsy (71) 1 2 3 Dropsy of the Head
(72) 1 1 Dropsy of the Belly (75) 1 1 2 King's Evil (80) 1 1 IV. LOCAL
DISEASES. A Discharge of Blood (102) 1 1 Costiveness (107) 1 1 Tumor of the
Stomach (113) 1 1 Ulcer (128) 1 1 Difficult Delivery 1 1 2 Unknown Diseases 6 1
2 2 2 7 3 1 24 Accidents 1 1 2 4 Total 150 14 7 4 12 6 9 10 18 14 12 2 258 *
Cullen's Genera Morborum. TABLE V. Deaths and Diseases of Persons of Different
Ages.
DISEASES. under 5 years betw 5 and 10 years 10 and 15 15 and 20 20 and 30 30
and 40 40 and 50 50 and 60 60 and 70 70 and 80 80 and 90 90 and 100 total I.
FERRILE DISEASES. Inflammatory Fever (G. 4*) 3 3 Nervous Fever (G. 5, 6) 1 1 1
1 1 5 Pleurisy (G. 12) 1 1 2 Inflammation of the stomach from a largedose of
Steel filings (G. 15) 1 1 Rheumatism Chronic (G. 22) 1 1 Gout (G. 23) 1 1 2
Small Pox (26) 86 2 1 1 90 Miliary Fever (29) 1 1 Scarlet Fever (30) 31 4 2 1 1
39 Thrush (33) 2 2 Consumption (35) 3 2 1 1 5 2 3 17 Worm Fever 2 4 6 II.
NERVOUS DISEASES. Palsy (41) 1 1 2 Swoon or Fainting (42) 1 1 2 Indigestion
(43) 1 1 Convulsions (48) 2 TABLE VI.
Deaths in males. females Total Total of Deaths in each Season. January, 4 7 11
33 Winter. February. 6 4 10 March 6 6 12 April, 6 3 9 34 Spring. May, 7 10 17
June, 5 3 8 July, 7 7 14 August 14 5 19 75 Summer. September, 20 22 42 October,
30 23 53 116 Autumn. November, 18 20 38 December. 10 15 25 Total 133 125 258
Christenings, Males. females Total N. B. The Christenings are by no means
accurate, many of the Dissenters not being registered. 102 109 211


