MEMORIAL CONCERNING The Surgeons Hospital.

[ February 18. 1737.]
MEMORIAL concerning the SURGEONS HOSPITAL.
WE the SURGEON-APOTHECARIES in Edinburgh, Erectors of the Surgeons Hospital
there, having lately set up and brought to some Bearing this new Hospital, do
think it our Duty to publish this short Account of our Proceedings, before we
call in the Money subscribed for.

WE have with Pleasure observed the good Effects of that pious and laudable
Erection of the Royal Infirmary: But have it to regret, that though the Funds
of their Hospital be considerably increased, and managed with great Care and
Frugality by the Directors; yet we were often called to vast Numbers of poor,
miserable, sick People; who could not be received into the Infirmary, because
their Stock is no ways answerable to the Number of the diseased Poor.

How often did we see poor Servants or Workmen, cast out of Business by
Indisposition, confined to a Bed of Straw, unable to help themselves or hire
others, destitute of Meat, Drink, Fire, and all other Things necessary for
their Condition! Which made it impossible for us, though never so willing, to
give that Relief by Medicine which their Cases required.

MISERABLE Objects of this kind were so numerous, that in Town and Suburbs they
amounted to some Hundreds, (of which nine or ten only could be taken in to the
Infirmary at a Time.) What then must be the Number in Scotland! Here Pity and
Compassion, Charity and brotherly Love, Love to our Country, and even common
Humanity set us a thinking how to provide some Relief in such calamitous Cases.

IT was for this Purpose that we frequently conveened, and conferred together:
But finding it impossible for us to attend, and provide any considerable Number
with fuitable Accommodation, as they lay scattered in so many different and
distant Places; we concluded, that the Erection of a new Hospital was the only
proper Mean by which such Numbers could be duly taken care of by us.

THEREFORE we resolved and determined to afford them all the Aid and Assistance
which our Surgery and Circumstances would admit of, by laying the Foundation of
a new Hospital, for curing and taking care of such, whose Cases in a peculiar
and proper Sense require a Surgeon.

FOR this Purpose, we concerted to enter into a Bond of Erection, obliging each
of us to contribute Money and Medicines sufficient to set this good Work
a-going, and to give our Attendance gratis during our Life.

OUR next Step was, to lay our whole Scheme before our Brethren at a Meeting of
the Corporation, for their further Advice or Approbation, as well as to invite
as many of them as inclined to join us.

AT which Time our Design was approved of, and they agreed to call our House by
the Name of The Surgeons Hospital.

As soon as we had projected the Erection of an Hospital, it immediately
occurred to us, that the erecting a new, or enlarging the old one, might
equally serve the same Ends: Therefore it was expressly stipulated amongst us,
That as soon as we should enter into a Bond of Erection, we should confer with,
and make Proposals to the Managers of the Infirmary, concerning an Union of the
two Hospitals.

ACCORDINGLY Proposals of this kind were made to them in Writing, Conferences
held for that Purpose, a Memorial given in to us by the said Managers, and a
Reply to that Memorial was delivered to them by Mr. Kennedy, our Preses, and at
that Time Deacon of the Surgeons, upon the first Monday of July 1736; to which
we have got no Answer these eight Months.

THIS we thought fit to mention, to show the World our Willingness to unite the
two Hospitals.

ABOUT this Time it was often objected to us, That when the whole Corporation
was invited and desired to serve the Royal Infirmary, when newly erected, we
refused to concur and give our Assistance.

HERE we must deny the Fact: And we cannot but wonder how so many People fall
into this Mistake, so directly contrary to a public Deed of the Corporation of
Surgeons; who at that Time obliged themselves, by an Act of their Society, to
serve, and furnish Medicines to the Infirmary gratis, with as great Security
for the Performance thereof as ever was given by them as a Society: Which Act
is recorded in the Books of the Calling, dated the 10th February 1729.

WHEN Things were brought this Length, we began to contrive, how to make our
Scheme more extensive, than what could be expected immediately from such small
Funds: Therefore it was made an Article in our Constitution, not only, to take
care of as many as our Hospital and Funds could accommodate; but likewise, to
give our Advice, with all proper Medicaments and Dressings, to any who should
be able to come to, or lodge near the Hospital.

AND, in the next Place, we appointed, That our Students and Apprentices should
pay something into the Hospital-fund yearly: Which they have hitherto done most
cheerfully; and we hope, that, by their Help, and other charitable Donations,
we shall be able to make this Hospital a School of Practical Surgery; not only,
advantageous and instructive to them and their Succeffors in our Shops, but
profitable to our Country, and in particular to this Metropolis: For it is
certain, that as the Surgeons of this Country have been much employed, and had
considerable Fame throughout the World, so this Improvement of their Education
will add to that Fame, and make Edinburgh an excellent Nursery for Physicians
and Surgeons; and, by being such, how many thousand Pounds will be saved to our
Country in a few Years, which now are spent in Leyden and Paris?

ADD to this, what Sums of Money we may expect will be returned to Scotland, by
our own Surgeons yearly returning home from all Corners of the World: Some have
calculated L. 100,000 Sterling remitted to Scotland this Way within these
twenty Years past; and, if we judge of what may be, by what has been, it will
be no inconsiderable Branch of Trade to our indigent Country.

ANOTHER Advantage which we beg Leave to say will arise from this School of
Surgery is, That our Country will hereafter be better served by Surgeons at
home, when all of them may have the Advantages of Hospitals at Edinburgh, where
their Education may be completed, at an Expense all of them can afford; which
never was the Case before.

FROM what we have observed concerning the Advantages of this School of Surgery
it is evident, That if this Piece of Education be confined to a few Surgeons
and their Apprentices, secluding all the rest, (whatever private Benefit might
arise to these few Surgeons, by such a Monopoly) it would not only be
prejudicial to all those who were secluded, but manifestly so to the Nation in
general.

IF this Piece of Education be confined to a few, the Benefit arising from it
to our Country must be limited proportionally: Suppose, for Example, one Fourth
of our Apprentices and Students get their Education completed by Hospitals,
and that the remaining three Fourths must want it; then, of Consequence, a few
of those who go to serve abroad may perhaps bring Money and Credit to our
Nation, while the greatest Part of them go unfinished, to cast the Balance the
other Way.

As for those who stay at home to serve in their own Country, a few of them
likewise may be sufficiently qualified for their Business, and fit to be
trusted with the Lives and Health of the Lieges, while three Fourths of them,
for Want of a complete Education, do more than overbalance the Good done by
the few skilful.

THIS is pretty obvious, and of this we were all sensible at the Beginning, and
it had no small Influence on our first Resolutions; therefore, we agreed to
make our Scheme as extensive likewise in this View, and as useful to all the
Surgeons and Apprentices in Edinburgh as possible, by inviting the whole
Corporation to join us, and to which they still have Access.

BUT to return to the further Progress of this Affair: We next laid down Rules
for the right Economy of the House, much the same with these observed in other
Hospitals; and opened our House to Patients on the first of July last: Since
which Time we have been receiving in and taking Care of as many as our House
could accommodate, where two of us have attended punctually every Day from
Eleven to Twelve in the Forenoon, except Sunday, when we attended from four to
five Afternoon, and the same attending Surgeons examine all Accounts every
Monday.

IN this Place, we think it not improper to take Notice, that however much we
were convinced of the Necessity of this Hospital when first it was projected,
yet the short Experience we have had since the first of July, has set this
Necessity in a much stronger Light than we could possibly have imagined before
this Trial; for although we have been, by the Blessing of GOD, useful to, and
cured many, yet if the Rest of the World were to see what Numbers we are
obliged to dismiss, purely for want of larger Funds; were they likewise to see
from what slight Strains, or inconsiderable Bruises, incurable Diseases arise,
when not taken care of timeously, they would very much lament our having
neglected this Piece of Charity so long.

THE Gain of the most Part of Servants is but daily Subsistence, and few of
them can afford to be many Days idle; hence it is, that so many of them are
made lame and mutilated, not to mention those who die, purely because they
could neither afford themselves proper Diet, Rest, nor Medicine at the
Beginning of the Disease, when they might have been speedily and easily cured:
So that in Truth, they may be more properly said to derive all this Misery from
Want than Disease.

IF no Provision is made for the diseased Poor, and if they are left to linger
out a miserable Life, without Expectation of any other Relief than Death, they
are, in some Respect, in a worse Condition than the Beasts of Burden, the
Proprietor for his own Sake taking Care of them, while the poor Mechanic or
Day-labourer is cast out naked and destitute, to struggle with Pain, Sickness,
Poverty and Death.

IT is with Pleasure that we reflect upon the public Spirit which prevails at
present for encouraging Trade and Manufacture, and we hope Hospitals may be
justly esteemed useful that Way; for as the Riches of a Trading Nation chiefly
consists in the Number of well employed Hands, so of consequence those who die
through Want of timely Help, are so many working Hands cut off from the
Community: And the lame and the mutilated are often not only miserable
themselves, and a Burden to their afflicted Friends, but, if we consider their
Number throughout the Nation, they will be sound no inconsiderable Tax upon the
Country.

OUR next and great Care about this Hospital was, to settle it upon a lasting
Foundation, that it might not possibly prove abortive before considerable
Contributions could be raised: This we have done in such a Manner, as to make
the Stability of our present Scheme pretty certain.

NOW our last and constant Concern is, how to make it more extensive; for the
Number of the Diseased is great, and our present Fund small.

HITHERTO we have done our Part, and shall continue to do according to our
Ability.

EVERY Tradesman employed in fitting up the House has contributed something;
and now we apply to all who shall see this Memorial, hoping none will be so
hard-hearted as to discourage, or so wicked as to oppose an Undertaking so
charitable, so necessary for the Poor, and so beneficial to our Country.

Therefore, Generous Readers;

WE now call upon you all, by the Titles of Men, Brethren and Christians, to
denote our common Tie of Humanity, and yet nearer Tie of Christian Charity. By
what Arguments shall we persuade you to extend your Bounty to a poor Hospital
in its Infancy?

IF you value the Prayers of those you may restore to Health and Happiness: If
Pity and Compassion, the Interest of your Country, or the Approbation of our
Savior, can have Influence; come, like the good Samaritan, pour Wine and Oil
into, and bind up the Wounds of your afflicted Brethren, by your Charity.
Imagine your selves given up to Pains and Want like theirs, or rather come and
see the Miseries and untimely Deaths which you might so easily prevent, (for
there is an Eloquence in visible Distress beyond what can be imagined;) and we
hope there will be no Need of other Solicitations to dispose all of you to
contribute according to the Circumstances with which GOD has blessed you.

N. B. All the Money that is subscribed for is payable to Mr. William Wardrop
Surgeon, our Treasurer.

Subscribers for L. 5, or upwards, may be chosen Directors.

The Names of Subscribers for L. 1, or upwards, will be printed in due Time.


