THE RIGHTS OF GREAT BRITAIN ASSERTED AGAINST THE CLAIMS OF AMERICA: BEING AN
ANSWER TO THE DECLARATION OF THE GENERAL CONGRESS.

LONDON: Printed for T. CADELL, in the Strand. MDCCLXXVI.

AN ANSWER TO THE DECLARATION OF THE GENERAL CONGRESS.
WHEN Independent States take up arms, they endeavor to impress the World with
a favorable opinion of their own cause, and to lay the blame of hostilities on
the injustice of their Opponents. But if Nations, accountable to none for their
conduct, deem it necessary to reconcile others to their proceedings, the
necessity is still more urgent with regard to those who, breaking through every
political duty, draw their swords against the State of which they own
themselves the Subjects. The opinions of mankind are invariably opposed to such
men. Their assertions are heard with distrust, their arguments weighed with
caution; and, therefore, it is as necessary for THEM to adhere to truth, in the
former, as it is prudent to avoid sophistry in the latter.

This consideration, however obvious it may appear to others, seems to have
totally escaped the attention of the body of men who lately sat at Philadelphia
under the name of "The General American Congress." In a paper published under
the title of "A DECLARATION by the Representatives of the United Colonies of
North America" Vide Appendix.
, the facts are either wilfully or ignorantly misrepresented; and the arguments
deduced from premises that have no foundation in truth. But, as whatever falls
from men who call themselves the Representatives of a People, must fall with
some degree of weight on the minds of the undiscerning part of mankind; it
becomes, in some measure, necessary to examine briefly the reasons held forth
by the Congress to justify the rebellion of their Constituents. On a subject so
trite, arguments advanced by other Writers may sometimes recur; but novelty is
less the object of this part of the disquisition, than perspicuity and
precision.

The Declaration of the Congress begins with an involved period, which either
contains no meaning, or a meaning not founded on the principles of reason. They
seem to insinuate, that no body of men, in any Empire, can exercise "an
unbounded authority over others;" an opinion contrary to fact under every form
of Government. No maxim in policy is more universally admitted, than that a
supreme and uncontrollable power must exist somewhere in every State. This
ultimate power, though justly dreaded and reprobated in the person of ONE MAN,
is the first spring in every Political Society. The great difference, between
the degrees of freedom in various Governments, consists merely in the manner of
placing this necessary discretionary power. In the British Empire it is vested,
where it is most safe, in King, Lords, and Commons, under the collective
appellation of the Legislature. The Legislature is another name for the
Constitution of the State; and, in fact, the State itself. The Americans still
own themselves the subjects of the State; but if they refuse obedience to the
laws of the Legislature, they play upon words, and are no longer Subjects, but
Rebels. In vain have they affirmed that they are the Subjects of the King's
prerogative, and not his Subjects in his legislative quality; as the King, with
regard to his Subjects in general, is to be considered only in his executive
capacity as the great hereditary Magistrate, who carries into effect the laws
of the Legislature, the only discretionary and uncontrollable power in a free
State.

The discretionary and uncontrollable authority of the British Legislature
being granted, their right to tax all the Subjects of the British Empire can
never be denied. Some ill-informed reasoners in politics have lately started an
obsolete maxim, which has been seized with avidity by the Americans, That "the
Supreme Power cannot take from any one any part of his property without his
consent;" or in other words, That Representation is inseparable from Taxation.
The Colonists, say they, have no Representatives in Parliament, and therefore
Parliament has no right to tax the Colonists. Upon this principle, scarce one
in twenty-five of the people of Great Britain is represented. Out of more than
seven millions, fewer than three hundred thousand have an exclusive right to
choose Members of Parliament; and, therefore, more than three times the number
of the Americans have an equal right with them to dispute the authority of the
Legislature to subject them to taxes. The truth is, Representation never
accompanied Taxation in any State. The Romans were a free nation; yet the
Senate, that is, the great body of the Nobility, possessed the sole right of
taxing the people. In this kingdom, the House of Commons have an exclusive
right of modifying and regulating the quantity of public supplies, and the
manner of laying taxes: but the Commons, by their own authority, cannot enforce
the raising the supplies they vote. That privilege is inherent in the supreme
and unaccountable power vested in the three branches of the Legislature united;
who are in fact the State, as the virtual Representatives of the whole Empire,
and not the delegates of individuals.

Why it has been so generally received as a maxim, in this country, That
Taxation and Representation are inseparable, requires to be explained. Men,
little acquainted with the Constitution, derived the opinion from their
finding, that it is the indisputable right of the Commons, that all grants of
subsidies and parliamentary aids should originate in their House. But though
they first bestow those subsidies and aids, their grants, as has been already
observed, have no effect without the assent of the other two branches of the
Legislature. The common reason given for this exclusive privilege is, That as
the supplies are raised upon the body of the people, the people only ought to
have the right of taxing themselves. This argument would have been conclusive,
if the Commons taxed none but those by whose suffrages they obtained their
seats in Parliament. But it has appeared, that more than seven millions of
people, besides the Peers, who are in possession of so large a share of
property in the kingdom, have no voice in the election of the Members who sit
in the Lower House. The Commons, therefore, and their Constituents not being
the only persons taxed, the former cannot possibly have the only right of
raising and modelling the supply, from the mere circumstance of Representation.
But if they have it not from Representation, they must in fact derive it from
the supreme and discretionary power, which is reposed in them, in conjunction
with the two other branches of the Legislature. It appears, upon the whole,
that Taxation is the result of that discretionary authority placed in the hands
of the Legislature, and exerted by them for the necessary support of the State.
To this authority the whole Empire must submit, and consequently no one of its
subjects can claim any exemption.

The Counties Palatine of Chester, Durham, and Lancaster, were anciently in the
same predicament with the Americans, on the article of Taxation. The Earl of
Chester and the Bishop of Durham became, by prescription and immemorial custom,
possessed of a kind of regal jurisdiction, within their respective territories.
A similar form of Government was established by King Edward III. in the County
of Lancaster; which was erected first into an Earldom, and then into a Dukedom,
in the person of Henry Plantagenet; whose heiress carried the same rights and
privileges to John of Gant, that King's fourth son, and his posterity. But
though the SUBORDINATE SOVEREIGNS of these Counties could pardon treasons,
murders and felonies; though they appointed all Judges, nominated all Justices
of the Peace, and, in short, possessed exclusively the whole internal
Government of their several Counties; their SUBJECTS (if the expression may be
used) were "always bound by the Acts and Statutes" Statutes at Large, 34 and 35
of Henry VIII. c. 13.
of an Assembly, in which they had no Representatives. They were also "liable
to all payments, rates, and subsidies, granted by the Parliament of England"
Ibid. 25 of Charles II. c. 9.
.

Those Counties (it must be confessed), like the Americans, considered their
being excluded from having Representatives in an Assembly by which they were
taxed, a grievance. Accordingly, the Town and County of Chester, as far back as
the thirty-fifth of Henry VIII. petitioned the Legislature for the privilege of
sending Members to Parliament; and their request was granted by an express
Statute 34 and 35 of Henry VIII. c. 13.
. The County and City of Durham made a similar application, and with the same
success, in the twenty-fifth of Charles II 25 of Charles II. c. 9,
. Had the Americans, instead of flying to arms, submitted the same supposed
grievance, in a peaceable and dutiful manner, to the Legislature, I can
perceive no reason why their request should be refused. Had they, like the
County and City of Chester, represented, that "for lack of Knights and
Burgesses to represent them in the High Court of Parliament, they had been
oftentimes TOUCHED and GRIEVED with Acts and Statutes made within the said
Court, derogatory to their most ancient jurisdictions, liberties and
privileges, and prejudicial to their quietness, rest and peace;" this Country
would, I am persuaded, have no objection to their being represented in her
Parliament.

But the Colonies, though that circumstance is only insinuated in the
Declaration, have uniformly affirmed, that granting the supremacy of Parliament
should extend over the whole Empire, yet that they themselves have a right to
an exemption from Taxes either by the concessions of the Legislature, or by
charters from the King. It seems incompatible with reason, say they, that the
Colonies should have internal Legislatures of their own, possessing the
authority of taxation, and that, notwithstanding, the British Parliament should
retain its power of laying imposts. The first of these assertions is not
founded in truth. The Charters give no exemption from Taxation; on the
contrary, some of them expressly subject the Colonies to the supreme
Legislature of Great Britain; and had the Charters mentioned an exemption, the
Legislature, by virtue of its supreme, universal, and discretionary power, can
recall any rights they have conferred, when the good of the State renders that
measure necessary. Though the King may give away by Charter a right that
militates against himself, as hereditary Chief Magistrate, he cannot authorize,
by any deed whatever, an exemption from the general laws of the State. In such
a case ONE of the THREE branches of the Legislature would usurp the power of
the THREE UNITED; a solecism as great in polity, as it is in mathematics to
assirm, that a part is greater than the whole.

It may be necessary, perhaps, to make an apology for entering so minutely into
the argument in favor of the right of Taxation. The Americans themselves have
deserted that ground. They speak no longer as subjects. They assume the
language of rivals, and they act as enemies. The question between them and
Great Britain (for it is no longer between them and Government) consists of
dependence or independence, connection or no connection, except on the footing
of a Sovereign State. They have already arrogated to themselves all the
functions of Sovereignty. They have formed a great deliberative Council. They
have taken the whole executive power into their own hands. They have struck a
new currency, raised armies, appointed generals; and that they have not chosen
ANOTHER SOVEREIGN, must be ascribed more to their Republican principles, than
to any remains of loyalty for their lawful Prince.

In this situation of affairs and opinions, it is matter of little surprise,
that men who deny the authority of the State should load the Legislature with
opprobrious epithets. The Congress accordingly stigmatize Parliament with
various charges of tyranny, violence, and oppression. Passing from this strain
of general scurrility, they enter into warm encomiums on the ancestors of their
Constituents. But they now deviate as much from truth in their applause, as
they had done before in their censure. They affirm, that the ancestors of the
Colonists obtained the lands which they have transmitted to the present race,
"without any charge to the country from which they removed." Their very enemies
could not wish to meet them on more advantageous ground. The sums expended upon
the various Provinces, since their first establishment, for their ordinary
support, government, and protection, have been so enormous, that without the
authority of incontestible vouchers, they could scarcely obtain credit An
Account of what Sums have been granted to the different Provinces in North
America, as far as it appears from the Estimates for the support of the Civil
Government of each Province; and also what Sums have been granted for the
Support of the Provincial Forces in North America.
L. s. d. New York Forces 339,055 16 8 Carolina in general 43,024 9 10 Georgia
settling, and securing that Province 250,853 4 6 -- Military Expense of ditto
130,066 18 4 South Carolina Forces 101,524 5 6 Nova Scotia Civil Government
1,358,240 17 6 East Florida Civil Government 59,300 0 0 West Florida Civil
Government 64,324 13 6 America in general forces 172,999 0 0 Rewards and
compensations 1,316,511 1 5 3,835,900 7 4


.

But, even granting that the Colonists had obtained their lands without any
charge to the Mother Country, were they capable of keeping those lands without
her assistance? Was it not to defend the Americans, that Great Britain involved
herself in the last expensive war? Did not those very "United Provinces," who
now pretend to set the power of this Kingdom at defiance, lay themselves in the
dust at her feet, to claim her aid and protection against a SINGLE Colony? Did
they not complain in the same abject terms with the Britons of old, "That the
Barbarians drove them into the sea, and that the sea drove them back on the
Barbarians?" Did not Great Britain, like a Guardian Angel, stretch forth her
hand to their aid; and, by expelling their enemies from the Continent of
America, rescue them, not only from danger, but the very fear of danger? Did
she not, over and above the many millions she expended upon the fleets and
armies employed in defense of the Colonies, advance more than ONE MILLION to
pay THEIR own native forces, employed in THEIR own Cause GRANTS in PARLIAMENT
for Rewards, Encouragement, and Indemnification to the Provinces in North
America for their Services and Expenses during the last War.
Date of Votes. L. s. d. 3 Febr. 1756. As a free Gift and Reward to the
Colonies of New England, New York, and Jersey, for their past services, and as
an encouragement to them to continue to exert themselves with vigor, etc.
115,000 -- -- 19 May, 1757. For the use and relief of the Provinces of North
and South Carolina and Virginia, in recompense for services performed and to be
performed with the approbation of the Commander in Chief in America, 50,000 ^
June, 1758. To reimburse the Province of Massachuset's Bay their expenses in
furnishing provisions and stores to the troops raised by them in 1756, L.
27,380 19 11 To reimburse the Province of Connecticut their expenses for ditto,
L. 13,736 17 7 41,117 17 6 30 Apr. 1759. As a compensation to the respective
Colonies in North America for the expense of levying, clothing and pay of the
troops raised by them, etc. 200,000 -- -- 31 Mar. 1760. Ditto, 200,000 -- -- To
the Colony of New York to reimburse their expenses in furnishing provisions and
stores to the troops raised by them in 1756 2,977 7 8 20 Jan. 1761. As a
Compensation to the respective Colonies in North America, for the expense of
levying, clothing, and pay of the troops raised by them, etc. 200,000 -- -- 26
Jan. 1762. Ditto, 133,333 6 8 15 Mar. 1763. Ditto, 133,333 6 8 22 Apr. 1770. To
reimburse the Province of New Hampshire their expenses in furnishing provisions
and stores to the troops raised by them for the Campaign in 1756 6,009 13 3
1,081,771 11 9


?

Did not the Mother Country, with more than a mother's fondness, upon all
occasions nourish, cherish, and support this prodigal child, that left the
house of his parent, "to feed on husks, with the swine of the desert?" Has she
not (to sum up the whole in one point of view) uniformly protected the Colonies
in war, encouraged their produce with bounties in time of peace An Account of
Bounties on American Commodities.
L. s. d. Bounty on Indico from 1749 to 1773 paid by Great Britain 145,022 3 4
Bounty on Hemp and Flax paid under the Act of 4 Geo. III. chapter 26. from 1766 to
1772 5,560 8 7 Bounty on Importation of Naval Stores from America, pursuant to
the Act of the 3d of Queen Anne, from 1706 to 1729 430,178 4 6 Under the Act of
2d Geo. II. from 1729 to 1774 1,028,584 7 3 Besides other Bounties granted on
Raw Silk Pipe Staves Hogshead Staves Barrel Staves Pipe, Hogshead, or
Barrel-Heading.



, entered into all their quarrels with their neighbors, made their enemies her
own; and, for their sake, has she not, in some degree, subjected herself to an
annual tribute to Indian savages, in whom habitual injuries had raised an
irreconcilable hatred to their oppressors? Did she not, too fatally,
relinquish great advantages on every other side of a successful war, to
eradicate the very seeds of future contests in America; and, by giving the
Colonies unlimited security from ABROAD, procure for them that prosperity at
HOME, which has encouraged them, like parricides, to raise the dagger against
her own breast?

The Congress, in the next paragraph of their Declaration, affect to reprobate
the last Peace, though they have derived so many and so great advantages from
that treaty. The conduct of the Americans ought also to induce this Kingdom to
regret the stipulations she made for their security. Had Canada remained in the
hands of the French, the Colonies would have remained dutiful subjects. Their
fears for themselves, in that case, would have supplied the place of their
pretended affection for this Nation. They would have spoken more sparingly of
their own resources, as they might daily stand in need of our aid. Their former
incapacity of defending themselves would have always recurred to their minds,
as long as the objects of their former terror should continue so near their
borders. But their habitual fears from France were, it seems, removed only to
give room to their ingratitude to Great Britain.

The effrontery with which the Congress reprobate the late Peace, is scarcely
equal to their folly in applauding the Minister who had carried on the war.
With peculiar inconsistency they affect to commence an era of "Public Ruin,"
from Mr. Pitt's resignation in 1761; yet the whole "object of their wishes" is
to be placed on the same footing as in the year 1763. They do not recollect, or
rather they pretend to forget, that the most splendid actions in the war,
happened after Mr. Pit retired from his office. They are ignorant, or
designedly conceal, that the commerce of this kingdom has amazingly increased,
and, in consequence, its revenue, since the era from which they date public
ruin. They know, or they ought, from their own experience, to know, that
notwithstanding their shutting their ports against our manufactures, permanent
and profitable sources of commerce have been opened in other quarters; that
instead of being distressed by their present interruption to trade, our
Merchants find themselves incapable of fulfilling their commissions from
foreign states; that as the surest test of the flourishing condition of
commerce, the course of exchange, to the amount of several per cents. is
universally in favor of Great Britain; and that, as the ultimate and
invincible proof of the public prosperity, the confidence of the people in the
measures of Government, and their contempt for the rebellious efforts of the
refractory Colonies, the national Stocks suffer neither fluctuation nor fall in
the price.

Having represented the pretended ruin brought upon the British Empire by the
late Peace, the Congress descend to the fictitious grievances of America since
the same period. They affirm, that "the Colonies were judged to be in such a
state, as to present victories without bloodshed, and all the easy emoluments
of statutable plunder." This figure of rhetoric, if it has any meaning, conveys
one contrary to the truth. The Colonists having obtained such amazing
advantages by a Peace, which they now reprobate, it was deemed just and proper
by Mr. Grenville, then at the head of the Treasury, that they should bear a
proportionable share of the national burdens incurred by the war. But as their
prior inability to bear internal Taxes had precluded him from having a
precedent, he only threw out, as it is vulgarly expressed, in the beginning of
the year 1764, his intentions of raising a revenue in America by a Stamp-Duty,
similar to that established in Great Britain; referring the consideration of
the whole affair to the next Session. His object was, to give time to the
Colonies to propose some other mode of Taxation, should that suggested to
Parliament appear either improper or burdensome. During the whole of the summer
1764, though some discontented spirits murmured, not a single doubt was started
against the ABSOLUTE RIGHT of Parliament to impose Taxes on every Member of the
British Empire. The time allowed to the Colonies furnished them with no
expedient for raising a tax more suitable to the purpose of a Revenue (which,
by the bye, was to have been spent among themselves); and, therefore, in the
beginning of the year 1765, the famous Stamp Act was passed, against a very
inconsiderable Minority, in both Houses of Parliament.

In this Kingdom, as well as in every State possessed of freedom, there are
always to be found factious persons, who oppose every measure of Government. In
their eagerness to disgrace the Minister, they too frequently obstruct the
service, and defeat the interests of their Country. Every side of a speculative
point is armed with arguments, that may impose on the ignorant, and encourage
the sanguine. The Opposition in Parliament, in short, committed themselves too
far in favor of the prejudices of the Americans, with regard to the Stamp Act,
to support it with vigor, when they themselves, very unexpectedly Lord
Rockingham and others in Opposition came into office July 10, 1765, Grenville
and his party having thrown themselves out of place on the Regency Bill.
, came into Office, a few months after it had passed into Law. Though their
view of the object changed with their elevation, they found that the flame
which their own factious speeches, in the preceding Session, had raised in
America, was too vehement to be extinguished without concessions. A natural
timidity of disposition, joined to the common want of firmness which
accompanies novelty in Office, rendered them inclinable to purchase present
quiet for themselves, at the expense of the future advantage of their Country.
But still they wavered on the point of irresolution, till Mr. Pitt's oratory
weighed down the scale. The Stamp Act was repealed; and from that moment may be
dated "the commencement of" what the Americans call "an Era of Public Ruin."

To enter into the motives of Mr. Pitt's oratory, for the total and absolute
repeal of the Stamp Act, would be to desert a great and public subject for the
sake of tracing the private views of an ambitious man. In his Argument, if what
he advanced deserves the name, he fell in with the vulgar and, it may be said,
false maxim, That no profit ought to be expected from the Colonies, but That
resulting from their Commerce. This opinion of Mr. Pit, whether it proceeded
from ignorance or design (and it probably proceeded from both), has formed a
popular error in former times, as well as in the present age. Many, who have
pretended to understand perfectly the affairs of this kingdom, most firmly, but
in my opinion very weakly, believed that the great secret of our political
interest consisted in forcing, in a manner, a monopoly of foreign commerce. It
was from this persuasion, that the popular Orator used, upon the occasion just
mentioned, a figure of rhetoric at once foolish and absurd, when he affirmed,
that the Colonists should be prohibited "from manufacturing even the hobnail of
a horse-shoe!" One might be tempted to ask the Orator, how this prohibitory
mandate could be enforced; or if it could, whether it is less arbitrary, than
to demand an internal tax from the Americans, for the support of their own
government, and even for the general support of the State, and as a suitable
return for the protection which they have ever derived from the Government of
this kingdom?

The Congress had surely forgot this strange rhetorical figure of the great
Orator, when they were tempted to date PUBLIC RUIN, from his resignation in
1761. They have also forgot, or they do not choose to remember, that he
acquiesced in the DECLARATORY BILL, brought in and passed by the Marquis of
Rockingham's Party, who were in office, in the beginning of the year 1766. This
Bill expressly declares, "that all his Majesty's Colonies and Plantations in
America have been, are and of right ought to be, subordinate to and dependent
upon the Imperial Crown and PARLIAMENT OF GREAT BRITAIN; who have full power
and authority to make laws and statutes of sufficient validity to bind the
Colonies and People of America, subjects of the Crown of Great Britain, IN ALL
CASES WHATSOEVER."

Mr. Pit, to preserve some degree of consistency, objected to the words "IN
ALL CASES WHATSOEVER." But his opposition was so languid, that he did not
attend the House when the Bill was passed; and only five Peers were found to
follow his opinion, when it came under debate in the House of Lords.

"The Declaratory Act," as the American Congress affirms, "comprehends all the
grievances of which they complain." Yet that very Congress, with peculiar
effrontery, not only approve, but even praise the conduct of the very Party by
whom the Bill was introduced, and the MAN, by whose CRIMINAL ACQUIESCENCE (to
use one of his own phrases) it passed into a law. THAT Party and THAT MAN,
being now in opposition to Government, the Americans endeavor to secure their
support, by flattering their vanity at the expense of truth! They forget past
demerits in the hopes of present services. But when they expect to deceive a
whole Party into their interest, they themselves are made the tools of that
Party; and, like the figure of the Negro, near Temple Bar, are turned round by
the machine, which they pretend to move.

The Congress, in a strain of eloquent adulation, speaks with raptures of "that
illustrious Band of distinguished Peers and Commoners," who now declaim, argue,
and protest, in favor of their own Rebellion. It has appeared that the Act of
which they most complain, was the manufacture of that very "illustrious Band,"
encouraged by the negative opposition made by the Earl of Chatham, whose advice
the Band followed, as it soon after appeared, to their own political
destruction. Besides, was it not under the Administration of the Earl of
Chatham, in the years 1767 and 1768, though the Americans date their
misfortunes from the resignation of Mr. Pit in October 1761, that the Bills
imposing internal duties, and consequently establishing internal Taxation in
America, were passed into laws 7 Geo. III. Chapter 46.
? Did not the present Administration, whose measures the Congress affect to
reprobate throughout, repeal all those Acts, except the duty on Tea 10 Geo. III.
, to gratify the prejudices of the Americans, and, if possible, to re-establish
tranquillity in all the Provinces? With what color of reason, therefore, can
the Americans lay the blame either of their real or pretended grievances on the
Noblemen and Gentlemen now in office; and yet approve of the conduct of those
very persons who passed the Declaratory Act, and followed it with Bills of
imposts raised in the Colonies?

In reprobating the Declaratory Act, the Congress recur to their usual maxim,
That Taxation and Representation are inseparable. Though it has been already
shown, that they are as much represented as twenty-four in twenty-five of the
inhabitants of Great Britain; though it has been proved, that whole Provinces,
not represented, had been for several ages subjected to imposts laid by the
Legislature; though it shall, hereafter, appear that they themselves have been
uniformly taxed by the British Parliament; this argument they hold forth as
invincible, and found upon it their present resistance to the supremacy of the
Parent-kingdom. In pursuing it injudiciously and too far, they actually
discover the expediency, and even necessity of that supremacy, of which they so
loudly complain. The Parliament of Great Britain, say they, will certainly
perceive, "that an American revenue, if not diverted from the ostensible
purposes for which it is raised, will actually lighten their own burdens, in
proportion as they increase ours." But is it not equitable, is it not just, is
it not necessary, that all the subjects of the empire should bear, as equally
as possible, the public burdens of the empire? Why should the Americans, who
have so largely, so uniformly, and so effectually experienced the protection of
Government, be the only persons exempted from paying their share of its
expenses? Is it either reasonable or suitable to the common usage of Nations,
that those who desert their country should enjoy greater privileges than those
that remain? The Americans having been spared during the infancy of their
Colonies on account of their poverty, endeavor to establish into an inherent
right what was actually an indulgence.

Though this indulgence has been a source of error to the more ignorant part of
the Americans, there are surely many among them, who know, that Parliament has
been uniformly accustomed to extend its supremacy over all the Colonies. In
matters of revenue, in commerce, in civil, in all judicial regulations; and, in
short, with regard to the general constitution of their government, the
Provinces of North America, till taught otherwise by a disappointed Faction in
this Kingdom, allowed, that the whole fabric of their polity might be
new-modelled and reformed by the superintending power of Parliament. In fact,
it has been so new-modelled and reformed, whenever abuses in the Administration
of their Government, under their civil polity, or the general interest of the
British Empire, made it necessary for Parliament to interpose its authority.
Instances of this interposition, in both cases, present themselves, in almost
every volume of the Statutes, from the Restoration down to the present reign;
yet the Americans falsely insinuate, that it was in the present reign the
exercise of the authority of Parliament (except only in the regulation of
trade) first commenced.

A brief recital of some of those instances may throw light on a subject,
rendered obscure and perplexed by the prejudices of the ignorant, and the arts
of designing men. To gain the ears of the Populace, by awakening their ancient
jealousies, the Americans affect to ascribe the present system of measures to
principles of Toryism, which, they pretend, prevail in our Councils. But,
unfortunately for this part of their plan of deception, it will appear, that
most of the Acts which bind America in coercive regulations, were passed soon
after the Revolution; in the reign of the very Prince, who brought about that
great event. The WHIG Ministers of King William (perceiving that the Colonies,
even then, had entertained views of placing themselves on a ground of
independence on Parliament) advised their Sovereign, and their advice now
stands on record, to pursue measures, which, in their consequence, should
effectually secure their thorough dependence on the Legislature of this Kingdom.

In consequence of the advice given by a WHIG Ministry to a King who had
mounted the throne upon WHIG principles; and also upon the fullest evidence of
the frauds and abuses committed in the Plantations, in violation of the Act of
Navigation; the Act of the 7th and 8th of William III. "for preventing frauds,
and regulating abuses, in the Plantations" was passed. By that Act, a power was
given to the Commissioners of the Treasury and Customs in England, "to
establish ports, and appoint Officers, in the Plantations; and those Officers
to have the same authority for visiting ships and goods, and entering houses
and warehouses, as was exercised by the same Officers in England."

All penalties and forfeitures were made recoverable in the Courts at
Westminster, or in Courts of Admiralty, in the Plantations; which Courts were
then, for the first time, established throughout all America. In any action or
suit concerning his Majesty's Duties, the offense might be laid in any precinct
or division of the Plantations, where the same should be alleged to have been
committed, at the discretion of the Officer or Informer. All laws, bylaws,
usages and customs repugnant to any laws of Great Britain which relate to the
Plantations, or mention the same, are declared "illegal, null, and void." Many
other restrictions, too tedious to be mentioned, were at the same time enacted
and imposed.

But it was not in matters of Trade ONLY, that Parliament, during the reign of
King William, superintended and controuled the Colonies. The Colonists, it was
found, had encouraged Pirates, in various places; and no justice could be
obtained in THEIR Courts against offenders, whom they openly abetted. To remedy
this shameful abuse, a remarkable Act was passed, in the 11th and 12th of
William III. This Act abolished all jurisdiction in that case, in the Courts in
the Plantations. The SOLE power of trying such offenses, in the Colonies, was
vested in Commissioners, appointed under the Great Seal of England, or Seal of
the Admiralty, according to the course of the Admiralty, that is to say,
WITHOUT JURY. The Commissioners were also empowered to issue warrants, in any
of the Colonies, for arresting such Pirates or their accessaries. They might,
at discretion, either try the criminals in America, or send them to England to
be tried. Should the Governors of any Charter or Proprietary Government refuse
to assist the Commissioners; should any person in authority, in the Colonies,
refuse to pay obedience to the Act; such refusal, in either case, was declared
to be a forfeiture of the Charter.

An Act passed in the 10th and 11th year of the same reign, confines the
advantage of the Fishery of Newfoundland to British ships fitted out from
Great Britain. The execution of the orders and regulations respecting that
Fishery, was placed in the hands of the Admirals, in the respective harbors;
that is to say, in the hands of the Master of the ship that should first arrive
from Great Britain. The decision in all questions of civil suit is vested in
such Admirals, with appeal to the Commander of the King's ships. All criminal
offenses are to be tried, in any County of England, by the King's Commissioners
of Oyer and Terminer and Goal delivery.

The opinions of this Nation concerning the Government of the Colonies, may be
collected from the above Acts. The authority of Parliament to bind America, in
all cases whatsoever, and whenever the general interest of the whole Empire
required it, was never disputed; and it was often exerted to correct abuses,
and to suppress the ideas of independence, which began, even then, to be
cherished by the Colonies. The same principles, and the same policy, were
carried down by Parliament through the three succeeding reigns of Queen Anne,
and of George I. and George II.

Early in the first of those reigns, the grossest abuses were committed by the
petty Legislatures in the Colonies, with respect to Coin. The interposition of
Parliament became necessary to correct those abuses. An Act was passed in the
6th of Queen Anne, for that purpose; when the Councils of that Princess were
guided by Whigs. By this Act the rates of Foreign Coin, in the Plantations,
were ascertained; and a severe punishment was inflicted on those who should
take them at higher rates. The American Trade was placed in the same reign
under further restrictions, by Act of Parliament. Rice and Molasses were added
to the list of enumerated commodities. In the reign of George I. Furrs and
Copper-ore of the Plantations were subjected to the same restrictions.

The British Parliament confined not to Acts their sense of the undoubted right
they possessed of controuling the Colonies, in all cases whatsoever. In the
Journals of both Houses, there are many Proceedings which furnish proofs of
their undeviating adherence to the same principles. In the year 1702, a Bill
was brought into the House of Commons, for abolishing all the Charter and
Proprietary Governments in America, and reuniting them to the Crown. In 1705,
the House of Lords came to several Resolutions on the subject of laws enacted
in several of those Governments. They declared those laws to be repugnant to
the laws of England, and destructive to the Constitution. This proceeding was
likewise followed by a Bill for abolishing those Charters.

These Bills, it must be confessed, were not carried into laws. But they did
not fail, through any doubt entertained by the Legislature against their
propriety. They were lost through a change in the situation of those, who
brought forward the measure. That the opinion of the Legislature continued the
same on this subject, is evident; as the same proposition was again taken up in
the year 1716; when a WHIG Ministry governed the Kingdom.

In the reign of George II. the instances of the controuling authority of
Parliament over the Colonies, are more numerous and striking. By an Act of the
2d of George II. Chap. 35. severe prohibitions and penalties are imposed and
inflicted on such persons as shall cut and destroy whole Pinetrees. Though such
trees are growing within the limits of a Township, the penalties are directed
to be sued for and recovered in the Courts of Admiralty. The Merchants of
Great Britain having, in the 5th of the same reign, preferred a Petition to
Parliament, complaining of the difficulties they met with in the recovery of
debts in the Plantations; an Act was passed, which subjected all real Estates
in the Colonies to just debts and demands; and to be assets, in the same manner
as in England, for the satisfaction of debts due by Bond. The exportation of
Hats from any of the Colonies, and even the conveyance of them by land from one
Colony to another, is prohibited, under severe penalties, by an Act passed in
the same Session.

In the year 1733 the Province of Massachusett's-Bay presented a Petition to
the House of Commons, praying that they might be heard by Counsel on the
subject of Grievances. The chief of these was, "That the Crown had restrained
their Governor, by instructions, in certain cases relative to the issue and
disposal of Public Money, and the emission of Paper-Bills of Credit." The
Commons, having considered the matter, came to a Resolution, "That the Petition
was frivolous and groundless, a high insult upon his Majesty's Government, and
tending to SHAKE OFF THE DEPENDENCY of the said Colony upon this Kingdom, to
which in LAW and RIGHT THEY OUGHT TO BE SUBJECT." Complaint having, at the same
time, been made to the House, "That the Representatives of that Colony had
CENSURED a person for giving evidence, before a Committee of the House, in the
case of a Bill then depending in Parliament;" it was resolved, "That the
passing such censure was an AUDACIOUS PROCEEDING, and a high violation of the
privileges of the House." A Committee was accordingly appointed to enquire who
were the abettors of this unwarrantable proceeding.

We may perceive, from the above circumstance, how jealous Parliament HAVE BEEN
of their supremacy and uncontrollable authority over the Colonies. Another
instance must carry the proof of this position beyond the power of reply. In
the year 1740, the House of Commons entered into a consideration of "the abuses
committed in the Colonies, in respect to the emission of Paper Bills of
Credit." After a long examination, they came to various Resolutions. They
resolved, "That the Act passed in the 6th of Queen Anne, ascertaining the rates
of Foreign Coin in America, had not been duly observed. That many indirect
practices, in that respect, had been introduced, contrary to the true intent of
the Act. That an Address should be presented to his Majesty to require the
Governors of his Colonies to take effectual measures for the strict observance
of the Act of the 6th of Queen Anne. That another Address should be presented,
requesting his Majesty to issue his Royal Proclamation, to settle and ascertain
the rates of Foreign Gold Coins. That the CREATING and issuing Bills of Credit,
in the British Colonies, by virtue of Acts of Assembly, had frustrated the
design of the Act of the 6th of Queen Anne. That an humble Address of Thanks
should be presented to his Majesty, for the orders he has already given on that
head; and, That he should also be requested to require and command the
Governors of the respective Provinces, not to give their assent to any Act,
whereby Bills of Credit might be issued in lieu of Money."

These spirited Resolutions of the Commons checked, for some time, the abuses
in the emission and circulation of Paper-Money. The New England Government,
however, did not continue long to pay any regard to ROYAL Instructions, though
supported and enforced by the authority of the House of Commons. The frauds
committed awakened again the attention of Parliament. In the 24th of George II.
an Act was passed, "to regulate and restrain Paper-bills of Credit in the Four
New England Governments." The Governors of those Colonies were prohibited,
under pain of being removed from their Governments, and for ever rendered
incapable of any public office or place of trust, from assenting to any Act,
Order, or Vote, for the issue of any Paper-bills of Credit; and all such Acts,
Orders, or Votes, were declared to be, ipso facto, null and void.

In the year 1741 the Colonies took up the idea of a LAND-BANK, which had
proved so unsuccessful in England in the reign of King William. The "American
Assemblies," it appeared to Parliament, "had PRESUMED to publish a scheme for
supplying a pretended want of a medium in trade, for setting up a Bank on land
security, and to solicit subscriptions." To correct this evil, an Act was
passed, in the 14th of George II. "to restrain and prevent such unwarrantable
practices; and to extend to America, the penalties inflicted by a Statute of
the 6th of George I. on persons guilty of such practices in these kingdoms."
They were also subjected, by the same Act, to the penalty and forfeiture
ordained by the Statute of provision and PRAEMUNIRE of the 16th of Richard the
Second.

There are several other Statutes by which Parliament with equal force assert
their authority over the Colonies. In some of these they carry this authority
beyond the limits, with which they have hitherto circumscribed it in this
Kingdom. In the 29th of George II. cap. 35. Officers of the Army are empowered
to enlist, in the Colonies, apprentices and indented servants. The persons so
enlisted were exempted from arrests in civil actions, where the value of the
action exceeds not ten pounds. To these striking instances of the controuling
power of Parliament over the Colonies, may be added the Act of 23d of George
II. cap. 29. By that Act, "every person erecting or working any mill or other
engine for slitting or rolling iron, or any plating forge or furnace for making
steel, is subjected to a penalty of 200l. to be recovered in any of the Courts
in Westminster Hall, or in the Court of Exchequer in Scotland."

The foregoing recital of Statutes binding the Colonies, prior to the present
reign, of which the Congress so much complain, is sufficient to convince the
dispassionate, that the controuling power of Parliament has been perpetually
exerted, and never disputed. There is hardly any object of Legislation in which
the laws of this Country have not bound America. Taxation has been purposely
omitted in the above detail. That article, as the great object of contest,
ought to be separately stated. I shall, therefore, throw into one point of
view, all the instances of the exercise of the power of the British Parliament
in that case.

The first instance of Taxation is the Act of the 12th of Charles II. for
granting to the Crown a duty of Tonnage and Poundage. This Act is in point. It
directs, that the duties abovementioned "shall be payable upon commodities not
only imported into the realm of England, but also into the DOMINIONS THEREUNTO
BELONGING." The Colonies are here included in express words. It is true,
indeed, that the Duties of Tonnage and Poundage were NOT collected in America.
The reason was, that the commerce of the Plantations was so inconsiderable,
that the revenue arising from it could not pay the expense of collection.

But whatever might have been the reason for NOT collecting the Duties of
Tonnage and Poundage in the Colonies, the Law was certainly understood to
extend to America. In the year 1680, the Assembly of the Island of Jamaica
refused "to raise levies for the support of Government." Upon this refusal, the
Lords of the Council made a Minute "to confer with the Judges upon the
question: Whether the subsidies upon the Tonnage and Poundage upon goods that
may by Law, or shall be directly carried to Jamaica, be not payable, according
to Law, by his Majesty's subjects inhabiting that Island, or trading there, by
virtue of the Acts of Tonnage and Poundage, or other Acts made in England?"
Unfortunately it does not appear, whether the conference was ever held; or if
it was actually held, what was the result.

The 25th of Charles II. cap. 7. is the next Act that binds America, in point
of Taxation. By that Act certain duties are made payable in the Plantations,
upon sugar, tobacco, cotton, wool, indigo, ginger, logwood, fustic, and other
dying woods, and cocoa-nuts exported to any other place, except England. These
Duties continue to be paid to this day.

In the 9th of Queen Anne, an Act was passed, imposing certain Duties on all
prize-goods taken in America, and imported into any of the Colonies. These
Duties were as follows: "All European goods (wine and brandy excepted) which
have been usually sent to the Plantations, are to pay THERE such Customs, as
are payable for the like goods imported into the Plantations from
Great Britain. Other goods taken as prizes shall be liable THERE to such Duties
as were payable for the same, by any Act of Assembly, in the said Plantations."

To these Acts, subjecting his Majesty's subjects in America to Taxes imposed
by the British Parliament, several others may be added. The Act of the 9th of
Queen Anne, for establishing a Post Office. The various Acts passed for levying
and enforcing the collection of the duty of sixpence per month, out of Seamen's
wages, for the support of Greenwich Hospital. All these Acts extend to America.
They bind the Colonies, as well as the Mother Country. Their authority was
never disputed; and the Taxes imposed by them have been uniformly raised. The
Act of the 2d of George II. cap. 7. is still more explicit and decisive in the
words. It requires the payment of the Duties for Greenwich Hospital, "by seamen
belonging to American ships, whether employed upon the high seas, or in any
port, harbor, bay or creek, within ANY of the Colonies."

It appears from this detail of facts, that the right of Parliament to bind the
Colonies, in all cases whatsoever, is not a claim founded on mere theory: on
the contrary, that the controuling power of the Legislature is warranted by
constant usage, and uninterrupted practice. That the Declaratory Act, of which
the Americans complain, contains no new, no assumed powers over the
Plantations; and that there is scarce any channel of Legislation, through which
the British Parliament has NOT exerted its supremacy, in as full and ample a
manner as it has been exerted over the inhabitants of Great Britain; and all
this prior to the present reign, in which the Congress place the commencement
of "Public Ruin."

The American Congress, with a partiality for themselves scarcely consistent
with their design of gaining others, in the next paragraph of their
Declaration, call the Acts, which were the CONSEQUENCE of the resistance of
their constituents, the CAUSE of their rebellion. In descending to particulars,
their first complaint is stated against "the extension of the jurisdiction of
the Courts of Admiralty and Vice-Admiralty beyond their former limits;" by
which, they allege, "the subject is deprived of his inherent right of a trial
by Jury." The Congress surely forget, or it is not consistent with their design
to remember, that the alterations of which they complain were made at the
request of their constituents. The reasons assigned for this request were, that
the Courts of Admiralty established formerly in the various Provinces,
possessed so little dignity, on account of the dependence and poverty of the
judges, that justice was either sacrificed to connexions, or biassed by
avarice. Besides that, Appeals to Great Britain could be seldom made, on
account of the expense and distance. To remedy this evil, the present
establishment of Courts of Admiralty in America was formed. Four great Courts
of Vice-Admiralty were erected. The Judges were rendered independent by ample
salaries. The line of Appeal became short, easy, and obvious; and as to trial
by Jury, the whole world knows that the Court of Admiralty in England never
admitted that mode of trial in CIVIL cases.

The complaint of the Congress, with regard to the Bill for shutting the Port
of Boston, is ridiculous as well as unjust, as the inhabitants of that place
had it in their own power to remove the grievance. The destruction of the
East India Company's tea, at Boston, is well known to have been the deliberate
act of a very great majority of the inhabitants. To obtain reparation by the
common course of law was impossible, where the number of the offenders screened
them effectually from justice. It was a public crime, and the punishment ought
to have been general. In pursuance of that plan of tenderness, which has been
fatally lost on the Americans, the Bill for suspending the trade of Boston was
rendered conditional. A door was left open for an immediate reconciliation,
should the Assembly of Massachuset's-Bay make a public grant, for repairing the
damage sustained, by a Company of Merchants, through a public outrage. Yet the
Congress stigmatize with the name of injustice, a coercive statute rendered
absolutely necessary by the shameless depredations of the inhabitants of
Boston; and which statute, they themselves had it in their power to terminate,
in an instant, by doing an act of common justice.

With equal effrontery, and with still less reason, the Congress exclaim
against the alteration made in the form of the government of Boston. With their
usual fallacy in argument, the Americans wish to establish it as a maxim in
polity, That Charters granted by the CROWN, can neither be reversed or altered
by the LEGISLATURE. They might as well go at once to the whole supremacy; and
save themselves the trouble of thus supporting a cause untenable on any other
grounds. The three branches of the Legislature united make daily alterations in
the Constitution of Great Britain; and, if their Supremacy extends over the
whole empire, they have the same right to alter the constitution of the
American Colonies. If the Americans deny this position, all argument is at an
end; and they avow an independence, which, in THEIR circumstances, marks them
out for enemies. After all, this alteration of which the Congress affect to
complain, is no more than putting the inhabitants of Massachuset's-Bay on the
same footing with the other Colonies. They have received in miniature the
counter-part of the constitution of the Mother-Kingdom; and have THEY a right,
or can THEY wish to be more free than the freest nation in the world?

The Act for regulating the Government of Quebec, furnishes the Congress with
an ample field for declamation. To inveigh against Popery and Arbitrary Power
has been ever a favorite topic with men, who wish to profit by the prejudices
of the people. Had the Congress attended to the general principles of the
British Constitution, they might have informed themselves, that His Majesty,
without the interposition of the two other branches of the Legislature, might
have permitted the inhabitants of Canada to remain for ever under French laws.
There is no maxim in the Law of England more generally known or less
controverted than, That in conquered or ceded countries, which have already
laws of their own, such laws remain in full force, till they are altered and
changed by the Sovereign. Had His Majesty, therefore, entertained such designs,
as the Congress obliquely lay to his charge, why should he call in the aid of
the Legislature to execute what was already done by the Common Law? The
Congress will not, surely, affirm, that the system of government established by
the Legislature in Quebec, is so arbitrary in itself, or so fit for the
purposes of despotism, as the Constitution which subsisted in that Province
under the French. Ought they not to consider, that no other form of government
could have been established, so suitable to the disposition of the inhabitants,
the tenures of their property, and the toleration of their religion, to all
which they had an undoubted right, by the terms of their Capitulation and the
articles of the subsequent Treaty of Peace?

The Opposition at HOME, as well as the Patriots ABROAD, have found an
extensive subject for pathetic eloquence, in the form of Government now
established by Law in Canada. The FORMER have either very treacherous memories,
or they change without any ceremony their opinions with their situation. Under
the administration of the EARL of CHATHAM, Mr. Morgan, Lord SHELBURNE'S
Secretary, was sent PRIVATELY to America, as Commissioner, to settle and
regulate a new code for the Government of Quebec. The Governor and Chief
Justice of that Province, if I am not mistaken, were joined with Morgan in this
SECRET, but important commission. The measure, it is said, was considered by
the Board of Trade; it was certainly debated, if not adopted by the Cabinet, as
far back as the year 1767, during the plenitude of the Earl of Chatham's power.
Lord Camden was Chancellor, and gave his sanction to regulations MORE ALLIED TO
DESPOTISM than those he reprobates at present. The Duke of Grafton, the Earl of
Shelburne, General Conway, and several others of "that illustrious Band," on
whose virtues the Americans expatiate with rapture, approved this POPISH,
ARBITRARY, TYRANNICAL system of Government Lord Rockingham had the merit of
sending a Popish Bishop to Quebec.
: yet all these are, now, true Americans, strenuous Protestants, Whigs of the
ancient mould, determined assertors of public freedom, avowed enemies to
OPPRESSION, POPERY, and ARBITRARY POWER!

The Congress enumerate, among their complaints against the British
Legislature, the Resolution of Parliament to give its due force to an
unrepealed statute passed in the time of Henry VIII. It is declared in the
Resolution, that upon this statute, treasons and misprisions of treason
committed in any of his Majesty's dominions beyond sea, subject to the Crown of
Great Britain, may be tried in England. Though this Resolution is considered by
the Congress as a part of the ideal system of enslavement, with which they
charge the King and Parliament, it contains no novelty, no uncommon stretch of
law. A thousand instances of the same kind are upon record, long before the
present disputes with America began. One instance is extremely remarkable; I
mean, the transactions in the Case of the Insurrection in Antigua, in the year
1711. All the proceedings were founded on the Act of Henry VIII. Some of the
Insurgents were sent to England; they were tried upon that Statute; and that
circumstance has established a precedent which cannot be controverted. But had
even a new law of this kind been made, what reason could the American Congress
have to complain? Have not the prejudices, insurrections, and even rebellion of
their own countrymen totally interrupted the common course of justice over all
the vast Continent which they inhabit; and shall the generality of the crime be
admitted a competent excuse against punishment?

From condemning the Acts of the Legislature, the Congress pass to complaints
against their Sovereign, as well as his principal servants. They allege, that
the "Americans have incessantly and ineffectually besieged the Throne for ten
years;" yet conceal the reason, which was, That their demands, rather than
requests, were such as the Sovereign could not grant, consistent with the
powers vested in him by the Constitution. They complain, that fleets and armies
have been sent to their country, to enforce the coercive laws enacted by the
Legislature, for the establishment of its supremacy; yet they pass over in
silence the outrages committed by themselves, which rendered that measure
necessary. Did they not draw the sword with one hand, when the other was
stretched forth with petitions for relief from pretended grievances? Did they
not purchase arms, ammunition, and artillery, form magazines, enlist soldiers,
and prepare, in every respect, for rebellion and war, when they affected to
speak the language of submission and peace?

All these are facts that cannot be controverted. The Congress know the truth,
but pursue their plan of deception. "They hoped in vain," they say, "for
moderation in their enemies"; yet their own conduct has been one continued
series of violence, oppression, and injustice. Having disclaimed their
allegiance to the Sovereign, disobeyed the acts of the Legislature, destroyed
the property, and insulted the persons of the servants of the State, assumed
the functions of sovereignty, and rushed into actual rebellion; they complain
of a want of moderation in Government, for exerting the power vested in it by
the Constitution, for restoring tranquillity, enforcing legal submission to the
laws of the State, and for protecting the injured and punishing the guilty.

Throughout the whole of their strange Declaration, the American Congress
appear to adapt their reasonings to the weakness of the prejudiced, and their
facts to the credulity of the ignorant. They affirm, that they have uniformly
endeavored to procure an accommodation with the Mother Country; yet they
reprobate the Resolution of the Commons, on the 20th of February, which opened
a fair channel for agreement. They call the Resolution "an insidious maneuver,
calculated to divide the Americans, and to establish a perpetual auction of
taxation, where Colony should bid against Colony, all of them uninformed what
ransom should redeem their lives; and thus to extort from them, at the point of
the bayonet, the unknown sums that should be sufficient to gratify, if possible
to gratify ministerial rapacity, with the miserable indulgence left them of
raising, in their own mode, the prescribed tribute." We may learn, from this
tedious and involved sentence, how much the Congress have profited by the
speeches of Patriotism in the British Parliament. A noted Orator, who has been
suspected of having penned the DECLARATORY BILL, (which, the Congress alledge^
contains the whole mass of American grievances,) used almost the same words in
the House of Commons, on the day the Resolution came under debate. But former
demerits have been forgot, in what the American Demagogues foolishly construe
into present services.

To show the nature of the Proposition which the Congress stigmatize with the
name of an "insidious maneuver," some previous facts must be explained. On the
second of February, a Motion was made in the House of Commons, for an Address
to his Majesty, which was soon after presented, with the concurrence of the
Lords. In this Address, the two Houses having stated some facts, were induced
to declare, that a rebellion actually existed at that time in the Province of
Massachuset's bay: That this conduct was the more inexcusable, when it was
considered with how much temper his Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament
had acted, in support of the Laws and Constitution of Great Britain: That they
were resolved never so far to desert the trust reposed in them, as to
relinquish ANY PART of the SOVEREIGN AUTHORITY over ALL his MAJESTY'S
DOMINIONS, which the law invested in his Majesty and the two Houses of
Parliament: That the conduct of the Americans was sufficient to convince them
of the necessity of this supremacy and power: that, however, they had always
been, and always should be ready to pay attention and regard to any real
grievances, which should be laid before them in a DUTIFUL and CONSTITUTIONAL
manner: That they requested his Majesty to take the most effectual measures to
enforce due obedience to the laws and authority of the Supreme Legislature: And
that they were resolved, at the hazard of their lives and fortunes, to support
his Majesty against all rebellious attempts, in the maintenance of the just
rights of his Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament.

In this Address the two Houses of Parliament, while they held forth the Sword
in one hand, evidently tendered the Olive Branch with the other. The Americans
themselves were made the arbiters of their own fate. The choice of war or peace
was left in their own hands. But as the offer of Parliament to listen to the
real grievances of the Colonists was deemed too general to form a foundation
for an agreement between them and the Mother Country, the Minister, wishing to
conciliate matters with America, even contrary to the opinion of many Friends
to this Country, laid before the House of Commons some EXPLICIT PROPOSITIONS,
which might answer that end. Accordingly, on the twentieth of February, the
following Propositions were introduced to a Committee of the whole House, by
the Chancellor of the Exchequer: "That it is the opinion of this Committee,
that when the Governor, Council, and Assembly, or General Court of his
Majesty's Provinces or Colonies shall propose to make provision according to
their respective conditions, circumstances, and situations, for contributing
their proportion to the common defense; such proportion to be raised under the
authorities of the General Court, or General Assembly of such Province or
Colony, and disposable by Parliament; and shall engage to make provision also
for the support of the Civil Government, and the administration of justice in
such Province or Colony; it will be proper, if such proposal shall be approved
by his Majesty in Parliament, and for so long as such provision shall be made
accordingly, to forbear in respect of such Province, or Colony, to levy any
duties, tax, or assessment, or to impose any further duty, tax, or assessment,
except only such duties as it may be expedient to impose for the regulation of
Commerce; the nett produce of the duties last mentioned, to be carried to the
account of such Province, Colony, or Plantation respectively."

This Resolution, which was carried by a great majority, plainly marked the
ground for a negotiation, and an equitable agreement with the Colonies. It was
moderate, comprehensive, and explicit. It named the persons from whom the
proposals must come, and those to whom they were to be made. The end and
purpose of the Contribution were explained. The appropriation of the expected
revenue was specified, and precluded every suspicion of its being misapplied.
Though the offer was conditional, it was plainly conclusive, as long as the
Americans themselves should adhere to the agreement. They had it in their power
to tax themselves, the great point for which they professed to contend; and the
only right reserved by the Legislature was to determine the QUANTUM of the
supply; and they alone can determine it, as being the supreme power, who are
the sole judges of what is necessary to support the State. The Proposition,
upon the whole, was AT LEAST as favorable to the pretensions of the Americans,
as to the claims of the Mother Country. The former, therefore, must have
accepted the proposal, had what they held forth to the Public formed the real
principles of their opposition.

The Minority in Parliament, who deemed nothing so fatal to their own views, as
an agreement with the Americans, upon equitable, and consequently permanent
terms, opposed this Proposition as insidious in its nature, and for that
purpose rendered obscure and perplexed in its language. The American
Demagogues, whose influence can only exist in the midst of anarchy and
confusion, opposed it with similar views. The latter, indeed, have approved so
much of the SENTIMENTS, or rather PROFESSIONS of the former, that they have, in
their Declaration, echoed back their very words in Parliament. The argument
before went only to the claim of the Americans to be permitted, in their
Assemblies, to settle the mode of Taxation. They then demanded an exclusive
privilege of fixing the amount or quantum of the supply; and now they will give
no supply at all. But if neither the mode nor the QUANTUM is to be left in the
power of Parliament, what power has Parliament left, with regard to the taxing
of the Americans? Ought the BRITISH LEGISLATURE to lay HUMBLY the wants of the
Public before the PETTY LEGISLATURES of America, and request their aid for the
general support of Government? What would this be, but the total emancipation
of the Colonies from that supremacy for which we contend?

The Americans, formerly, declared themselves willing to contribute to the
exigences and expenses of the State, provided the demand should come by
requisition from the King, and not by an immediate exertion of Parliamentary
authority. This offer his Majesty declined, with that patriotism which has
uniformly marked his OWN measures, during his reign. Anxious for the happiness
of ALL his subjects, he chose to be the Monarch of ONE great and free nation,
rather than the Sovereign of a number of petty States, weakened by their own
disunion. Had his Majesty been actuated by those motives of ambition, which are
not uncommon among Princes, he would have eagerly closed with the offers of the
Americans. Instead of making himself dependent, for the maintenance of his
dignity, upon the grants of ONE Assembly, he might have extricated himself from
even the fear of pecuniary difficulties, by a proper management of many
Assemblies. The Representatives of one Province might be gratified into the
views of the Crown, from the revenue of another; British Members might receive
the wages of corruption in America; and American Representatives be sent for
the price of their votes to this Kingdom.

But succeeding events have demonstrated, that the Americans were not sincere,
in any one of their declarations, in favor of an amicable accommodation. The
Propositions voted, on the 20th of February, came up to their own former
demands; yet they evaded them, by treating them as insidious. The truth is,
they knew their own demerits toward this Country, and they could not believe,
that proposals so highly favorable could have been, on her part, sincere. One
good, however, has resulted from the Propositions. The Colonies, by rejecting
them, have left no doubt remaining concerning their real intentions. They
confine no longer their claims to the exclusive privilege of taxing themselves.
They aim, evidently, at a total independence in all matters whatsoever; and
more particularly with regard to the Act of Navigation. They have long made
secret but most dangerous encroachments on this PALLADIUM of our Commerce. They
now publicly avow their resolution to pay no regard to any Parliamentary
restrictions, whether ancient or recent, on THEIR Commerce. They now openly
trade all over Europe; and the obtaining the privilege, which they have, at
length, usurped, has been the primary cause of their resistance to Parliament.
The manufacturers and merchants of this Country have been long no strangers to
this American policy; yet the Congress have the effrontery to expect, that the
mercantile interest of Great Britain will espouse their cause.

The American Congress, having in a loose, cursory, and superficial manner,
advanced some pretended arguments to justify their rebellion, descend to the
misrepresentation of facts, with the same design. They affirm, "That General
Gage, who had occupied Boston as a garrison, sent out a large detachment of his
army, on the 19th of April, who made an unprovoked assault on the inhabitants
of the Province of Boston, at Lexington." On this allegation of the Congress,
it may be remarked, that the rebellious conduct of the Town of Boston, where
all the authority of legal government had been long extinguished by the tyranny
of a rabble instigated by factious leaders, had rendered a force necessary in
that place, to restore order and tranquillity, to protect the innocent, and to
restrain the excesses of the turbulent and guilty. That the military
preparations made in all parts of the Province, and especially at the Town of
Concord, with the avowed intention of opposing all legal authority, induced and
even forced General Gage (though fatally too late) to send out a detachment of
the troops under his command, to prevent hostilities, by seizing the means of
carrying them on. That some of the Inhabitants of the Province, in "warlike
array," stood in the way of this detachment, with arms in their hands; and that
when ordered to remove in a peaceable manner, they made "an unprovoked assault"
on his Majesty's troops, by firing FIRST upon them, and killing some, and
wounding many.

The audacity of the Congress, in asserting FALSEHOODS, demands a brief detail
of the TRUTH. General Gage, having been informed, that arms, ammunition,
cannon, and other implements of war, had been collected in the town of Concord,
ordered a detachment of the Army to march with all possible secrecy to that
place. He gave orders to the detachment, to observe the most strict discipline,
and to resent no insults offered them by the country people, except actual
hostilities. The General's orders were, in truth, too implicitly observed.
There was not one LOADED MUSKET in the whole detachment, except those in the
hands of FIFTY Marines, who formed the van, when they were FIRED upon, by the
country people, at Lexington. The affidavits of the rebels, on this subject,
are impositions and perjuries. There is not a man, whether officer or soldier,
in the whole detachment, consisting of 800 men, but is ready, in the most
solemn manner, to attest the truth of this fact.

It were to be wished, for the honor of the insurgents, that their BARBAROUS
CRUELTY to the wounded soldiers, were more problematical than their firing
FIRST on the King's troops. The soldiers who fell by the first fire of the
rebels, were found scalped, when the detachment returned from Concord to
Lexington Bridge. Two soldiers who lay wounded on the field, and had been
scalped by the savage Provincials, were still breathing. They appeared, by the
traces of blood, to have rolled in the agonies of this horrid species of death,
several yards from the place where they had been scalped. Near these
unfortunate men, another dreadful object presented itself. A soldier who had
been slightly wounded, appeared with his eyes torn out of their sockets, by the
barbarous mode of GOOGING, a word and practice peculiar to the Americans.
Humanity forbids us to dwell longer on this scene of horror. The rebels, to
break the force of accusation, began to recriminate. They laid several
instances of wanton cruelty to the charge of the troops; yet nothing is better
ascertained, than that not one of the soldiers ever quitted the road, either
upon their march or return from Concord.

The Congress stigmatize the expedition to Lexington and Concord, with the
epithets "of an unprovoked and wanton assault." Was the collecting warlike
implements at Concord, raising men throughout the Province, disciplining troops
in every district, forming magazines, purchasing ammunition, and preparing
arms, no provocation? Were not the whole Country assembled before they knew of
this expedition? And was not their being so completely provided with the means
of repelling hostilities, a sufficient proof, that they had previously resolved
to commence them? Could TEN THOUSAND men, the number that attacked (though at a
PRUDENT distance) the troops on their retreat, have been collected by accident,
or called together by a sudden alarm? Are not the Congress conscious to
themselves, and was not General Gage sufficiently apprized, that the people of
Massachusets-Bay had determined to begin hostilities, had the expedition to
Concord never happened? The truth is, the march of the troops had only hastened
the execution of the plan of rebellion settled before in the secret Councils of
the Provincial Congress.

The assertions of the Congress concerning transactions within the town of
Boston, are as utterly devoid of truth, as their account of what happened in
the country. The hostile intentions of those WITHIN, were as apparent as the
rebellion of their brethren WITHOUT was certain. The great law of self-defence
must therefore have justified General Gage for having deprived the former of
arms, which they almost avowedly intended to raise against all legal authority.
After the skirmish at Lexington and Concord, all supplies from the country were
cut off from the town of Boston. Many of the inhabitants desired to remove,
with their effects. Their request was granted; but it was at the same time
demanded, that they should deliver up their arms. This was, at first, approved
by all; but great clamours soon after followed. Such of the inhabitants as were
well affected, or pretended to be well affected to Government, alleged, that
none but the ill-inclined showed any inclination to remove; and that when they
should become safe with their effects, the town would be set on fire. A great
demur having also arisen about the meaning of the word EFFECTS, whether
MERCHANDISE was included; and the General being likewise sensible, that the
permitting articles of that kind to be carried to the rebels, might strengthen
them in their resistance; he retained the goods. But they are still safely kept
for the owners, should they either continue faithful, or seize his Majesty's
mercy, and return to their duty.

The next paragraph of the Declaration, as it is not supported by truth, is
addressed to the passions. The Congress complain, with an attempt at the
pathos, "of the separation of wives from their husbands, children from their
parents, and the aged and sick from their relations and friends." But is it not
notorious to the whole world, that this SEPARATION, which the Congress affect
to lament, was the necessary consequence of the rebellion of their countrymen?
Did they not surround the town of Boston, with an armed force, with the avowed
intention of destroying his Majesty's forces, Generals, and Governor? And were
the gates to be left open "to let ruin enter," as one of their own writers
expresses himself? Have the people of Boston suffered more hardships than the
inhabitants of besieged towns usually suffer? Have they not even suffered sewer
restraints than men in their situation had reason to expect? Was not Dr.
Warren, the Chairman of the Provincial Congress, a notorious abettor of the
insurrection, a nominal General in a rebel army, permitted to come into Boston,
under pretense of visiting a sick friend, on the day preceding the action on
Bunker's-hill, where he was killed in arms against his King and Country? Is
this a mark of those cruel restraints, those melancholy separations, of which
the Congress complain? But THEIR business is to engage the passions, where they
can make no impression with their arguments.

In the next paragraph of their Declaration, the Congress, with their usual
want of impartiality and fairness, mention the CONSEQUENCES of their own
rebellion, as the cause of their taking up arms. They observe, that General
Gage issued a Proclamation, "declaring all the inhabitants of Massachusets-Bay
rebels, suspending the course of the Common Law, and publishing instead thereof
the use and exercise of the Law Martial." But, did he declare them rebels till
they had attacked his Majesty's troops, seized his forts and garrisons,
besieged his army in the capital of the Province, and not only interrupted the
common course of justice, but even totally annihilated all legal authority? It
is with peculiar effrontery, that the Congress number the suspension of the
common course of justice among their grievances, after all law and order had
been trodden under foot by their own countrymen.

With the same degree of arrogant folly the Congress complain, that "their
countrymen were killed on Bunker's-hill, that Charlestown was burnt to the
ground, that their ships and vessels have been seized, that their supplies of
provisions have been intercepted, that General Carleton is instigating the
Canadians and Indians against them, and that domestic enemies are encouraged to
attack them." All these things may certainly have happened; but have they not
happened in consequence of their own rebellion? Have they a right to attack
others, and have others no right to defend themselves? Do the inhabitants of
Massachusets-Bay think, that as they have broken through all the ties that bind
the subject to the Sovereign, the law of nature and of nations ought also to be
suspended to gratify their ambition, to flatter their folly, to favor their
extravagant schemes of independence? To the above imaginary catalogue of
American grievances, may be opposed the just complaints of Great Britain. Have
not the rebels carried their hostilities to every corner against the
Parent-State, that first gave them existence, and reared them to prosperity?
Have they not attacked her troops at Lexington and at Concord, fired upon
Boston, burnt the Light-house, taken Ticonderago and Crown Point, and even
penetrated into Canada? And have they not used every artifice to instigate the
Savages to make war on their Sovereign and Mother Country? Almost all these
injuries preceded the just exertions of this Kingdom to punish their rebellion.

The conclusion of the Declaration, though labored, contains nothing but empty
declamation, and therefore merits little notice. The same disregard to truth,
or rather the same attention to misrepresentation, which distinguishes the rest
of that strange composition, is carried down to the end. They allege, "that
they are reduced to the alternative of choosing an UNCONDITIONAL submission to
tyranny, or resistance by force." The Congress surely forget, or it suits THEIR
purpose to pass over in silence, the favorable (perhaps too favorable)
conditions offered to them, by the Resolution of the Commons, in the month of
February last. The terms couched in that Resolution were so obviously
advantageous to America, that the Opposition in Parliament declared them
INSIDIOUS; or, in other words, "too good to be sincere." An amicable settlement
had ceased to have been an object with the Demagogues ABROAD; and it would have
ruined the schemes of the Faction at HOME. The FORMER derived their influence,
consequence, and power, from anarchy and confusion. THEY could exist only in a
storm. The restoration of peace and tranquillity must have reduced THEM to their
original insignificance; and as for the LATTER, rendered desperate by
disappointed ambition, they would not hesitate to ruin their Country, to
procure the fall of their rivals.

Such being the state of opinions among the leaders of Faction on both sides of
the Atlantic, "resistance by force became naturally the choice of the
Congress." To deceive an unhappy people, over whose minds they had established
a temporary dominion, they boast of "their perfect union, and their great
INTERNAL resources; and that foreign assistance is attainable." As to the
first, we have no reason to give it implicit credit. The show of unanimity,
which now subsists in America, appears, from undoubted information, to be the
effect of fear, more than any love for the desperate cause of the rebels. Men
of property are, from interest, enemies to confusion; and the intelligent,
foreseeing the inevitable issue of hostilities against the invincible power of
a mighty Empire, are averse to a contest, that, on the side of the Americans,
must terminate in ruin. But BOTH are terrified into silence by the tyranny of a
misled rabble; or their STILL VOICE is drowned in the clamours of Faction and
tumult of Party.

The INTERNAL RESOURCES of the Americans are as problematical, as their
unanimity in rebellion. Consist these mighty resources in a wretched
Paper-currency, established on no ostensible fund of credit; and voted by an
illegal Assembly, whose authority is feeble, on account of its novelty, and
transitory, as it arises from temporary prejudices? Should force, or even
folly, stamp a domestic value on the paste-board dollars of the Congress, what
foreign nation will receive them for its manufactures and commodities? Are the
Americans themselves capable of furnishing all the great implements necessary
for the prosecution of war? Can they supply their armies with tents, with
powder, with cannon, or with muskets? Is any one of these articles
manufactured in a sufficient quantity in America? And how can they be procured
in Europe, with the wretched currency of the General Congress?

The Colonists, had not reason been warped by prejudice in every part of their
conduct, might have foreseen, that their commencing a war deprived them
instantly of the resources for carrying it on. Their whole Coast is lined, it
is to be hoped, at this very moment, with our ships of war, to put a total stop
to their Commerce. They have, therefore, lost at one stroke their whole trade
in Corn and Rice with Spain, Portugal, and the Mediterranean; which, at a
moderate computation, brought annually One Million Five Hundred Thousand Pounds
to North America. They have lost the supplying our own West India Islands, as
well as those of other nations, with provisions; a branch of Commerce estimated
little short of a Million annually. They have lost their Fishery, an article
too great for computation; and they have lost the exportation to Great Britain
of commodities which would not have answered in any other market, had the sea
remained open to their Navigation.

But if the Americans have little reason to depend on DOMESTIC RESOURCES, they
have still less to hope from FOREIGN AID. Will France, in the present state of
her finances, involve herself in a ruinous and expensive war, to gratify the
revenge of a Faction in this Country, or to favor the ambition of Demagogues
beyond the Atlantic? Will Spain give her assistance to raise an INDEPENDENT
EMPIRE in America? Will she encourage her own American subjects to rise against
her authority, by abetting the rebellion of the American subjects of
Great Britain? Can either Branch of the House of Bourbon be so blind to its own
interest, as to wish to see a Sovereign State erected so near its settlements,
which from their proximity, their produce, and their wealth, must, in such a
case, become objects of invasion, depredation, and conquest? What has either
France or Spain to fear from THIS KINGDOM, whose interest consists solely in
preserving what she has already acquired? But have not BOTH every thing to
fear, should a new Sovereignty start up in America, in which a want of
resources would, in some degree, justify the providing itself at the expense of
wealthy neighbors?

Having endeavored to terrify Great Britain with their DOMESTIC resources and
FOREIGN aids; the Congress thinking, perhaps, they had gone too far, conclude
with assurances, that "they have not YET determined to dissolve their union
with the Mother Country." But that UNION, it appears from the sequel, must not
be construed into SUBORDINATION, on the part of the Americans. The general
supremacy of the Legislature, which by pervading the whole British Empire
renders it ONE State, must not, it seems, cross the Atlantic, but in such
proportions as may suit the inclinations of the Congress. "THEY have taken up
arms," as they openly avow, "against that Supremacy;" and "THEY will not lay
them down till hostilities shall cease on the part of Great Britain." This is
the Ultimatum offered by the Congress: Withdraw your armies, recall your fleets,
and you may have peace from the Americans; for, as "they fight not for
conquest," they do not YET mean to transfer hostilities into the heart of these
kingdoms!

The haughty Monarch who dreamt of universal monarchy in the last century,
could scarcely have expressed himself in more insolent terms to the petty
Princes surrounding his dominions, than the Congress have done to the powerful
Empire to which they owe the allegiance of subjects. Some allowance ought to be
made for THEIR ignorance, and a great deal for the petulance of men new to
consequence and authority; but, even in that case, the insolence of the
Declaration is calculated to raise indignation, as well as contempt. The
Congress, however, are only the echoes of a desperate Faction in this Kingdom,
who have uniformly, in their public exhibitions, degraded the strength, power,
and authority of Great Britain, to exalt America on the ruins. With an
effrontery without example in any other age or nation, THESE MEN assume the
name of Patriots, yet lay the honor, dignity, and reputation of their Country
under the feet of her rebellious subjects. With a peculiar refinement on
Parricide, they bind the hands of the MOTHER, while they plant a dagger in
those of the DAUGHTER, to stab her to the heart; and to finish the horrid
picture, they smile at the mischief they have done, and look round to the
spectators for applause.

It appears, upon the whole, that the Declaration, which ought to contain all
the argument in favor of the Americans, contains, in fact, nothing that does
not militate against their cause. The right of taxing all the subjects of the
Empire, for the general support of the State, is a part of that Supremacy which
the first principles of the Constitution have vested in the British
Legislature. This Supremacy has been exerted by Parliament, and admitted by the
Americans, ever since their ancestors migrated from these kingdoms. If they now
deny it, by that very act they cease to be subjects, and become rebels. But
granting, for the sake of argument, that Taxation is no part of the supremacy
of Parliament, the very conduct of the Americans not only justifies, but even
renders it absolutely necessary, that a precedent should be made. They own,
"that their internal resources are great." The inability of contributing to the
necessities of a State, from whom they have derived their origin, their
support, their protection, and their prosperity, is no longer a pretense; and
if they will give no Revenue as subjects, they owe a debt as allies. They
affect to maintain armies by land. They threaten to send fleets to sea. They
allege, that their resources are capable of supporting a rebellion against the
Mother Country; yet they justify that rebellion by the demand made by the
Mother Country, for their bearing a part of their own FUTURE EXPENSES.

That the FORMER expenses of America have drawn from Great Britain an
incredible treasure, may be seen from the following authentic estimate. We
shall begin this estimate with the accession of the House of Hanover to the
Throne of these Kingdoms.

L. s. d. From the year 1714 to the year 1775, the money voted by Parliament,
for the forces employed in defense of the Colonies, amounts to 8,779,925 3 11
Grants in Parliament, for rewards, encouragement, and indemnification to the
Americans, during the last war 1,081,771 11 9 Bounties on American commodities
to the end of 1774 1,609,345 3 9 Sums granted to the Colonies, for the support
of their Civil Government and Provincial Forces 3,835,900 7 4 Extraordinary
expenses for forts, garrisons, ordnance stores, transports, carriages,
provisions, may be estimated equal to the expenses of the forces 8,779,925 3 11
Expenses of fleets and naval stations employed and established in America for
its defense may be estimated at 10,000,000 00 00 Annual presents to the
American Indians, for abstaining from hostilities against the Colonies, and for
the cession of lands, 610,000 00 00 34,697,142 10 10

To this amazing sum might be added, by implication, the other expenses of the
two last Wars. The FORMER of those wars was undertaken for the protection of
the American Commerce, or rather American SMUGGLING, to the Spanish Colonies.
We entered into the LATTER for the defense of the Colonists; we carried it on
for their security; and terminated it for their SOLE advantage. The two last
Wars have cost this Country, at a moderate computation, ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
MILLIONS. To this extraordinary waste of treasure, what have the Colonies to
oppose to balance the account? Is it a languid Commerce, which scarcely makes
its returns once in three years?

We have heard much (indeed, a great deal too much) of this Commerce from
factious men on both sides of the Atlantic. This is the mighty engine which
they wield over the heads of the ignorant; the great bugbear with which they
terrify the timid. To estimate the value of the American trade with any degree
of precision, is impossible. The accounts kept in the Customhouse are no
authorities. When exports pay no duty, a door is opened to false entries. The
vanity of some Merchants, the interest of others, too frequently induce them to
magnify, beyond measure, the quantity of their export trade. Besides, the
mercantile abettors of American resistance thought they served the Colonies,
whilst they gratified their own private views. We may conclude, that the
Commerce with North America has been greatly over-rated, as the TOTAL LOSS of
it has NOT affected this Kingdom. We ought, perhaps, to ascribe to ITS
INSIGNIFICANCE what we are taught to attribute to an INCREASE in other channels
of trade.

Like all monopolies, the Commerce with North America, such as it has been, was
much more profitable to the Merchant, than advantageous to the Manufacturer.
One-third of this commerce with any State in Europe (from which the returns are
annual) would have brought equal profit to the manufacturer, and would have
enabled him to employ an equal number of hands. Political impostors will not
fail to advance magnificent fictions on this head, and the ignorant cannot
cease to give them credit. On a subject where proofs are so difficult to be
obtained, one may hazard a conjecture. The money expended by this Nation upon
America, for the PROTECTION of HER inhabitants and the ENCOURAGEMENT of HER
Commerce, would have been more than sufficient to purchase ALL the manufactures
ever exported from Great Britain to the Colonies now in rebellion. I mean not
to include, in this conjectural estimate, any sums expended by us in any OTHER
part of the world during the two last (truly American) Wars.

The Americans, with a degree of folly scarce excuseable in the most consummate
ignorance, claim a merit with Great Britain, for the Revenue arising from
imposts laid upon some of their commodities, in THIS Kingdom. The chief of
these are Rice and Tobacco. The Revenue arising from Rice is so insignificant,
that it scarce deserves to be mentioned. If exported to the south of Cape
Finisterre, Rice pays no duty at all. The consumption here and the
re-exportation to the Northward are very inconsiderable. In like manner,
Tobacco, when re-exported, pays no duty; and it is a matter of great doubt,
whether the frauds committed in the draw-backs may not nearly balance the
ostensible Revenue arising to the State from the home consumption.

But granting, a great Revenue should arise from Rice and Tobacco to the State,
what favor do we owe to our Colonies on that head? That Revenue is paid by
OURSELVES. The Tax is on the Consumer, and not upon the Planter. Should Siberia
supply us with Rice and Tobacco, the price would not probably be greater to the
Consumer, nor the Revenue less to the State. If the Americans claim any merit
from those Taxes, what do we NOT owe to the Emperor of China? The Revenue from
Tea is much more considerable than that from Rice and Tobacco. A Congress at
Pekin might accuse us of ingratitude on this subject, with as much justice as
the Assembly lately sitting at Philadelphia.

It is evident, from the above state of facts, that the Colonies have no claim
to an exemption from Taxation, on account of any advantage that has accrued to
this country from their commerce. But Taxation has now ceased to be any part of
the dispute. It goes to the whole authority of the Mother Country. The
Americans offer no longer the very name of Obedience. But why should I speak of
Obedience? This VERY CONGRESS, whose Declaration is the subject of this
disquisition, have passed a VOTE OF INDEPENDENCE. They have long acted as
rebels, they NOW affect to contend as enemies. Their abettors in this Kingdom
are no strangers to this circumstance; yet they dignify avowed rebellion with
the title of "A GLORIOUS STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM."

Such is the conduct of the Americans, to which that of Great Britain has all
along formed a striking contrast. With the indulgence and patience of a Parent,
she soothed, flattered, and even courted them to a reconciliation. In pity to
the weakness, in condescension to the folly, in consideration to the prejudices
of a froward child, she held out the olive branch when she ought, perhaps, to
have stretched forth the rod of correction. Her pity, her kindness, and
affection, were lost upon the Americans. They advanced rapidly from claim to
claim, and construed her forbearance into timidity. Each Act that was repealed
furnished a subject for triumph, and not an object for gratitude. Each
concession became the foundation of some new demand, till, at length, by
assuming all to themselves by rebellion, they left the Mother Country nothing
to bestow.

In this situation of affairs, Great Britain must pursue one of two lines of
conduct, with regard to her refractory Colonies. She must either put up with
the loss of ALL her expense, and emancipate them for ever, or reduce them to
that state of dependence which subjects owe to the supreme authority in every
Empire. As the latter line must of necessity be pursued, it ought to be pursued
with a mixture of spirit and prudence. To be in every respect in a condition to
force equitable terms, is the best security for their being voluntarily
offered. But should terms be offered by the rebels, the RIGHTS of THIS COUNTRY
must be more regarded in the accommodation, than the CLAIMS of AMERICA. To
permit the Colonies to GAIN by one rebellion, is to sow the seeds of another.
But if the Colonies, as communities, are not permitted to gain by their
refractory conduct, I am far from wishing that individuals should lose any part
of their rights as British subjects.

To propose a plan to the Americans, in their present political frenzy, would
be to speak to the winds. To make them less free than the other subjects of the
State, can never be the design of this Country. To obtain greater privileges,
can scarcely be their own design. If they are not madly bent on independence,
let them propose the conditions on which they wish to continue subjects. But if
they are to continue subjects, they must perform their duty as such, and
contribute toward the expense of the State, for the general protection. The
Legislature of this Kingdom cannot possibly depart from any part of its
supremacy over the Colonies; but it is in the power of the Colonies to share in
that supremacy. If they complain of being taxed without having the privilege of
sending Members to Parliament, let them be represented. Nay, more: Let their
representation increase in proportion to the Revenue they shall furnish. If
they wish rather to vote their QUOTA toward the general supply, through their
own General Courts and Assemblies, the resolution of Parliament on that subject
is still open to their choice.

But as long as they assume the language of a Sovereign State, this Kingdom can
enter into no negotiation, can meet no compromise. Nations, as well as
individuals, have a character, a certain dignity, which they must preserve at
the risque of their existence. Great Britain has obeyed the dictates of
humanity beyond the limits prescribed by her reputation. To tempt her further,
is full of peril, as her indignation begins to rise. She has long had reason to
complain of American ingratitude; and she will not bear longer with American
injustice. The dangerous resentment of a great people is ready to burst forth.
They already begin to ask, with vehemence, Is this the return we ought to
expect from Colonies, whom with parental indulgence we have cherished in
infancy, protected in youth, and reared to manhood? Have we spent in their
cause so much treasure, and have they the ingratitude to refuse to bear a small
portion of our burdens? Have we spilt so much of the blood of their enemies,
and do they repay us by imbruing their hands in our own? The law of God and of
Nature is on the side of an indulgent Parent, against an undutiful Child; and
should necessary correction render him incapable of future offense, he has only
his own obstinacy and folly to blame.

FINIS.
APPENDIX.
An ACCOUNT of what SUMS have been GRANTED to the different PROVINCES in
NORTH AMERICA, as far as appears from the ESTIMATES for the SUPPORT of the
CIVIL GOVERNMENT of each PROVINCE, distinguishing each Year. And also of what
SUMS have been GRANTED for the SUPPORT of the PROVINCIAL FORCES in
NORTH AMERICA.
Years. NEW YORK. CAROLINA. GEORGIA. SOUTH CAROLINA. NOVA SCOTIA. EAST-FLORIDA.
WEST-FLORIDA. AMERICA. Forces. Net distinguished whether North or South.
Settling and Securing. Military. Civil Government. Civil Government. Civil
Government. Forces. Rewards and Compensations. L s. d. L s. d. L s. d. L s. d.
L s. d. L s. d. L s. d, L s. d. L s. d. L s. d. 1716 7,112 12 0 1717 7,093 3 4
1718 7,141 16 8 1719 7,141 16 8 1720 7,161 8 0 1721 7,141 16 8 1722 7,141 16 8
3,071 7 6 1723 7,141 16 8 3,071 7 6 1724 7,161 8 0 3,079 15 9 1725 7,141 16 8
3,071 7 6 1726 7,141 16 8 3,071 7 6 1727 7,141 16 8 3,071 7 6 1728 7,161 8 0
3,079 15 9 1729 7,141 16 8 3,071 7 6 1730 7,141 16 8 3,071 7 6 1731 7,141 16 8
3,071 7 6 1732 7,161 8 0 3,079 15 9 1733 7,141 16 8 3,071 7 6 1734 7,141 16 8
3,071 7 6 1735 7,141 16 8 3,071 7 6 26,000 0 0 1736 7,161 8 0 -- -- -- 10,000 0
0 3,079 15 9 1737 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 20,000 0 0 3,071 17 6 1738 7,141 16 8 --
-- -- 8,000 0 0 1739 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 20,000 0 0 1740 7,161 8 0 -- -- --
4,000 0 0 1741 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 10,000 0 0 1742 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 65,607 6 8 1743 7,141 16 8 -- --
-- 12,000 0 0 2,445 10 0 1744 7,161 8 0 -- -- -- -- -- -- 87,724 2 2 1745 7,141
16 8 -- -- -- -- -- -- 26,406 12 11 1746 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 4,000 0 0 2,445 10
0 5,830 17 6 1747 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- -- -- -- 2,445 10 0 5,830 17 6 1748 7,161
8 0 -- -- -- -- -- -- 2,445 10 0 5,846 17 0 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
235,749 2 10 1749 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 5,304 3 4 -- -- -- 5,830 17 6 1750 7,141
16 8 -- -- -- 5,304 3 4 -- -- -- 5,830 17 6 76,255 3 0 1751 7,141 16 8 -- -- --
-- -- -- -- -- -- 5,830 17 6 111,510 13 7 1752 6,946 3 4 -- -- -- 4,000 0 0 --
-- -- 5,671 2 6 61,493 0 4 1753 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 2,000 0 0 -- -- -- 5,830 17
6 94,615 12 4 1754 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 18,128 19 1 -- -- -- 5,830 17 6 58,447 2
0 1755 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 2,957 10 0 -- -- -- 5,830 17 6 40,418 7 8 -- -- --
-- -- -- 49,468 5 0 1756 7,161 8 0 -- -- -- 3,557 10 0 -- -- -- 5,846 17 0
55,720 1 7 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 120,000 0 0 1757 7,141 16 8 -- -- --
30,000 0 0 -- -- -- 5,830 17 6 44,170 9 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 50,000 0 0
1758 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 3,557 10 0 -- -- -- 5,830 17 6 16,528 12 11 -- -- --
-- -- -- -- -- -- 41,117 17 6 1759 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 4,057 10 0 -- -- --
5,867 7 6 21,181 3 5 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 200,000 0 0 1760 7,161 8 0 --
-- -- 4,057 10 0 -- -- -- 5,883 9 0 17,636 11 7 -- -- -- -- -- -- 35,744 8 4
202,977 7 8 1761 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 4,057 10 0 -- -- -- 5,867 7 6 10,595 12 9
-- -- -- -- -- -- 22,179 0 0 200,000 0 0 1762 7,141 16 8 -- -- -- 4,057 10 0 --
-- -- 5,867 7 6 5,864 1 10 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 133,333 6 8 1763 2,367 11
4 -- -- -- 4,136 0 0 -- -- -- 1,945 1 6 10,263 15 9 -- -- 0 -- -- -- -- -- --
133,333 6 8 1764 -- -- -- -- -- -- 4,031 8 8 -- -- -- -- -- -- 5,703 14 11
5,700 0 5,700 0 0 1765 -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,966 0 0 -- -- -- -- -- -- 11,911 14
11 5,200 0 0 5,200 0 0 1766 -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,986 0 0 -- -- -- -- -- --
12,874 16 0 5,250 0 0 5,300 0 0 1767 -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,986 0 0 -- -- -- -- --
-- 5,557 11 5 4,750 0 0 4,800 0 0 1768 -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,986 0 0 -- -- -- --
-- -- 3,895 1 11 4,750 0 0 4,400 0 0 1769 -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,086 0 0 -- -- --
-- -- -- 4,375 17 11 4,750 0 0 4,800 0 0 1770 -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,086 0 0 -- --
-- -- -- -- 4,239 0 5 4,750 0 0 4,800 0 0 1771 -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,086 0 0 --
-- -- -- -- -- 5,796 10 5 4,350 0 0 6,100 0 0 1772 -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,186 0 0
-- -- -- -- -- -- 5,346 10 5 4,950 0 0 5,650 0 0 1773 -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,086 0
0 -- -- -- -- -- -- 5,146 10 5 4,950 0 0 7,274 13 6 1774 -- -- -- -- -- --
3,086 0 0 -- -- -- -- -- -- 4,346 10 5 4,950 0 0 4,850 0 0 1775 -- -- -- -- --
-- 3,086 0 0 -- -- -- -- -- -- 4,346 10 5 4,950 0 0 5,450 0 0 337,955 13 8
43,024 9 10 250,893 3 9 130,064 8 4 121,104 4 6 699,220 17 6 59,300 0 0 64,320
13 6 172,999 0 0 1,316,514 1 5

An ACCOUNT of MONEY Voted for the FORCES employed in the Defense of AMERICA
since the ACCESSION of the FAMILY of HANOVER; distinguishing each YEAR.
L. s. d. 1714 39,478 11 0 1715 34,742 14 2 1716 34,837 17 10 1717 34,742 14 2
1718 40,283 15 11 1719 37,325 2 1 1720 37,423 1 10 1721 40,396 9 7 1722 40,396
9 7 1723 40,396 9 7 1724 40,502 17 8 1725 40,396 9 7 1726 40,396 9 7 1727
40,396 9 7 1728 40,502 17 8 1729 40,396 9 7 1730 40,396 9 7 1731 40,396 9 7
1732 40,502 17 8 1733 40,396 9 7 1734 41,041 6 3 1735 52,754 15 5 1736 52,895 0
8 1737 52,754 15 5 1738 63,026 9 7 1739 65,106 19 7 1740 73,469 11 10 1741
72,723 18 9 1742 74,027 8 9 1743 73,827 8 9 1744 81,595 19 8 1745 97,739 5 5
1746 97,038 7 11 1747 97,038 7 11 1748 97,277 2 6 1749 63,002 17 1 1750 81,059
14 2 1751 81,059 14 2 1752 78,838 18 7 1753 81,059 14 2 1754 81,059 14 2 1755
81,059 14 2 1756 142,813 15 7 1757 249,854 1 3 1758 449,594 4 7 1759 445,013 9
7 1760 482,797 8 6 1761 583,892 18 9 1762 615,845 12 11 1763 310,317 0 8 1764
252,093 15 11 1765 268,054 19 9 1766 268,565 19 9 1767 279,668 1 5 1768 270,666
2 6 1769 269,615 2 3 1770 259,662 12 7 1771 259,909 3 1 1772 263,660 5 6 1773
269,196 17 8 1774 247,324 5 2 1775 247,506 15 2 7,437,236 1 7

L. s. d. The Sums granted for the extraordinary Expenses of the Army, Forts,
Ordnance Stores, Transports, Carriages, Provisions, are so much dispersed
through the Accounts of the various Offices, that it was found very difficult,
if not impossible, to extract the particulars. The general Estimate is
8,779,925 3 11 The same Observation may be made with regard to the Navy The
Expenses of the Ships employed in North America, are so much blended with the
other Expenses of the Navy, that it is impossible to separate them. At the most
moderate Computation they may be estimated at 10,000,000 0 0 Money laid out in
Indian Presents, in holding Congresses, and in purchasing cessions of land, may
be estimated at 610,000 0 0

An Account of Bounties on American Commodities.
L. s. d. Bounty on Indico from 1749 to 1773 paid by Great Britain 145,022 3 4
Bounty on Hemp and Flax paid under the Act of 4 Geo. III. chapter 26. from 1766 to
1772 5,560 8 7 Bounty on Importation of Naval Stores from America, pursuant to
the Act of the 3d of Queen Anne, from 1706 to 1729 430,178 4 6 Under the Act of
2d Geo. II. from 1729 to 1774 1,028,584 7 3 1,609,345 3 9 Besides other
Bounties granted on Raw Silk, Pipe Staves Hogshead Staves, Barrel Staves, Pipe,
Hogshead, or Barrel-Heading
Total of Money laid out by Great Britain on the Revolted Provinces, since the
Accession of the House of Hanover 34,697,142 10 10

ACTS establishing the SUPREMACY of PARLIAMENT over AMERICA.
1. By 12 Chapter II. chapter 18, anno 1660. Tobacco not to be transported from
America, except to England, or Plantations belonging to his Majesty, under the
penalty of forfeiting ship and goods, etc. 2. By 15 Chapter II. No European goods
to be imported into any of the Plantations, except on English-built ships,
whereof the master and three-fourths of the men are English. -- Duty laid on
sea-coals sent to the Plantations, by the 10th section of said Act. By 22 and
23 Chapter II. Plantation goods not to be carried to Ireland, and penalties
inflicted for unloading them, otherwise than in England. 3. By 25th Chapter II. The
exportation of Plantation commodities farther restrained. 4. By 13 and 14 Chapter
II. sec. 12. Same restraints extend to Molasses and Rice. By 7 and 8 Wm. III.
sec. 16. An Act for preventing Frauds, and regulating the Plantation-trade --
Section 15 prohibits any body, claiming lands by Charter or Letters-patent on
the Continent of America, from selling their property to any person, otherwise
than natural-born subjects of England, Ireland, Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, without the consent of his Majesty, heirs, and successors. By 7 and 8
Wm. III. sec. 6. Officers of Customs to have the same power in America, as in
England. -- Sec 9 directs that all Bylaws and Customs in America contrary to
said Act, or any other Act to be made in England, shall be void. 8 Geo. I. chapter
15. sec. 24. Furs required to be brought from the Plantations to Great Britain.
5 G. II. chapter 7. Lands in the Plantations made liable to the payment of Debts. 5
G. II. chapter 22. Hats not to be exported from one Plantation to another.
ACTS complained of by the AMERICANS.
IN Mr. GRENVILLE'S Administration. 4 G. III. chapter 34. Paper Bills in the
Plantations declared void.
UNDER the Administration of Lord ROCKINGHAM and the Duke of GRAFTON. 7 G. III.
chapter 41. Customs and Duties in the British Colonies put under the management of
the Commissioners residing there.
UNDER the Administration of Lord CHATHAM and the Duke of GRAFTON. 7 Geo. III.
c. 59. Suspending all proceedings of the Council of New York, till provision be
made for the British troops. 8 Geo. III. chapter 22. Act for more easy recovery of
Penalties inflicted by the Acts relating to Trade, and the Revenues in the
Plantations.

ACTS of PARLIAMENT for imposing Taxes on America.
12 Chapter II. chapter 4. Tonnage and Poundage extended to all his Majesty's
Dominions, without exception. 25 Chapter II. chapter 7. sec. 2. If Bonds are not given
to land the goods imported from America, in England, etc. then several duties
to be imposed, collected under the direction of the Officers of the Customs in
England. 9 Ann. chapter 10. -- Post Office. 9 Ann. chapter 27. Lays a duty on Prize
goods carried to America. 3 Geo. II. chapter 28. sec. 25. The Half-Subsidy to be
paid on Rice from Carolina to Cape Finisterre -- 8 Geo. II. chapter 19. The same
extended to Georgia, and continued down by subsequent Acts. 6 Geo. II. chapter 13.
Upon the Importation of Rum, Sugar, and Molasses into America, several duties
to be paid.
ACTS complained of by the AMERICANS.
IN Mr. GRENVILLE's Administration. 4 Geo. III. chapter 15. Certain Rates and
Duties on foreign goods imported into the Colonies. 5 Geo. III. Postage of
Letters.
IN the Administration of Lord CHATHAM and the Duke of GRAFTON. 6 Geo. III. chapter
52. Alterations made in the Act of the 4th of Geo. III. 7 Geo. III. chapter 46.
Duties laid on the importation of certain goods imported into the Colonies.
UNDER Lord NORTH's Administration. 10 Geo. III. The above Act repealed, except
as to Tea.

A DECLARATION BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UNITED COLONIES OF NORTH AMERICA,
NOW MET IN GENERAL CONGRESS AT PHILADELPHIA, SETTING FORTH THE CAUSES AND
NECESSITY OF THEIR TAKING UP ARMS.
IF it was possible for men who exercise their reason to believe, that the
Divine Author of our ^xistence intended a part of the human race to hold an
absolute property in, and an unbounded power over others, marked out by his
infinite goodness and wisdom as the objects of a legal domination, never
rightfully resistible, however severe and oppressive; the inhabitants of these
Colonies might at least require from the Parliament of Great Britain some
evidence, that this dreadful authority over them has been granted to that body.
But a reverence for our Great Creator, principles of humanity, and the dictates
of common sense, must convince all those who reflect upon the subject, that
Government was instituted to promote the welfare of mankind, and ought to be
administered for the attainment of that end. The Legislature of Great Britain,
however, stimulated by an inordinate passion for a power not only
unjustifiable, but which they know to be peculiarly reprobated by the very
c^itution of that Kingdom, and desperate of success in any mode of contest,
where regard should be had to truth, law, or right, have at length, deserting
those, attempted to effect their cruel and impolitic purpose of enslaving these
Colonies by violence, and have thereby rendered it necessary for us to close
with their last appeal from reason to arms. -- Yet, however blinded that
Assembly may be, by their intemperate rage for unlimited domination, so to
slight justice and the opinion of mankind, we esteem ourselves bound by
obligations of respect to the rest of the world, to make known the justice of
our cause.

Our forefathers, inhabitants of the island of Great Britain, left their native
land, to seek on these shores a residence for civil and religious freedom. At
the expense of their blood, at the hazard of their fortunes, without the least
charge to the country from which they removed, by unceasing labor, and an
unconquerable spirit, they effected settlements in the distant and inhospitable
wilds of America, then filled with numerous and warlike nations of barbarians.
Societies or governments, vested with perfect legislatures, were formed under
Charters from the Crown, and an harmonious intercourse was established between
the Colonies and the Kingdom from which they derived their origin. The mutual
benefits of this un on became in a short time so extraordinary, as to excite
astonishment. It is universally confessed, that the amazing increase of the
wealth, strength, and navigation of the realm arose from this source; and the
Minister who so wisely and successfully directed the measures of Great Britain
in the late war, publicly declared, that these Colonies enabled her to triumph
over her enemies. -- Toward the conclusion of that war it pleased our
Sovereign to make a change in his Councils. -- From that fatal moment the
affairs of the British Empire began to fall into confusion, and gradually
sliding from the summit of glorious prosperity, to which they had been advanced
by the virtues and abilities of one man, are at length distracted by the
convulsions that now shake it to its deepest foundation. The new Ministry
finding the brave foes of Britain, though frequently deseated, yet still
contending, took up the unfortunate idea of granting them a hasty peace, and of
then subduing her faithful friends.

These devoted Colonies were judged to be in such a state, as to present
victories without bloodshed, and all the easy emoluments of statuteable
plunder. The uninterrupted tenor of their peaccable and respectful behavior
from the beginning of Colonization, their dutiful, zealous, and useful services
during the war, though so recently and amply acknowledged in the most honorable
manner by his Majesty, by the late King, and by Parliament, could not save them
from the meditated innovations. Parliament was influenced to adopt the
pernicious project, and assuming a new power over them, have, in the course of
eleven years, given such decisive specimens of the spirit and consequences
attending this power, as to leave no doubt concerning the effects of
acquiescence under it. They have undertaken to give and grant our money without
our consent, though we have ever exercised an exclusive right to dispose of our
own property. Statutes have been passed for extending the jurisdiction of
Courts of Admiralty and Vice-Admiralty beyond their ancient limits, for
depriving us of the accustomed and inestimable privilege of trial by Jury in
cases affecting both life and property; for suspending the legislature of one
of the Colonies; for interdicting all commerce of another; and for altering
fundamentally the form of government, established by charter, and secured by
Acts of its own Legislature solemnly confirmed by the Crown; for exempting the
"Murderers" of Colonists from legal trial, and, in effect, from punishment; for
erecting in a neighboring Province, acquired by the joint arms of Great
Britain and America, a despotism dangerous to our very existence; and for
quartering soldiers upon the Colonists in time of profound peace. It has also
been resolved in Parliament, that Colonists charged with committing certain
offenses, shall be transported to England to be tried.

But why should we enumerate our injuries in detail? By one Statute it is
declared, that Parliament can "of right make laws to bind us in all cases
whatsoever." What is to defend us against so enormous, so unlimited a power?
Not a single man of those who assume it, is chosen by us, or is subject to our
control or influence; but, on the contrary, they are all of them exempt from
the operation of such laws; and an American revenue, if not diverted from the
ostensible purposes for which it is raised, would actually lighten their own
burdens in proportion as they increase ours. We saw the misery to which such
despotism would reduce us. We for ten years incessantly and ineffectually
besieged the Throne as supplicants; we reasoned, we remonstrated with
Parliament in the most mild and decent language. But Administration, sensible
that we should regard these oppressive measures as freemen ought to do, sent
over fleets and armies to enforce them. The indignation of the Americans was
roused, it is true; but it was the indignation of a virtuous, loyal, and
affectionate people. A Congress of Delegates from the United Colonies was
assembled at Philadelphia, on the 5th day of last September. We resolved again
to offer an humble and dutiful Petition to the King, and also addressed our
fellow subjects of Great Britain. We have pursued every temperate, every
respectful measure; we have even proceeded to break off our commercial
intercourse with our fellow subjects, as the last peaceable admonition, that
our attachment to no nation upon earth should supplant our attachment to
liberty. This we flattered ourselves was the ultimate step of the controversy;
but the subsequent events have shown, how vain is this hope of finding
moderation in our enemies.

Several threatening expressions against the Colonies were inserted in his
Majesty's Speech. Our Petition, though we were told it was a decent one, that
his Majesty had been pleased to receive it graciously, and to promise laying it
before his Parliament, was huddled into both Houses amongst a bundle of
American papers, and there neglected. The Lords and Commons in their Address,
in the month of February, said, That "a rebellion at that time actually existed
within the Province of Masschuset's Bay; and that those concerned in it had
been countenanced and encouraged by unlawful combinations and engagements,
entered into by his Majesty's subjects in several of the other Colonies; and
therefore they besought his Majesty, that he would take the most effectual
measures to enforce due obedience to the laws and authority of the Supreme
Legislature." Soon after the commercial intercourse of whole Colonies, with
foreign countries, and with each other, was cut off by an Act of Parliament by
another, several of them were entirely proscribed from the fisheries in the
seas near their coasts, on which they always depended for their sustenance; and
large reinforcements of ships and troops were immediately sent over to General
Gage.

Fruitless were all the entreaties, arguments and eloquence of an illustrious
band of the most distinguished Peers and Commoners, who nobly and strenuously
asserted the justice of our cause, to stay or even to mitigate the heedless
fury with which these accumulated and unexampled outrages were hurried on.
Equally fruitless was the interference of the City of London, of Bristol, and
many other respectable towns, in our favor. Parliament adopted an insidious
maneuver, calculated to divide us, to establish a perpetual auction of
taxations, where Colony should bid against Colony, all of them uninformed what
ransom should redeem their lives, and thus to extort from us, at the point of
the bayonet, the unknown sums that should be sufficient to gratify, if possible
to gratify, Ministerial rapacity, with the miserable indulgence left to us of
raising in our own mode the prescribed tribute. What terms more rigid and
humiliating could have been dictated by remorseless victors to conquered
enemies? In our circumstances, to accept them would be to deserve them.

Soon after the intelligence of these proceedings arrived on this Continent,
General Gage, who in the course of the last year had taken possession of the
town of Boston, in the province of Massachuset's-Bay, and still occupied it as
a garrison, on the 19th day of April sent out from that place a large
detachment of his army, who made an unprovoked assault on the inhabitants of
the said prevince, at the town of Lexington, as appears by the affidavits of a
great number of persons, some of whom were officers and soldiers of that
detachment, murdered eight of the inhabitants, and wounded many others. From
thence the troops proceeded in warlike array to the town of Concord, where they
set upon another party of the inhabitants of the same Province, killing
several, and wounded more, until compelled to retreat by the country people
suddenly assembled to repel this cruel aggression. Hostilities thus commenced
by the British troops, have been since prosecuted by them without regard to
faith or reputation. The inhabitants of Boston being confined within that town
by the General their Governor, and having in order to procure their dismission
entered into a treaty with him, it was stipulated that the said inhabitants,
having deposited their arms with their own Magistrates, should have liberty to
depart, taking with them their other effects. They accordingly delivered up
their arms; but in open violation of honor, in defiance of the obligation of
treaties, which even savage nations esteem sacred, the Governor ordered the
arms deposited as aforesaid, that they might be preserved for their owners, to
be seized by a body of soldiers; detained the greatest part of the inhabitants
in the town, and compelled the few who were permitted to retire, to leave their
most valuable effects behind.

By this perfidy wives are separated from their husbands, children from their
parents, the aged and sick from their relations and friends, who wish to attend
and comfort them; and those who have been used to live in plenty, and even
elegance, are reduced to deplorable distress.

The General, further emulating his Ministerial masters, by a proclamation,
bearing date on the 12th day of June, after venting the grossest falsehoods and
calumnies against the good people of these Colonies, proceeds to "declare them
all, either by name or description, to be rebels and traitors, to supersede the
course of the common law, and instead thereof to publish and order the use and
exercise of the law martial." -- His troops have butchered our countrymen; have
wantonly burnt Charles Town, besides a considerable number of houses in other
places; our ships and vessels are seized; the necessary supplies of provisions
are intercepted, and he is exerting his utmost power to spread destruction and
devastation around him.

We have received certain intelligence, that General Carleton, the Governor of
Canada, is instigating the people of that Province and the Indians to fall upon
us; and we have but too much reason to apprehend, that schemes have been formed
to excite domestic enemies against us. In brief, a part of these Colonies now
feels, and all of them are sure of feeling, as far as the vengeance of
Administration can inflict them, the complicated calamities of fire, sword and
famine. We are reduced to the alternative of choosing an unconditional
submission to the tyranny of irritated Ministers, or resistance by force. The
latter is our choice. We have counted the cost of this contest, and find
nothing so dreadful as voluntary slavery. Honor, justice and humanity, forbid
us tamely to surrender that freedom which we received from our gallant
ancestors, and which our innocent posterity have a right to receive from us. We
cannot endure the infamy and guilt of resigning succeeding generations to that
wretchedness which inevitably awaits them, if we basely entail hereditary
bondage upon them.

Our cause is just: our union is perfect: our internal resources are great, and
if necessary, foreign assistance is undoubtedly attainable. We gratefully
acknowledge, as signal instances of Divine favor toward us, that his
Providence would not permit us to be called into this severe controversy, until
we were grown up to our present strength, had been previously exercised in
warlike operations, and possessed of the means of defending ourselves. With
hearts fortified with these animating reflections, we most solemnly before God
and the world declare, that, exerting the utmost energy of those powers which
our beneficent Creator has graciously bestowed upon us, the arms we have been
compelled by our enemies to assume, we will, in defiance of every hazard, with
unabating firmness and perseverance, employ for the preservation of our
liberties, being with one mind resolved to die freemen rather than to live
slaves.

Lest this Declaration should disquiet the minds of our friends and fellow
subjects in any part of the empire, we assure them, that we mean not to
dissolve that union which has so long and so happily subsisted between us, and
which we sincerely wish to see restored. Necessity has not yet driven us into
that desperate measure, or induced us to excite any other nation to war against
them. We have not raised armies with ambitious designs of separating from Great
Britain, and establishing independent states. We fight not for glory or for
conquest. We exhibit to mankind the remarkable spectacle of a people attacked
by unprovoked enemies, without any imputation, or even suspicion of offense.
They boast of their privileges and civilization, and yet proffer no milder
conditions than servitude or death.

In our own native land, in defense of the freedom that is our birthright, and
which we ever enjoyed till the late violation of it; for the protection of our
property, acquired solely by the honest industry of our forefathers and
ourselves, against violence actually offered, we have taken up arms. We shall
lay them down when hostilities shall cease on the part of the aggressors, and
all danger of their being renewed shall be removed, -- and not before.

With an humble confidence in the mercies of the Supreme and Impartial Judge
and Ruler of the Universe, we most devoutly implore his divine goodness to
conduct us happily through this great conflict, to dispose our adversaries to
reconciliation on reasonable terms, and thereby to relieve the Empire from the
calamities of civil war.

By Order of CONGRESS, JOHN HANCOCK, PRESIDENT.
Attested, CHARLES THOMPSON, SECRETARY.
Philadelphia, July 6, 1775.

