A TREATISE OF THE Venereal Disease,

Plainly Discovering and Directing both Sexes, how they may become their own
Doctors.

Teaching them plainly, and perfectly to know their own Condition and Degree of
Infecton, be it what it will, from the slightest Gonorrhaea, to the most
extreme and deplorable Degree of it.

And how to cure themselves of any such Disorders, Quickly, Safely, and
Secretly, and at a very small Expense, without making their Case known to any,
by pleasant and agreeable Medicines, mild in their Operations, and without
Confinement or Hindrance of Business.

Also to heal all Gleets proceeding from former ill Cures, Seminal Weakness, or
Genital Imbecilities.

To be had of the Author Richard Rock, in King's-Arms-Court, Ludgate Hill,
Price. 6 d.

A TREATISE OF THE Veneral Disease.
I Shall not amuse the READER with Accounts how this Distemper had its First
Rise, or how it was brought into Europe, and to England in particular, or the
several Ways by which it is Contracted, but shall proceed to give you a True
Description of every Stage of this Disorder, and the several Methods of Cure,
in a most certain, safe and expeditious Manner, and so plain, that every one
may understand their own Case, and cure themselves without making it known to
any.

The Symptoms, which formerly attended, were the falling out of the Eyes, Teeth
and Nails, etc. which has not lately happened to any Body.

Several others are not now so common or severe as formerly, such as the
falling off of the Hair, Crusts all over the Body, Caries of the Bones, foul
Ulcers of the Palate, Uvula, Jaws and Nostrils, Nocturnal Pains, etc.

There are now only Four Symptoms left, and these are a Gonorrhaea, a Bubo,
Chancres, and Peri or Warts, which seem to comprehend the whole Disease.

Generally it consists of a Gonorrhaea only, nor indeed do the other Symptoms
show themselves, unless the Cure is neglected, or managed by Unskilful Persons.

The Gonorrhaea admits of an easier Cure than formerly, and is often carried
off without Medicines inwardly, if timely taken in Hand, and a due care taken
in the Regimen.

As for the other Three Symptoms though they require a more Elaborate Treatment,
yet they are now much less obstinate than formerly, all which shall be
discussed of in their proper Places and Order.

Of the GONORRHAEA.
THe first Degree of Infection appears in Men, with a Gentle Running or
dropping from the Urinary Passage, producing a pleasant Sensation, and as it
were glewing up the Orifice, the Extremity of the Urethra, grows hot, and gapes
wider than usual. The Parts of Generation are affected with an uncommon
Titulation, especially at the Time of making Water, without Pain, but with a
Sense of Heat that daily increases.

If the Infection spreads, or is not so mild, the Tention and Induration of the
Penis come on with Pain, thick Drops of the more fluid part of the Semen, or
Seed, flow in greater Quantity, of a yellowish or greenish Color, often with
Heat, Redness, Tenderness, small pustles, Blisters and Ulcers both within and
without the Urinary Passage, with great Sharpness and Sense of Heat, through
the whole Urethra after making Water.

The next Symptoms are more violent, the Perineum swells, grows painful, the
Urine scalds, with frequent Provocations to make Water, and but a little at a
Time, with a Distortion and Bending of the Penis, called a Cordee, with
frequent and involuntary Erections, occasioning great Pain to the Patient, on
every such Occasion, and when warm in Bed, a violent Running Phimosis, or
Paraphimosis, that is when the Foreskin is either so swelled as it cannot be
brought forward to cover the Nut of the Yard, or that it cannot be drawn
backward, one or both of the Testicles, or Stones swelled and enraged with
Pain, increasing as the Gleet or Running is obstructed. Sometime causing cold
Trembling and Fainting, but as they abate so the Running multiplies, and comes
away more freely, of an Ash Color, sometimes marked with Specks, Streaks, or
Threads of Blood; stinking, yellow, green, and corrupt, and these are the usual
or common Claps.

WOMEN. The Case is almost the same in Women, but this is to be observed, That
after the Infection is received, the Female Parts of Generation are wet with an
unusual Moisture, and are troubled with frequent Itching and Heat, almost
painful and daily advances.

The Heat, Burning, Redness and Pain of the Vagina, or Urinary-passage, being
increased, the Admission of the Penis is scarcely to be endured: The Urine is
sharp and scalding, but in general not so sharp as in Men, the Running
plentiful, like Matter, bloody, yellow, green, and stinking, and by the Tention
of the Pudendum and Vagina, bring on great Pain.

If the Running is of a clear white, or ash color, and any Thing ropy, shows
the Infection slight.

If of a Saffron Color, dark yellow, or brown, from being mixed and discolored
with Blood, is the second Degree of a Clap.

If a yellowish green, green, or very dark green, mixed with Matter plainly
shows that the Inflammation is attended with Ulcers, and is the last Stage of a
Clap.

All these different Symptoms appear, but vary according to the Temperament of
Body, Habit and Constitution of the Patient, and the greater or lesser Degree
of the Infection, and the Distance of Time since the Injury was received.

You are to observe, That the greater the Degree of the Venereal Poison is, the
sooner it appears, but a slight Hurt will remain for sometime before it shows
itself; but the sooner it appears the easier is the Cure performed. From what
has been said it plainly appears, That there are Three Distinct SPECIES of the
Gonorrhaea, which only differ in Degree, the First will easily degenerate into
the Second, the Second into the Third, if the Vehemence of the Symptoms be not
quickly restrained.

These Three Degrees are divided into Four Stages, that is, the Beginning,
Increase, Height, and Declintion.

Neither Man or Woman can indulge in the Use of Venery, whilst they are in this
State of a Gonorrhaea, without violent Pain; and what is worse, without
manifestly increasing the Disease.

The first Thing to be considered is, to learn and understand your own Case, by
observing the Nature of it; therefore it is expedient to remark, what Effect
the Venereal Poison has on the Body, according to the several Symptoms herein
before discribed, whereby you will plainly discover the Degree of Infection,
and by that Means be directed in the Method of Cure.

I proceed now to give proper Directions to each Person to cure this Disease in
its several Stages, and shall trace them all in a Regular Manner; but observe
that every Gonorrhaea, if Medicines are timely administered, is free from
Danger, and easily admits of a Cure, sooner or later, in Proportion to the
Vehemence of the Symptoms, the Acrimony of the Infection, and the Constitution
of the Blood; but if neglected, and come to a great Hight, is sometime before
it will yield to any Medicine, therefore too early an Application cannot be
made for Cure.

An Information therefore follows of such Antivenereal Remedies as are endued
with all the Natural Qualities requisite to perform a speedy and safe Cure, in
all the Cases herein described, and that the Patient may be directed, and
readily know how to be furnished with all such Medicines, and be secure from
all Bad Preparations, (sold at several Shops in London) by Authors who conceal
their Names, which they would have no Occasion to do, did their Preparations
answer what they pretend for them.

1. The First Degree of this Distemper being Exterior, and only in the Top of
the Urinary-passage, may be cured by External Means, for as that part is of a
Spongy Nature, it as easily imbibes any Liquid, as the Venereal Poison, for
which the INCOMPARABE LOTION, or WASH is recommended as the most easy and
private Method of Cure whatsoever.

And this is performed by only pouring some of the Liquid into a Cup, washing
the part with it, and soaking it therein two or three Times a Day, for two or
three Minutes together or longer, as you have an Opportunity; but be sure to
let the Water cover the Nut of the Yard, and to take fresh Liquor for every
Washing. Surely no Person that is not in Love with Pills, Bolus, and
Electuaries, will refuse so easy a Cure as this, and so soon performed.

This Remedy must be of singular Benefit to all Travelers, who cannot possibly
take Physic on their Journey, therefore this LOTION is advised to them, let
the Degree of Infection be what it will, for if not to be cured by this Remedy
alone, yet it will most certainly prevent their growing worse, until they have
an Opportunity of taking other Medicines, which must be of great Advantage to
them.

Those who are taking physic, if they use this INCOMPARABLE LOTION will soon
find it to forward the Cure to Admiration, by drawing out the Infectious Venom,
while the Internal Medicines by their anodine and detergent Qualities assuage
the pain, and cleans the Ulcers of the Seminary Receptacles.

This LOTION is to be had only of the Author RIHARD ROCK, at his House in
King's-Arms-Court, Ludgate Hill, and ready to be delivered to any Messenger, by
asking for a Bottle of Water for the Scurvy, Price 4 s. 6 d. where you may have
Advice and proper Remedies (prepared by the Author) in all other Disorders.

As sometimes the Cure will not be performed perfectly by the LOTION only, by
Reason of the Disposition of the parts of Generation; for some Venom may lay
hid in the Wrinkles of the Frenum or Prepnce, and the least Seeds of Morbifick
Matter being introduced into a Sound Body, in the smallest Quantity, will by
Degrees increase, in Bulk, Form and Efficacy, and sooner or later, infect and
corrupt the whole Mass of Humors.

Therefore for Fear of such an Accident, and to make the Cure certain and safe,
the INFALLIBLE ANTIVENEREAL BOLUS is recommended, which is pleasant to take,
and will most certainly eradicate any Lurking Poison, which the Water may not
happen to reach, two or three of which will be sufficient to perform the Cure,
without any Danger of Return. To be had as before directed, by asking for the
BOLUS for the RHEUMATISM, Price 1 s. each. Those who suspect they have received
an Injury, or have any Relicts of a former Disorder, may by taking a Dose or
two, be perfectly freed from such Apprehensions.

This Medicine has no unpleasant Taste, never causes any Sickness, Gripeings,
or other Disorders of the Body, especially after the First Dose or two. But as
the very Name of Physic is nauseous to some Persons, they may wet a piece of
Wafer in a Spoon by dipping it into Water, then put in the Bolus and cover it
with the Wafer, and then there can be no Taste, but of the Water only in taking
it. These Wafers are to be had at every Confectioner's, you may have a great
many for 2 d.

Be sure to abstain from all Acts of Venery whilst under Cure, for one single
Act will increase the Disorder more than three Doses of Physic can rectify.

The less Wine or Strong Liquor that you drink the better; but Spirituous
Liquors must not be touched, yet you may in the Evening drink a Glass or two of
Wine to support the Spirits, if you find Occasion, always remembering the less
you drink of Strong Liquors the better: Neither should you eat any
High-season'd Meats, Pepper, or other Spice, and the more spareing you are in
Diet, much the sooner will the Cure be perfected, for the more Impure Bodies
are nourished, the worse they grow always. But to drink plentifully of
Small-Beer, or Milk and Water a little warm, when the Physic is not working,
is good, and Water Gruel or Green Tea at all Times. Of any of these Liquors you
cannot drink too much.

You may go Abroad while you take Physic, but be careful to guard against Wet,
Windy, or very Cold Weather; at such Times it is best to confine yourself, if
your Affairs permit.

2d. For the Second Degree of Infection, the Person that has this Disorder
must take a Bolus every other Day, very early in the Morning until he finds the
Heat of Urine gone, and the Running decreased, or but little in Quantity, neat,
clear and white, and become somewhat Ropy, which will appear by touching some
of it with your Finger and Thumb, and pulling them assunder gently; and if it
draws out in Strings, or ropy, in such Case you may be assured the Cure is near
perfected, and nothing then remains but to strengthen the Weakened parts; so
then he must leave off taking any more Physic, and take of the Balsamic
Restrictive ELIXIR, 50 Drops betimes every Morning, at Four in the Afternoon,
and at Night going to Rest, always fasting an Hour before and after taking it,
and this you must continue until the Running is wholly ceased.

It neither purges or gives any Manner of Disorder, but keeps the Body in a due
Temperament, strengthening all Weakness of the Back, Genitals, and Reins,
Seminal and Urinary Vessels, and thereby most certainly prevents a Gleet, which
frequently happens after a Venereal Injury, for want of taking such Restrictive
and Strengthening Medicines.

If the Heat of Urine should be violent, during the Time you are taking
Physic, or that you are troubled with a Stranguary or Difficulty in making
Water, besides the Bolus, he must take of the following Diuretic Powder,
drinking plentifully as often as you can, too much you cannot, of thin
Water Gruel, Green Tea, or Milk and Water a little warmed, sweetened to your
Taste with Sugar, and this must be continued until such Uneasiness and Pain is
gone.

This will occasion you to make Water in a considerable Quantity at each Time,
and clear or of a pale Color; if of a high Color, it is for want of drinking
so much of those Liquors as you ought

The DIURETIC POWDER.
Salt Prunella, Half an Ounce, fine Loaf-Sugar, an Ounce and half, mix them
together, and keep them in a dry place, and take as before directed.

3d. Now if from the great Acrimony, or Quantity of the received Infection;
from the Neglect of applying proper Remedies, in Time, to check the Disorder;
from great Irregularity in Drinking, or Diet; from the previous Acrimony of the
Blood; or from the Weakness of the Parts the Symptoms increase, then arises the
Hight or last Stage of a Clap,

For the Cure of which, the Patient must observe all the Rules and Directions
before given in the Slighter Cases of this Disorder, and ought to take the
Quantity of a small Nut on the point of a Knife, every other Morning, of the
Most Noble ANTIVENEREAL ELECTUARY, or so much as he finds will give him five or
six Stools, until the Heat of Urine is gone, and the Running appears clear,
etc. as before, and then the BALSAMIC ELIXIR is to be taken as in other Cases;
by taking of which (and observing all former Directions) in a very short Time
the Heat of Urine, all Soreness and Pain, will be perfectly removed, and all
other uneasy Symptoms.

In some Persons Six Doses of this most Excellent ELECTUARY, will carry off all
the Malignant Disorder, in others 10, 12, or more are required, according to
the Teperament of Body, or the Stubborness of the Disease, and as the Party
shall be more or less abstinnous.

I would not have any think the Cure long, for nothing can be more pernicious
to the Patient, than too short a Cure, (if it may be termed so) for by stopping
the Running so suddenly, the Blood and Juices are infected, the Patient poxed,
and probably he and his Posterity ruined; whereas when all the Degrees of this
Disease are wholly taken off, not too suddenly, but by a due Method and proper
Remedies, which is the onle safe and sure Way, there can be no Danger of any
ill Consequences following, which this Electuary, I aver, will perform.

One Thing more I have to offer, that is, whoever takes of this Electuary, will
never be troubled with a Gleet, which most of the other common purging
Medicines will do. The Price of this Electuary is 6 s. a Pot. Enquire for a Pot
of Electuary for the Gout.

As we have given particular Instructions for curing the Three Degrees of a
Gonorrhaea, in order that the Party afflicted might the better understand the
different Applications necessary for each Disorder, and shown how easy the Cure
may be made by the use of the beforementioned Medicines, but because some few
People amongst the other Symptoms of the Disease herein before discribed, are
afflicted with Buboes, Chancres, Phimosis, Paraphimosis, and swelled Testicles,
something shall be said on each of them in particular.

Of Buboes and Method of Cure.
VEnereal Buboes are Tumors of the Conglobate Glands, which are situate in the
Groins, are painful, hard, and tending to Suppuration, of the Size of Pigeons
or Hens-Eggs, sometimes as large as a Man's Fist; some immediately appear after
Coition, in either or both Groins; sometimes they are occasioned by a
suppressed Gonorrhaea, and lastly by a latent Pox.

Upon the Increase of a Bubo arise pain in the Inguinal Glands, and as it is
impossible to walk, unless the Muscles of the Leg and Thigh pull them forwards,
which cannot act without pressing upon the Tumid Glands of the Groin, therefore
the Action of Walking cannot be performed without Pain.

To heal this Disorder before it comes too large, painful, or inflamed, The
Purging Antivenereal Electuary must be taken every other Day, as before
directed, and besides that must foment the disordered parts, Night and Morning,
for Half an Hour at a Time, afterward applying a Cataplasm which must be
secured to the Swelling.

The Way of using the Fomentation, is after this Manner, make it very hot, and
then having provided two pieces of Flannen, full large enough to cover the
Diseased Parts, dip them into it, and take one out again, and squeese it, apply
it to the place as warm as can be endured without Scalding, when it begins to
cool take out the other piece, and put that into the Liquor again, that you
used first, and foment in like Manner, consinuing this until the Swelling
abates and disperses.

If the Yard is to be Fomented follow the above Directions, only observe, To
wrap the Flannen round the Part.

But if the Swellings do not disperse, but tend to Suppuration, then a Ripening
Poultice must be applied, and an Apperture made, by a Caustic or Incision, the
Party afflicted must omit Purging, and Eat and Drink freely as usual, until it
is come to a due Disgestion, and then proper Dressings must be applied to
promote the Running, cleanse and heal the Sore, which must not too suddenly be
closed.

You may have the Ingredients for the Fomentation, Cataplasm, Poultice, and
proper Dressings, at my House for a small Charge.

Of a Chancre and the Cure.
AT First arises a small miliary red, pointed, hot, Itching Pimple, the Top of
which, by Degrees, grows whiter, and more even, and at last opens with a small
Opperture, from whence a small Quantity of Ichor is discharged, occasioning a
Swelling and Inflammation of the Parts, the Ulcers increasing, are surrounded
with Callossities, dense or hard, and abounds with a thick viscid Pus, and
frequently excites Ulcers of the same Kind in the Neighboring Parts.

They are situate in Men upon the internal Face of the Prepuce, upon the Back
or Sides of the Glans, but sometimes upon the Extremity of the Urethra.

WOMEN. In Women upon the internal Face of the Labia; often upon the Clitoris,
sometimes on the Root of it, or on the Prepuce, with which the Clitoris is
covered, upon the Nymphae, Carunculae, Vagina, and Extremity of the Urethra.

Some arise immediately from Impure Coition, others come on without any
Suspected Venery, at least of a late Date, and are brought on by a Pox that
has been concealed for some Time.

In Case the Ulcers proceed from an Injury of long Date, they must be treated
in a rougher Manner, and by a Skilful Hand, and therefore shall say no more on
that Head, only assure those Persons who shall apply to me for Cure of these,
or any other difficult Disorders, That I will (under God) restore them to their
former State of Health, and in as short a Time, and safe a Manner, as any
Person whatsoever, by the best and most approved Methods now in Practice, both
in Physic and Surgery.

Those of a Fresh date, the Patient must Foment as before directed, until all
Swelling and Inflammation is gone, and the part quite easy which must be kept
very clean, washing it with warm Milk, and dressing the Sores with some of the
Detergent Unguent, spread on Lint, which is to be repeated every day, until the
Chancre is healed, with which, and every other day taking of the Antivenereal
Electuary, you will be perfectly cured in a little Time. You may have this
Unguent of me, Price 1 s. the Box. Ask for the Ointment for Wounds.

Of the Phimosis, and Paraphimosis.
WHen the Prepuce is swelled, so that it embraces the Glans, that it cannot by
no Means be drawn back, this in Greek is called Phimosis, that is to say, a
Binding, sometimes it is so corrugated and lightened behind the Crown of the
Glans, that it cannot be brought forward, this is called Paraphimosis, that is
to say, a Ligature round about.

Where these Cases happen, there frequently springs up upon the Face of the
Glans, which is laid bare in the Paraphimosis, or upon the Margin of the
Prepuce, with which it is covered in the Phimosis, several Watery Bladders,
filled with a thin or thick Limph, sometimes cccupying the Crown, sometimes the
extreme Point, and sometimes the Side of the Glan; nay, they sometimes arise
upon the Prepuce, or Frenum, and is attended with Pain, Inflammation and
Strangury.

WOMEN. In Women the Labia, Nymphae, Clitoris, Prepuce, and the Carunculae
Myrtiformes, which beset the Mouth of the Vagina, being afflicted with
malignant Ulcers, are swelled or inflated, in the same Manner as the Prepuce
and Glans in Men.

The CURE.
If the parts are much inflamed, frequent bleeding at the Arm is necessary, and
to foment the Diseased Part with Milk, wherein the Flowers and Bark of Elder
have been boiled, at least twice a Day, for Half an Hour at a Time; besides
this if the Patient has Time it will will be of great Service, if after having
washed the Penis clean, he soak it in some Bread boiled in Milk, of a thick
Substance, as hot as he can bare it, for a Quarter of an Hour, which will
effectually remove the Swelling and Inflammation, and by taking every other Day
of the Antivenereal Electuary, all other Symptoms will vanish.

But if the Swelling and Inflammation should prove so obstinate, as not to be
removed by the aforesaid Means (which does not happen to one in twenty) it will
be necessary to use an Anodyne Cataplasm, and some emolient, relaxing,
paregorical Applications are to be made, and if the Party is disturbed from
Rest by Pain, a Narcotic must be taken. All which Remedies may be had of me at
a moderate price.

TUMOR of the TESTICLES.
IT frequently happens in a Gonorrhaea, that one or both of the Testicles
swells, from the Restraining or Suppression of the Virulent Semen, that ought
to flow from the Seminary Vesicles in the Gonorrhaea, from this an Inflamatory
Tumor of the Testicles is produced.

If the Venereal Poison has concealed itself in the Blood, the Semen will be
frequently thickened, and stick to the Sides of the Spermatic Vessels, in an
infinite Number of hard Knobs; from hence proceed the Distention and Swelling
of those Vessels, and the Inflamatory Tumor of the Testicles: This Disorder is
not accompanied with a Gonorrhaea, and arises from a hidden Pox.

The CURE.
To abate the Inflammation, Bleeding in the Arm should be frequently repeated,
according to the Age, Strength and Constitution of the Patient, the Testicles
must be fomented as in other Cases immediately after each Time applying a hot
Cataplasm, and on that one of the hot Cleaths used in Fomenting, which keep
close to the Part Night and Day, unless when fomenting, drink of the Ptisan,
and the other Liquors proposed before for the Gonorrhaea in great plenty; the
Patient's Diet must be very low, that is only of small Chicken or Veal Broth;
the Body, if costive, with Emolient Clysters.

All purging and stimulating Medicines internally, and all astringent and
repelling Externally must be laid aside, and Anodyne Lotions, Fomentations, or
Cataplasms substituted in their Room; and if the pain should be acute, use
Narcotics.

When the Inflammation abates, the Patient may take a gentle Cathartic,
dispersing the Humors by Degrees with Cataplasms.

Antivenereal Remedies may also now be administered as in the Case of a
Gonorrhaea, which by correcting the Venereal Poison, may restore the Semen to
its Native Fluidity, and heal the Disorder.

During the Application of these Remedies, the Testicles should be supported in
a Truss, least from their Weight, the the Spermatic Vessels should be
stretched, and by that Means hinder the dispersing of the Semen: Besides it
will be of great Ease to the Party's Walking.

What has herein before been related of the several Degrees of a Gonorrhaea,
and the Method of Cure, I think may be a sufficient Direction to all Persons,
afflicted with any Kind of this Disorder, to cure themselves, without being
Exposed, or making their Case known to any one.

To prevent any Symptoms or Signs that may show themselves, by the Running
appearing on the Patient's Linen, and thereby discover the Disorder, I advise
them to wear a Piece of Linen, three or four Times double at the least, under
the Shirt Night and Day, to prevent its being Stained, and seen by those who
wash it, which must be secured to the Place in such Manner, as to receive the
Dripping Matter, by Strings, or otherwise, as the Party shall find most
convenient.

I imagine, if a small Opening was made in a Sponge of a reasonable Size, so
that the Head of the Yard might be received in it, and the Cloth placed over
that, it would be the securest Way to prevent a Discovery: For the Sponge by
its Nature will imbibe the Running, and being washed, at least twice a day in
Warm Water, will always keep clean, and be ready to receive the Gleeting Humor.

When you introduce the Top of the Penis into the Sponge, have it bare, and
remember to wash it well every Time you clean the Sponge.

Of a DRY GONORRHAEA, or rather the DRY VENEREAL DYSURIA.
THese are Disorders that but rarely occur, and therefore are but seldom
treated of; yet I think with good Reason, that a particular Account of these
Complaints ought to be set forth, that all Persons who are afflicted, with this
Distemper, may be informed of it and the Method of Cure, which being neglected,
will soon disperse it self through and corrupt the whole Mass of Blood, to the
utter Ruin of the Party, and perhaps Destruction of a whole Family, which may
be hereby prevented.

In this Case the Patient is afflicted with a sharp burning difficulty in
making Water, without making any discharge of Purulent Semen, or Seed, or at
least with an exceeding small Matter, for at that Time the internal Parts of
the Urethra, or Urinary-passage, suffering great Tention and Inflammation,
occasions very acute Pain from the Urine that flows over it, the very Urine in
the Bladder contracts great Heat from the inflamed Parts.

The Strangury comes on which is attended with heat, pain, redness, and
swelling of the Perineum; sometimes of the whole Penis, at other Times you have
only pain in making Water, without any other Symptoms, but without any Running,
and these are either the Forerunners of a very vehehement and virulent
Gonorrhaea, or the Consequence of a Bad One, suddenly suppressed by a Pretended
Cure

A Third Sort of GONORRHAEA.
THis is frequently met with in MEN, and is called SPURIOUS, and in which a
thickish purulent Matter flows, not from the Urethra or Urinary-passage, but
from the Crown of the Glans, or extreme Part of the Penis or Yard, which is
painful and inflamed, but is not discharged in so great a Quantity, as in the
Common Gonorrhaea, but yet plentiful enough.

WOMEN. Women are also obnoxious to this Species of Gonorrhaea, in which the
Venereal Humor is discharged, not from the Vagina or Urinary-passage, as in
the Common Cases, but only from the External Part of the Pudendum, or upper
part of the Privities, with a Pain and Heat in the Parts.

The CURE.
Plentiful and frequent Bleeding, all the Parts of Generation should be
fomented with warm Milk, or a Decoction of Marsh-Mallow-Roots and Linseeds, and
if Baths were prepared after this Manner, it would greatly forward the Cure.

As it is impossible that a Person should remain always in a Bath, or be
continually fomenting the Diseased Parts, Anodyne Cataplasms, or a Poultice of
White Bread and Milk, and the Yolk of an Egg, or the Pulp of Cassia, which
should be spread largely over the Disordered Parts, so as wholly to cover them,
and must be frequently changed to prevent their drying.

A cooling and Anodyne Clyster must be given to the patient, as occasion
requires.

It is proper to drink freely of a cooling Ptisan, and the other Liquors before
directed.

An Injection should be thrown up the Urinary-passage, if it can be without any
considerable Increase of pain, which must be gently tried at first with the
Anodyne Syrup; all which may be had of me, separate or together; and those who
are desirous to have a sufficient Quantity of Medicines for the Cure of a
Gonorrhaea, may have them put up together. price, One Guinea.

The Violence of the Disease being abated, the wished for Seminal Discharge, or
Running follows, and then must be treated as other virulent Venereal Disorders
before mentioned.

In case there should not be a proper Discharge or Running (which for the most
part happens in a Week's Time) more stricter Rules must be followed, and not to
be administered by the Parties themselves: Therefore if those who happen to be
thus afflicted, will apply themselves to me, I promise (under God) to make a
perfect Cure of them, in the most expeditious Manner that the Nature of the
Disease will admit, and in so secret a Manner, as not to be suspected of having
any such Disorder.

SPURIOUS. The Spurious Gonorrhaea is to be managed in the same Manner as the
Second Degree of Infection, only with this Difference, that the parts must be
fomented twice a day, and kept clean, by washing with the Lotion recommended
for the Cure of the First Stage of the Venereal Disorder.

Of the CONFIRMED POX.
HAving given a Description of the Gonorrhaea, I come now to treat of the worst
disorder of the Venereal Disease, called a Pox, in which not one or two parts
of the Body are disordered, but almost every part of it is infected, and
comprehends such a Number of different Symptoms, that it rather appears to be a
World of Distempers than one, and therefore I shall attempt no farther than to
discribe the Nature, Form, and Disposition of this Disease.

1st. The diseases of the parts of Generation either increase, or break out
again from neglect, ill, short, (or rather pretended) Cures, of the Gonorrhaea,
by ignorant and unskilful persons; otherwise arising anew.

2d. If with the Confirmed Pox, the patient has a violent Gonorrhaea, the
discharge increases Callosities, or Swellings arise in the Semenary Vessels and
Urethra, from whence proceed Impostumations, and Ulcers.

3d. They break out again where they have been cured, the Parts of Generation
afflicted with Chancres, Ulcers, Warts, near the Anus arise F^ci, or
Excrescencies about the Fundament; in the Groin Buboes, or Swellings in the
Groin, Tumors or Swellings in the Testicles, of different Kinds.

4th. They arise anew where they have not been before.

5th. The Color of the Skin is altered, with pain and spots, especially on the
Breast, and between the Shoulders, of a rose, purple, yellow or livid Color;
sometimes spreading wide, Scabs, Ringworms, Tetters, and many Sorts of Dry, or
Running Pustles.

5th. Chops in the Hands and Soles of the Feet, itching, running with a thin
Ichor, the Skin coming off in several pieces like Scales.

6th. It is troubled with hard Knobs, or pustles, not rising high, but
ulcerated at the Top, for the most part dry, but sometimes moist, are common on
the Corners of the Lips, the Sides of the Nose, about the Forehead, Eyes, and
Temples, and behind the Ears; from whence they spread over the whole Head, and
by degrees occupy other parts of the Body, but chiefly those that are furnished
with Hair.

7th. The Nails become uneven, and being ulcerated drop off.

8th. The Internal Parts of the Mouth, Throat, and Nose are disordered; all
Parts of the Mouth suffer Pain, Heat, and Inflammation, are eat into by Ulcers,
and a Caries is communicated to the Bones of the Palate, by which they are in a
short Time distroy'd, which penetrates as far as the Nose, by which Means the
spongious and triangular Bones thereof, with the Vomer, by which it is
supported, sink in.

9th. From hence arises a Hoarsness, loss of Speech, Gums eroded and ulcerated;
from whence proceeds Pain, Loss of Teeth, and Stinking Breath.

10th. Frequent and violent Pains, especially when warm in Bed, in the Bones,
Joints, and Tendons, which swell out in greater or smaller Degrees; sometimes
soft, sometimes hard, and truly bony, with violent pain; at an other Time easy
to be borne, which destroys the Substance of the Bone.

WOMEN. Women are troubled with Complaints that are proper to themselves, as
Cancers of the Breast, Suppression, or imoderate Flux of the Menstrua, Whites,
Hysteric Fits, Inflammations, Impostumations, Gangreen, Ulcers, Cancer of the
Womb, Barrenness, or frequent Abortion; and Child born, half rotten.

From some of which Disorders, Overstraining, or Weakness of the Back, and such
like, a Running frequently appears, and is not so easily discovered from that
which proceeds from an impure Coition, or other Way of Venereal Contagion,
which often misleads and deceives the truly Virtuous Fair, who have received
such Injuries from the ill Conduct of their Husbands, (and at the same Time are
ignorant of it) who to conceal their Wicked Practices, never inform their Wives
of the Reality of their Disorders, by which Means they mistaking their Disease,
it daily increases on them (and I fear) too often ends in their Destruction,
which if timely discovered might have been cured with very little Trouble.

For prevention of all such sad Consequences, I advise all Females to duly
consider their own Case, and examine it by all the Symptoms herein before
discrib'd of a Gonorrhaea, and also to observe, if they have any White Flux
continue, during the Time of their Menstrual Discharge, in such Cases they may
depend upon having received the Venereal Infection: But if the White Flux
wholly stops during the Time of Menstruation, and returns afterward, it then
proceeds from some other Disorder, and not from a Gonorrhaea.

Be sure not to use any Astringent Medicines before you are duly satisfied of
your Ailment; for should your Case be Venereal, instead of a White Flux, the
Gleeting Matter being stopped, you infallibly bring on a Pox.

But don't imagine that all these Symptoms ever occur at one Time, or in the
same Person, neither do the worst of them rarely happen to any, yet I thought
proper to collect them all together the more clearly to show the several
Degrees of this Deplorable Disease, and that all People afflicted with this
Extreme Part of the Venereal Disorder, might at once view and understand their
own Case.

The CURE.
All Sorts of Poxes admit of Cure, many with great Ease, by the Help of
Mercurial Unction, which is a most Efficatious Method of rooting out the
Venereal Poison.

But since this tiresome Method is generally dreaded, we are forced for the
most part to attempt a Cure after another Manner, though a great Length of Time
is required in the Performance; yet with Ease and Safety to the Patient.

Although whoever follows the Instructions given for the Cure of a Gonorrhaea,
will never be afflicted with any of the before mentioned Symptoms of this last
Stage of the Venereal Infection: Yet as there are many People, who have not had
the Benefit of my Never-Failing Medicines, have fallen into the Hands of
Unskilful Persons, or neglected to cure themselves at first, either by such
Neglect, bad or short (or rather pretended) Cures, are arrived at this last
Degree of the Disorder, and may want proper Instructions to relieve themselves
from such Complaints, without the Use of a Mercurial Unction, I shall therefore
proceed to give such persons all necessary Directions that their Case requires.

To cure this Height of the Disease without Danger, or Confinement, or weakening
the Body as little as possible, may be accomplished, by the great Medicine I
have for so many Years made use of, The Incomparable Specific Pills, by taking
Two every other Night, will abate the Venereal Poison by Degrees, until it is
entirely rooted out of the Body, which though it takes longer Time to complete,
yet the Patient will be fully recompensed, by the Easiness, Safety, and
pleasantness of the Operation, and by his being freed from the Confinement,
that must necessarily accompany a Salivation. These Pills are to be had of the
Author, Price 1 s. each Dose. Enquire for the Pills for the Dropsy.

The same Rules in taking these Pills, (which are wonderful mild in working)
are to be observed as directed for the other Purgative Medicines, both in the
Operation, and Respect to Diet, until the Cure is perfected.

There remains a Fourth Species of the Venereal Disease, to be added to those
which we have already described. To wit, the Verrucoso Excrescencies of the
Puaenda, which sometimes succeed Impure Coition, but for the most part follow
other Pocky Disorders that have been ill managed.

In MEN they arise upon the whole Penis, but more particularly upon the
Prepuce, and Glans, at the Corona, or near the Frenum.

WOMEN. In Women upon the whole Pudendum, but especially upon the Labia,
Clitoris, Prepuce of the Clitoris, and Nymphae: In Pathies they spring up from
the Verge of the Anus: Lastly, in Nurses, who receive the Disease in giving
Suck, they beset the Papillae of the Breast.

They differ in Figure as well as Situation; if they are oblong, slender, and
round, they are called P^rri; if they are round, but shorter, they are termed
Verrucae; but if they are very smooth, and extend into an an oblong Area, they
take the Name of Condylomata: Lastly, if of a large Size, and spread in
Fimbriae, and form Excressencies like Leaves, they are known by the Title of
Cristae.

Sometimes they dry up of themselves, and fall off, leaving a Root behind them,
from whence they spring up a-fresh; sometimes they are permanent, but are
flaccid, soft and almost void of Sense; sometimes hard dry, rigid horny,
destitute of Sense, and perfectly callous; but sometimes they are painful,
discharging something ichorous from their Heads, and seem to be of a Cancerous
Nature.

The CURE.
The Patient must Bleed, take of the Specific Pills once or twice a Week, also
Alternants, Diluents, and Attenuants, which will correct the Heat, Acrimony,
and Viscidity of the Blood, using different Methods according to the Difference
of the Weather, or the disordered State of the Fluids.

If there is Reason to believe, That the Pox is concealed, a Regular Course of
Mercurial Unction is to be entered upon, if your Affairs will admit of
Confinement: If not, or that you are unwilling to submit to such Operation, you
must be obliged to use Internal Remedies for a great Length of Time before the
Cure will be obtained; for which be pleased to consult the Author.

Causticks may be used to consume these Excressencies, but the Pain is hardly
to be endured, and frequently brings on Inflammations; therefore to take them
off with a Knife or Scissors is the most certain and easiest Way, for then the
Affair is finished in a Moment; otherwise the Pain must be very acute for some
Length of Time: But if the Patient dreads the Knife or Scissors, he must be
indulged with the Use of Cathaeretics. After the Incision the Sore is to be
treated in the same Manner as a Green Wound.

All which Medicines, Causticks, and Dressing, may be had at my House, on
writing for them.

Concerning GLEETS.
THey often proceed from former ill (or rather imperfect) Cures, sometimes from
a Seminal Weakness, and Imbecilities of the Genitals, etc.

These Disorders are generally the Distroyer of Virility in Men, and Fertility
in Women, and in Length of Time cause a whole Decay of Nature, which are
infallibly cured by the Balsamic Restrictive ELIXIR, which is neither
unpleasant to the Taste, nor occasions the least Disorder to the Patient.
Price, 6 s. the Bottle.

This ELIXIR is of so strengthening and sanative a Quality, that it not only
strengthens and comforts the Spermatick Vessels, but revives the Spirits, warms
and restores the Genital Parts in both Sexes, not only prompting a Desire of
Coition, but also furnishing Materials for the Performance of the Act.

WOMEN. Females may hereby most assuredly cure themselves of that troublesome
Disorder the Whites, and all other Weaknesses of the Womb, Back, and Urinary
Vessels; only observing, not to take it when their Monthly Visits happen, or a
Day or two before they are expected.

We have nothing more to add to this Discourse, but that the Patient relying on
the Operation of the Medicines recommended in this Book, and the Account and
Character herein before given of them respectively, and will punctually observe
the Directions given in the taking of them, and have a due Regard to his
Regimen, will be absolutely cured of either Gonorrhaea, Confirmed Pox, or
Stubborn Gleet, and all other Imbecilities in the Genitals, with the greatest
Privacy, as little Trouble, Charge, or Hindrance of Business, and perhaps much
better, cheaper, and sooner, than by any other Medicines now in Use, and
prevent the sad, and dangerous Consequences of an ill or pretended Cure.

And by Reason neither these, nor any other Medicines whatsoever, will always
have the same Operation, and Effect upon ^ll People, but will vary according to
the different Temperament of the several Bodies they have to work upon,
Therefore that all Persons who shall purchase my inestimable Remedies, for all
or any of the herein before treated of Disorders, may surely meet with the
Desired Effect, of a speedy, certain, and safe Cure, I desire they will from
Time to Time, communicate to me by a Line, the Manner their Physic operates,
and the Progress of the Disease, describing the Manner and Color of the Gleet,
and all other Symptoms attending the Disorder, and they shall receive all
proper and suitable Instructions and directions from me how to behave, and such
Alterations made in their Medicines [if any are wanting] as the Exigency of the
Case shall require: Or, if they choose rather to call upon me at my House, they
shall receive such Instructions as are necessary for their Direction in the
Method of Cure, and perhaps more satisfactory than can be done by Writing; and
the rather since I may understand their Case the better on a Personal View,
than they may happen to apprehend, or be able to discribe themselves.

This last Favor I request of all my Patients, for their private Good, That
they may not be delayed and hindered of a Cure, and then they will assuredly
find that my Medicines will fully answer the Ends for which they are proposed,
and what I have promised for them, which I think will be Evidence enough to
denote their Real Worth, and Excellency, as well as the honest and sincere
Meaning of the Author, as would be attested by some Hundreds that have been
cured by them in my Two and Twenty Years Practice, were it proper, in such
Cases, to send one Patient to another.

Those who send Letters from the Country, are desired to send them Post Paid,
and they will be Answered.

ERRATA.
PAge 17. Line 7. for so suddenly, read too suddenly. Page 25. Line 13. for
with Emolient Clysters, read must be loosened with Emolient Clysters.

FINIS.

