THE TUTOR OF TRUTH. BY THE AUTHOR OF THE PUPIL OF PLEASURE, etc. etc. IN TWO
VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

However Hypocrisy may flourish for a time, even its happiest moments are
clouded, and TRUTH shall at last prevail.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARDSON and URQUHART, under the Royal Exchange.

M DCC LXXIX.

THE TUTOR OF TRUTH.
LETTER LIII. G. LASCELLES, Esquire. to Capt. CARLISLE.
YOU are absolutely too effeminately scrupulous, CARLISLE -- what I proposed
was well meant. However, as your virtue is of a most obstinate, anchoretical
nature, which neither love nor friendship can make a voluptuous impression
upon, I shall quit the subject; but not without saying, that you are a very
singular man; and I question, upon the whole, whether the sex like you a bit
the better for those scruples which stand so constantly betwixt you and a
delicious offer.

As to Miss DE GRAY, it is as impossible she can love such a flash in the pan,
such a match always lighted, as MEDWAY, as it is impossible for her to live in
the same house with CLEMENT CARLISLE, and not be (however secretly) in raptures
with him -- that is to say -- if his ice does not lie in the way. Seriously,
CLEMENT, you make difficulties where I should go as smoothly as upon a carpet.
The Marchioness remains quiet, and I am your entire friend,

GEORGE LASCELLES.

LETTER LIVE. From the Same to Sir ANDREW FLIGHT.
Dear ANDREW,
THE stratagem takes: I have written the letter we projected, and it answers
our expectation. He could not bear the idea -- he was hurt -- he could not
believe his eyes -- he would not do her such a violence for the world -- But
you knew his virtue. I judge it is owing in a great degree to my caution in
directing to you in a counterfeit hand, that has kept our correspondence so
long as private as we wished it; for, had I written in my usual character, a
single letter would have betrayed me to CARLISLE, with whom I have lived on
terms of absolute intimacy for ten years, without his ever suspecting me to be
a jolly fellow. So easy is it for men of spirit, to impose upon these mighty
good kind of men. Never, surely, was any thing half so a-propos, as his putting
the Marchioness under my care -- or rather my sister's, who really thinks me as
great a saint as CARLISLE himself. But to come to the point, it may certainly
be contrived for you to take unto your bosom this Italian treasure -- CARLISLE
refuses her, that is one plea -- you are a fine fellow, that is another -- you
have money, that is greater than even the former: her passions are awake, that is
number 4 in your favor: she is married, and therefore above the folly of
solicitation -- number 5 -- her constitution glows like the torrid zone --
number 6 -- She abhors the Marquis -- count nine for that. In short, she will,
she must, she shall be yours -- As to the arrival of the Marquis, do not
apprehend any danger from that quarter: I have counteracted the contents of the
letter from CARLISLE, you may depend on it. It is, by your LASCELLES, so
ordered, that, if he goes at all in search of his Perdita, he will not direct
his course to England, but to a very different quarter of the globe. I will
prepare every other grand essential, even till your bed is dressed with roses.
In the mean time keep HEATHCOATE ignorant of the business, and continue to use,
or rather to amuse him, with the ridiculous that results from your play upon
the HODSONS, DREWSONS, HEWSONS -- what the plague is their vulgar name? He is a
worthy fellow, but not fit for such a plot as the present -- therefore till the
deed be done, keep him out of it.

As to the Lady's beauty, depend on your old caterer for that. I have a hawk's
eye at a pretty wench. To say the truth, the Marchioness is more to your taste
than any I have had the honor and friendship to recommend. Her eyes have just
that fluid floating in them, and are exactly of that brilliant black you like:
her nose is turned to the perfection of your beauty -- a little on the
aquiline, and set off by a pair of brows so markingly expressive of pleasure,
that you may depend upon them. Then her lips is first of that superior order,
without corpulence, and so full of majesty, without haughtiness, that most
attaches you. Her bosom is finely filled, and rises, as the poet emphatically
terms it, "suing to be pressed." Her arms, hands, fingers, are, likewise, all
suited to you. But enough. She is to be the subject of a much closer criticism
than it is even possible for me to give.

Once more, however, let me charge you, by an old and serviceable friendship,
never to breathe the name of LASCELLES in any way not consistent with every
thing sacred. You know my loss of a damned fortune at one stroke of the die,
first reduced me to this. As it was impossible to hold still the elbow,
something was necessary to repair my mischance, and, literally speaking, keep
me in play: besides which, I was to live as I had ever been used to do; I was
to be the same character. Two paths presented themselves, the one led to the
gallows by the way of purse-gathering, the other to the accommodation of a
friend, by the way of woman. I saw you, loved you, valued your health, and
chose the latter path. You know how I have succeeded: let the ample catalogue
of your passions, gratified in every form, convince you of it. You only I
served: you only know me to be not absolutely -- a CARLISLE. I once more repeat
to you the necessity of burning every letter, and every slip of paper you get
from me, the moment it comes to hand: if a syllable at any time transpires, I
am destroyed for ever: the consequence of which irreparable injury is, that I
must cut your throat. But keep our counsel and you shall be the very Jupiter of
a seraglio.

I shook hard last night; my hand trembles this morning at the disappointment.
Pray send fifty pieces to take off, by way of bracer.

Adieu. LASCELLES.

LETTER LV. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to G. LASCELLES, Esquire.
GEORGY,
THOUGH BLESSINGBOURNE has not yet honored my last draughts, and I have but
just an hundred pieces about me, I, nevertheless, divide cheerfully with you --
My purse is yours -- How can talk so childishly about disclosure of secrets?
Could you not have me cut into piecemeal by fathers, brothers, aunts, mothers,
and cousins, if I were ridiculous enough to blab? I adore woman to please me,
and men to laugh at. You very liberally supply me with the one kind of
gratification, HEATHCOATE with the other. Neither jars with the other's
province, and I have money enough to support you both. As to character, I like
it as well as you, and except laughing at men, and lying with women, I solemnly
declare I would not do a wrong thing for the world. But every man to his
passions -- those are mine. You rejoice my heart with repeating to me in every
letter the personal charms of CARLISLE's fair follower. It Is a confounded thing
though, to consider she is so taken with CARLISLE; and yet to do him justice,
he is an elegant, glorious fellow. Every day marks the goodness of his heart,
and you would be an ungrateful dog to say a syllable against him. If you can
prevent all risque (for though you fight for me, I hate quarrels) I will be
satisfied with your success by the middle of next month. In the mean time I
have a game of my own to play. Just such a one as I can manage without
assistance. Not a snap of the finger of peril attending the whole enterprise.
But, HEATHCOATE is my correspondent in this adventure; it is not of importance
enough for the ambitious GEORGE LASCELLES, whom even a Marchioness cannot deter
from his attempts: the object of my present humble aspiring is only the wife of
the most grazier-looking HAL. HEWSON. But mum, not a word more on a subject
that does not belong to you. HEATHCOATE is the man for trifles and laugh.
MEDWAY is, as usual, the most sullen rascal in Europe; he was going to run me
through the body the other day for tossing down a tumbler of fair water, which
(though I swear it was an accident) he insisted was done with an ill-natured
design to spot his waistcoat -- CARLISLE, who is ever a peacemaker,
interfered, or else I should most likely have written to you from Elysium.

Yours, A. F.

LETTER LVI. The Earl of BLESSINGROURNE to Mr. DE GRAY.
SIR,
YOU did not remember either me or my overtures respecting my nephew, Sir
ANDREW, by the post. Certainly you are ill, and therefore I send to make
friendly inquiries after your health. As to any other cause of your delay, it
is impossible to be conceived; for how should so well-informed a gentleman as
Mr. DE GRAY forget, what is due to a very splendid offer, from one of the
oldest peers in the realm? The Countess renews her compliments. I am in hourly
expectation of a dukedom: your address, however, at present, is, as usual, to
the Right Hon. the Earl of BLESSINGBOURNE.

I am, Sir, yours, BLESSINGBOURNE.

LETTER LVII. Captain CARLISLE to Mr. LASCELLES.
THOUGH your last relished more, my dear LASCELLES, of the inconsiderate than I
hope belongs to your character, yet it set my heart at rest upon the subject of
the Marchioness.

Another strange circumstance has happened in this family. Two days after I had
returned such a reply to Mr. DE GREY's letter as appeared to me proper and
consistent, he put into my hands a letter from BLESSINGBOURNE, who had made
formal overtures of marriage betwixt Miss DE GRAY and Sir ANDREW FLIGHT.
Nothing ever excited more real astonishment, for I had never once dreamt of a
treaty coming from that quarter, knowing, so perfectly as I do, LUCIA's opinion
of Sir ANDREW. The epistle was penned with all the title-swelled vanity
connected with the BLESSINGBOURNE character; and coronets, crests, and
supporters, lions rampant, spread eagles, and fields azure, danced through
every line. Having commented upon the style, with a good humor, which is above
turning the result of a man's infirmity into a cause of affront, Mr. DE GRAY
asked me my opinion of the match --

Pray heaven, I may never undergo so severe a trial as I sustained in the
process of the following short but most agonizing conversation, of which, you
will have the more perfect idea from dialogue. It past in Mr. DE GREY's library.

Mr. DE GRAY. I have ever made you, my dear Mr. CARLISLE, my confident upon
various occasions: we have never canvassed together a love affair. Though you
tell me you are to have a little more knowledge of society, before you venture
upon a wife; yet I know you to have a very competent judgment of these things,
because you have ever been an accurate observer. This letter before us, opens
to you a secret of the utmost consequence to your friends. Peace. What do you
think of it?


CARLISLE. Sir -- you must certainly -- be -- be the best judge of these
matters -- It Is too nice a point --


Mr. DE GRAY. Riches you know are out of the question. Titles do not glow in my
eyes, as they do in those of his Lordship --


CARLISLE. Oh -- Mr. DE GRAY -- what -- what are titles, to -- to --


DE GRAY. To what, my CLEMENT?


CARLISLE. I beg pardon, Sir. -- Perhaps a Countess may not displease even the
amiable Miss DE GRAY.


DE GRAY. What, you would advise her then to the match; would you, my friend?


CARLISLE. Who, I advise -- Gracious God forbid that I -- that is -- I should
be sorry any thing might, from my advice, turn out so -- so -- so as --


DE GRAY. Nobody, to be sure, can answer for events: but what do you think of
Sir ANDREW, my dear CARLISLE?


CARLISLE. What does Miss DE GRAY think of him, Sir?


DE GRAY. That Is what I meant rather to ask you. As an old friend, I did not
know but she might have let you into the secret --


CARLISLE. What secret, Sir --?


DE GRAY. Perhaps, you think more highly of -- Mr. Medway. [I was ready to sink
into the earth, LASCELLES, at this question.]


CARLISLE. Of Mr. MEDWAY, Sir! -- To be sure MEDWAY -- Mr. MEDWAY, certainly,
Sir -- if he meets the Lady's approbation.


DE GRAY. At any rate I will decline his Lordship's offer. I am persuaded,
LUCIA has no sort of affection for Sir ANDREW. He is too light, too volatile.
-- Now, that objection does not, I think, lie against MEDWAY. He is a strange
headed, but I believe he is a good hearted creature. Do you think this person a
better match?


CARLISLE. He has made offers then, Sir, has he?


DE GRAY. Admitting he had, is he a man you would have me fix on? --


CARLISLE. If to Miss DE GRAY he were agreeable, Sir, -- to be sure -- you --
you -- you could not do better --


DE GRAY. Tell me frankly, my dearest Captain, do you know any body whom you
think she likes better in the tender way we speak of? --


CARLISLE. Sir -- likes better -- likes better than Mr. MEDWAY?


DE GRAY. Aye, my friend -- I could wish her happiness to depend, in some
measure, upon your choice. Perhaps neither Sir ANDREW, nor MEDWAY, are the men
you would fix on -- Be candid -- do you know -- are you acquainted with any
person who you think loves her more tenderly? --


CARLISLE. More tenderly! -- oh yes, my dear Mr. DE GRAY, ten thousand times --
more tenderly -- oh God of heaven! --


DE GRAY. You charm me with the tidings. -- Pray name him to me -- Is he young?
Is he amiable -- Is he steady -- has he any of the virtues that distinguish the
-- of -- of --

Here, LASCELLES, the conversation was interrupted by the appearance of MEDWAY
himself, who came bursting into the library for his fishing pole.

Never was man relieved more critically. We were talking of you, Mr. MEDWAY,
said Mr. DE GRAY, -- hush -- hush -- cried MEDWAY, emphatically extending his
finger -- It Is plain, Mr. DE GRAY has fixed his heart, as well as LUCIA here is,
on this man. Yet what a strange conversation! For heaven's sake help me, if
possible, to a clue. Yet MEDWAY -- depend on it, MEDWAY is the man, to the
terror of


Your CLEMENT CARLISLE.

LETTER LVIII. Mr. DE GRAY to the Earl of BLESSINGBOURNE.
MY LORD,
THE importance of the consideration to both the young parties concerned, and
the regard that is due to the natural inclinations, as to the acquired
affections, are the apologies I have to offer for appearing to neglect a
suitable return of acknowledgment for the honor of your Lordship's letter, and
for the ample proposals it contained.

Prior to the receipt of your Lordship's favor, I made some attempt to obtain
the secret of my child's heart, and since, I have made a like attempt upon the
heart of another person. Not, my Lord, that it is possible for me to prefer any
gentleman to the nephew of the Earl of BLESSINGBOURNE, but because I suspected
an affection subsisting elsewhere: I think, my Lord, I have discovered a
passion in my daughter, and a return of it in a certain young friend of mine,
that may, possibly, grow, in a little time, into a circumstance of essential
consequence.

Within a few days I shall be more assured of this, and if my child proves to
have a heart not pre-engaged, there can be no doubt of her soon becoming
sensible of the great honor of an alliance with so near a branch of the
BLESSINGBOURNE family. On the contrary, if it should turn out that her
affections are already possessed, it will appear obvious to your Lordship,
that, as, in such a case, she cannot reward the tenderness of Sir ANDREW, she
can have no just title to the many dignities, and the immense fortunes which
would follow such a union.

What I would invite then from your Lordship, is, a short suspension, that the
matter may lie open. I again repeat, that a few days will naturally determine
every thing. In the mean time, Sir ANDREW had better, I conceive, remain
unacquainted with our treaty, left it should any way terminate to his
dissatisfaction. On my part, I will hasten the necessary discovery as much as
in my power, although your Lordship will easily imagine, a father's power, in a
point of so much importance, is not very extensive, when the father is
convinced of his child's integrity and discretion.

I shall be happy, my Lord, to hear, that the mode, I have submitted to your
Lordship, is crowned with your approbation.

I distinguish myself when I present my most humble compliments to the
Countess, and I have the honor to be,

My Lord, your Lordship's Most devoted and obedient servant, ROBERT DE GRAY.

LETTER LIX. The Earl of BLESSINGBOURNE to R. DE GRAY, Esquire.
SIR,
THE Countess and I had no conception of such a reply to our very
distinguishing overtures, in favor of a young person utterly untitled; we
receive a very ill return from you, Mr. DE GRAY. Our visit to Prudence Place
was, principally, (out of an old friendship, and because we thought your
daughter a very decent, prudent person) to promote a match between her and our
nephew. We offered the most peculiar splendours, we offered lineal honors --
but we are desired to wait the issue of another treaty. And pray, Sir, may we
ask, which or who it is amongst your friends that ought to have the first offer
in preference to the nephew and heir of the Earl of BLESSINGBOURNE? I shall not
mention the clear annual rent-roll of near fifty thousand guineas a year, that
will devolve to him, nor will I rest my consequence upon the superbest
equipage; nor on the most magnificent seats in Europe; I confine myself to that
illustrious line, into which the arms of your young Lady would be, if I may so
say, -- encoated. Every body can tell, Mr. DE GRAY, I am not a boaster; but,
indeed, your tardy conduct borders somewhat upon incivility and disrespect. The
Countess thinks so too. Nevertheless, we still think your LUCIA would adorn a
coronet; she is her favorite. A little intercourse with my Lady, after
marriage, would make her -- would -- properly speaking -- prepare her for her
new honors. Once more therefore we offer our services to you again, and upon
the full assurance of your immediate consent, the Countess and I are proceeding
to measures that may bring the point to a crisis.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient servant, BLESSINGBOURNE.

LETTER LX. From the Same to Sir ANDREW FLIGHT, at R. DE GREY's, Esquire.
Dear ANDREW,
WE have reasons to desire you will look upon Lucia De Gray, as upon a Lady
that is first to be the Lady FLIGHT, and afterward Countess of BLESSINGBOURNE,
if not of a rank still higher. She will be informed of this circumstance at the
same time you are; and as soon as certain preliminaries between Mr. DE GRAY and
I are adjusted, the ceremony shall be completed. To be sure the honors are
every one in our hands, but never mind that: she is a beautiful woman: and with
regard to honors, as they cannot be divided, we are contented to bestow them
in consideration of her merit and person.

I shall give you very liberally, and I send you now a bill for present use,
though, by-the-by, it astonishes both me and the Countess, how you can continue
to squander such sums in a country village during the time of a visit.

Adieu. BLESSINGBOURNE.

LETTER LXI. The Countess of BLESSINGBOURNE to Miss DE GRAY.
Miss DE GRAY,
I HAVE prevailed on the Earl to suffer ANDREW, our nephew, to offer you his
hand. The acceptance of it is a point so much out of the question, that it
would be ridiculous to mention it. To do you justice, you are the only young
woman I know, of no descent, who could sit at my righthand, upon a visit to
certain people, without disgracing me. Nay more, I believe your being about me
a little when you are Lady LUCIA FLIGHT (for I dare say you will wait patiently
for my coronet a few years) will totally finish you both for a carriage and a
drawingroom. This is saying very much, Lady LUCIA -- 'Pshaw, I am so used to
write only to people of condition, that I declare I can scarce reconcile my pen
to a Miss, or a Madam -- This, Miss DE GRAY, is, I say, allowing great matters
for you. I know but four people upon earth -- and one of them is a crowned head
-- who can either sit in a sedan, carry themselves in a coach, or fill a chair.

On the day of marriage, which shall not be distant, if Mr. DE GRAY behaves
prudently, I shall decorate you with my own hand. Mean while you will,
doubtless, become sensible of the accomplishments of your future husband.

Adieu. C. of B.

LETTER LXII. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
HERE is a fine piece of work cut out, HEATHCOATE. Aunt and uncle have resolved
to marry me to LUCIA DE GRAY. The old foolish Lord has sent me a letter which
set me laughing for a whole hour. He bids me look upon the damsel as upon the
happy she who is to be the cara sp^sa of Sir ANDREW FLIGHT. He bids me prepare
for marriage -- marriage, HEATHCOATE? If I ever marry -- why then -- But, by
the sacred souls of all the Lords, Barons, Farls, Dukes, Dutchesses, Popes,
Cardinals, Kings, and Grand Monarques, that went before me, I will turn this
event to some pleasant advantage. I say pleasant, because to think upon it
seriously, is quite and clean out of the question. LUCIA DE GRAY is too modest,
yet too aweful, and too much -- a thousand times too much, hovered over by a
set of cutthroat fellows, who would slice me and eat me, were I to pretend to
the serious fact. And between ourselves, I believe both CARLISLE and MEDWAY are
in her train. To say the truth, she is a woman I can never laugh either with or
at: for as to the former, I never could make her smile at the expense of
another in my whole life; no, not even the HEWSONS, who might set the muscles
of the very devil upon the simper: and as to the latter, she does every thing
so unaffectedly, that ridicule is obliged to give up the subject in despair.
Then she has a cursed method of looking so as to command deference; and
therefore, beautiful as she is, I hate to be in her company -- nevertheless,
HEATHCOATE, if I do not draw from this precious epistle of my uncle some divine
^un -- but enough -- time will show.

I am now likely to be in the very meridian of my species of enjoyment -- after
much fatigue of -- laughing, I have brought the HEWSONS to the true perfection
of absurdity -- a very little time will show you that the ludicrous can go no
farther than I have made it go in them -- Such joy -- such frolic -- such --
but it would be absolutely iniquitous to forestall the business -- no, let it
take you by surprise -- let it come on you unawares -- let it seize you
unprepared, and deluge your cheeks in tears of extacy.

Farewell. A. F --.

LETTER LXIII. Mr. GABRIEL HEWSON to Miss DE GRAY.
Charming Madam,
IT is impossible to have been so long burning under the torrid rays of your
transporting beams of beauty, without becoming sensible to their piercing --
heart-piercing fervor. As well might the tender bud lie on the shore of India,
without being parched by the favors of Apollo -- a titled gentleman now at my
elbow, but whose name I am not yet entitled to disclose, is, as it were, my
guardian genius, and tells me, that you, charming Madam, have within these few
days been pleased, out of the benignity of your gracious self, to speak of my
parts and person with some condescending complacency. This emboldens me,
charming Madam, to say, that I think you are the most incomparable piece of
celestial workmanship in the way of woman, that ever glowed under the
astonished eyes of a small spectator -- the natural consequence of all this,
Madam, is, that I am the humblest of your idolaters. I find, charming Madam,
met in you, all the graces which Horace, Pliny, Homer, Virgil, and all other
writers, ancient or modern, give to their several favorites. Your lips are
sweeter than those attributed to Briseis -- your hair has more of the nitidus
in it, than belonged to that which was the distinguishing property of the
divine Lyce's, and your air is considerably more ennobled than that of the
majestic Dido, Queen of Carthage, celebrated in the Aeneid written by Virgil.

I should never, charming Madam, have presumed to address such ambitious
sentiments to your exalted elegance, were I not told that you prefer scientific
superiority to personal perfection. Some persons have been pleased to flatter
me with possessing pretty fully the laurels of the first excellence; and as to
the last, though nature has not endowed me altogether with the graces of a
CARLISLE, yet I find in my glass an alteration somewhat for the better every
day, and hope in the end to step without any kind of embarrassment.

I take love-secrets to be amongst the sanctum sanctorum of arduus rebus, and
therefore I beg this may be confined to the sacred shrine of your most
beautiful bosom.

I am, charming Madam, Your obsequious slave, (in rosy fetters) GABRIEL HEWSON.
P. S.

Omnia vincit amor.



LETTER LXIV. Mr. HENRY HEWSON to Mr. HEATHCOATE, Esquire.
Esquire,
I HAVE not catched up goose feather for some time, Case why? because I was
amind to gee time for the perfaction of the thing -- I am got a woundly way
since my last, and fancy a couple o'weeks more will finish me, that is, if Sir
ANDREW sticks close by me, and I continues to practice the thing -- Case why?
practice makes parfect. To show you that I have not been silent for nothing, I
must let you know that I have not changed ten words with HETT. this week. Case
why? what is so far from the go of the genteel gig, as to take notice of one's
household spouse before company? 'specially when a body is learning a touch of
the times. To say truth, her lips looked develish ruddy the other day, and I lent
um a smack that echoed like wagon whip -- for I could not help it, seeing
that is she is one of your dainty ones -- but Sir ANDREW soon took me aside, and
ga' me a bit of a lesson, and made me heartily ashamed on it. I must let you
know too, that I manage my little bit of a black sack bobbishly, thof ribbons
and flourrididdles at sides tickle nape of one's neck consumedly. Neither do I
look so damned ugly as might be surspected, regard to frenchfied foretop, and
hair-bundles stuck out side of one's head. Fat of one's feace helps to take of
hugeness of thing, which is but natural, seeing that one swells out the other;
and this makes feace and hair go, as a man may say, cheek-by-jowl without
quarreling. It Is pity, I Am given to sweattin so much, as I find it don't do at
all for a better-most person. I have got half dozen fine white handkerchiefs,
but they are so cussed cambrickey that they are nothing in such a grepe as mine,
and I melt so this fmoaking weather, that I make ' em every mother's son quite
of a stew. Truth is, I begin to see, pliteness has, like every thing else,
'vantages and not 'vantages. When I was an ignoramus, I used to sit in hall, or
ride to hayfield with nightcap on head, or colored handkerchief under hat for
'vantage of dripping in summertide; but no such matter now; there is nothing so
ill-bred as to be caught sweattin; nay, more than that, it is quite out of the
go of the thing to mention the very word -- it is sweattin with fellers of
yesterday, but, I find, it is presfieration with folks that are obliged to be
desunt. Sir ANDREW has been ^t me some time (seeing I cannot keep this
presfieration to myself) to bleed and bolus for six weeks or so, that I may
vacuate some of my moister, and dry up my porusses abit. What do you think of
this, Esquire? I hate purgers as I hate Lucifer -- Satancotus, as Gab calls
him, but I would even potecarryarize myself for sake of good breeding. To tell
you the truth, there is sort of a pleasant comical nothingat-all, in the life
of your better-most genii, that I like mortationly well indeed. I warrant you,
we went it round the great garden last night by moonshine for two hours -- none
but your tip-top specie, giggling and going it all the time -- clack -- clack
-- clack -- yes -- yes -- yes -- no -- no -- no -- ha! ha! ha! -- he! he! he!
-- ti-tum, ti-tum -- titi-dum -- Pardon me, Madam -- pardon me, Miss -- Skuse
me, Sir -- out with the foot -- off with the hat -- down with the breech -- oh
Esquire -- Esquire HEATHCOATE, it is just the thing to a T. Last night, a little
before we went awalkin, I finished giving the hand, as they call it -- that is
to say, getting a pretty lady over a gutter, for instance -- or handin her over
a puddle, or any thing the same way -- allowing for th'alteration. I was once,
before I had my fortune, low enough to say on such cassion, Come Bet, Het, Pol,
Mol, Fan, Kit, or what not -- allowing for the alteration -- Come, gee us your
fist, or tip us your daddle -- or lends hold of your forefoot, else may hap you
may draggle the tail of you in the water. Odds merciful miserecordibus! as Gab
says, no such thing now by a million. Contrary so much, that one of the best
things a better-most body can do, is to manage this matter as't should be. Sir
ANDREW himself, for sample, is the greatest dabster in the world at it. For
instance, there is he, there is a woman, and there is a crossing, or a slippihin
of waterwash; mayhap, we'll say, covered over with stepping stones -- Now mark,
Esquire. Now comes your jemmy work -- Well -- get over they must -- Indulge me,
Miss, or Madam, or my Lady, says he, allowing for th'alteration, with the favor
of your fair hand -- Sir, you are very plite. Well -- what is next? Whew --
she is a the other side. But how the miserecordibus did she get there I wonder,
says you? Ah! there lies the point. Now I Will tell you. First, Miss, etc.
allowing for the alteration, tucks up piece of petticoat, sets her pretty foot
on stepping stone, shows dainty turned ancle, and is obliged, for the sake of
bettermost breedin, to look a little as if she was scared. Oh, Lord -- says she
-- Fear not, dear creature, divine angel, noble Madam, magnanimous Miss, etc.
allowing for the alteration -- fear nothing: then, Esquire, he takes her hand,
and takes her waist, and gis her a querrick, and they take a little bit of a
thing 'twixt a hop and a jump, and he kisses her glove, and bends hinder-part,
and bows head, and gets grin into's feace, and gis a bit of he, he, he, and
shows his white, powder-purg'd grinders, and -- and -- it is all over as neat as
the Lady's leg: I have been a long while on this head, case it is almost half way
clean up to the top genii, and Sir ANDREW 'clares 'pon his honor, no gentleman
can do long without it -- I have practiced hugely, and I find I am up to every
part of the puddle-pliteness, 'cept pousing out hinder-part, and getting the
grin. In aiming at the first matter, I have overset one of Master DE GREY's
china jars; for the thing is natural. I a'n't made quite so plite as I should
be 'bout the bottom of waist, or mayhap a little bit farther, so it is out of the
question for me to wriggle't as little and limberly as such a fine genteel,
greyhound-ham'd son of a gentleman as Sir ANDREW. The grin too is, as I just
now said, a hard thing to hit off. I cannot, for soul of me, find out any thing
to make a man laugh at getting a woman over a cartret, and as to laughing where
one don't see the joke, and where the thing is one almost nothing at all, I
never could do it since I was born. Besides, why? I am so cuss'd covered about
the gills, that if I could laugh as heartily as Sir ANDREW, 'twould not do, for
my cheeks are too solidum firmus, if a man chose to be learned, that it is
enough to crack one's cheek furniture. I begin to day to learn to hold my
tongue, or else talk about nothing, just as cassion sees fit. Hett gets on at a
pure size. Sir ANDREW is giving her a lectur about airs, and high notions,
fan-fluttering -- hemming, and the like, now in the garden. Gab would do very
well if his larning did not stand in his way. But we shall all be fit to be
seen in a short time, before we go back; though as to coming near Captain
CARLISLE, that is impossible: yet I am sure he never took any pains to be
better-most, for every thing he does looks too easy for that -- same thing with
Miss LUCIA.

Esquire, farewell, Or valley, as Gab says, Yours, H. HEWSON.

LETTER LXV. Mrs. HEWSON to Sir ANDREW FLIGHT.
YOU assure me there is nothing more common, than for elegant people to write
to each other, while they are under the same roof. You propose Lord and Lady
SHUTTLECOCK, of your acquaintance, as examples, who, you tell me, when even
they are chagrin'd, retire to their chambers, and keep the waiting woman upon
the hurry-scurry, with carrying notes of reproach to and fro, for several
hours. Well, I protest, I wish the practice were universal, for it is mighty
pretty; but then, indeed, it would become vulgar, and after that, it would
nauseate.

Miss LUCIA is so filled with spleen and megrim, that there is no getting an
answer out of her. As to corresponding with you, Sir ANDREW, whom I see every
hour, what can I possibly have to say? If you wish me upon paper, as well as in
person, to assure you, that I most cordially detest -- detest every thing, that
was once most charming, I will repeat it. No truth was ever clearer. Those
lasses, who were favorites formerly in my village, are now as detestable to me
as the village itself. I was once so great a novice as to find pleasure in
seeing my rustic neighbors walk in their Sunday dresses with their happy
homely husbands, and assemble in the shade. My foolish heart leapt as they sat
singing at their doors, or working at their windows -- the very hollo --
how-do-you, and hail-fellow-wellmet, had all attractions for me -- The smell of
an hay-cart was pleasure, and the sight of an harvest-home absolute extacy.
Note the alteration: I am wholly inverted in point of pleasure: if, on my
return to Helter-Skelter-Hall (which is fitting up) I feel any satisfaction
from the sight of people working at windows, or singing at doors, it will be
upon account of the pride of comparing their grovelling situation with mine: if
I bear the noise of an haycart, it will be only from reflecting that my
carriage-horses (for such I will have) shall fare the better for it. -- If I
can again reconcile to myself the presence of lads and wenches dizened out in
their foolish finery, it will only be for the joy of my sweeping by them in
magnificence, that shall make them shy off with amazement: and if an
harvesthome can ever more become supportable, it will only be from the
consideration that it comes but once a year, and is then over for a twelvemonth
-- What other arguments can I use to convince you of my readiness to adopt the
modes and manners you speak of? -- As to Mr. HEWSON -- he is a very good
creature, and, when you have done with him, I shall love him better than ever.
I cannot come into your opinion about the elopement you speak of, be it ever so
fashionable; for I most assuredly do love Harry, and therefore it is
impossible. Your assertions of tenderness to me, I am to take, you know, as
mere effects of sentiments which are to come of course, and as such, they are
very gallant. I shall not, indeed, be in any degree angry with you for the
continuance of such civilities in the way of promoting breeding. Nor will I
scruple any thing so accomplished a gentleman proposes, except the elopement
scheme, which, I again say, I can never consent to. Any thing else I obey --
nay, I have convinced you of it. I do not speak to Harry before company; I walk
and step as different as possible from what I did -- I perceive the absolute
necessity of only occasionally hearing and seeing: I find every now and then as
violent a desire to faint, after a little decent walking, as Lady
BLESSINGBOURNE herself. -- I was almost expiring with the smell of violets last
night in my room, though I used to dote on them. I can drink two glasses, and
exactly another half, of wine and water -- My dinners, of late, never digest,
without a drop of ratasia. Those drops, and restoratives, which I before never
heard of but in books, are now a part of my existence. I can bear no smells but
such as are artificial. Every thing natural actually turns upon my stomach. I
used to rise at six, I am now never up till near twelve. -- I used to let my
arms brave the sunbeams -- I now sleep in gloves. -- I used to defy the tan, I
now never venture to stir without a shade.

What would you wish more?

My seven o'clock lesson in LUCIA'S bower shall certainly not be forgotten.
Mean time I have the great honor to be

Sir ANDREW FLIGHT'S most obedient, and very humble servant, HENRIETTA HEWSON.

LETTER LXVI. Miss DE GRAY to Miss LASCELLES.
O MISS LASCELLES, what strange and unaccountable confusions are every hour
happening in this house? Here is now come down formal overtures from Lord
BLESSINGBOURNE, for the ever fickle Sir ANDREW FLIGHT. The Countess too has
written to me, in a way, that ought to make me ill satisfied with her. My
father has had a letter, and Sir ANDREW himself received encouragement in this
business from -- his own vanity. He sent into my chamber this morning the
ridiculous enclosure. But I must break off my letter almost as soon as I have
begun it. A summons is given which I never disobey. In haste, therefore,

Adieu. LUCIA DE GRAY.
[The Enclosed.]
Sir ANDREW FLIGHT'S Letter to Miss DE GRAY.
WHAT, lovely LUCIA, is to be done in this business? the old folks you see are
resolved. -- What says your heart upon the subject? Please to consult that; and
at your leisure, make acquainted with its determinations

Your ANDREW FLIGHT.




LETTER LXVII. Mr. DE GRAY to the Earl of BLESSINGBOURNE.
MY LORD,
I CAN now take upon me to say, I should do some violence to my child's
inclination, and perhaps wound the bosom of another person, equally dear to me,
were I to carry on any longer the most distant idea of a tender connection
betwixt her and Sir ANDREW FLIGHT. It is impossible that I should reply to more
of your Lordship's last peculiar letter, or, indeed, that I should, with any
propriety, lengthen this letter, beyond adding to it the name of

Your Lordship's obedient, and most humble servant, ROBERT DE GRAY.

LETTER LXVIII. Captain CARLISLE to G. LASCELLES.
IF I described to you, in my last, a scene that was painful, I have now one to
relate that is dreadful. Mr. DE GRAY again desired today a conference with me
-- Miss DE GRAY was to partake of it -- Ten minutes before, we had met,
accidentally, in the garden, and, after a moment's pause of confusion, parted
precipitately by different walks. -- This' second interview, therefore, came
upon us before the anxiety occasioned by the first had worn off. Our disorder
became exceedingly visible, and neither of us spoke for a minute, though during
that minute it was the elaborate design of both to speak -- Have you not
received a letter? said Mr. DE GRAY to LUCIA.

A letter, Sir! said she, trembling.

Yes, my dear, from --

From Miss LASCELLES, do you mean, Sir? Oh, yes, I had one this day --

NO, LUCIA, I mean from the Earl of BLESSINGBOURNE.

From Lord BLESSINGBOURNE, papa?

[Here, LASCELLES, I rose as if to withdraw.]

Pray, Mr. CARLISLE, don't leave us: no business can happen at this house,
without your being a welcome party. -- Yes, my dear LUCIA, I mean from the Earl.

No, indeed, Sir.

Nor from the Countess?

Yes, Sir -- I -- I must confess, I am honored with one from the Countess.

May I see it?

If I have it about me, Sir -- but I am afraid -- oh, no -- here it is.

Read it to us, my dear girl; we know what the Countess can do -- and I have, I
believe, the fellow of it.

Excuse me, Sir, I have got a terrible cough. If you please, I will leave it
with you and Captain CARLISLE.

Pray, my best LUCIA, don't stir -- Come, CLEMENT -- here, take my letter too,
and read both to us --

I, Sir? --

Then, I will.

[Here, LASCELLES, he read, first, the Earl's, and then that of the Countess;
upon which I had the rashness to exclaim -- I am not very apt to give way to my
indignation; but, if I had here that scoundrel Lord, who can suffer his wife to
insult such a woman as Miss DE GRAY, I Would twist his nose off!]

Oh, my dear LASCELLES, what a scene ensued. LUCIA turned pale -- fixed her
eyes upon me, in a kind of gentle reproach, and, after making an effort to
retire, she fell lifeless on the floor. God of Heaven! what did I feel at that
moment? -- She continued to rise, only to faint again -- I kneeled down -- I
caught her in my arms -- My tears bathed her beautiful hand -- I staggered
under the weight of her, through enfeebling agony -- Her dear lips quivered --
I leaned down in my confusion, even till I felt her cheek upon mine -- I kissed
the tears away -- Her father was speechless -- She revived a little, but again
relapsed, and without alarming any other part of the house (which her delicacy
desired might be the case) she was conducted by Mr. DE GRAY into her apartment.
He is still by her side -- I went out in an agony, and I write this in the same
situation. What can possibly be the meaning of all this? -- Is Sir Andrew then
at last the man? -- Was she so violently hurt at my menace against Lord
BLESSINGBOUNE? Does her passion extend to the very roots of the family? What
then becomes of Medway? Whatever be the truth -- it is certain that LUCIA DE
GRAY is wretched, and therefore it is impossible the most poignant misery
should be escaped by the unfortunate

CLEMENT CARLISLE.

LETTER LXIX. Mr. LASCELLES to Captain CARLISLE.
I HAVE the pleasure to inform my dear friend that AUGUSTA is more reconciled
to her situation than could be expected. She seems, at length, to become
conscious of the propriety of taking our advice, admires you for the fortitude
of your virtue; and even induces the idea of soon seeing the Marquis; whom,
by-the-by, it is near time to hear from. I dispatch this news in a short note,
merely because I am convinced it will communicate to you the pleasure it has
already given

Your G. LASCELLES.

LETTER LXX. Captain CARLISLE in answer.
YOUR favor, relating the happy change in the disposition of the Marchioness,
is replied to immediately; and although it came to my hand, just after I had
taken it from sealing a letter containing the most pathetic accounts, yet was I
not wholly dead to the felicity of so agreeable a piece of fortune. Continue, I
beg of you, to confirm, to establish, and to complete her in such charming
resolutions -- tell her, she has now found out the method of making me truly
admire her: assure her, that by such conduct my adoration is effectually
acquired. Inspire her with cheerful ideas of society -- honor -- elegance --
and all the transports in the train of truth -- Omit no circumstance that may
fix her in the ideas she now entertains.

I am your faithful CLEMENT CARLISLE.

LETTER LXXI. Mr. LASCELLES to Sir ANDREW FLIGHT.
THERE is infinite difficulty in the business -- The Marchioness begins to rave
about her confinement, which, without the presence of CARLISLE, is, she says,
insupportable. She raves -- she stamps -- she insists upon seeing him. Thirteen
love letters have I destroyed since yesterday morning, which she imagines I was
fool enough to send to CARLISLE -- One written since upon the same subject, I
preserve just to send you by way of specimen -- All the glorious fire which she
expresses there, shall, in due time, burn for you -- I -- GEORGE LASCELLES, the
successful, have said it. My sister has written twice to Miss LUCIA of late --
She always gives me her packets to put in the office -- Not knowing but she
might say something improper of the violent Marchioness, I threw the aforesaid
packets, not into the office, but into the fire -- My head and hands are full,
but the Lady is beyond every thing that was ever before seen on this side
Heaven; and so I shall go through it with spirit for the sake of my beloved
Baronet.

I have been thinking that a few new trinkets might soften a hard place or two;
-- she came unaccommodated, you know. If you were to supply this matter, you
might, perhaps, get her vanity in your favor -- that is a wonderful point
gained. When afterward she came to know, that one of the richest, as well as
neatest men in England, was the accommodator, (and upon so disinterested a
principle too) why it is ten to one -- the thing is, at least, worth an effort
or two -- whatever, therefore, you remit, shall be laid out to the most
promising advantage. I am pretty well versed in the baubles that set a woman's
eyes sparkling; and if you can once charm the eyes, depend upon it the heart is
not in a very bad humor.

Adieu. G. LASCELLES.

LETTER LXXII. The Duke of DOWNDERDALE to Sir A. FLIGHT.
Nephew,
LEAVE DE GREY'S directly. You are not to attach yourself to his daughter. We
are ill-treated. Come post to the Abbey immediately.

P. S.

The dukedom, you see, is obtained.



LETTER LXXIII. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
I SHALL certainly add to all my delicious laughs the secret possession of Mrs.
HEWSON -- She meets me every evening in the wilderness for instruction -- Humph
-- read the enclosed which I have just broke open -- Conjecture the charming
consequence -- But let me see -- the moment of meeting is not yet these four
hours -- what is to be done? -- Oh spirit of pleasure, that leavest not a single
second of vacancy, I thank thee. I have it, and my next shall explain the issue.

A. FLIGHT.
[The enclosed.]
From Mrs. HEWSON.
INDEED, Sir ANDREW, you are unreasonable -- it will be carrying the politesse
too far -- A woman may certainly -- However, I will meet you, without fail, on
purpose to convince you that you are -- exceedingly in the wrong.

Yours, HENRIETTA HEWSON.




LETTER LXXIV. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to G. LASCELLES, Esquire.
I HAVE only time just to wrap up a bill or two, which you will lay out to the
best advantage, and level your artillery full at the heart of the divine
Marchioness, for the future service of

A. FLIGHT.
P. S.

Your letters are all askew. Guess, by the size of my letter, how busy I am in
pleasure.



LETTER LXXV. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to Mr. HEATH COAT.
FIRE and faggot, HEATHCOATE, what a desperate conclusion had my cursed love of
laugh like to have brought me to! You remember my promise of turning uncle's
love-letter to advantage -- yes, faith, I had like to have made a pretty
advantageous piece of business of it truly! -- Within an hair's breadth of
being drowned, that is all! Wanting some employment, as I told you, to amuse the
time, betwixt four o'clock, and Mrs. H -- 's appointment, I must needs swagger
away into the garden, where I knew MEDWAY, the monster, had just withdrawn with
his angle. He was standing with his eyes fixed intently upon the line, greedily
devouring the dancing cork upon the stream, when I passed by on the opposite
side, as not seeing him. The Earl's letter was in my hand -- I appeared to be
tickled to the soul. I affected to hold my sides with the pain of laughing. I
mentioned the name of Lady LUCIA thrice with rapture. My hero threw down his
fishing-rod, and coming round to me with inconceivable violence, and the most
scarlet visage you ever beheld, even more a flame than a setting sun, he cries
out -- Puppy, jackanapes -- what did you frighten away my fish for? the largest
carp that ever was seen nibbled that moment at my bait. Had it not been for you
I should have hooked him. What name, likewise, was that I heard you mention? --
it sounded like LUCIA -- What letter is that? -- give it me this moment. --
There is a plot on foot. -- Hush, my dear, give it me.

If my uncle insists upon it, OLLY, said I, how the devil can I help it?

Insists upon what? replies he.

Upon my being married, replied I.

Married! to whom?

To Miss LUCIA, that is -- Lady LUCIA that shall be -- Countess of
BLESSINGBOURNE, that might have been -- Duchess of DOWNDERDALE, that may be!

What LUCIA? retorted the savage.

Are there then more heavens than one heaven? -- more LUCIA DE GREY's than one
LUCIA DE GRAY? said I, with great intrepidity, taking snuff.

I will read every syllable of that letter before I suffer you to move -- I Will
not be sported with, Sir ANDREW.

Nay, I am all upon honorable terms. There are no secrets -- It Is to be a
public affair, OLLY. There is the letter for thy inspection.

He took it hastily.

While he was swallowing the contents, up came Captain CARLISLE, but, seeing us
engaged, with his usual politeness was going to take another part of the
garden. As if from some secret impulse, that worse was at hand, I beckoned him.
He walked toward me.

So then you are a fellow who make pretensions to Miss DE GRAY, are you?

I did, by no means, like a certain ill-look about his eyes, and therefore
replied mildly -- As to that, my dear OLLY, you may easily see it was all my
uncle's doing -- My uncle, you see --

Your uncle be damned, replied he. Have you written to the Lady yourself?

Written to the Lady, my dear OLLY? written to the Lady? -- why, as to a letter
to the Lady --

Look ye, Sir ANDREW, as I know you don't run into danger, I shall not hurt
you; but I must just inform you, casually, that for equivocating you are a most
abominable coward; and as to the matter of daring but to think of Miss LUCIA --
hush -- hush -- my dear, say no more upon that subject -- I shall be satisfied
with giving you to the fish, that is all --

At the close of this speech, he caught hold of my arm, and would absolutely
have twirled me souse into the pond, had not CARLISLE ran briskly to my rescue,
and saved me from the barbarian's fury. He even told CARLISLE that he insulted
the fishes by saving me, and then walked away growling like a lion. -- Poor
CARLISLE seemed to be sadly out of spirits, and when he had rescued me, bowed
with his wonted elegance as if I had done him the favor, and walked dejectedly
away.

Such, HEATHCOATE, has been my fun -- however, bad luck now, better hereafter,
says the proverb. To convince you that I have a bolder heart than you imagine,
I will in despite of events go this moment to Mrs. H --; for my watch tells me
it is exactly the time.

Adieu. A. FLIGHT.

LETTER LXXVI. Mr. MEDWAY to the DUKE of DOWNDERDALE.
MY LORD,
IF you knew me perfectly, you would know I hate words -- When one man thinks
fit to do an injury to another, the consequence is so universally known, that,
I take it, the only words really proper for the occasion are -- hush -- hush --
no noise. LUCIA, whom you took upon you go give away, is beloved by me.
Besides, your letter about her, is the sauciest thing I ever read in my life --
the more so, in consideration that you are a Duke. If you are not mean enough
to plead privilege, you will invite me to some place or another just to tell me
that I am a scoundril. Hush -- hush -- you understand me.

O. MEDWAY.

LETTER LXXVII. Miss DE GRAY to Miss LASCELLES.
MY misery increases every moment -- I am scarce able to hold the the pen --
CARLISLE still avoids me most assiduously -- yet it is a generous sentiment of
his, that has reduced me to the state in which I have for some time been
involved. My father has been several times on the point of making particular
enquiries; but so great a simpleton am I, that, whenever he takes hold of my
hand and begins to press it to his bosom, I tremble from head to foot, and he
is deterred from speaking. I am certain my heart will break, if an alteration
does not soon take place. Medway has again this minute been aiming his
moonstruck mysteries at me. Coming out of my chamber, I saw him upon the
staircase. I don't wonder, child, at your indisposition, said he -- but hush
-- hush -- think of it no more -- You may depend upon his death within a week
-- No noise -- Words are wind -- Wind is air -- Air's a tell-tale -- hush. You
may depend upon his death, I say, within a week.

Death! -- my dear LASCELLES -- death! -- whose death? -- Ah, my God! -- surely
not Captain CARLISLE's. Yet, why do I terrify myself? MEDWAY is his admirer --
The poor fellow's a madman.

But, indeed, my dear, every thing alarms me now -- I must hit upon some
expedient, or you will assuredly lose

Your LUCIA DE GRAY,

LETTER LXXVIII. Mr. LASCELLES to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
'SDEATH and misfortune, what is to be done now! -- such a scene has passed at
our house within the last twenty-four hours, that I am half distracted. -- The
Marchioness has escaped -- My sister discovered me just as I was about to pull
the fruit, which was (make-believe) ripening, for our tool, Sir ANDREW, and I
am in the utmost confusion. -- To crown the whole, I have reason to think that
cursed letter of CARLISLE's got safe to hand, while mine miscarried -- for,
within this hour, I have noticed two strange muffled up fellows walking
backwards and forwards within sight of my dining room windows -- Perhaps the
Marquis himself may be in town, and, according to his Italian custom, these may
be his desperadoes, who will dog me to my destiny -- I am all terror, for I am
all guilt. -- Have you a bed to spare if I could escape to your apartment! -- I
cannot arrange my thoughts sufficiently to tell the story of the whole
ill-judged transaction. But, altogether, passion seems to have laid a trap for
my destruction.

Yours G. LASCELLES.

LETTER LXXIX. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
WORSE and worse, HEATHCOATE. Disappointment again and again -- Within the
breadth of an hair of my perdition! The charming Mrs. HEWSON was at the bower
two minutes after me.

"Punctual as lovers to the moment sworn," said I -- Well, charming pupil, are
you now convinced that --

I am convinced, said she, Sir ANDREW, that you ought to be contented with the
many innocent freedoms I allow, without pressing me to grant any thing criminal.

Fie, child, when shall I persuade thee to throw off entirely all those
Helter-Skelter-Hall ideas! -- Believe me, women of true taste and fashion are
above such grovelling, homespun notions -- Pleasure is the word with persons
that are truly polite; and the pleasures I speak of, are the most
indispensible. Take my word for it, you can only be a better sort of Plebeian,
unless you admit of them -- Commence then, I implore you, the true woman of the
ton at once, and make your Sir ANDREW happy -- Nay then, if you refuse me, I
must take the fashionable liberty gently to force compliance.

To force compliance? -- is it really your intention to dishonor me? -- Stand
off, Sir; you insult me -- I am certain it is no derogation to a woman of
fashion to be true ^o her husband -- and if it were, that is a part of the ton
I shall never aspire to: to speak the plain fact, Sir ANDREW, this last action
and conversation has given me a very poor opinion of --

I caught hold of her again --

She threw me from her, and gave a shriek -- But what of that? -- to make the
matter ten times more terrible, her exclaiming arroused the ear of the pensive
Carlisle, who was sitting not far off. Never saw I such manly menaces upon the
brow of mortal. His look awed me more than the loudest threats of the terrific
MEDWAY -- Fie, Sir ANDREW, said he, (when the Lady was walking off in pretty
confusion) -- Is this well concerted? Must you violate the laws of hospitality,
at the very time that you seduce simplicity? -- Fie upon it! -- I am not one,
Sir ANDREW, who pique myself upon breaking in upon the private revellings of
the libertine; but the ground you now tread upon, is consecrated by belonging
to your friend -- If that, Sir, has no weight with you, I must add something to
its force, by informing you, that it is the property of my guardian.

Saying this, he gave a gentle inclination of his head, and passed on.

Oh, HEATHCOATE, HEATHCOATE, how diminutively was I shrunk up; how despicably
was I dwindled after his departure? I sat a little while under the agony of
being the subject of my own ridicule. Annihilation just then would have been a
blessing, and I sneaked into the house at last, as melancholy a mite as even
crawled upon the earth. To finish the matter, CARLISLE treated me at supper, as
if nothing had happened.

Adieu. A. FLIGHT.

LETTER LXXX. Mr. LASCELLES to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
THE fellows that hovered over my house have disappeared, and I take up the pen
again in more quiet to speak upon the subject of the runaway Marchioness. Ah,
what a line of success was I in, if my cursed passion had not made it crooked!
-- But there was no possibility of resisting the temptation -- I saw the lovely
creature in so many different positions -- This moment she dropped upon her knee
to call blessings on her CARLISLE -- the next she sprung up and execrated her
fatal partiality. 'Twas in vain, under such circumstances, to attack her in my
own person -- She looked -- she loved -- she existed only in CARLISLE. What was
to be done? Stratagem assisted -- I counterfeited the hand of CARLISLE -- made,
in his name, a solemn appointment to meet her with Mr. Lascelles' permission --
Enjoined a sacred league of reciprocal silence during the midnight visit -- was
punctual to the assignation -- assumed the murmurs of CARLISLE'S mellifluous
voice, and was received with rapture -- Felicity was before me -- but I was
interrupted even at this very moment, just as the heaven of beauty was in
prospect; it was contrived by some demon, that detests me, to occasion a
stumble as I was stepping along the apartment. By appointment, no lights were
to be admitted -- but this unfortunate stroke soon introduced one, and it was
brought in the hand of my very sister. The Marchioness was fixed in
astonishment -- I knew not which way to stir -- The rest is too painful to
repeat -- We left AUGUSTA in her chamber, but about an hour after we were
departed, (my sister to weep, and I to curse myself) I heard somebody go softly
down stairs, and presently tampering at the bars of the street-door -- I
followed the impulse of my suspicions, and hurried down also -- You are not to
be told it was the Marchioness -- I besought her to return -- Without
condescending to reply, she proceeded in her efforts: upon my interfereing a
second time, she exclaimed, in a voice, that at once terrified and commanded me
-- "Villain, set me at liberty!" -- I was fool and idiot enough to obey her --
She rushed into the street like lightning, and, being habited in her boy's
apparel, ran along unsuspected.

CAROLINE does nothing but upbraid -- One thing is, the Marchioness has no idea
of CARLISLE's address -- At all events, I must weather it out -- Perhaps all
may again be well -- Whatever folly you commit, let not the cursed lusts of the
flesh get the better of your policy.

Adieu, Adieu. GEORGE LASCELLES.

LETTER LXXXI. Captain CARLISLE to Mr. LASCELLES.
HOW is it that I do not hear any thing respecting the Marchioness? -- But you
will send me by the bearer (GEOFFRY) an explicit account of her. He goes to my
house in town to prepare things for my reception there, and returns as soon as
he possibly can; the faithful old creature is never easy unless he adjusts
every thing himself. It will be impossible for me to bear the sight of Prudence
Place many days longer. The enclosed, which I have just received, will account
for it. Heaven be with you, prays

Your C. CARLISLE.

LETTER LXXXII. [The enclosed.] Mr. MEDWAY to Captain CARLISLE.
NOT a word of noise, my dear boy -- softly -- softly -- The new Duke is an old
fool -- his nephew is an infant -- I will put an end to the whole matter
instantly. Say nothing -- I am a brief man. I did indeed design to kill his
Grace first -- but let him linger on a little longer -- hush -- hush -- I will
do the thing directly -- Whisper -- whisper, my friend CLEMENT -- the ceremony
is at hand. I love you even though you saved a puppy from being drowned -- but
hush, he shall die yet.

Adieu. O. MEDWAY.

LETTER LXXXIII. The Duke of DOWNDERDALE to Sir ANDREW FLIGHT.
Dear Newphew,

IF this reaches you before you are set off, don't leave Prudence Place without
chastising the insolence of the audacious OLIVER MEDWAY. He has absolutely had
the impudence to challenge me to single combat -- to challenge a Duke, Sir
ANDREW, think of that -- Think of it, nephew, with proper solidity, and let it
fire your indignation -- Wipe off, I charge you, this stain upon the ermine of
your most illustrious family -- Purify us at the risque of your life -- We know
your native courage -- we know the sums you have expended in the art of
defense. Now this is the time -- Fight without delay -- if you are wounded, all
the physicians of the globe shall be at your service -- if you slay him, which
I a thousand times the rather hope, hasten to the continent, and I will join
you there -- if you fall, never were funeral honors so great as yours shall
be, and you will also be entitled to a place by the side of crowned heads in
Westminster-abbey. I send a special courier with this, that he may bring me the
issue of the combat -- If you do not choose to engage, lose no time to say so,
that, old as I am, I may chastise the insolent myself. But why do I say, not
choose to fight? You will be even too heroic: the blood in your veins is too
rich to suffer an insulter of your family to live. Mars protect you, my boy.

DOWNDERDALE.

LETTER LXXXIV. The Marchioness of N. to Signora **** at Rome.
OH VIOLA, VIOLA, let not the fondness of the heart ever tempt you to expect
any thing from the generosity of man -- of man, not only born for our
destruction, but glorying in the deed -- Ah, my friend, what perfidy! -- what
cruelty! --

But wherefore do I waste time in these womanish complaints? -- The moments are
too precious -- they are marked for revenge -- revenge, VIOLA, which shall
sweep from the earth the most barbarous of men.

Yes, VIOLA, he shall die -- die by the arm of the wronged Marchioness -- Wish
you to know the name of my victim? know it then in that of the detestable
Carlisle.

Oh, the indelicate -- the ungrateful -- I have not composure enough to write
-- He absolutely attempted the basest --

You can have no idea of it but from his own words.

To The Marchioness of N ****.
I come, my beautiful Marchioness -- I come! -- The hour of my joy shall be
midnight; in the very part of the week you have mentioned -- But silence,
reciprocal silence must prevail -- No lights -- Nothing but a tender exchange
of the warmest vows that ever were breathed from the lips of lovers. Adieu.

I have a little disguised my hand for fear of accidents -- but no more --
Adieu -- ten thousand times adieu --

CARLISLE.


This fallacious piece of wickedness, under the appearance of tenderness, was
delivered, as usual, by the execrable LASCELLES -- to what end, do you think?
-- Ah, my dear Signora, it is too shocking for your fancy ever to conjecture
it! With a blush I tell you, that, on my part, -- for, oh Signora, I loved to
death -- the moment of assignation was expected with unutterable impatience. It
was observed.

The apartment was dark -- universal tremor shook every nerve as I heard the
step approach me -- But the foot in advancing encountered a chair -- Sure it
was placed there by Providence to produce the alarm which discovered to me --

-- I am overwhelmed in tears -- which discovered the villainy of Lascelles and
Carlisle. Yes, Viola, CARLISLE, the great, the elegant, the virtuousseeming
CARLISLE -- CARLISLE, degenerated to a mere pander -- an ordinary wretch, who
had agreed to sacrifice the woman that adored him, -- sacrifice her to the man
with whom he placed her for protection! -- But this is not half his baseness;
-- this was not an enormity of sufficient magnitude for the illustrious
CARLISLE. When LASCELLES left the room (while I was hurrying on my boy's
apparel, resolved to escape) -- I felt under my feet some papers, which my good
genius directed me to take up. I got safe from the detested house, and
wandered, a solitary wretch, in the streets, I knew not whither. It could not
yet be past two o'clock in the morning, and the watchmen, who are always abroad
till after that hour, were still upon their guard. As there are lamps disposed
through all the parts of this city, I stood under one of them to examine my
papers, which I judge must have fallen from LASCELLES' pocket -- They contained
-- they contained -- O pity me, VIOLA -- read -- read their infamous contents,
and confess, that your poor Marchioness has but too much justice in the
vengeance which she is resolved to take.

[The enclosed PAPERS.]
PAPER I.
Superscribed The Copy of a Letter from Captain CARLISLE to Mr. LASCELLES.
Dear LASCELLES,
YOU are too generous -- Why should you wish to offer marriage to such a
wanton? No, my friend, even if she were a widow, I would dissuade you from it:
rather follow my first advice, and, as I do assure you she is perfectly
detestable to me, make the easiest terms you can with her. But, you still
insist on treating her with terms of honor. What! will you show fidelity to
her after she has received you under the notion of your being CLEMENT CARLISLE?
I must again say, that you are too generous to such a wanton. But act as you
please. She is, of all women in the world, as much my aversion, as she can
possibly be your admiration.

CLEMENT CARLISLE.


PAPER II. Superscribed Copy of a Letter from Mr. LASCELLES to Sir A. F. at
Paris.
Dear Baron,
Purchase for me, I beseech you, the most brilliant suit of jewels in your
whole city, and send them down to me immediately, that I may lay them at the
feet of one whose eyes are ten times brighter than any thing either Paris or
Golconda itself can afford.

G. LASCELLES.


Superscribed Copy of a Letter from Captain CARLISLE.
THE day of my marriage with LUCIA D. G. is fixed for the 27th instant. If,
without suspicion of that fury, whom you so foolishly love, you can disengage
yourself, I should wish you to be at the ceremony, were it only to assure you
that, so far from liking the Marchioness, I dote upon my beautiful intended.

Adieu. C. CARLISLE.


Such were the complottings, levelled by two barbarous men, my VIOLA, against
your poor -- your unhappy Marchioness. I thought madness would have seized me
at the moment of reading such a black design -- a design, my VIOLA, which
LASCELLES was cruel enough to endeavor to carry into execution -- But why do I
tell you of the misery I have sustained? -- Why do I dwell upon the hardships
of passing, formerly, through the streets of London, while every happier heart
was at rest? -- What are these, VIOLA, to the agony of a soul burning with
revenge? -- Marriage too -- The villain is upon the verge of matrimony, is he?
This then is the cause of all my misery -- of all my disappointments. His
truth, his love, his tenderness is all reserved for another woman it seems --
the happy LUCIA D. G. -- Perdition upon her charms! Discord upon their union!
Oh, that I could find out her abode! Married -- what married! -- whom?
CARLISLE, my CARLISLE -- oh distraction -- distraction!

No, never, VIOLA -- excuse my despair. I have an oath to send to the great and
good God, who now beholds me upon my knees.

It is registered, VIOLA -- it is written in the adamantine volume -- I am to
answer it.

Farewell.

In Continuation.

I HAVE fixed upon a small apartment belonging to people (to whom money
reconciles all mysterious appearances) within sight of CARLISLE's house in
London -- Six hours vigilance has produced yet no other success than the sight
of servants, who come in and go out of the house, as if they were at present
the masters of it. He is certainly out of town, -- perhaps making splendid
preparations for his marriage -- oh, my brain -- my brain -- I would die with
transport to prevent it -- It must be prevented -- My oath -- my oath -- my
oath!

Farewell.

In Continuation.

I HAVE had a second string to my vow of vengeance. I shift my place,
alternately, from watching the house of CARLISLE, to that from which I have a
prospect upon LASCELLES. By this means I am mistress of both: nothing can
happen but under my eye.

My soul is upon guard.

I will now send off my letter. Farewell again -- to the

Marchioness of N * * * *.

LETTER LXXXV. Mr. LASCELLES to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
OH! my dear HEATHCOATE, I have spent half this day, in vain, to pacify my
outrageous sister, but to no purpose. Her cursed virtue plagues me to death. I
have dispatched a line to CARLISLE, which, I hope, will keep all quiet, till,
by some means, I can recover the Marchioness -- But, at present, I have not had
courage to step over my own threshold since the cursed accident happened. One
thing consoles me not a little: I perceive two papers, which I purposely wrote,
forged, and dropped in AUGUSTA's apartment, are -- beyond my expectation, as she
went away in the night -- picked up. As she knows not CARLISLE's address in the
country, and is, I believe, without much money -- she may be tempted to return.
On the other hand, if these scheming papers have fallen into my sister
CAROLINE's possession, it is worse still. -- However, at all events, I take
care no letters shall go out or come into my house without my knowledge. Yet, I
suspect, that CAROLINE receives letters left for her at some other place -- I
know not what to think. The cursed uncertainty too of the Marquis's journey,
either to my place of direction, or to CARLISLE's, much increases my anxiety.
Ah! HEATHCOATE, HEATHCOATE, what a hell it is to be liable to so many terrible
apprehensions! O guilt, guilt, guilt!

Adieu. G. LASCELLES.

LETTER LXXXVI. From the Same to Captain CARLISLE.
[Previous to LASCELLES's receipt of the Captain's last].

I DID not, my dear Captain, write to you again upon the subject of the
Marchioness; since, I judged, you would take it for granted, that, if any thing
more unlucky had happened, I should immediately have informed you: add to
which, I was very unwilling -- unless absolutely necessary -- to multiply those
attentions, which are employing your generous heart at Prudence-Place. I am
astonished at the Marquis's delay. Your letter must have miscarried. Is it not
advisable to write another? London is as barren and burning as Arabia Deserta
this horrid hot weather: I would not have you obliged to pass your summer here
for any consideration. Not a single soul of your acquaintance will be seen here
these three months. For my part, I am tied by the foot. Business, you know
(agency, my dear friend) must be minded. By-the-by, I must, once more, draw
upon your kindness (that bank which is, I think, never to be overdrawn!) a
friend of mine wants 200l. for two months, can you spare it? If you can,
forward it when the post returns, to your ever obliged

GEORGE LASCELLES.

LETTER LXXXVII. From the Same to Sir ANDREW FLIGHT.
EVERY thing smiles -- in a little time, your amor will laugh like yourself --
But you sent the money short. Female elegance is expensive. I have something in
my eye that would thaw the chastity of Diana -- yet, it may slip through my
fingers: it is, like the Marchioness herself, too beautiful to hang in hand.
Send an hundred pounds more, therefore, immediately, that the purchase may be
completed. I never saw LUCIA DE GRAY, but, I am convinced, she must be an
Ethiopian to AUGUSTA N.

Yours, G. LASCELLES.

LETTER LXXXVIII. Mr. HEATHCOATE to Mr. LASCELLES.
Dear sellow-labourer in the same vineyard,
I RECEIVE the account of thy misery, with sympathy -- May that genius which
has hitherto inspired us, still keep thee from being crushed! -- All thy
secrets are, and will ever be, safe in thebosom of your

D. HEATHCOATE.
P. S.

We will continue, as usual, to divide the Baronet betwixt us. He has, as I
hope, you already know, received a fresh supply. His uncle has great additions
of fortune annexed to his dukedom -- We may expect, therefore, to be as rich as
Lords, at least. Keep up thy spirits.

Adieu. D. HEATHCOATE.



LETTER LXXXIX. Mr. MEDWAY to Mr. DE GRAY.
Dear SIR,
THERE are so many meddling fellows about, that I perceive it is impossible to
stay till the house is clear, and it must be a public piece of work at last.
Yes, my dear friend, though I hate noise, it must be done -- Please to let it
be Wednesday, Thursday, or Saturday next, as is most proper and suitable. I
had, however, rather have it done, private, in the house, by the way of hush,
if possible. Noise is shocking -- We don't want a pack of starers to instruct
us what to do. Hush -- hush. Five words are as effectual as fifty. I could have
explained much conciser, had I not chosen to make the appointment that is to
determine the thing in writing. But there is too much company to speak upon
certain subjects that shall be nameless -- hush -- hush. The sun gets up by
four o'clock at this time of the year. Shall we rise therefore to morrow or the
next day morning, and so contrive to have the business all done and over before
the unconcerned part of the family are stirring? No noise -- no noise -- set
your foot lightly -- set your foot lightly -- who is the wiser, who is the wiser?
-- hush -- hush -- hush. You understand me. I will give you this with my own
hand: do you do the same -- hem -- hem -- No noise -- hush! --

OLIVER MEDWAY.
P. S.

Say in your answer, Ceremony, four o'clock, such a day -- Enough -- hush.



LETTER XC. Captain CARLISLE to Mr. LASCELLES.
PITY me, my dear LASCELLES, pity me! Never -- no, never was man so beset by
temptations! MEDWAY drew me, a little while since, in his fly way, to the very
farthermost end of the room, and in the softest whisper told me, that -- O
misery, Mr. LASCELLES! -- he should have the ring upon LUCIA's finger in less
than three days. "Hush -- hush -- said he, it is the greatest in the world --
the poor girl is quite sick upon my delay -- She chides me with her looks,
every time I see her. I cannot even have leisure enough to put to death the
uncle and nephew -- They must live till the beginning of the week -- Pray
pardon me for that, my dear friend. One would have sunk if you could but have
let him alone -- Poor LUCIA, longer delay would certainly kill her! -- Three
days has she, already, kept her chamber -- Mum -- Mum -- No noise -- I have the
thing that will settle the business in my pocket."

This conversation was, like all his discourse, in set, solemn sentences -- Mr.
DE GRAY, with an air of sadness upon his venerable brow, came into the room,
and we parted.

Oh LASCELLES, help me to language -- help me to sentiments which describe
sensations of horror, that I may transmit to you some idea of the feeling that
took hold of my heart, when I beheld MEDWAY put, as if by stealth, into the
hand of Mr. DE GRAY, a paper that seemed to be stamped with several seals! --
Though it was too much like a letter, and too small to be a settlement, yet my
fancy suggested it was some deed sufficient to my destruction --

Had not water been at hand, I should certainly have dropped.

To swell the circumstance, both the HEWSONS and Sir ANDREW FLIGHT were in the
room.

This was not all. Mr. DE GRAY seemed to receive the packet with pleasure, and
retired rather abrupter than he was wont to do, when he leaves a company.

MEDWAY hummed a love sonnet, and capered about the room; passing by me every
now and then with a wink.

The trial was too hard to be supported. I withdrew. What was to be done? It
was plain that Sir ANDREW's affair was out of the question; Medway -- Medway
only, was the man. For Medway -- the cruel -- (ah! why do I call her cruel?) --
the charming LUCIA DE GRAY was now languishing in her chamber: for him, she had
been long indisposed -- his image it was that filled her thoughts -- his person
it was that charmed her eyes -- he only was -- to -- to --

I lost my senses, LASCELLES -- and I now lose them again at the recollection
of what followed these reflections.

LUCIA DE GRAY herself appeared. She came tottering from her apartment, with a
countenance, which, although ever lovely, denoted infinite emotion.

Oh Mr. CARLISLE, said she, lifting up both her hands, what is doing above in
the library?

Doing, my dear Miss DE GRAY, replied I, (as we walked into the garden, whither
she was going to air) you frighten me -- why -- what is doing?

Ceremony (said she, in the most faultering voice) for what could my father so
loudly repeat the word ceremony, Mr. CARLISLE?

When was that, my dear Miss DE GRAY? Your DEAR Miss DE GRAY, CLEMENT -- ah!
that -- I beg pardon, Madam -- Habits are unconquerable -- I beg pardon -- I
say, Miss De Gray --

My God, Mr. CARLISLE! -- I had no such idea -- no such -- How can you use me
so, Mr. CARLISLE?

Madam?

Perverseness! -- I say, Mr. CARLISLE, I am not conscious of any conduct, that
-- that -- should warrant -- such treatment -- such treatment, Mr. CARLISLE, as
I -- I -- have received from -- from --

Treatment, Miss DE GRAY -- treatment -- my -- my -- treatment have you
received? what! ill treatment? -- O hasten to tell me when, how, where, by whom
-- then see, my -- my dear -- dear -- then, Madem, I say, see if I will brook
it! -- Has Sir ANDREW, has Mr. Medway? -- but I ask pardon, Madam, my zeal has
hurried me into language which, as things are circumstanced, must naturally
offend you.

It does, indeed, Sir -- It seems studied to do more than offend me -- to break
my heart.

Your heart, Miss DE GRAY! -- I have done -- I shall -- I, I -- have done -- I
wish you -- I wish you, very happy -- Indeed I do -- Upon -- upon my soul,
Madam, I do! --

Happy, Mr. CARLISLE! -- oh barbarous! -- Give me leave to go in -- I wish I
were dead! -- I have business upstairs, Sir -- Happy, happy -- you wish me
happy; and yet you talk in these ungenerous terms of one who -- who has been
such an old friend -- oh, Mr. CARLISLE, how can you use me so?

Upon these words she went again into the house in anger and agony
inexpressible. But who could ever have suggested that her passion for that
strange man, should have made her so sensible of the slightest impression
against his character? His very name, pronounced in a loud voice, sets her on
flame -- An old friend -- ungenerous to an old friend -- To be sure I have
known Mr. MEDWAY some time -- I have -- But why do I argue upon the subject? --
Every moment makes my disappointment more manifest -- Why then am I perplexing
my heart with constant attempts to explain what, if I was not wilfully blinded,
is as clear as the light of Heaven? The only wise part -- the only possible
part for me now to act, is, directly to withdraw. Perhaps the morrow may
complete my misery. Mr. DE GRAY is now, even now, adjusting the ceremony -- The
very ring is before me. Were I to stay longer, I should not be able to answer
either for my truth or my honor. Oh LUCIA -- LUCIA -- LUCIA! -- I can no more.
--

P. S.

The 200l. you shall have from my own hand. -- Dear friend, farewell.

C. CARLISLE.



LETTER XCI. Mr. DE GRAY to Mr. MEDWAY.
CONSCIOUS, dear Mr. MEDWAY, of no sort of offense; but, on the contrary,
feeling for you the same warmth of friendship as usual, I am not a little
surprised at the turn and coloring of the sentiment in your last letter. I
have now puzzled over it a great while, without being in any measure rewarded
for my pains. To speak the whole truth, I do not comprehend one sentence of
your whole favor. You seem to be agitated, and desirous of performing certain
ceremonies with peculiar privacy, at a very early hour of the morning: and yet
I cannot conceive of what nature those ceremonies should be; nor, if they are
of an hostile complexion, can I suggest to myself, whence they should happen. I
beg you will be so friendly as to explain this matter. If you can point out to
me any circumstance that, to your eye, looks like an impropriety, no man will
be more willing to be instructed how it may be amended. If it should prove,
that you are yourself mistaken, no man will more cheerfully impute it to that
origin from whence many similar errors have proceeded, namely, from excessive
sensibility.

I am, my dear MEDWAY, Your obedient servant, ROBERT DE GRAY.

LETTER XCII. Mr. MEDWAY to Mr. DE GRAY.
SIR,
Ho! ho! -- is that the case? -- You don't choose to understand me -- You
desire explanations -- Certainly right -- Nobody can blame you. Hush -- hush. I
am no flincher. Name every thing -- place, weapons, ground, time, etc. -- I
love you, and therefore will give you every advantage over me in the world. But
your daughter must not marry any body else, while there is upon the face of the
earth such a man as the forgotten

OLLY MEDWAY.
P. S.

No noise.



LETTER XCIII. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to Mr. LASCELLES.
I WILL add five hundred pieces to the 100l. you send for, GEORGE, if you will,
without any delay -- (mark the word any) -- come down to Prudence Place, or, to
a place of appointment nearer, and kill OLLY MEDWAY in single combat: reasons
for this. Prompt payment. I shall only say his death is necessary, not only to
my honor, but to my future well-being with my uncle, consequently your
subsistence is touched as well as that of

ANDREW FLIGHT.
N. B.

The credit of his fall must be mine. Be at the sign of the Duke's Head in the
neighboring village, Wednesday evening. Knowing your exactness, I shall behave
like an hero accordingly.



LETTER XCIV. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to the Duke of DOWNDERDALE.
Honored Uncle,
IT looks suspicious to detain your messenger any longer -- The great nicety of
finishing a trifle of this nature is, to do it quietly. I am waiting my
opportunity; and although, for your Grace's sake, and the sake of my family, my
blood boils to be at him, yet, as I am a visitor here, it will be decent to go
prudently to work. I am glad you did me the justice to believe I would chastise
the insolent. If I see your Grace again on this side Heaven, it will be with
honor; if not, I shall meet you in elysium. Your Lordship -- I should say --
your Grace, will pardon my being a little jocular upon these sort of
circumstances -- They are the bagatelles of such spirits as descend from such a
bosom as your Grace's to that of your happy

A. FLIGHT.

LETTER XCV. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to Mr. MEDWAY.
MEDWAY,
AFTER a good deal of reflection, I am not able (though I am one of the best
tempered men in the world) to brook your dastardly behavior -- You called me
coward -- puppy -- jackanapes, etc. besides reflecting on my uncle, HIS GRACE
of DOWNDERDALE -- Now, I must inform you, there is a large spot of waste,
unfrequented, heath-ground at the back of the Duke's Head in the village.
Twelve o'clock on Wednesday night, (I mean Wednesday next) let me have the
pleasure to see you to answer these several charges. Meantime, to show our real
bravery, let us be exceeding good friends, and disguise the deadly designs that
are glowing in our heroic bosoms. I send this by Mr. GABRIEL HEWSON, who being
a quiet worthy lad, shall be my friend in the field.

The angry ANDREW FLIGHT.

LETTER XCVI. Mr. MEDWAY's Answer.
HUSH -- hush. I begin to think better of you. No noise, little Sir ANDREW. I
rather expect the chance of a pop or a pink to night; but, if my wound in that
quarter should not be mortal, you may depend upon shaking hands on Wednesday
with

Your OL. MEDWAY.

LETTER XCVII. Captain CARLISLE to Mr. DE GRAY.
I FEEL myself of late, my very dear friend, not quite so well in my health. I
impute it to the recent alteration of climate. A little excursion may possibly
assist me, and therefore I propose to set out tomorrow morning to my town
house, and so back again.

But, as it is possible, my dear Sir, some changes may happen in your family
before my return, I will, with your leave, joined to that of Mr. MEDWAY, (who I
understand is now closeted with you) make bold to pay my parting devoir -- in
your presence -- to Miss DE GRAY. Perhaps, Sir, it is decreed, that I am never
more to salute her under that appellation. Nothing however can happen that can
violate the heartfelt esteem, with which

I am, My dear Sir, Your most affectionate servant, CLEMENT CARLISLE.

LETTER XCVIII. Mr. LASCELLES to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
JOY, joy, HEATHCOATE -- I -- I I have recovered my lost treasure -- recovered
her, though by compulsion -- I caught her upon the look-out for Captain
CARLISLE; and as good luck would have it, scarce ten minutes before old limping
GEOFERY, the Captain's favorite footman, arrived with a letter from his
master. -- I am ready to leap out of my skin; though, as to the Lady herself,
never did I see such a dreadful alteration: her visage pale, her eyes dim, her
air languid -- She scarce seems to have taken refreshment since her escape --
Though my sister kneels down and presses her, with tears, to eat, she most
obstinately refuses. What a violent woman! I gave it out to two fellows, whom I
had upon the scout, that she was a relation of mine, hurt in her senses, who
had broke from us. Her behavior to them, on being seized, justified this; for,
in getting her up stairs to her old apartment, she took a little pocket-knife
from her side, and aimed it with full force at one of the men's throats. I own
I am sorry to see her in this situation, though I had rather have her any way,
than have her to look for. CARLISLE would certainly have taken vengeance. Now
all may be well again. I am glad to see my sister behave so prudently to
AUGUSTA. In a day or two I shall send you better news about her. If I ever
again run the risque of gratifying my passion at the price of my policy, then
execrate

Your old unfortunate G. LASCELLES.
P. S.

I am going down on Wednesday to fight for five hundred pounds: OLLY MEDWAY is
to be the mark. The money, you may be sure, is to be for ANDREW'S FRIENDS. The
Fame he may put into his pocket if he pleases. It Is to be within half a mile of
Prudence Place -- yet shall I not be seen. I shall fire my pistol, and come
away again directly. As to my exit, that is out of the question. I am shot-free.



LETTER XCIX.
Captain CARLISLE to Mr. LASCELLES.

THE strangest as well as the most sudden alteration has happened in the
affairs at Prudence Place that you can possibly imagine. Oh, my LASCELLES, I am
lighter than the air -- the dead weight is taken from my bosom -- I have
neither a thorn in my heart, nor a wrinkle on my brow. Though the path that led
to this paradise was not without brambles that obstructed, it presented, at
last, the smoothest, the most lawny, as well as the most rosy prospect in the
world.

You shall hear.

Unable, any longer, to bear the increasing perplexities of my situation, I
wrote a letter of excuse to Mr. DE GRAY for a week's absence, and went to pay
my farewell respects to LUCIA.

Suggesting what might be the state of my feelings at the close of such an
interview, I took care to have my carriage waiting for me at the door the
moment I left her apartment -- nor did I even allow myself this pleasure of
entering her apartment at all, till I had pre-invited Mr. De Gray to be
present, and even till I had apprized Mr. Medway of the sole purpose of my
visit.

I meant only to make -- my heart ach -- and withdraw. -- Oh human nature! --

Mr. DE GRAY opened the door to me; he had scarce entered himself -- Behind him
stood -- MEDWAY, making his salutations to LUCIA, who, upon seeing me advance,
put on, as of late had been usual, a sort of anxiousness, which I have been but
too apt to construe in my disfavour.

LUCIA DE GRAY looked, as if she thought it a strange meeting.

"Pray sit down, gentlemen," said she, in a fluttering manner -- "Pray sit
down."

Her father took her by the hand. I was preparing to speak on the subject of my
departure -- but could, for the soul of me, get no farther than -- "I am come,
Madam -- I am come, Miss DE GRAY -- I am -- I am come" --

"Very true, Captain," replied Mr. DE GRAY, taking me up briskly, "you are come
extremely apropos -- you are come just in time to be a witness to -- "

Oh! LASCELLES, my perverting fancy caught at the only wrong construction of
the sentiment, and I interrupted him by exclaiming,

"Excuse me, my dear Mr. DE GRAY -- pray excuse me -- I would dedicate not only
my leisure, but my life to the wishes of your family -- but to be a witness --
to be a witness, my good Sir, upon so interesting an occasion -- is -- is -- is
-- indeed, I could not be of any service."

"Service, Mr. CARLISLE," said MEDWAY -- "there is no service in the case --
the only service you can be of in promoting the design of our visit to this
young Lady, is to be a witness that I have had all the reason in the world to
suppose I was beloved by her."

"Was it ever questioned, Mr. MEDWAY," said I?

"Questioned," -- retorted Miss DE GRAY -- "questioned, Mr. CARLISLE -- beloved
by me -- Mr. MEDWAY beloved by me!"

" Yes, Madam, I," -- said MEDWAY?

"Now then we come to the point," replied Mr. DE GRAY --

"Perhaps these explanations," said I, "may be improper before me -- I
certainly intrude -- Family affairs are sacred -- I beg permission to withdraw
-- Had I known you were upon business of so much delicacy" --

"Stay, Mr. CARLISLE," answered LUCIA, with more firmness than is usual to such
extreme delicacy as here is -- "it is a justice you owe me to stay, Sir -- With
regard to you, Mr. MEDWAY, I beg to know upon what misconstruction you found
the astonishing fact you charge me with?"

" Astonishing fact, Madam," rejoined MEDWAY -- "Is it not clear? have I not
fed my fond heart with this idea many months? -- did you not always meet me
with a smile? -- have I not a thousand times said, that you was made to be the
best wife in the world? -- have I not been ready to murder any man that should
dare to look steadfastly at you? Has not your father heard me declare, that I
would lose my blood in your service?"

Here LUCIA lifted up her hands again.

"I grant all this, my dear MEDWAY," said Mr. DE GRAY, "but surely, this is no
foundation for a passion. LUCIA smiles whenever she meets any of her friends.
It is a complacency that belongs to her character -- it belongs even to her
face: her features are made for giving welcome to her father's friends -- Such
Mr. MEDWAY most certainly is."

"Lookee, Mr. DE GRAY," replied MEDWAY -- "hush -- hush -- no noise about this
business -- I am no talker. I have been intending to make your daughter my wife
a long while. I thought both you and she knew plain enough my meaning,
especially as I was exceeding cautious least it should be known to any body
else -- which I despise. I took the affair for granted. It seems I am deceived.
Nobody understood my meaning but myself -- The business is easily brought to an
issue. Here Is the upshot. Do you now, Mr. DE GRAY, approve of my beginning more
explicit overtures?"

"That question," said Mr. DE GRAY, "is first to be submitted to my daughter.
You are a worthy man, and I here declare I have no objection to any gentleman,
upon whom I have any solid reasons to believe she places her affections."

"Give me your hand," cried MEDWAY; "you speak fairly -- I love honor better
than life -- life -- it is MY heaven -- Well, Miss LUCIA, now is the time.
Every thing rests with you?"

Guess, if you can, LASCELLES, what I underwent at this moment! My heart was at
my lips.

"Since it is incumbent on me to speak," said the beautiful trembler, "I must
confess, that, though there is no man I more esteem than Mr. MEDWAY, as a
friend; yet, yet, in the light of -- of -- a lover, I -- I -- cannot say that
-- that -- Pray be not displeased with me, if I say that -- "

"Enough said, enough said -- hush -- hush -- I Am only angry," said MEDWAY,
"that you did not tell me so before; but -- no noise -- I see it was partly my
own fault. Give me a buss -- you are a good girl -- a bad one at a hint, though
-- hush -- hush -- you are a bad one at a hint. Give me your hand, Mr. DE GRAY.
I thought I was acting the right part -- But I am too old, and too odd a fellow
to die of disappointment, so all I have farther to say on the subject is this;
don't speak of my affair below -- Let us separate -- Let us go down a little
after one another -- Who Is the wiser? who is the wiser?"

"Another moment, if you please," said Mr. DE GRAY, (rising and advancing to
LUCIA, whom in the course of the conversation he had left) -- "Since matters
have gone thus far, and we are all friends together; tell me, LUCIA, if you
think there is any other person who may be going on in the same mistake. If so,
we may rectify it in time. Do you imagine any other, in this family, for
instance, lays claim to your tenderness, my dear?"

My God, LASCELLES, what a question!

"No, indeed, Sir," answered LUCIA, with a sigh.

"Oh! yes," rejoined MEDWAY, "that bit of a Baronet, Sir ANDREW FLIGHT."

"Sir ANDREW FLIGHT!" cried she hastily -- "the matter was not improbable with
so worthy a man as Mr. MEDWAY, but surely Sir ANDREW FLIGHT could never -- "

"Madam," returned MEDWAY, "I was about to have jerked him into a fish pond
upon that account. If you have ever any thing to say to such a fellow as that,
I Will never forgive you."

"Perhaps it may be in your power, Mr. CARLISLE," said Mr. DE GRAY, (coming
round to me) "to help us to another upon the lover's list."

Think of my confusion, LASCELLES! after great hesitation I spoke as follows,
while LUCIA went first to one window then to the other, as if taking different
views of the garden.

"I must own, Sir, it does not seem difficult for me to mention another of Miss
DE GREY's admirers. The difficulty would be in finding a person of her
acquaintance who did not come under that character."

"Come, come, CARLISLE, no noise -- no noise," said MEDWAY, "you have yourself
been her admirer any time these -- "

Here LUCIA turned round, with a face blooming with a thousand blushes.

"Mr. CARLISLE my admirer, Mr. MEDWAY? -- "

"Yes, Miss DE GRAY, Mr. CARLISLE has, to my knowledge, been your admirer
before he went to Italy. You may thank me -- for now I see the whole train of
my mistake -- that he has pined and grieved, and -- "

"For heaven's sake, Mr. MEDWAY!" said LUCIA.

"CLEMENT," said Mr. DE GRAY, "MEDWAY is too hard upon you: he has had a slight
scratch of the passion himself, and he wants to make us believe you have had a
wound too. But come, Mr. MEDWAY, I have something to show you in the library --
such a fishing-pole as, perhaps, you never saw."

They both went out of the room hand-in-hand -- LUCIA attempted to follow.

"And must you go then, Miss DE GRAY?" said I.

"Go," replied she, turning -- "lord, why not, Mr. CARLISLE? -- I am going to
see the fishing-pole."

"What a blessing I should have deemed it, Miss DE GRAY, if this discovery had
been made before I went to Italy!"

"What did you say, Mr. CARLISLE? -- Italy -- Good God! -- Has your Italian
attractions then -- "

"O LUCIA! -- LUCIA! I can hold no longer -- Too long -- too long already has
a sense of honor, and a religious regard to what I, all the time, thought your
happiness, kept me silent -- for this I bleed -- for this I was in despair --
for this too it was that I was again preparing to depart -- But -- truth
requires no longer sacrifice. My feelings may now again show themselves --
Again may I adore those charming eyes -- again -- You are not angry with me,
LUCIA?"

"Angry with you -- CLEMENT?"

"Dear, generous LUCIA DE GRAY -- This hand must bear the impression of my
gratitude."

"Pshaw -- nonsense -- how can you, CARLISLE? but you were departing -- whither
would you go, CARLISLE?"

"I had forgot that my chaise is at the door, LUCIA?"

"And must you go then, CLEMENT?"

" Go, my adorable LUCIA! yes I must go this moment -- I must go as fast as my
feet can carry me, to -- order my horses to be put into Mr. DE GREY's stable."

"How soon you men alter your minds, Clement."

"Ah, LUCIA! LUCIA! I am now possessing one of the happiest moments of my life."

"I am myself not miserable, CARLISLE -- and -- and -- and so take my hand, and
-- "

"Do with it what I please! -- "

For the first time since my return, I not only kissed that, LASCELLES, but
ravished a rapture upon her rosy lip. Here is an end of my conversation-letter.

I shall not come to town -- my horses are turned to grass -- Love is likely to
allow them a long feast of pasturage -- I cannot tell you how light I feel at
the heart -- But let me not in my ecstasy forget my friend! The cash, which I
designed to bring myself, I now remit a draft for. I beg you will ever continue
to command, on all sorts of occasion, the services of

Yours, CLEMENT CARLISLE.

LETTER C. Mr. LASCELLES to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
A MISERY, and a misfortune more extreme than before, has fallen upon me --
The Marquis is come -- The Marchioness is every thing but absolutely distracted
-- My sister is overwhelmed in tears! I am plunging in the abyss of despair. My
whole family is in ruins.

A violent thundering at my door last night, and almost toward the zenith of
it, announced the impatience of somebody who had authority to disturb us.

Ah! HEATHCOATE, conscious guilt at that moment emasculated my usual hardihood;
I felt my heart convulsing in my bosom, and the shameful drops of fear were
upon my brow. Flying then from my bed, wrapped up only in a robe de chamber, I
charged my servants to deny me -- gave my sister the like injunction, and then
stole, with inglorious terror, into a kind of lumberroom at the top of the
house, that I might escape even the voice of my accuser. To this precaution,
probably, am I indebted for my life -- Who, HEATHCOATE, can expect to conquer
the man whom he has wronged? For money, I am mercenary enough to fight, but
with the weight of crimes upon the heart, one's intrepidity has no room to
play.

The knocking being for some time repeated, and every repetition with more
vehemence, admittance was at length given.

Oh these high-spirited foreigners! No sooner was he entered, than he demanded,
in a tone of implicit command, his violated wife. He did not, it seems, wait
any reply. He did not wait even long enough for obedience. In disregard of
every thing that looked like ceremony, he flew up stairs -- rushed from one
room to another; and found at last the object of his search. I heard the shriek
of the Marchioness's amazement, even to the remotest corner of my hiding hole.
Barbarous man! abandoned woman! re-echoed through the cave. I was witness to the
clamourous denunciation of death upon CARLISLE and myself. I was witness that
the Marquis was in possession of CARLISLE's address -- the name of DE GRAY, and
even of LUCIA, were articulated with curses of vengeance -- With execrations,
still stronger, was all future connection with the Marchioness renounced; and he
rushed down the staircase at last, swearing never more to close his eyes till
his revenge, as far as it could be had in this world (that was his expression)
was complete.

Since his departure, I have crept from my sanctuary, and tried, but not
without tremor, to gain admittance to the apartment of AUGUSTA. She has drawn a
triple bolt across the door -- She will not speak -- My sister is on the bed of
sickness. O TRUTH! what a DEITY art THOU? -- thy smile might chase away
despair. But what are these reflections to the pusillanimous and false

G. LASCELLES?

LETTER CI. From the Marquis of N. to Miss DE GRAY.
MADAM,
DO a stranger the honor to deliver the enclosed (after you have yourself read
it) to the greatest and most accomplished villain upon earth. I take this mode
of getting my letter to his hand, that you, whom I presume to be young and
innocent, may, if not too late, escape the wrongs that are heaped upon the head
of

The Marquis of N.
The enclosed to Captain CARLISLE.
SIR,
AS cowardice is not, I hope, amongst the number of your vices, I send you this
honorable warning, that I shall be within ten paces of Prudence Place at
twelve o'clock this night, to pay you a double debt, the first in nature of a
money obligation, the second in recompense for having debauched the wife of a
friend. Your conduct would warrant assassination: but I scorn it.

The Marquis of N.
P. S.

I have no design to rob you of the Marchioness. She is sighing for you where
you placed her. If you exceed my appointment but a single moment, I will be in
your house. My soul is determined.

M. of N.






LETTER CII. Miss DE GRAY to Miss LASCELLES.
AT length, my dear Miss LASCELLES, the long line of mysteries is unravelled.
Yes, my friend, the cause of your poor LUCIA's anxiety is now no longer
problematical. Alas! it is made but too manifest! So there IS an Italian
attachment I find after all! the warm heart of Captain CARLISLE could not, it
seems, remain insensible of beauty, blooming under so bright a sun. Nay, his
passion, to do him justice, is of the most fashionable kind. A wife has been
his object: to give him greater eclat -- the wife of his friend --

Oh, Miss LASCELLES, I have not patience to go on -- Oh that I could find --
that I could but have a single glance of this all-accomplished Marchioness of N
--! That is his dulcinea -- She must be very handsome -- she must, certainly,
surpass all the ladies on this side the line -- Heavens, Miss LASCELLES, what
an angel she must be! -- I must be a -- but why do I talk of such a deformity
as myself! The superior charms of the Marchioness -- Oh, Miss LASCELLES, that I
could see her!

But from whom do you suppose I received this illustrious intelligence? -- even
from the injured husband himself. The letter of the Marquis is at this minute
before me. My eye, even now, fixes upon that part of the epistle where --

Oh, Miss LASCELLES, however merited the vengeance which I now perceive hanging
over the head of CARLISLE, his life is still precious to me, and I must make an
effort at least to prevent the mischief -- I thought him, my friend, the very
Tutor of Truth, instead of which, I behold him the Preceptor of Infamy -- yet
-- for his life -- let it be preserved, that he may mend it.

What measure shall I take? There is no time for choice or deliberation -- a
few hours only are between Captain CARLISLE and Death! -- Death! -- Death! --
Oh, Miss LASCELLES, I am distracted!

LUCIA DE GRAY.

LETTER CIII. Captain CARLISLE to G. LASCELLES, Esquire.
(Sent previous to his knowledge of the Marquis's arrival.)

SUCH is my joy since this happy alteration in the posture of affairs at
Prudence Place, my LASCELLES, that it is impossible for me to leave it again
till the loveliest of women is firmly and irrevocably mine. I have fixed in my
mind Saturday next for that blessed change in my condition; against which time
I could wish to present the lovely LUCIA DE GRAY with certain little elegancies
that might show my attention, though they can never add any thing to the graces
of her person. Do you then, my friend, be my agent upon this occasion. Let your
taste be consulted, and give mine the credit of it. I enclose you an order for
five thousand pounds, and I recommend you by a line to a person who has a
better mechanical knowledge, than you or I, of the true water, and intrinsic
excellence of diamonds. This business must be done immediately, and you are not
to forget, that in doing it, you oblige LUCIA DE GRAY, at the time you oblige

CLEMENT CARLISLE.

LETTER CIV. Miss LUCIA DE GRAY to Miss LASCELLES.
WHO, CAROLINE, can say unto misery, thus far shall thou go and no farther? I
am more completely a wretch than ever.

Soon after I had sent away my last, CARLISLE came to pay me the compliments of
the day. He paid them with the best dissembled tenderness you ever saw. He
congratulated his heart upon the return of its tranquillity -- He took my hand,
and carried it with a zeal which any woman might have taken for real, to his
lips. He even talked, with blooming cheeks, upon the day of marriage: he
pretended that he suffered unutterable things by delay. He said, he should
never be happy till I was his. He absolutely carried the cruel joke so far as
to assert, he had commissioned your brother to purchase decorations for the
joyful day!

This seemed a proper opportunity to draw up the curtain, and discover the
first scene of his farce. Oh what a dialogue!

"I think, Mr. CARLISLE, you wrote some letters to my father from the house of
a Marquis of N. during your residence at Rome?"

"I did, Madam -- I did, my dear LUCIA."

"You spoke, I think, occasionally, of the Marchioness his Lady?"

"I did. She is a charming woman. Except LUCIA DE GRAY, I never saw a lovelier."

"'Pshaw, your exception is a flattery. Is she sensible?"

"She is, beyond imagination."

"You were upon very good terms, no doubt?"

"The best in the world. I have sat the whole evening conversing with her upon
subjects even of science."

"A learned Lady then!"

"Rather accomplished than learned: she wants, however, that gentleness which
distinguishes the lovely LUCIA DE GRAY."

"You left her, certainly, with regret?"

"Had it not been for LUCIA DE GRAY, whom I fondly expected to see, it might
have been so."

"Is she still at Rome, Captain CARLISLE?"

"I fancy not, LUCIA. The Marquis visits in Rome, but his home is Paris. Though
the Marchioness herself is a native of England, and I had the pleasure to
revive her acquaintance with her own language so much, that she now speaks it
as fluently as the French and Italian."

"Those were agreeable tete-a-tetes. Pray did she never express any desire to
see her native country?"

"Oh often -- almost every hour."

"Was it not incumbent on your politeness, CLEMENT, to offer them a -- "

"I did; but the Marquis was obliged to take a journey to the interior part of
Italy."

"The Marchioness accompanied him him, no doubt?"

"No, she was ill at that time with a cold, and did not go with the Marquis."

"I protest I should not have been surprised if she had, in such an absence,
played truant, and come over to her native country with you, CLEMENT?"

"With me -- LUCIA -- come over with me -- Why that, you know, would have been
-- a -- a -- "

"Like a woman of spirit, that is all. I dare say now, CLEMENT, if you would
but confess, this has been the case."

"How can you think so? -- what reason in nature have you -- to -- to --?

"Why, not much reason, indeed; but a billet, which I received this morning,
mentions a Lady that, in some degree, allowing for the alteration, as Mr. HENRY
HEWSON says, answers the description of the Marchioness."

"May I -- may I beg permission to peruse your billet, LUCIA? -- Is it from -- "

"'It Is from a quite new correspondent; and, by-the-by, there is a small
enclosure for you. Here are both."

I gave him, Miss LASCELLES, the Marquis's letter.

"It is very true, Miss DE GRAY," said he, without any emotion, after reading
them, "that the Marchioness is at present under my protection; and it is true
also that she came to England, though not with me, very soon after me."

"Is it? then the Marquis is not angry without cause?"

"It is a painful circumstance to relate, my dear LUCIA, though there is no
guilt on either side. You will excuse me on the subject. I beg you will, for a
few hours, keep the matter from Mr. DE GRAY, and all the rest of the family. I
shall certainly wait upon the Marquis, and accommodate every thing. She is
still worthy of his affection."

Did you ever, CAROLINE, see guilt confessed, carried with so high a hand? He
is so habituated, I suppose, to crimes of this nature, in his Italian
connexions, that he thinks nothing of it. It Is, in his notion, I dare say, an
innocent freedom, and not seduction. Was there ever so composed a libertine? He
has just made his bow, without any other sort of disorder, and walked off. --
Let him fight, CAROLINE! let him fall -- I hate the sight of him -- I -- I -- I
-- oh, my God, my God, what a wretch I am!

LUCIA DE GRAY.

LETTER CV. From the Same to the Same.
AH, CAROLINE, CAROLINE! I renounced the barbarous reflection -- I shuddered at
the horrid idea of CLEMENT CARLISLE's death. This moment have I sent the
enclosed to that ungenerous man. I wait the issue with anguish inexpressible.

Adieu, Adieu. [The Enclosed.]
From Miss DE GRAY to Captain CARLISLE.
SIR,
I CONJURE you to preserve your life, or at least not to risque the loss of it.
Do not meet the Marquis. Ah, what have I said? Have I recommended cowardice to
my -- to -- to Mr. CARLISLE? Yet, what can courage do to the man of conscious
guilt? it can, at best, only aggravate guilt by precipitating death to the man
who is already wronged. I charge you to -- to -- I know not what to say to you,
Captain CARLISLE. You have murdered the peace of the unhappy

LUCIA DE GRAY.




LETTER CVI. From the Same to the Same.
HE will go, Miss LASCELLES -- He talks with firmness and the coolest fortitude
of his innocence. He even accuses me of an unkind suspicion. He has that
philosophy of assurance, if I may so call it, to confront conviction. Yet, I am
cheared at the idea -- Ah! if it should indeed be possible for his avowed
innocence to appear -- if it should indeed be possible --

Alas! it is not possible. Is she not under his protection? Is she not the
handsomest woman in Italy? Is not her husband at hand to take vengeance on the
seducer? --

But yet, who knows what softening circumstances may at length turn out, on the
side of Mr. CARLISLE -- In the mean time he may, perhaps, fall a victim to
appearances -- Oh, what agony besets me on either side! -- Why, CAROLINE, do
you not write to the wretched

LUCIA DE GRAY?

LETTER CVII. From the Same to the Same.
IT strikes ten o'clock -- We have just risen from supper. CARLISLE did the
honors of the table (my father choosing to sup in his room) with as much grace
and composure as ever. He was neither more dejected nor elated than usual; and
he behaved to me, as if an upbraiding sentiment had never past between us. He
was dressed in his new regimentals -- His Colonel's commission is come down. I
think I never saw him look so lovely -- He says it seems awkward to be called
Colonel.

Surely he must -- he must be innocent, and if he is -- O, Heavens! he is gone
out of his room: I heard his door shut -- Excuse me, CAROLINE, I must not lose
sight of him. If he goes, I have a foreboding that he will fall -- What then
remains for your

LUCIA DE GRAY?
P. S.

I dare not acquaint my father.



LETTER CVIII. Mr LASCELLES to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
THE obstinate Marchioness has rejected all nourishment till this day, with a
pertinacious violence and resolution peculiarly her own. I was alarmed even for
her life, and her death would, at this conjuncture of affairs, be the most
unseasonable thing that could possibly happen. This apprehension is removed by
the receipt of the enclosed billet -- You will there see the terms upon which
she requested CARLISLE's direction. You will see too that it would have been
impolitic in me, under such circumstances (and especially as she must be too
feeble to stir abroad), to stand out with her. Besides this, I have her under
guard; the trusty MARYANNE will not suffer a second escape. The Marchioness
seems much more composed. She does not beat her beautiful bosom; she does not
loudly lament her fate as before: the maid is this moment passing my room, in
her way to the apartment of my poor sick CAROLINE, with assurances of AUGUSTA's
tranquillity -- Thus far, therefore, there is a treaty betwixt me and agony.
But this is only guarding against the enemy in one quarter, while one is more
open to his attack in another. The Marquis is certainly hovering about --
Perhaps he is gone down with the sword of Italiant-taught revenge even to
Prudence Place; upon that supposition the utmost confusion, if not, the most
complicated death succeeds: upon that supposition too, I am not safe in this
house a moment. I know not what to do! let me think a little.

GEORGE LASCELLES.
[The Enclosed.]
From the Marchioness to Mr. LASCELLES.
THE Marchioness will be quite easy, and will submit with the greatest patience
to her confinement, if Mr. LASCELLES will give her some such written testimony
as may be convincing, that the person of CARLISLE is not in imminent danger --
If it is in danger, the Marchioness will never more, during her whole life,
complain, if Mr. LASCELLES will warn that gentleman of his real situation by
forwarding the card enclosed by a special courier.

AUGUSTA N.


To Captain CARLISLE.
SIR,
ONE whom it seems you detest, and who is, in your opinion, a wanton, takes
this method of informing you, that, while you continue in England, your life is
at a hazard from the Marquis of N. As you value that, therefore, go immediately
to some place of safety, where you are not the object of an assassin. You will
think I am sincere in this counsel, when I further inform you that the chamber
of AUGUSTA would be the only part of the world, where the tenderness of that
foolish wanton dare not now wish you.

AUGUSTA N***.




LETTER CIX. Mr. LASCELLES to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
LET no man despair, HEATHCOATE; let him rather put his trust in this maxim of
the song, The wretch of today may be happy tomorrow. Blessed be the hand of
the postman, and may he ever travel through the winter night in security, for
bringing me so many cordials. Oh, HEATHCOATE, how infinitely are our pains and
pleasures dependent upon half a sheet of paper, made legible by so
insignificant a thing as a goose's feather! Heaven first taught letters for
some wretch's aid. But I have not time for either sentiment or poetry. Would
you believe it, my friend? all is yet quiet at Prudence Place. CARLISLE's
affair with his LUCIA goes on smoothly, and he has absolutely enclosed me an
order for five thousand pounds to -- to -- to -- what do you think? -- even to
purchase jewels for the day of marriage. Could I possibly have a greater proof
of nothing having yet happened respecting the Marquis? -- But on the other
hand, this general quietus cannot much longer be expected. We shall certainly
soon have a fresh alarm: the present calm I take to be only one of those which
succeeds one tempest, and foretells another. Take my word for it, the clouds
are again collecting, and will again break, perhaps with more fury than ever --
This then is the moment to strike some masterstroke -- This is the time to --
to -- soft! let me again think a little.

In Continuation.

Te Deum, my friend, Te Deum! it is found -- it is found! -- You and I are in
cursed situations. We have absolutely elbowed ourselves out of every thing. Our
very liberty is become precarious; but our friendship has been as firm, as our
conduct has been cautious. We have won and lost together. At present fortune is
kind, and has put into our hands five thousand trumps. A curse upon character,
while we have these golden honors. Now then, my friend, now while the odd
trick is ours, let us repair all by one lucky hit. My sister has a morsel of
independency, enough for the subsistence of such a character -- The Marchioness
will, either by Heaven, or by her husband, be soon provided for: CARLISLE is
rich enough to lose a sum of 5000l. -- We are poor enough to find it acceptable
-- You understand me. All is still in my house -- I am going to slip on a
riding-dress -- I shall desire to see you in the same situation exactly at --

Peace -- peace! by Heaven, HEATHCOATE, it is not yet too late to improve our
winning cards fourfold. It is not too late to observe my appointment with Sir
ANDREW. I am sure four horses will carry me to the edge of the village, at
least an hour before the appointment: in half that time I will contrive a
secret parley with Sir ANDREW, and make with him such terms of sighting, as
shall not only purse-draw, but draft-draw him. Here is one of the tribe of
Benjamin, who will give me solid moneys for his flimsy paper, HEATHCOATE. These
preliminaries being settled, he will naturally leave me in expectation of the
battle-loving MEDWAY; and in that moment, my friend, will I -- but hush, as
MEDWAY says, no noise -- Leave every thing to me. Be ready. I shall put this
letter into the office, where I take chaise, and, if occasion sees fit, shall
dispatch others upon the road, or even by especial messengers, for you know how
I act in a plot. Adieu -- I shall press this with my seal and be gone -- Adieu
-- I could not help listening at AUGUSTA's door -- all quiet there -- CAROLINE
almost snores -- MARYANNE winks in her wicker chair -- I have stripped the house.
It is a mere shell, so now I will leave it -- again

Adieu.
LETTER CX. The Marchioness of N*** to Signora -- at Rome.
BE it sufficient apology to you for my late silence, that I tell you I have
been a prisoner till within this hour, without the privilege of getting a
letter to the post. Such is the consequence of following the fortunes of the
man you love. But on this subject I can speak no more. My strength is almost
gone, and yet I am setting out for a journey -- The horses are putting to the
carriage. It is not to Rome. It is not to Paris -- No, Signora, it is to the
retreat of Captain CARLISLE. Yes, my VIOLA, I have at length obtained his
address, his real address, and I am going at full speed to make use of it -- Be
not startled, my friend -- I set out with no hostile design. -- My violent
wishes for revenge are all composed now their object is in my power -- In my
power, VIOLA? oh, Heavens, CARLISLE is in the Marquis's power -- Even now
perhaps there may be an horrid interview -- My blood runs cold at the thought
-- Oh that the horses were ready! -- They are -- they are! -- The postilion
opens to me the door -- I will take the unfinished letter in my pocket -- I
will pay double -- double, VIOLA; I will pay an hundred fold for my speed --
the life -- the precious life of Carlisle is in danger -- I am gone --

In Continuation.

There is five minutes stop to change horses -- the other poor faithful
creatures are panting before me -- I take up a very bad pen to tell you, that,
though I am now traveling in the night, and that a dark one, I travel as a
man, and am not without arms. Join with me, VIOLA, to bless the name of
MARYANNE -- To a poor creature so called am I indebted for at least the chance
of saving the loveliest of men -- the chance! oh, my God, is it then reduced to
a chance? -- to a bare probability? I would sooner have every other work of
nature annihilated, than that the least misery should happen to CLEMENT
CARLISLE -- Ah! Signora, that the Marquis of N. had been such a man! -- I am
summoned -- the letter must not yet be sent away -- Adieu.

In Continution.

We are changing again -- but I am always somewhat the later, as there is, it
seems, a gentleman traveling with equal speed, the same road, and he
forestalls the swiftest horses. Perhaps, Signora, it is the Marquis -- Perhaps
every turn of his carriage-wheels precipitates the fate of my CARLISLE -- oh
horror -- horror! -- oh that the horses had wings instead of feet! -- Thank
heaven they look fleeter than my last -- They are pawing, and champing the bit
proudly before me -- I shed tears of joy at the symptom -- I move onwards --

In Continution.

Ah! Signora -- Signora, I am agitated by ten thousand fears -- The person, who
is going so furiously before me, proves to be LASCELLES -- The maid who
released me from my prisonchamber told me he was gone a different road -- What
can be the meaning of this? -- I have all along described the person of the
Marquis, but have received no account that answers -- Perhaps he may be yet
tracing his enemy, as he calls him, through the streets of London, and I may
still be so happy as to preserve him -- Oh, VIOLA! what a charming thought!

The pen and ink is with me in the chaise -- You must dispense with a
handwriting scarcely legible --

I keep at proper distance from the carriage of LASCELLES -- I have bribed my
postilion into implicit obedience -- Money seems to do every thing in this
country --

Oh Heavens, VIOLA! we are in the middle of the last stage -- LASCELLES
increases his pace -- How shall I obtain an interview with CARLISLE? Shall I
drive directly to the house and require an audience? Shall I carry to him
terror in my look, and insist upon being heard?

Ah, no, Signora -- Let me not, now that all my unhappy enthusiasm for revenge
is over -- let me not interrupt the scheme of joy that is carrying on betwixt
him and a worthy woman -- Why, poor innocent! should her passion be destroyed
by mine? -- Here Is is regular -- chaste, correct, consistent -- She never
intentionally clashed with the unfortunate Marchioness of N * * *

No, VIOLA, I will never disturb the gentle bosom of another woman, whom I know
to be guiltless -- Let them be happy, Signora -- Let them be happy -- I shall
be in my grave.

I have come to a resolution, VIOLA! I will discharge my carriage before I
enter the town, and then wrapping myself up in my coat, walk on, till I enquire
out some inn or open house -- There will I write my fears, and send them to Mr.
CARLISLE. If his answer mentions his safety, and his intention to remain so, I
will then return to -- ah, whither, Signora -- I have no house -- no fortune --
no husband -- no friend --

And shall I depart without even seeing him? -- Hard -- a very hard trial for
me, VIOLA! oh, what feelings oppress me! -- No matter -- no matter -- My fatal
love has already endangered his precious life, and if I can now save him, I
will be content to suffer.

LASCELLES paid off his chaise before me -- We stopped within a quarter of a mile
of the village -- I saw him descend -- he walked briskly on -- I hastened to
discharge my account -- saw both the carriages return homeward, and prepared to
follow Mr. LASCELLES -- I will follow his steps precisely, unless they lead
directly to Mr. CARLISLE, and delicacy shall prevail, though the sacrifice were
to kill me.

Ha! the postman blows his horn -- he passes me -- he takes my packet, though his
bags are sealed -- I pay for his civility -- Upon the chance of my letters
getting to Rome, I make use of the wafer I have in my pocket, and send it away.

Oh! -- Farewell.
LETTER CXI. Miss DE GRAY to Miss LASCELLES.
HE is gone, Miss LASCELLES, he is gone. I saw him move with the most reserved
steps toward the green lane that leads to the horrid scene of rencontre.

I am resolved to pursue him, let the consequence be what it will.

Your L. D. G.

LETTER CXII. From the Same to the Same.
NEVER surely, Miss LASCELLES, was any scene so complicated with horrors and
surprises, as that to which I have just been a witness. I write now in the
deepest distress, and write now in the deepest distress, and in a house of
general mourning. In the first place, Miss LASCELLES, your brother is no more
-- the fair but unhappy occasion of his death is also near her end, and the
husband is almost distracted. Ah, my CAROLINE, how I tremble!

But it is necessary for me, however painful, to proceed to the minutest of
this horrid business.

I traced Mr. CARLISLE, unobserved, till he came within view of the spot. I
heard somebody advance from behind a tree. It was the Marquis of N ***. It was
too late to discover myself, or to hope any thing from entreaties. They joined,
and walked together. I went tremblingly behind. CARLISLE told the whole history
of the unfortunate AUGUSTA. He attributed the whole to frolic: he protested
that she was still under the most sacred protection at the house of Mr.
LASCELLES in London. He pleaded a thousand apologies -- Pledged himself for her
fidelity. The Marquis would scarce suffer him to finish a single sentence
without interruption: he is the most headstrong man in the world; he execrated
CARLISLE as a seducer; he even reprobated him as a coward. He infisted upon
taking his life, if it was not immediately defended. He strode onward to
measure the ground.

"A little farther on then, Sir," said he to the Marquis, "this is not a proper
place for our, in my opinion, very unnecessary business. -- Behind yonder house
is a heath, the clash of our weapons will not there be heard."

I was ready to expire, my dearest Miss LASCELLES, at every step, and with very
great difficulty escaped observation.

"If it must be so, Sir," continued CARLISLE, "this is the spot."

At this moment, Miss LASCELLES, we heard a confused murmur of voices. The
sounds came from the other side of a small plantation of firs.

"Stop, Sir," cried the Marquis -- "no witnesses -- all fair play, if you
please; I do not mean to assassinate you, Carlisle; nor shall you assassinate
me."

They both went on the other side of the plantation -- The moon shot forth her
ray at the very instant of entering; and as if Providence designed it so, her
beams were beyond comparison bright -- Oh earth and heaven, what a scene was
opened upon us from removing this curtain of darkness!

In one part we beheld the persons of Mr. MEDWAY and Mr. LASCELLES, as it
proved to be, standing upon the defensive. In another stood the figure of a
stripling leaning pensively against a fir, as if he were unengaged in the
combat, yet chose to be a spectator. At a small distance (yet not sufficiently
near to be distinguished for the persons they really were) clustered another
groupe, as if they wished rather to see, than to be seen.

"Confusion," said MEDWAY, "we are discovered. If I knew by whom, I would
annihilate him -- Ha!" continued he, looking in the face of his antagonist, "by
Heaven, this is not Sir ANDREW FLIGHT."

"I am his friend, Sir," said the other, "and I choose to fight for him --
Curse on the moon-beams!" --

"Good God," cried CARLISLE, by this time come near enough to recognize him:
"Is it my friend LASCELLES, whom I behold?"

" Carlisle!" exclaimed Mr. LASCELLES -- "Is it you?"

"Come, Sir," said the Marquis eagerly, "no trifling -- my time is precious."

CARLISLE drew his sword.

"Oh, oh; hush -- hush" -- said MEDWAY, "softly -- if that is the case -- no
noise: we are all come upon the same errand, I find. Advance then, every man
his bird, and there is an end of it. As to Sir ANDREW, I will chastise him for
himself, and in the mean time, as you think fit to represent him, I will
chastise you for meddling in the quarrels of a fool -- Come on, Sir."

He fired his pistol in a moment: Mr. LASCELLES exchanged the salutation --
They were preparing again -- The Marquis and CARLISLE began to parry.

Mr. LASCELLES seeing this, eagerly threw down his pistol:

"Stop, stop, for Heaven's sake stop," said he to the Marquis -- "touch not --
lift not your arm against CARLISLE, I charge you -- Here, Sir -- here into this
bosom direct your vengeance -- It Is I, Marquis, I have been the cause of all
your misfortune."

There was no time for expostulation: Mr. LASCELLES caught the sword from the
hand of CARLISLE, and insisted upon first engaging with the Marquis.

CARLISLE was without arms. MEDWAY hastened to arm him. The Marquis rushed upon
him, without regarding LASCELLES.

LASCELLES again threw himself before CARLISLE, and even pushed vigorously at
the Marquis. He was at length provoked to begin with your brother, my dear Miss
LASCELLES The very first thrust of the Marquis was fatal, for the weapon passed
through the side of Mr. LASCELLES into his heart. The Marquis received a wound
also in exchange --

Your brother had scarce fallen, before the stripling, whom the other objects
had prevented from more notice (and who had, indeed, retired farther off upon
seeing us) now came forward in a feeble manner, and fell upon the ground almost
at the feet of the Marquis.

"Desist, desist," said the poor thing, in the most piercing tone in the world
-- "desist from farther altercation -- Here lies, at the point of all her
wishes, the unhappy cause of -- "

The sentence was left unfinished, for the speaker of it fainted away.

Oh, Miss LASCELLES, it was the Marchioness of N *** in disguise -- She had
raised her own beautiful arm against her own charming bosom. The point of a
small sword was still sticking there.

I ran to her relief.

The Marquis stood fixed in horror, but still looked sullen.

MEDWAY was gone.

CARLISLE was agonized by the most divided attention.

The Marchioness appeared to be expiring -- She requested to be carried to
LASCELLES, who was in the same situation --

It is too hard a task for me, Miss LASCELLES, to recount to you the dreadful
particulars of this pathetic scene. It is incumbent upon me, however, to
observe, that such circumstances appeared on the part of your brother by his
own dying confession, that, as it is impossible for his life to have been
happy, you will the less lament him. You, however, my dear Miss LASCELLES, he
cleared from every imputation that might, in consequence of these discoveries,
have been thrown upon you -- He confessed his error -- he bathed the lovely
hand of poor AUGUSTA with his last tears. He received her forgiveness -- As for
the Marchioness herself -- Oh, Miss LASCELLES -- words can give you no idea of
her situation.

She was tremblingly sensible to every thing -- She looked tenderly at me, and
gave my hand to CARLISLE.

She gave it as she lay bleeding before us -- We conveyed her to Prudence
Place. Her husband is not even yet convinced of his cruelties, yet she kissed
his hand -- She wondered not, she said, at CARLISLE's preference.

"Superior beauty added to superior virtue," said she, taking my hand, "might
well conquer."

Ah, CAROLINE! how I felt this flattery -- It went through my very heart -- My
father wept over her -- I never saw a house of so much misery -- Poor
CARLISLE'S condition was more touching than the rest -- He execrates himself as
the innocent cause of all -- The Marquis and he are now together -- The Marquis
seems not to regard his wound, which is deeper than we imagined -- yet he is
not so tender as he should be to AUGUSTA. Your brother is laid on CARLISLE'S
bed -- I saw him, a little while since, take his lifeless hand gently, and turn
away weeping.

"Poor fellow," said he, afterward, to me, "the beauty of the temptation was
great -- his love of the dice may well account for all the rest. I loved him
much -- Let his failings excite no other terror than that of making us the
wiser for his example.

Here, my CAROLINE, is a prospect darkened -- Do not believe I can rejoice
under such circumstances -- Your brother's corpse will be -- Oh, CAROLINE,
these are hard subjects -- I must resign them to a firmer hand than that of the
trembling

LUCIA DE GRAY.

LETTER CXIII. Mr. MEDWAY to Sir ANDROW FLIGHT.
SIR,
THOUGH death has been but too busy in this house within these few hours, I
cannot bear to have a trick put upon me without punishing the tricker. You
imposed upon me a stranger, whom I might have sent to the shades, without any
right so to do. But you are yet in the land of the living, and I insist upon
justice. You sent a challenge with your own hand. If you do not meet me this
night, by the way of hush, without any noise, I will cane a coward all the way
from Prudence Place to the Duke of Downderdale's.

Hush -- you comprehend me.

O. MEDWAY.

LETTER CXIV. Mr. DE GRAY to Miss LASCELLES.
Dear MADAM,
THE tears that flowed from the eyes of LUCIA, as she bade the servant carry a
letter with your address to the post, convince me, how sincerely she joins me
in deploring the unhappy circumstances of Mr. LASCELLES'S death. Yet, what
consolation can, in these cases, be offered to you? Notwithstanding your
brother's mistakes in other respects, his fraternal affection might be very
unblemished: if so, you will naturally cast a veil of oblivion over such parts
of his character as were concealed from you and his other friends, and you must
lament that part of the misfortune which deprives you of a tender relation.
LUCIA'S society, however, may assist your sense, and smooth your path to that
acquiescence which must be obtained. Come therefore, dear Madam, amongst us: or
rather, prepare yourself for such a journey. It is not, methinks, advisable to
be here till after the present week. Mr. LASCELLES, with his dying breath,
bequeathed his remains to CLEMENT CARLISLE. He requested that the legacy might
be accepted as a testimony of Mr. CARLISLE'S forgiveness. He will perform his
duty to your satisfaction.

Our situation is too painful at this crisis for me to proceed. But let it be
considered, for indeed the poet is right, Our only lesson is to learn to suffer,
And he who knows not that, was born for nothing.


I am sincerely yours, ROBERT DE GRAY.

LETTER CXV. From Miss DE GRAY to Miss LASCELLES.
WHAT a peculiarity of disposition marks the Marquis of N***! Though his wound,
which he received from your brother, is become more alarming, he insisted upon
being permitted to go into the apartment of the poor languishing AUGUSTA at a
very unseasonable hour of the last night. CARLISLE dissuaded him from this; but
soon after he again renewed the subject, and was admitted.

He shut to the door, and spoke to his Lady in a very ungentle manner. We were
going to expostulate with him upon the impropriety of this conduct, when he
came out of the room, and told us, the Marchioness would be well enough to
depart soon -- He did not stay for any reply to this strange intelligence, but
ran down stairs into the saloon, and from thence into the stable. He insisted
upon his horse, on which, under pretense of taking the air, though he was scarce
able to sit, he rode away at full speed. He disturbed us, to enjoy this frolic,
in the middle of the night; and he has not been heard of since. Surely there
never lived so singular a character.

Alas! the Marchioness is by no means in the recovering way the Marquis
represented her. Though her wound was more promising at the last dressing, her
fever is rather increased than abated. Yet she has never spoken disrespectfully
of this strange husband since her illness. She seemed much relieved, however,
at the news of his being gone. "Then," says she, "I shall die in peace: he will
not come again to abuse me."

How pathetically, my dear Miss LASCELLES, am I concerned for the life of this
lovely woman! -- Do not believe I counterfeit: I speak sincerely. Her conduct
has a larger apology in the treatment of so barbarous a husband. -- Pray
Heaven! she may recover.

Since I wrote this sentence, I have been at her bedside, and she cried out --
"Oh, Miss DE GRAY, how good you are? -- Violent as I have been -- for which I
know you will forgive me -- had I known Mr. CARLISLE'S LUCIA before, I am
convinced my veneration for her would have cured me! If I wish to recover,
Madam, it is only to show you my gratitude: indeed it is!"

Oh, CAROLINE, that she may live, even though the Marquis is unworthy of her,
is the prayer of

Your LUCIA DE GRAY.

LETTER CXVI. Mr. MEDWAY to Mr. TOWNSEND.
HERE IS pretty news for you! A rascally Lord refuses to give me satisfaction,
and a villainous Baronet has writ me a challenge, and run away without keeping
his appointment. He wanted, moreover, to have bilk'd me by a representative,
one LASCELLES, who is killed by another hand, just as he was going to attack me
for a sum of money, with a design to send me to the shades, and make off with
the price of killing me. There have, also, several other strange things
happened in this family of late. There is a wounded Marquis gone just now
bleeding away: and his wife is upon her, as I think, deathbed. For this last
matter I am much concerned, as she is, even now, a most lovely young creature,
and I hate, of all things, that young handsome women should die; though the
Marquis, her husband, has no worthy quality belonging to him but his courage. I
choose to give up my pretensions to LUCIA. I choose to give her to CARLISLE,
because she loves him, I find, better than me. I choose to alter my will in her
favor. All these points are so many touches of my humor. But as to this
Baronet, I must hunt him every where on this side Heaven, till I have him upon
his knees. He made his escape ingloriously this morning, and indeed lurked
about the house like a scout with a pale face, ever since the death of
LASCELLES, his bravado. I will either pink him, or humble him, TOWNSEND, were
he to take refuge under the hoop-petticoat of his aunt DOWNDERDALE. I will not
be tricked -- Hush -- no noise. My honor must be satisfied another way; the
opportunity is at hand. I would not die with a debt upon my sword for the
world. Hush --

O. MEDWAY.

LETTER CXVII. From the Same to Mr. GABRIEL HEWSON.
SIR,
YOU some time ago brought a letter of assignation from Sir A. F. who is gone
off without either drawing his sword, or firing his pistol. Which of these do
you choose? He being gone, the laws of honor require (in my idea) that you
should represent him -- I must therefore have a shot, or a stroke at you --
Hush.

OL. MEDWAY.

LETTER CXVIII. From the same to T. TOWNSEND, Esquire.
SURELY, TOWNSEND, it is fated for me to be pestered with rascals! I expected
satisfaction from the cowardly second of the vile Sir A. F. and, behold you, I
had no sooner intimated my design, than he took to his heels also, and sends me
the sorry excuse I enclose to you.

But, by Heaven, I will have them both on their knees yet -- Hush.

O. MEDWAY.
[The Enclosed.]
From Mr. GABRIEL HEWSON to Mr. MEDWAY.
Sombre-Hedges. SIR,
THE most superlative degree of astonishment seized me at the receipt of your
letter. As to Sir A. F.'s epistle, I knew not its contents, and I do not find
any law in my classic oracles -- Tully, Tacitus, and Pliny Junior, not
forgetting the golden-ruled Epictetus, which ordains the single combat to be
fought by the carrier of a challenge.

Besides this, Sir, my authors tell me, such battles are criminal, and that he
who kills a man by the way of a duel sports with that eternity which he enters
upon, without his commission. But you are a very fierce gentleman, and if the
sage Socrates himself was to tell you, you were in the wrong, I do not doubt
but you would stigmatize the venerable seer as a coward.

To avoid all these concussions of the soul and body, and to fly from a scene
which is no longer fit for a scholar's residence, I have betaken myself away,
and send this immediately on my arrival at Sombre-Hedges.

If I have unwittingly offended, Sir, be assured that I implore a thousand
pardons; and that I may never offend again, be satisfied also, that I will no
more put my head into high places, where the superior powers of the foodful
earth are quarrelling in the face of day for want of other avocation.

I am yours, GABRIEL HEWSON.




LETTER CXIX. Mr. MEDWAY to the Duke of DOWNDERDALE.
MY LORD,
YOUR nephew has run away. When I thought of giving him the meeting, I imagined
him my equal -- that is to say, I imagined him an honest man, who is a prince's
equal. But, within these few minutes, I have found him very much my inferior,
and below my sword, by being -- a villain; who not only hired a tool to fight
for him, but had condescended to lay plots for the destruction of the sex which
he ought to protect. This, therefore, is written to acquaint him, that I have,
for the future, nothing to do with any part of him but his nose, which I shall
twist as nearly round as possible, when I see him. No noise. Let him keep his
secret, and no greater harm will happen to him, from the supreme indignation of

OLLY MEDWAY.

LETTER CXX. Mr. MEDWAY to Mr. GABRIEL HEWSON.
SIR,
COLONEL CARLISLE and Mr. DE GRAY have interceded with me to accept your
apology; you may therefore go safely to bed in SombreHedges, with Pliny Junior,
although I have just heard you were bold enough to write a letter to Lucia upon
a certain subject at a certain time -- Hush -- you comprehend me. However, let
that pass. Read in a corner and keep at home for the future.

You did me justice in supposing I would not take an affront from Socrates. By
Heaven, I would not brook a wrong look from that Caesar who penned his own
commentaries -- no, not from Mars himself. Never make a noise, but let Hush be
your motto.

O. MEDWAY.

LETTER CXXI. Miss DE GRAY to Miss LASCELLES.
NOT a word yet from the unaccountable Marquis, although we wish very much to
send him news of his wife's surprising change for the better. By the care of
our excellent physician, and by her own previous happy state of health, her
wound is healed within a few days to every body's astonishment. Her candid
behavior to me has engaged not only my attention, but my tenderness. She says,
she loves Mr. CARLISLE now, just as much as she ought to love an amiable man
who is to be the husband of her protectress.

She never enquires after the Marquis.

I am summoned. Make yourself easy for Heaven's sake, my CAROLINE -- This
request is not more at the heart of your LUCIA, than at that of the beautiful
Marchioness, who speaks of you with a warmth of gratitude peculiar to her. Poor
thing, I hope we shall nurse her up yet.

Your L. DE GRAY.

LETTER CXXII. From the Same to the Same.
THE occasion of my being so soon called away from my writingdesk, while I was
last addressing my very dear CAROLINE, was to be present at an interview
betwixt my father and Mr. and Mrs. HEWSON.

They desired a few minutes conversation with me and Mr. DE GRAY, in the
library. They came hand-in-hand. They opened the design of their visit
immediately.

"Master DE GRAY," said the husband, "I am obliged to you for all favors, but
I have had enough of your high life: so has HETT: we have seen men killed,
women wounded, friends fighting, honest men's wives attempted to be ' bauched,
and Lords taking pet without ' casion. So in a few words, HETT and I have '
solved to go back, and live again at Skelter. As to fine breedin, we will make
that out as well as we can. Better be unp'lite, Master DE GRAY, than ' plite
enough to cut friend's throat, and ' bauch friend's wife: so servant, Master DE
GRAY, and God be with you."

My father applauded this resolution, and without any more ceremony they parted.

They are this minute actually on their way to Helter-Skelter-Hall.

The Marchioness continues to improve. But -- soft -- There is a servant just
dismounting from his horse, whose sides give smoking testimony of the rider's
expedition.

He is coming into the house -- his look and speed alarm me.

In Continuation.

Oh, Heaven, my CAROLINE, the Marquis of N * * * is no more. The messenger
delivered a letter to the Marchioness which mentions his death. The letter is
from a relation of his in London, where he died -- The wound being neglected,
turned to a mortification, and dispatched him in a few hours -- This obstinate
man, it seems, showed his resentment even upon his deathbed, and bequeathed
all his fortune to a distant branch of his family -- Not a single guinea to his
Lady -- She read the letter with very little emotion, considering what is said
to be his natural violence. But she resolves to go directly to London, feeble
as she is, and pay him the last duties. She hazards the air too soon, but she
persists. CARLISLE says, she is deprived of every thing by this stroke, but a
scanty jointure. I ventured to touch upon this. She frankly said, in answer,
that she had sufficient fortune in the loss of a cruel, tyrannical husband!

In Continuation.

No entreaties can prevail upon the Marchioness to stay. She declares she is
well. Her fever is indeed gone, but the Doctor says, she risques a relapse. She
has paid to my father and me her parting civilities. They were terribly
touching, CAROLINE. She suppressed a sigh as she gave her hand to CARLISLE; but
she recovered herself, and with incredible resolution got into her chaise,
accompanied by Mr. MEDWAY.

Pray come down to us immediately. With the different transitions from one
affecting object to another, I am quite fatigued. I tremble for the Marchioness
-- I feel for you -- I am unhappy to think it should be my fate to interfere
with the happiness of another woman. Yet CLEMENT is too dear to be resigned,
and poor, frail human nature will prevail.

Hasten then to comfort the heart of

Your LUCIA DE GRAY.

LETTER CXXIII. Miss LASCELLES to Miss DE GRAY.
I WAVE all remarks upon the dark passages of our late correspondence, my dear
Miss DE GRAY; nor will I admit any strokes of the deeply-wounded heart in this
letter, which is only to tell you, that I shall endeavor to be with you
directly. I am stricken very hard, it is true, but I am still

Your own CAROLINE LASCELLES.

LETTER CXXIV. Sir ANDREW FLIGHT to Mr. HEATHCOATE.
Dover.
I SUPPOSE you know the transactions of MEDWAY, LASCELLES, etc. etc. I am a
ruined man -- Uncle banishes me -- MEDWAY threatens me -- Have, however,
received a last supply, as uncle calls it, with which I shall set off for Paris
-- I have crept here like a runaway -- the laugh is against me -- LASCELLES was
a sad dog -- However, uncle may still come round, and till he does, farewell to

ANDREW FLIGHT.

LETTER CXXV.
Helter-Skelter-Hall.
Mr. HENRY HEWSON to Mr. GABRIEL.
WE have gotten again to the Hall, brother GAB -- sick to the souls of us to
the p'lite thing. HETT, and I, never saw old Skelter look so well in our lives
-- What Is better, the old moss and stones have not been yet meddled with. Every
thing was glad to see us come whame again -- Dog Dashgrove got grin into's
feace, just as thof he was p'lite, and I thouft spaniel bitch would have lost
tail with wagging it at me. I took pointer out, and have shotten 2 brace
o'birds, half which I send you by carrier. HETT last night made sillabub, and
milk'd crumple-horn herself -- What do you think of that? She may bless herself
she was not 'bauched, and you, that that son of a gun MEDWAY did not pounce you
-- There Is doings indeed! A curse on it, a man can neither keep's life nor wife
among your p'lite genii. So much for bettermost specie. Before I come away, I
told Master DE GRAY a bit of my mind. And atween ourselves, GAB, why should you
and I go out of our way, to make fools of ourselves? CARLISLE is, to be sure, a
good lad, but as for the rest of the pack, 'cept Master DE GRAY -- hush --
hush, as MEDWAY says -- Never stir, if HETT and I did not lie in clover last
night. We snuggled together in old yellow bed upon farmer's sheet of her own
working, and we got up better than if we had been ducked in dainty down of
p'liter genii. l'th' morning, in came neighbor Carter, Tim Traddleditch, Gef.
Geehup, and Walter Wake, and ga' the bells a bit of a gangle on the 'cassion.
Upon this, I tapt harvest-beer, No. 11. left side of little cellar, where cider
used to stand, you know -- Upon this, we ' vited neighbors wifes, and Abraham
Amen, the clerk, and Davy Dipstick, the 'ciseman, and made a day out -- Sure as
you're alive -- for which God be thanked -- HETT and I told the whole story --
Never heard so much laugh at the frolic in your life -- When I come to talk of
giving hand at gutter-work, I thought old Amen would have gone into stericks --
and when I talked 'bout Lord BLESSINGBOURNE's sticking out hinder part, "A'cod,"
cries Geff. Geehup, "an I had been behind un, I would have lent un such a
sisseraro, that his hinder part should have remembered me till Candlemass."

But to make short of the story, after a deal more merriment, we closed the
whole affair by giving boys a bunfire; and what do you think we did --? dash my
best buttons, if we did not send little black bag, tossicums, florrididdles,
and all into the fire. So here ends the affair of the bettermost specie -- If
you take my advice, GAB, you will do same. Come and make merry with us. As to our
fortun: there is more ways than one to the wood. Let us help poor neighbors --
Let us buy bit of land of one's own -- Let us set fatherless he or she up in
business -- Let us put friendless people in a way -- In short, let us do any
thing but be p'lite and good for nothing. HETT says so too.

Your ever loving brother, HENRY HEWSON.

LETTER CXXVI. Sombre Hodges.
Mr. GABRIEL's Answer.
I PERFECTLY approximate to my beloved brother's last sentiments. I see plainly
that a quiet corner, and philosophical soul are the best of blessings.
Helter-Skelter-Hall cannot be more dear to you, than Sombre Hedges are to him
who is thy tenderly fraternally affectionate friend. I gave an entertainment
last night, without sixpence expense, to better society that ever were seen at
Prudence-Place, if we except the Colonel, his guardian, and Miss DE GRAY. Who,
thinks my brother, was at my banquet? Even some of the greatest men of all
antiquity -- Homer, Horace, Cicero, and Seneca -- Such friends will I never
more leave, unless it is to visit my relations at Helter-Skelter-Hall.

I will suffer the sacred dust again to gather around my dwelling. I will again
nurse my frugal blaze, and trim my decent lamp -- I will once more plant the
pensive yew, the oak o'ershadowing, and the willow gray -- Pensive pleasures
shall again be mine, and those, who love the bustling of the world, shall not,
if they are pinched, want a protector -- Yes, HENRY -- beloved HENRY -- I am
now refixed for life -- My old woman shed a tear at my return -- my cat rubbed,
fondling, her tabby sides against me, and, if it had been possible, my dog
would have spoke my welcome.

Again are you addressed by the dusky gentleman of Sombre Hedges, who is
resolved to play no more the truant.

My bag (and other instruments of my folly) I shall not burn, but I have fixed
it, in the deepest disgrace, upon a peg opposite my study, that it may ever be
saying, or seeming to say unto me -- Oh GABRIEL, GABRIEL, be contented with thy
own hair, and the best authors; though thou were to be tempted by bags of gold
instead of silk --

Adieu, GABRIEL HEWSON.

LETTER CXXVII. Mr. MEDWAY to Colonel CARLISLE.
(Dated two months after his departure from Prudence-Place.)
Dear Colonel,
I HAVE been the constant companion of this charming widow ever since we left
your house. There is something about her that attaches me to her, but no
circumstance so much, as that she has lost her fortune, and buried the fellow,
who deprived her of it, decently. I do not know how it is, but she has got a
stronger hold of my heart than ever your LUCIA had. The plague of it is, I
suspect, she still likes you -- yet I struck a bold stroke yesterday --

Mark it.

"Hush, hush, AUGUSTA," said I, "it is not to be expected that OLLY MEDWAY
should please your eye, after such a fine-formed fellow as CLEMENT CARLISLE,
but he is engaged, you know -- With respect to the Marquis, no noise, child,
about him. He is not worth keeping terms of mourning with -- I despise the
black custom of seeming to lament, when one ought to jump for joy -- Now the
case stands thus: Can you behave well enough to OLLY MEDWAY, not to call him at
every third word, CLEMENT CARLISLE? If you say you don't love the said CLEMENT,
I should hate you: but can you take for a husband a man who loves him as much
as you ought?"

"I believe, for his sake, and Miss De Grey's," replied she, sighing, "I could."

"But what do you sigh for then?"

"P'shaw -- will Mr. MEDWAY comply with my terms?"

"Name them."

"Will he reconduct me to the house of Signora --, at Italy?"

"No noise -- Shall I order a chaise to the door?"

"Yes."

"Hush."

Damn it, CARLISLE, she sighed again. But what a poor reduced rascal I must be!
I like her well enough to take her any way.

"You must excuse," said she, "now and then a sigh -- Even Miss DE GRAY did not
frown at me for that."

Confusion, CARLISLE, a tear, which I caught upon my lip, followed this remark.
But what is a more childish trick still, the water came running from my eyes too.

Willing to get her a thousand miles from Prudence-Place, I am going to order a
chaise.

I know no more than you, what will be the result of it; but I will follow my
humor, were it to lead me to the end of the earth and the water.

I received your two letters, but pray keep your money for other purposes --
There is no occasion to make the woman more uneasy by your damned presents.

Her affairs are now mine: and whether she is ever nearer to me than she is
now, no man shall dare to be her banker but

OLLY MEDWAY.

LETTER CXXVIII. From the Same to the Same.
Rome.
WE are with Signora -- AUGUSTA sighed, for the first six hundred miles of the
journey, every half hour -- the rest of the way, pretty well. -- I have been
with her to all her old friends -- I have trotted after a fair face like a chit
of nineteen -- But she does not sigh above once a week -- She suits my humor
to a hair. I shall certainly have her in a short time -- at least by the hand,
and, if you don't interrupt me, perhaps by the heart. -- Send word when you are
married -- That will be my cue. If you ever come to Rome, I will move with the
Marchioness further still, and if you resolve to pursue me, I will cut your
throat. I did intend to give my money to your LUCIA, but I shall now give it to
my AUGUSTA. Hush -- I Will follow my humor. Hush -- I am a man of few words; and
the Marchioness loves me the better for it. Unless you die, which I don't wish,
I will never return to England. No -- no -- Colonel, let us be good friends at
a distance. No noise.

OLLY MEDWAY.

LETTER CXXIX. Colonel CARLISLE to Mr. MEDWAY.
Prudence-Green.
THEN all may again be well. Your letters charm me. AUGUSTA will every day
become more sensible of MEDWAY's merit, and her good heart will be wholly his.
What a load is now removing from LUCIA and your friend! Felicity seems once
more to be flying toward Prudence-Place -- Sir ANDREW FLIGHT has wisely
decamped: MEDWAY and the Marchioness are in the way I most wish them: the
HEWSONS are got home -- Miss LASCELLES is so far composed to consent to live
with her LUCIA: and Mr. DE GRAY is better than he has been for some time.

What then remains?

Ah, my friend, need you be told?

The greatest blessing of your CLEMENT's life remains.

Tomorrow will LUCIA DE GRAY be mine for ever!

You will not expect me to proceed?

What could I possibly say more? yes, my dear MEDWAY, I will venture to add
farther this one sentence.

However hypocrisy may flourish for a time, even its happiest moments are
clouded, and Truth shall at last prevail.

I am, Dear MEDWAY, Your very affectionate, And obedient, CLEMENT CARLISLE.

FINIS.

