A SHORT Historical Account Of the several Kinds of WORMS Breeding in Human
Bodies: EXTRACTED From the Writings of the most Eminent Authors.

WITH A particular Description of their Symptoms, and the most Approved
Remedies for their Expulsion.

By M. M.

LONDON: Printed by B. Mills, and Sold by J. Baker, and T. Warner, at the
Black-Boy in Paternoster Row. 1716.

A SHORT Historical Account Of the several Kinds of WORMS Breeding in Human
Bodies, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Breeding of Worms in Human Bodies.
THAT our Bodies should become the Prey of Worms, when they are returning to
their Original Dust, might be submitted to without Regret; but to be seized on
before that time, and even upon our very Entrance on Life, that Infant
Innocence should sustain the Fate of the Profane Prometheus, in having their
tender Bowels corroded by these Intestine Vultures, is a Condition exceedingly
deplorable, and yet so very frequent, that it is almost always suspected in
Children on every Disorder, and not unjustly; since, as Platerus observes, few
Persons are free from Worms; and Experience verifies the Observation in the
Dissection of Dead Bodies.

Hippocrates has assured us, That unborn Infants are invaded by them; and
Dolaeus in Dissecting an Infant, which died as soon as born, tells us, he found
a Cluster of Worms in its Bowels.

The Physicians and Philosophers of former Ages, had a very short and easy Way
of Accounting for the Generation of Insects, by supposing them bred of
themselves, out of some putrefying Matter, by the Assistance of Heat or Motion.

But this Account is now justly rejected, as extremely Absurd and Unreasonable,
by those, who have been the least acquainted with the great and surprising
Discoveries of the Modern Philosophers; who, by the Assistance of Microscopes
(an Advantage unknown to former Ages) have found, that the minutest Insects are
furnished with all the Parts that are necessary, not only for Life, but also
for the Propagation of their several Kinds, as perfect as in larger Animals;
and consequently, are not produced at Random; but are the regular Offspring of
Parents of the same Kind, no less than others.

It Is observable, that Nature's wise Author has given such a Propension to
those Creatures, who cannot bring up their Progeny, to lay their Eggs in Places
proper to breed them. Thus Flies commonly drop theirs in dead Bodies, Pustles,
Ulcers, etc. because in such tender Parts their Eggs may lie easy, and find
Warmth sufficient to hatch them; and afterward, Humidity and Food for the
Nourishment of the Animal. An Instance of this is related by Mr. de la Cross,
in his Memoirs, p. 229.

A Dutch Woman had her Leg swollen and glandulous, about a Span from the Knee;
the Chyrurgion, who had it in Cure, to know the Cause of the Disease, took off
this glandulous Body to the Bigness of a Nail, washed it in Brandy, cut it, and
perceived therein a great many little Worms; whereupon, having consulted Mr.
Leeuwenhoeck, he affirmed, they were come from the Eggs, which a Fly had lain
in the mortified Part, as he proved in the following Manner; He put these Worms
into a Box, with a Piece of raw Beef, which was soon consumed by them, as well
as the glandulous Body, wherein they were hatched; He fed them three several
times, and five Days after, viz. July 31, he found his Box empty; but having
looked carefully about the Room, he recovered some of these Worms, that would
eat no more, and were already grown to the length of ones Nail: He put them on
a Paper, covered with a large Glass; and the next Day, in the Morning, he
observed one of these Worms shortened, but increased a third Part in Bulk, so
that it had something of the shape of a Tun: In the Evening, he perceived four
others in the same Posture, which from White became Red.

Aug. 11. The Cods of these Worms were all black, he opened one of them, whence
he took out a perfect Fly, that was yet wet and motionless: He observed, that
besides the Cod, this Insect was wrapped up in a very thin Membrane. He opened
this untimely Fly, and found a great quantity of Eggs in its Body.

Aug. 15. All the Flies enclosed in the Glass were hatched, and at the same
time he perceived other Flies against the Glass-Windows of his Chamber, which
he had supposed to have come from those Worms, which he had not retrieved. In
feeding these Infects, most part died, or fled away: So that, Sept. 7. he had
but Two left, that were probably Male and Female, for they laid 145 Eggs; some
of which he caused to be hatched in less than 24 Hours, by carrying them in his
Pocket, shut up in a Box.

The Learned Baglivi, Physician at Rome, in a Letter to Mr. Andry at Paris,
writes thus concerning the Breeding of Worms. The Beginning and Original of all
Animals and Vegetables is from an Egg; for what else are the Seeds of Plants
but Eggs, in which all the Rudiments of the future Plant are contracted, as it
were, into a short Compendium? And those, by Virtue of the Fermentation of the
Nutritive Juice, by the Elastick Power of the Air, and the double Warmth, one
of the Sun, and the other of the central Warmth of the Earth, the great Mother
of all, are uncovered by little and little; and their Fetters being as it were
loosed, they grow, and arrive in due time to such a Bulk, as great as is
allotted to every sort of Plant by the Laws of Nature.

If all Philosophers and Physicians think thus concerning Vegetables, much more
must they think so of living Creatures, not only of those that are called
Perfect, but of the Imperfect also, which are commonly called Insects. For
besides, that there is the same equal Order in all Things, and that all come
from one Principle, and after a certain general Circuit, end all in one again;
Insects, by an admirable Connection and Construction of Parts, and by a more
noble Exercise of vital Operations, do not only, in no wise, give place to
Plants, but far excel them.

Wherefore, since no Man says that Plants rise from Putrefaction, they ought
not in Reason to deduce the Original of Insects, and other baser Animals from
thence. For it is a shame to Philosophers and Physicians, in this most happy Age
of Sciences, wherein the Causes of Things are illustrated by Experiments, and
solid Precepts of the Mathematics, to ascribe to the fortuitous Chance of
Putrefaction, that which the constant and perpetual Law of Nature, remaining in
its Seeds, rules and directs.

For it is not Putrefaction that produces imperfect living Creatures, but the
Heat and Fermentation of the Things putrefying, that makes fruitful the Seeds
of Things spread all over the World, if I may be allowed so to speak; or
rather, it stirs up, and revives the imperceptible Parts of the future living
Creature in the Egg; and, as it were, inspires 'em with the first Life, in the
same manner with the Heat of the Sun, or that of brooding Hens.

What we have said of Insects in general, may be aptly applied to the Worms
bred in Human Bodies, seeing they are not generated by putrefying Humors; but
the Worms Eggs lying hid in the Intestines, are enlivened, and brought forth by
the same Means.

CHAP. II. Of the several Kinds of Worms bred in Human Bodies.
THESE pernicious Animals differ greatly, not only among themselves, as to
Shape, and other Circumstances; but also in respect of the several Parts of the
Body they possess, and whence they receive their Denomination.

Thus the Cephalic breed in the Head, where they occasion violent Pains,
Distractions, and sometimes contagious Distempers; Sennertus mentions a Person
afflicted with an Headache violent to Distraction; when after seven Days
Continuance, and the Patient almost dead with the Pain, a Worm came out of his
right Nostril, above a Span long, after which he soon recovered.

Mr. Andry says, he knew a Man, who being cured of a Venereal Disease,
complained afterward of an unsufferable Pain in his Head; for which his Skull
was trepan'd, and a little short Worm was found upon the Dura-mater; which
being taken out, the Patient recovered a persect Health.

Such another Case is related by Forestus, only the Worm he speaks of was Black.

Hild-sheim tells of a Person, who voided Thirteen long Worms alive, and Woolly
like a Caterpiller from his Nostrils, Ears and Mouth.

C. Gemma reports of a Matron dying of a Pestilential Fever, whose Head being
opened, there appeared abundance of Worms, both in the Substance of the Brain,
and between the Coverings, and also Swarms of Insects like Bugs.

But the Account which F. Angelinus sent his Friend is wonderful, concerning a
Person who had an Epidemical Fever, and was restless eight Nights; when, upon
his Recovery, he was troubled with an Itching in his right Nostril; and soon
after there came out of it a Worm as long as ones little Finger, its Body thick
and red, its Head black and hard, with two sharp Arms like those of a Scorpion;
six Feet toward the Head, and some small ones toward the Tail, on which it
walked very briskly; it lived four Days without Food.

Kerckingius in his Anatomical Observations, gives us the Figure of an Hairy
horned Worm, which came out of the Nostril of a Woman at Amsterdam, on the 21st
of Sept. 1688. which he kept alive 'till the 3d of October, without giving it
any Food: And which is very Remarkable, it brought forth another Worm before it
died.

A Pestilential Fever raged at Beneventum, and swept off abundance of People;
at length the Physicians opening the Head of one that died of it, found a
little live Worm very short, and all over red; and having tried several Things
to kill it, found nothing effectual but the Decoction of Radishes in Malmsey
Wine, which was no sooner poured on the Worm but it died; after which they
administered the same Remedy to all their Patients, and almost all recovered.

Schenckius also relates, That in the Year 1571. and Epidemical Fever raged in
Ancona, which caused a furious Giddiness, and Death on the third or fourth Day.
All the Physicians of the Place confessed they did not understand the Disease,
and consequently knew not how to cure it. A rich young Man finding a Periodical
Pain beginning in his Head, became apprehensive of being seized with the
Distemper; and being frighted by the ingenuous Acknowledgment of the
Physicians, left the Country, and went to Venice; where calling for a
Consultation of the most Learned Physicians, one of them asserted, that a Worm
in the Brain was the occasion of those Periodical Pains, which were so violent
in the Paroxysm, without disturbing his Reason or Memory, that it seemed as if
his Head had been bored with an Iron.

They administered several Things without Effect, so that he died in three Days
time after his Arrival. They opened his Head, and found on the Right side,
under the Piamater the Head of a Worm, which by Reason of the cold Air,
immediately retired into the Substance of the Brain. They then cut open the
Ventricles of the Brain, and traced out the Worm, which was all over Red, as
long as one's Forefinger; the Head black and pointed, and the Neck Hairy.

Amatus Lusit. took a Worm out of the inner Corner of a Girl's Eye; 'twas half
a Span long, white, and alive when taken out.

Sometimes Worms are found in the Ear, as in a Girl of Ten Years old, who was
afflicted with the Evil, and had a violent Pain in the Right Ear, which
suppurated from time to time, and sometimes she became Deaf. Mr. Andry, after a
fruitless Application of several Remedies, suspected Worms, and applied an
Ointment for that Purpose; whereupon abundance of small Worms came forth, they
were yellow, long, and very slender.

Kerkingius gives an Account of five Worms, which came from a Man's Ear in the
Year 1663. very much like Hog-Lice.

There are Worms which breed under a Crust, that covers the surface of the
Teeth. They are very small, and have a round Head, marked with a black Point,
the other Part of their Body being long and slender. These Worms corrode the
Teeth by degrees, and occasion a Stink, but no violent Pain. They are called
Dentarii.

Even the Liver has been observed to entertain these Insects, so Casper
Bauhinus relates, That in October 1578. several small Worms were found in the
Liver of a Child of two Years of Age, that died of the Smallpox: They were
red, round, somewhat long and soft; it seemed strange to several Physicians,
who were present at the opening: But it may be considered, that there may be
several Accidents, wherein the Gall in the Liver may be so much altered, as to
lose very much of its Bitterness, and thereby permit the Ingendring of Worms.

They sometimes breed in the Heart, occasioning violent Pains, Swoonings and
sudden Death. Thus Sphererius writes, That a Florentine Gentleman discoursing
one Day with a Stranger, in the Great Duke of Tuscany's Court, dropped down
dead, on a sudden; and his Body being opened on Suspicion of Poison, a live
Worm was found in the Heart.

The Pleurisy has been often observed to be occasioned by Worms. Gabucinus
visited a Maid, seized with a Pleurisy, and observing her cold and hot
reciprocally, and in her hot Fits one of her Cheeks very red, the other
continuing pale, suspecting Worms, he prescribed her a Medicine for that
purpose, which, brought away a great Number of Worms, and thereupon the
Pleurisy left her.

Several ancient Men, as Quercitan testifies, defunct, of Pleurisies, had their
Intestines full of large Worms, which he concluded the Cause of that Distemper.

Dr. Loss, in his Observations, relates such a Case of a Youth about Fourteen
Years of Age, of a thin and bilious Constitution, who in a very sharp Winter,
having gotten Cold, was seized with a true Pleurisy, attended with a continual
Fever; a pricking Pain in his lest Breast, reaching to his Throat, a difficulty
in Breathing, a violent Cough, and Spitting of Blood; his Body was by Intervals
cold and hot, with a Redness in his Cheeks, and a great Restlessness. About the
fifth Day of the Disease, being Costive, a Glister of Milk was injected, which
brought away five Worms, which were Teretes; wherefore with some Alteration of
the Medicines, which were before prescribed, the following Powder was exhibited.

and Scord. card. ben. a j Corallin. ij C.C.C. j Rhabarb. 4 Sal Centuar. j Dose
ss.

After which Worms came away daily, in all above Thirty, and he recovered.

Dr. Andry had so remarkable a Case of this sort, that it put him upon Writing
an entire Book on the Subject of Worms. The Case was this, On the 4th of June,
School. a young Man, about Thirty Years of Age, was seized with a Fever, great
Pain in his Side, Spitting of Blood, and Difficulty of Breathing. He began the
Cure by Opening a Vein, and repeated the same the next Day, on the 3d he
sweated, on the 4th he seemed to be much better; but from thence to the 5th he
had a Delirium, which went off the next Morning. The Delirium not being
preceded by the usual Signs, occasioned a Suspicion of Worms, and finding
withal a great many in his Excrements by Stool, he prescribed a purging
Medicine the next Morning (which has been very successful in that Case) an Hour
after the taking it, the Patient found something stir in his Body, which Motion
continued two Hours, and determined in the Issuing forth of a live Worm, or
rather Link of Worms, four Else three Inches in Length, being the Cucurbitini,
which are particularly described, p. 34.

Sometimes we meet with 'em in the Blood, where they obstruct the Orifice in
Bleeding; so a Surgeon at Paris, whilst he was Bleeding a Patient, found the
Blood stop on a sudden; and turning up the Arm to find the Cause, he saw an
horned Worm as long as an Earwig, which burst out with Violence along with the
Blood.

Such another Accident is related by Mr. de la Crose, in his Memoirs, of Mr. du
Puy, a French Physician; who being present at the Bleeding of a Lady, his
Patient, the Blood, after it had sprung out above two Ounces, stopped on a
sudden; and as he was looking for the Cause of it, he perceived an
Heterogeneous Body that stopped the Orifice; whereupon taking the Chirurgion's
Forceps, he drew out a Worm as big as could come out of the Incision.

He accounts for its coming there in the following Manner: The Egg of some
flying Insect had been swallowed by the Patient in her Food, and being
descended into the small Guts, went with the Chile into the Milky Veins,
through all the Pores of the filtrating Glandules, the Heart, Lungs, Aorta,
'till arriving at last to the Extremities or the Fingers, it remained there
among their small Arteries and Veins, and was hatched out by the most
convenient and natural Heat of the Blood and Flesh. Having thus gotten the Life
and Motion of a Worm, it swam for greater Ease and Room into the Arm; and
following still the cherishing Liquor, wherein it was bred, it came at length
to the Incision of the Vein, whence Mr. du Pay extracted it.

They have been often seen in the Urine, and of various Kinds; some like
Hog-Lice, others like Mites in Cheese, some like Leeches, others like
Grass-Hoppers; of which last sort was that voided by Count Mansfield, when he
lay ill of a continual Fever.

Vidius writes of one, who after tedious Pains in the Kidneys, discharged a
small Worm by Urine; its Head was sharp and horned, its Back and Belly broad,
and covered with an hard Shell like a Tortoise, its Color black, but reddish
on the Belly.

Sennertus says, he saw the whole Substance of the Kidneys of a Dog wasted, and
only the outward Skin left, which was full of Worms like Earthworms.

Dr. Turberville, in the Philos. Trans. No. 167. p. 839. gives an Account of a
Gentlewoman, who was much troubled with the Falling Sickness, and discharged by
Urine a great Number of short Worms like Millipedes; two or three Purges were
prescribed her, and still in every Water that was brought the Physician, he
found, Eight, Ten, or more of those Worms; they appeared lively, and full of
Motion, and the Fits continued daily; at last he gave her Oxymel Helleboratum
in Tansy- Water, which wrought well, and was successful; so that she had a
complete Cure.

In the Philos. Trans. there is an Account of one Mr. Thomas Dent, who being
afflicted with Tumors on his Tongue, applied himself to one Mrs. French at
Leicester; who (in the Presence of Two Aldermen of that Town, Mr. Gibbs,
Chaplain to the Earl of Derby, and others) pierced the Parts tumify'd with a
Lancet, and drew some Blood; and soon after with a small Spatula, and another
Instrument, wherewith she opened the Orifices, she picked out five or six Worms
at a time. She plainly showed them to the Spectators, as they came out of the
Flesh; they were all alive, and moved their Heads, somewhat lesser than
ordinary Maggots: In less than eight Days she took out of the Tongue more than
an hundred Worms, almost all of the same Bigness, except two very large ones,
which she said were of a Cancerous Production. She took more than Thirty out of
the Gums, which last Operation was her ordinary Practice.

Mr. de la Crose in his Memoirs, p. 223. gives an Account of one Sarah
Hastings, who followed the same Practice at Holm, in Huntingdon-shire; and had
attained to so great Skill, as to discern at first Sight, whether any Person
had Worms great or small in his Gums, Tongue or Face: These Worms she affirmed
to be the Cause of Rottenness of the Teeth, of Pustules, and many other
Putrefactions; she drew them out of any Part in three or four Minutes, with a
Goose-Quill, cut like a Pen; she pierced the Part so Dexterously, that the Pain
was almost insensible; then she threw the extracted Worms into a Glass of clean
Water, where they appeared to have a round and red Head, the rest of the Body
being white. He there relates several extraordinary Cures of that Sort, too
large to insert here.

But of all the Parts, the Stomach and Guts are the most usually infested with
Worms, especially in Children: However, before we enter upon a particular
Description of those, which properly belong to these Parts, it may be
convenient to entertain the Reader with some Histories of very strange Animals,
excluded the Stomach by Vomiting. The Accounts are taken out of the Philos.
Transactions.

The first is Dr. Lister's, of a Baker at York, who in March 1681/2. vomited up
a Worm of a very strange Figure; I found it ( says the Doctor) in the Blood,
which came up with it; having caused it to be washed, for the more careful
Examination of it; much of the Blood being Clods of a kind of skinny and fleshy
Substance. Of this kind of Blood there was about two Pounds saved in the
Washing, and this odd Animal amongst it: It was of a dark, green Color, like
an Horse-Leech, and spotted, not unlike some of them. I could not perceive,
when I found it, any Life or Motion in it. The Girl, who washed it, had beaten
off almost a Fin, and part of one of the Forks of the Tail, and burst its
Belly; yet it was regularly and curiously shaped in all its Members. The Man
imagined he drank it the Summer before in Pond-Water, whereof he was used to
drink after sore Labor in his Calling. This is certain, he had about his
Stomach, and right Side, a most exquisite and tormenting Pain for at least four
Months, which many times threw him into Horrors and Chilness, Ague like; and
indeed, when he vomited this up, he was the sickest Man I ever saw, not to die:
He also voided Blood by Stool several Days.

I am at a loss where to place this Animal, it not being like any thing I ever
saw in Nature. It was about four Inches long, and in the thickest Part three
Inches about; it had three Fins on a side, all near the Head, and all of them
were thick and fleshy; but the forked Tail was finny and transparent, and to be
extended. It was placed Horrizantally, not as that of most (if not all) small
Fish; and even Newts and Tadpoles, or Frogs in Disguise, in which Particular it
differs from all, as well as in the Fleshiness of the Fins.

Besides this odd Animal, I found the Head of another of a different Shape; but
the like dark green Color.

I Am apt to think, we often eat and drink what is alive; and it is certain, some
Things will live on in our Stomachs in spite of Concoction, as Gut-Worms bred
in us, and perhaps in some Children before they are born. And yet I am of the
Mind, that what was accidentally swallowed by us alive, and that shall have the
Power to live on within us (especially if it be young and tender) and yet
growing, may have its Shape and designed Form so monstrously perverted, as to
appear to us quite another Thing than naturally it is; and this I take to be
the Case of this odd Creature, which might have been the Spawn, or Embrio of a
Toad or Newt.

The skinny Lumps of Blood vomited up with it, I think, may be easily
accounted, for. For this Spawn, or Embrio of a Toad or Newt, might well envenom
the Stomach or Gut, in which Part or Wrinckle soever it chanced to rest or
stick first, and cause an Inflammation there, and have it swelled or closed up
within a Tumor of its own making; which in Process of Time might gather to
this Bigness, and at length bursting in Pieces, come up together.

Familiar Instances of this Nature we see in Fruits or Wens, which Insects
raise upon Vegetables; who by natural Instinct know how to envenom a Plant, and
compendiously provide both Food and Housing for their Young. So far Dr. Lister.

The next is, No. 117. p. 395. Of a Girl at Sheffield, about eight Months old,
who was seized with violent Fits of Vomiting, which held her about a Week; and
Mr. Fisher being sent for, and happening to say, that Wormwood was good for the
Stomach, whilst he was gone to fetch some Things proper for that Occasion, they
in the mean Time offered the Child some Wormwood Ale, which she took so
greedily, that she swallowed down a Pint of it; and at his Return, she vomited
up in his Presence three Hexapodes (i. e. Worms with six Feet) all very active
and nimble; and the Child soon recovered. Mr. Fisher carried them the same Day
to Mr. Jessop (who sent the Account) they killed one of them in trying
Experiments upon it, but gave each of the other Two, the Head of a shining
Atricapella (a Bird with black Feathers on its Head) which in about five Week's
Time they eat up, Bones, Feathers and all, except the Extremities of the
Feathers and Beaks. Then they gave them a Piece of Larus (a Sea-Cob) but that
it seems did not agree so well with them, for they died within two Days after.

The last Account is Dr. Lister's, the Son of one not far from Rippon, about 9
Years of Age, in Feb. 1674. was afflicted with a great Pain in his Stomach, and
continual Vomitings; a Powder was given him, wherein was a small Quantity of
Mercurius Dulcis; he thereupon vomited up several strange Worms, two of which
were brought the Doctor at York, one dead, the other alive, 'till he put it
into Spirit of Wine, to preserve it in its true Shape. These Worms were very
Caterpillars, with fourteen Legs, viz. six small pointed, the eight middle
Stumps, and the two hind ones Claspers. They were something more than an Inch
long, of the thickness of a Duck's-Quill, thin hair'd, or rather naked, with
brown Annuli, and black Heads; the same for kind, that is often seen on Plants.
These, no doubt, would in due time, if the Place had not hindered, have shrunk
into Chrysalis's, and changed into Moths; as also those mentioned by Mr.
Jessop, in the preceding History, would have changed into Beetles.

The proper Inhabitants of these dark Regions, are of four Sorts; viz. The
Teres, the Cucurbitini, the Taenia, and the Ascarides.

1. Of the Teres, or common long and round Worm, Dr. Tyson has given a very
curious Anatomical Description in the Philos. Trans. No. 147. p. 154. from
whence I shall borrow a few Observations. Though we are gravelled (says the
Doctor) in Assigning how these Sorts of Worms should come first into the Body;
yet being once there, nothing is more plain, than that they are propagated by
an univocal Generation; there being in this Sort, so perfect a Distinction or
Sexes, Male and Female; and the Organs of each so curiously contrived, so
conspicuous and plain, as show how solicitous Nature is in preserving, and
propagating the meanest Species.

This Worm, which Children are usually troubled with, is usually a Foot long,
the Male generally less than the Female; its thickness about that of a Wheat
Straw, or Goose-Quill, at both Extremes, they grow narrow, the Mouth consists
of three Lips, the Anus of a transverse Slit, a little before the extreme Point
of the Tail.

In Cutting through the Muscles under the Skin, there issued out a copious Ichor,
which is naturally discharged by some Pores in the Skin, and makes a Covering
to the Body, which is often cast off, and observed as a mucous Matter in the
Stools of those, who are troubled with them.

In Opening the Cornua Vteri of the Female Worm, they were found turgid with a
Milky Juice, a little of which being placed on a small Microscope, was found to
be nothing else but an infinite Number of Eggs, though to the naked Eye, it
appeared only as a fluid Body.

By Comparing that small Quantity, I did observe, and in which I could
distinguish so many Eggs, with the whole Quantity contained, in both the
Cornua, I cannot guess there could be fewer than Ten Thousand in each Female
Worm, which sufficiently accounts for that prodigious Number of Worms,
sometimes observed to be bred in Animal Bodies; and were it not that the
greatest Part of the Litter of this Worm is usually carried forth by the
Faeces, it could not be avoided, but we should be devoured by such a
multiparous Enemy, bred in our own Bowels; of whose pernicious Effects, some of
the following Instances are fatal Proofs.

Dr. Preston, in the Philos. Trans. p. 326. No. 224. relates, That in
Dissecting a Boy of Nine Years of Age, who died suddenly, being seized with a
Fit of Vomiting; besides, a great many other Disorders of all the Bowels, they
found a Worm in the Stomach about nine Inches long, and a Line and a half broad.

Dr. James Burrows reports, in the Philos. Trans. No. 264. p. 598. That in May
or June 1700. a Laboring Man of middle Age at Stanton, seven Miles from Bury,
had for many Days together so inordinate an Appetite, that he eat up an
ordinary Leg of Veal roasted at a Meal. He would eat Sow-Thistles, and diverse
other Herbs, as greedily, during the time his Bulimia lasted, as the Beasts
that use such Food; and all he could get was little enough to satisfy his
Hunger, 'till at length he voided diverse Worms, as long, and as big about as a
Tobacco-Pipe; after which, his Appetite declined by degrees, 'till it came to
the common Rate of others.

We have also an Account, in the same Place, of a Dissection performed by the
Sieur Soye, in an Hospital, on the Body of a Servant Maid, about twenty six
Years of Age, who was from time to time seized with a Bloody Flux. He found the
Colon, and part of the Mesentery ulcerated, the Mouth of which Ulcer was so
large, that one might easily thrust in his Fist at it, and 'twas stopped with a
Clew of Worms greater than it.

Dr. Loss, in his Book of Observations writes, That the Son of Sir Lewis Dive,
a Child of a good Constitution of Body, after an Indisposition of two or three
Days, attended with a dry Cough, and a restless Condition, especially in the
Night, with continual Cryings, was at length seized with violent and continual
Convulsions, whereof in three Days he died. In cutting open the Body to
discover the Cause, they were soon satisfied, when they found the Duodenum
quite eaten through by a Teres, or long Worm, which was taken out alive.

Dr. Willis, in his Book of Fevers tells us, He knew one in an acute Fever, who
was molested with continual Swoonings, 'till he vomited up a long round Worm;
and thereupon his Swoonings left him.

Examples of this Kind are very numerous, and it is no wonder to meet with this
Species in their proper Soil; but the Account which Dr. Lister has published in
the Philos. Trans. is very surprising; viz. In April 1673. a Chyrurgion at York
brought him about twenty Worms, which he had just taken out of an ulcerated
Ancle of a Girl about eight Years of Age; she had been in great Misery some
Months, and had been sent up to London, where she was touched and dressed for
the Evil; sometime after her Return, her Pain continuing, a young Puppy was
opened, and applied to the Sore. The Chyrurgion, who took off the Puppy, found
it to his great Surprise full of Worms, at least sixty in Number, of the
Species of the Teretes, which Children familiarly void from the Guts. They were
between three and four Inches long, all about an equal Bigness, as of one
Brood, something thicker than a Duck's-Quill, very sharp at both Ends; stiff,
and exactly round, and yet could move, and twist themselves visibly enough. The
Leg was sound, all but the Ancle, which was vastly swelled, and the Girl
otherwise hearty, and well colored.

2. The Taenia, or Tape Worm, so called from its Resemblance to a Tape or
Ribbon, is broad and flat, and white; its Thinness renders it diaphanous, its
Length is very uncertain, because its Substance being very soft and tender; it
usually breaks off when it comes away, so that it is very rare to find it
entire; the whole is probably the Length of all the Bowels, that is, seven
times the Length of the Man; but lying very much folded together, takes up but
little Room; it usually comes away Piecemeal, seven or eight Foot long,
sometimes nineteen, twenty three, thirty; forty five Foot of it has been found
broke off at a time; it grows gradually smaller toward the Tail, which
terminates in a very small and long Part like an Hair; in its widest Part, its
Breadth is about that of one's Forefinger.

Spigelius tells us of a Woman, who voided at several times several Pieces of
this Wormy, whereof two were extraordinary long. The first that came away, was
two Yards and a half long, containing the Tail Part of the Worm, but wanting
the extreme Part of the Tail, perhaps unknowingly broke off by the Patient
before, part of it hanging out of the Anus; her Sister drew it forth so far,
but tired with its prodigious Length, she broke it off with her Nails; this
Piece, in that Part where it was fresh broke off, was as broad as ones little
Finger, and became narrower gradually as it approached the Tail; its Substance
was soft, throughout white, bloodless like a Membrane of the Guts. Another
Piece that came away about a Year after, was eight Foot long, and the breadth
of ones Middle-Finger; the Joints were larger and thicker, the Incisures wider,
and the Sides more jagged.

Fabricius gives a Description of the like Sort of Worm, which a Woman of
twenty Years of Age voided, upon taking a Purging Medicine, which was twenty
Spans long; one of the Extremes was as slender as a Thread, the other broad.

The same Author relates the following History.

A Lady at Lausanne, in France, very subject in her Youth to Palpitations of
the Heart; and after a sort of Purge she used to take, she voided sometimes
very long Pieces of Worms. After she was married, and began to have Children,
her Palpitations left her, only she was troubled with a Lienteria; during
which, she voided downwards several Pieces of Worms; some six, some nine,
others ten Spans long. Every time she voided these Pieces, she felt the Worms
break in her Bowels; one Day, after taking her Remedy, she voided a Piece of
Worm seven Else long; and a few Days after, another Piece, without perceiving
as before that any thing broke; from which time she became perfectly well. All
the Pieces put together, would make above twenty Else.

Olaus Borrhicius tells us, That a Patient of his has voided eight hundred Foot
of this Worm in several Pieces; and that hitherto, he has not met with the
Head; for the Patient declared, that always in the Voiding, he perceived it
break off.

A Sucking-Child (by the Relation of Casp. Wolphius) brought forth a broad
Worm, at least three Else long.

3. The Cucurbitinj, or spurious jointed Tape Worm; Vallisnerius, an Italian
Physician, has published a very large and accurate Description of this Species
of Gut-Worms, the Result of his indefatigable Industry, from whom I have taken
this Account following. Anno 1706. visiting a Jewess, twenty five Years of Age,
three Months gone with Child (who, like many of that Nation, was incident to
broad Worms, which in her third or fourth Month, usually occasioned her to
Miscarry; but when she was not with Child, they never gave her any Disturbance.
She often voided, by Vomiting and Stool, many of these Worms, as well singly as
linked together, in the manner of a Chain:) She had just discharged a very long
Chain of these Worms, besides several singly. He separated without much Pains,
many of these from each other in that Part which was largest; but observed,
they were very strictly joined together.

Every one of these consisted of a Membranous, soft, white, shining, flexible
and slippery Matter; the upper Part smaller than the lower.

In the upper Side of each there arise two very small Prominences, which, when
pressed with the Fingers, feel like little Horns, or crooked Thorns, and are
conspicuous by the Microscope.

By these they adhere firmly to the hinder Part of the preceding Worm, in whose
postick Part are Cavities fitted to receive these Prominences.

The lateral Parts of these Worms are rugged, and out of their Middle rises a
kind of Tet, whose Center is perforated with a very conspicuous Opening, and
pours out sometimes a quantity of Chyle, sometimes clear Water, sometimes a
yellow Serum.

Their Mouth is in the narrower and upper Side, between the two Protuberances;
If it be objected, that if the Mouth be in this Part, they cannot receive
Nourishment by it adhering so closely to the preceding Worm. It Is answered,
they being fed with a fluid Matter Chyle, which penetrating every where, easily
enters that Chink where the Mouth is, since the middle Part is not so close as
the Jettings. Besides, that when the Worms adhere so close, it is to preserve
themselves when in danger of Expulsion; at other times they are more closely
connected.

These flat Worms, when single, very much resemble in Bigness and Shape the
Seed of a Gourd, which in Latin is called Cucurbita, whence they are called
Cucurbitini; and being very numerous, and adhering to each other so firmly in
the manner aforesaid, do form a Chain of a surprising Length, which has been
mistaken by several very eminent Authors for an entire Worm; in particular, the
Ingenious Dr. Tyson, and Mr. Andry of France, the former having given a very
particular and large Account of it in the Philos. Trans. No. 146. p. 113.

Mr. Andry, in Examining these Worms very diligently with a Microscope, after
cutting them open, perceived them full of small globular Bodies, resembling
that Cluster of Eggs, usually found in Carps: These Eggs are so numerous, that
the Quantity taken up with the Point of a Pin, though no bigger than a Grain of
Dust, would appear, under a Microscope, an incredible Pile of small Eggs; which
sufficiently accounts for the vast Number of these Insects.

They are found in Persons of all Ages.

Dr. George Francus saw a Child one Year three Months old, in the Year 1686. in
good Health, and Fleshy; who, though it sucked, used to drink Beer and Water,
after he had voided several small Worms upwards and downwards; at length,
brought away a Chain of Cucurbitini three Else long; which would have been much
longer, if the frighted Nurse had not broke it off, instead of drawing it all
out. Miscel. Curios.

Wagner relates of a Soldier, who was freed of such a Chain of Worms six Else
long; and soon after of another longer than the former.

Examples of these Worms are innumerable, though many Authors have set them down
so confusedly, that it is not possible to distinguish whether they are the
genuine Taenia, described in the second Article, which is but one entire Worm,
or this spurious Sort, consisting of a Chain of Cucurbitini.

Dr. Tyson mentions a Person in London, who has voided vast Quantities of these
Worms for several Years together; but in several Pieces, two, three, four, six,
or more Yards long; and says, he had a Piece by him of a great Length, voided
by a young Man, upon the Use of an Emulsion of the cold Seeds. It was twenty
four Foot long, and consisted of five hundred and seven Joints or Worms, in
Thickness about that of an Half-Crown. The Person dragged it from himself, not
without frightful Apprehensions, that Guts, and all were coming out.

These Chains of Worms lie convoluted in several Places, and are sometimes as
long as all the Guts, and sometimes vastly exceed that Length.

These Worms have been found sometimes included in a Bag; which has been
mistaken by several for a large Worm. The Jewess, beforementioned, upon a Time
imagining a large Piece of her Bowels coming from her, though she felt no Pain,
being frighted at it, she sent for her Physician, who was himself at first
surpised at it. This Substance was like a doubled Rowler, close in every Part,
composed of a thick, smooth, shining, transparent and mucilaginous Membrane,
two Thumbs broad, above a Yard long; it was hollow, and contained within it a
numberless Quantity of Cucurbitini, not linked together; but every one
separate, their Bigness was various, they were all alive, and moved freely.

This Bag seems to be formed mostly of a concressible Humor in the Intestines,
after the same manner as Polypus's in the Heart and Arteries, and is increased
by a glewy Matter, cast out by these Worms from their lateral Orifices.

The Teretes also, or long and round Worms, are sometimes found involved in
such a Bag.

4. The last Species of Worms, usually found in the Intestines, are the
Ascarides; they are very small and round, full of Vivacity and Motion. Their
Habitation is in the lowest Part of the Intestines, where they provoke a
continual Itching; and occasion sometimes most direful Symptoms. Dr. Curteis,
in his Treatise on the Recovery of Health, gives us the following Example.

A Boy, about twelve Years of Age, was so extremely afflicted with such
formidable Symptoms, as were imputed to the Effect of Witchcraft: What gave
Birth to so general a Conjecture, were the extraordinary Convulsions, Rolling,
Screaming, violent Beating himself, etc. by frequent Paroxisms; all which soon
disappeared, and the Mystery was at an end, upon his liberally taking the
Aethiops, Mineral and Purging; and thereupon voiding an almost incredible
Number of Worms of different Sizes, and especially of these Ascarides;
whereupon the Patient was rescued from his imagined Witchcraft, and a very poor
old Woman from worse than Hanging, who was suspected of being the Occasion.

Several Examples of this Sort of Worms might be produced out of Authors; but
this is sufficient for a Specimen.

CHAP. III. The Signs of Worms from Mr. Andry.
THE Signs of Worms are Common or Particular.

The common Signs show the Genius, and the Particular the Species; that is,
when the Common meet, we say, there are Worms; and when we find particular
Signs, we may say, not only that there are Worms in general, but that those
Worms are of such a particular Sort.

The common Signs are fiery sparkling Eyes, livid Cheeks, cold Sweats in the
Nights, Abundance of Spittle drivelling from the Mouth in Sleep, great Drowth
in the Daytime, Dryness of the Tongue and Lips, a Stinking-Breath, Grating of
the Teeth in Sleep, a constant Looseness, with whitish Excrements, frothy
Urine, sometimes White, sometimes Obscure, but for the most part Thick and
Muddy.

Frequent Vomitings, and Convulsion-Fits are sometimes Signs of Worms; that is,
when the Vomitings throw up nothing but what has been eaten, and the
Convulsions are without Foaming at the Mouth.

Sometimes they rise in their Sleep, and move their Lips as if they were
eating: To know if these Symptoms are from Worms, observe, if they are eased by
Abstinence; for they that have Worms, cannot fast without finding themselves
tormented; not by Hunger, for many times they have no Appetite; but by
Twitchings and Tearings, caused by the various Motions of the Worms in search
of Food.

A dry Cough is very often a Sign of Worms; by this Forestus knew, that a
little Girl, who had been six Months ill of a Quartan-Ague, was troubled with
Worms; he prescribed her Medicines accordingly, which brought away five Worms,
and her Ague thereupon left her.

A Stinking-Breath is very often a Sign; so Brassavolus, visiting an old Man
eighty Years of Age, who seemed to lie a dying, knew by his Breath that he was
troubled with Worms; he thereupon directed him some Vermifuges, which scoured
away five hundred Worms, and cured him.

Raging Hunger many times proceeds from Worms, when it is accompanied with
extreme Leanness, though the Party eat much; thus a Boy, about twelve Years of
Age ( says Forestus) had kept his Bed for several Months, and was dried almost
to a Skeleton, without feeling any other Illness than a slight Pain in his
Belly, near his Navel: The Physician was at first a little at a stand to find
out the Distemper, the Cause of which he could not imagine; for the Child eat
very well, though to no Purpose; his Urine was of a good Consistency and Color,
though somewhat Crude and Waterish; but the Pain of his Belly, together with his
extraordinary Hunger, caused him to suspect Worms: Therefore, for several Days,
twice a Day, he ordered a Glass of the Decoction of Hyssop, Marjoram, Fennel,
Fumitory, Centaury and Wormwood, with Oxymel, Syrup of Fumitory, and Honey of
Roses. This Medicine, every time he took it, caused him to void a great Number
of Worms, and perfectly cured him.

The particular Signs differ according to the Species of Worms.

The Signs of Long and Round Worms, are Tensions of the Belly, with Hardness
and Pain, Itching of the Nose, Corrosion of the Guts, Hiccoughs, a Palpitation
in Sleep, Waking with sudden Startings, or Shrieks, an unequal Pulse,
intermitting Fevers, of which the Party will have three or four Fits, without
any certain Order; the Eyes hollow, and sometimes red; the Cheeks sometimes
glowing red, and sometimes of a Lead Color; sometimes they want a Stomach, and
vomit after Eating; they have Fevers, accompanied with Cold in the extreme
Parts of the Body: These Signs never meet altogether, but sometimes one,
sometimes another.

The Signs of Ascarides are a continual Itching in the Fundament, causing
Faintings, and sometimes Swoonings; the Itching proceeds from the Motion of
these Worms, and the quick Sense of the Part where they lie.

The Signs of the Taenia, or Tape Worm, are Lassitude, and Faintings after
Meat; frequent Numbness and Dullness in the Daytime, which cause an Heaviness
above the Navel, though these may proceed from other Causes.

The Signs of the Cucurbitini are little Bodies, like the Seeds of Cucumers or
Melons, found in the Excrements; I suppose they are the young Brood not yet
linked together. Both Hippocrates and Aristotle mention these as certain Signs;
to which may be added shifting Pains of the Liver, accompanied with great
Fluxes of Spittle; Pains in the Stomach succeed those of the Liver by
Intervals, and sometimes attended with tedious Pains in the Back.

Some Observations from Baglivi.
When Children are observed to rub their Bellies very much, it is a Sign of
Worms; especially if they are often gripped.

Very often it happens, that Persons are suddenly, and without any apparent
Cause or Signs of any other Distemper, reduced to the extremest Danger, like
the Assault of an Apoplexy, with Coldness of the extreme Parts, a creeping
Pulse (which is most commonly a Sign of Worms, as is also the Hiccough)
Swooning, and sometimes a sudden Madness; in such a Case we ought to suspect
Worms, and to prescribe accordingly.

Bleeding by Drops, in continual Fevers, from the Nostrils, is sometimes a Sign
of Worms, as very Judicious Authors have asserted.

Whenever there is the least Cause to suspect Worms, by no Means defer the
Administration of Remedies; for they often occasion sudden Death to grown
Persons, as well as to Children or Infants.

Whatever Distemper Children are troubled with, Worms, are always to be
suspected; for either they immediately increase the Disease, or by Reason of
its Continuance, the Seeds of Worms are hatched into Life, and fill the Bowels
with that pestiferous Vermin.

CHAP. IV. Of the Remedies for the Destroying of Worms.
And they are,

1. EXternal Applications, as Fomentations, Cataplasms, Ointments, Plasters,
all which are not a little beneficial; For as Dr. Fuller observes, Worms do so
securely burrow, and entrench themselves in the Foldings and Cavities of the
Bowels, as to escape and elude the Impression of Purging, or other Medicines;
for which Reason outward Applications are very useful to disturb them from
their lurking Places, and so expose them to the Attacks of Internals, which may
destroy, and expel them.

2. Internal Administrations, which by a specific Quality, disturb and kill
them; the Forms of these are various as Liquors, Syrups, Powders, Bolusses,
Pills, etc. whereof some are Purgative, others not; in the Use of which Dr.
Andry recommends the following Observations.

That the best Time to take them is in the Wain of the Moon; he confesses, he
looked upon this at first as an idle Fancy, but that his Experience convinced
him of his Mistake.

That in the Administration of Remedies for the Worms, there ought to be due
Intermissions; lest being too vigorously attacked, they should retire into the
Cavity of the Gut-Colon, where they would be very much out of the reach of
Medicines.

As for Glisters, they are observed to be very useful, and they are of two
general Kinds; Sweet and Bitter.

The Latter are of great Efficacy against the Ascarides; which (as Dr. Fuller
observes) are a small, but an almost invincible Nation; for though you should
wash away all by one Glister, yet a new and numberless Offspring will quickly
discover themselves, being produced of the Seed of the former, deposited in the
Rectum; so that 'twill not be sufficient to have expelled the Parents, unless
their Posterity be also vigorously prosecuted and destroyed; this may be done,
if after the Ascarides disappear, we do not presently desist, but repeat these
bitter Injections for some time, once in two or three Days at first, and
afterward once a Week.

But for the Teretes, or long and round Worms, these bitter Injections are by
no Means proper, so long as they are brisk, lively and agile, and inclined to
get up into the Stomach, or small Guts, lest being driven upon those Parts,
they should occasion a great deal of Mischief there; but after the Use of other
Medicines, which have made them Sickly, and thrust them down, the Exhibition of
such Glisters may be very seasonable and successful.

The sweet Glisters made of Milk, Sugar, etc. are convenient before the Use of
the Bibber ones, when the Worms are lurking in the small Guts, where, by
gnawing and tearing the Bowels, they excite violent Pains in the Belly; for the
Worms take to the Milk, being pleasant and agreeable to them, and so leave off
preying on the Bowels, and are also enticed out of their Burrows, and following
the agreeable Liquor, are disposed to come away by Stool.

A View of some of the most celebrated Remedies.
Dr. Simon Pauli's Worm Powder, which expelled a great Number of the
Cucurbitini.

C. C. rad filic. a ij Corallin. sem sancton. a j Myrrh lig. Al. fl. Sulph. a
ss. Nitri. iij M. f. Pulvis dos. j.

Dr. Nic. Andry's Powder, which brought away that large Chain of Cucurbitini,
and cured the Patient of a Pleurisy, mentioned Page 16.

Diagryd. Crem. Tart. Diaphor. Miner. Rhab. rad. filicis faemin. a ss Tanacet
fol. and fl. p. i. Cort. rad Mori. j M. f. Pulv. in jusculo pingui mane, jejuno
Ventriculo exhibendus.

Electuarium Vermifugum.

Succ. Menth. and Trifol. fibrin a ij Rutae and Marrhubij albi a j coq. leviter
cum Sacch. alb. lb j and despumentur tum add Corallin. and s. Tanacet ac
sancton a ss Cinnam and Cardamom min. a ij Cort. Citr. condit. lb ss and f.
Elect.

Scharff's Essence for Worms, which expelled a Worm of a very great Thickness.

Herb. Abrotan, Scordij Tanacet a Mj. Rad dictam filicis Zedoar. a lb ss fl
Centuar Mj. Persicor p. ij Corallin iss. s. Sancton. Coriand. a vj Bacc. Junip.
ij Myrrh. Theriac. a ss. Concis. Contus. infunde in S. q. Sp. Juniper rectif.
Tinctum quod est separetur; Novus Sp. affundatur; conjunctis liquoribus addendo
Sp. C. C. sale volatili impregnati ij. f. Essentia.

A Fomentation by Dr. Fuller.

Rad Aristoloch. rot. j Herb. Abs. vulg. Abrotan. faem. Tanacet Sabin. a Mj.
Helleborast. Mss. Pulp. Colocynth. Aloes. a j f Dec. in aq lb iij ad lb ij col.
pro fotu open stupharum Abdominis regioni calide usurpando.

After using this Stupe or Fomentation, the following Pultice may be laid on
the Navel.

There. Ven. Farin. Lupin. a iij sem Sancton iss hier pier. ss Ol. Absinth.
Still. gt. xvj succ. Tanacet. as. F. Cataplasma

Or this Plaster.

Aloes ij Ol. Abs. chym. gt. viij-cum fell. bov. as. F. Massa quae super Alutam
ducta Vmbilico applicetur.

A Bitter Glister to expel and kill the Ascarides, from Dr. Fuller.

Rad. serp. V. j Colocynth. j Herb Tanacet Sabinae a Mss. f. decoctio in aq. F.
qs. col. vj add Ol. Hyperic. ss. Ol. Abs. Chym. ss. sp. Hier picr. ss. M.

The same may be used for the other Sorts of Worms, but then others made of
Milk ought to preceed, for Reasons beforementioned. Dr. Fuller gives the
following for this Purpose.

Lact. Vaccin. rec. vj Theriac Januens. ij M.

The Honorable Mr. Boil, in his Treatise of Specific Medicines, commends
Small Beer frequently shaken with good Quicksilver, as an excellent Remedy to
kill Worms; the Quicksilver communicating its Virtue, without changing the
Color or Taste of the Liquor.

The Aethiops Minerable has been generally obser'd to have very happy Effects;
Dr. Harris, in his Treatise of Children's Diseases, relates an extraordinary
Cure performed by that Medicine, as follows.

J. P. A Boy of Thirteen Years of Age, was so pined away with a Consumption by
Worms, as it proved, that he was more like a Skelaton, than a living Person;
his Eyes hollow, his Nose sharp, and his Bones only covered with Skin; he
became senseless, and so weak, that he could scarce crawl from one Side of the
Room to the other with the Swiftness of a Snail; all his Excrements by Urine
and Stool, fell involuntarily from him. By taking the foresaid Medicine twice a
Day for some Time, and gently Purging every fourth Day without Rhubarb, he
voided a great many Worms, and recovered perfectly well.

Such, whose Curiosity leads them to enquire more fully after Instances of this
Nature, may consult the elaborate Works of Dr. Nicholas Andry, and Dr. Daniel
Clerc, who have treated very largely on this Subject.

AN APPENDIX Concerning the first Original of Worms.
IT has been already observed in the preceding Treatise, that even unborn
Infants are not always free from Worms, which Vallisneri, an Italian Physician,
endeavors to Account for in the following Manner.

The Chyle (says he) appointed for the Nourishment of the Infant, is first
prepared in the Stomach of the Mother, and rendered more perfect and pure by
the Digestions and Glands of the Bowels. Now, since the Intestines are the
general Seat of Worms, and the Fetus is for several Months nourished by this
Chyle, the Seeds of Worms, which are in the Mother's Bowels, mixing with the
Flower of the Chyle, are, by the usual Passages, carried along to the
Membranes, which involve the Fetus: By this Means it may be easily guessed how
the Infant may receive this Verminous Progeny into its own Bowels. But if it
happen, that the Mother be either entirely free, or having Worms, they should
not happen to spawn during the Time of her being pregnant, then, indeed, the
Infant will not be infested with them in this Manner; but if this Infant should
happen to be suckl'd by another Woman, who has Worms, her Milk may furnish the
Child with a Colony of these Insects, since Milk differs not from Chyle, and is
conveyed from the Bowels to the Breasts.

But whence (it may be demanded) have this Mother or Nurse these Worms, which
they thus communicate to the Child? It Is answered, they have also received them
in the Manner aforesaid; and that they have been so conveyed down through all
Ages, from the Beginning of the World, and the first Parents of Mankind.

And, indeed, since the Seeds of Things, none excepted, were created at the
Beginning of the World, all Sorts of Insects, part of folded insert page
featuring images of worms all repeated on the next image page type of worm Fig.
1.
worm eggs Fig. 2.
type of tapeworm Fig. 3.
part of worm Fig. 4.
section of worm with point facing down Fig. 5.
section of worm with point facing up Fig. 6.
section of worm Fig. 7.
section of worm Fig. 8.
ten smaller worms Fig. 9.
three hookworms Fig. 10.
may vie with Man himself for the Antiquity of their Original; and forasmuch as
those Worms, which inhabit the Bowels of Mankind, are never found elsewhere; it
must be inferred, that their Seeds were originally implanted in the Body of the
first Man, or Woman.

At this Rate, 'twill be objected, all Persons must necessarily be possessed
with these Insects, or else their Succession might fail.

It Is supposed, that the Seeds or Eggs of Worms may lie a long Time within
every Man's Body; and these, sometime or other, as Occasion offers, be produced
into Life, which, without such Occasion, would have remained unchanged: Thus,
in a certain ancient Person, the Eggs of the Tape-Worm were hatched not 'till
after the fifty fifth Year of his Age, at which Time he began to be molested
with that kind of Worm; either because the Juices of his Bowels had never
before gotten that Quality, which was requisite to vivify those Eggs; or
because the Place was not rightly disposed for that Purpose. But those that in
this Man were so slowly excluded, may be much sooner in another, even before
his Birth, or in his Childhood, or Youth, according as Circumstances may favor
their Production.

Again, in many Persons they may be never animated; because there may be always
wanting a suitable Disposition of the Humors, or Place to produce them, just
as the Eggs of the Vermis Africanus; for Example, though they may be lodged in
the Skin or Flesh of every Many, yet this Insect troubles none but Africans,
Indians and Arabians; not the Inhabitants of the Northern Climates, because the
Heat of Africa, or India, promotes the Vivification of these Eggs, which cannot
be animated in colder Countries; as on the other hand the Seeds of the Taenia,
by Reason of the Moisture of the Climate, are rendered fruitful amongst the
Hollanders, which in India or Africa, because of the extreme Dryness of those
Regions, are unprolifick.

This Notion is confirmed by the Observation of Hemmersam, who speaking of the
Vermis Africanus, says, it is worth noting, that those, who only sail by Guiney,
feel an Itching in the Skin, chiefly in that of the Arms and Legs; but most
commonly in the Thighs: This Itching certainly indicates the beginning Motion
of the Vermis Africanus, excited by the Heat of that Country.

Every one knows, how much Heat, and the Fermentation of Juices, conduces to
the Production of Animals.

Neither is the seeming Uselessness of so many Seeds, consequent upon this
Notion, any just Objection, when the same may be said of many other Seeds,
whereof the much greater Part is often lost; and that Loss not to be accounted
of, if we consider their infinite Number.

Nor, lastly, ought we to object the often long Continuance of these Eggs in
the Body, before they are vivify'd; for as much as the Seeds of several Plants
kept many Years, and afterward committed to the Earth, do germinate as readily
as if they had been fresh; and the Ova of Women advanced in Years, are often
equally prolifick with those of younger Women.

These Worms, then (may the Objector further argue) were created by God in the
Body of Adam, either before his Fall, or afterward; but if we consider Man as
he was first created, perfectly Innocent, it seems not probable, that the just
and good God would implant such foul Vermin in his immaculate Body. And
besides, as that State of Innocence was entirely free from all manner of
Diseases, and possessed of a perfect Happiness, undisturbed by any Disorder of
Body, it were impossible he should have any Worms in his Bowels; which we find,
by daily Experience, are the Causes of innumerable Disorders; and even of Death
it self.

Nor can it easily be imagined, how this filthy Insect, hatched, and nourished
in Putrefaction, could suit with that sweet manner of Living, directed by the
Light of pure Reason, void of all Intemperance, and its Consequences; which
produce that putrid Humor, proper to receive, and produce the Eggs of Worms.

To have Recourse to the Divine Prescience in this Case, viz. That God
foreseeing the Apostasy of his Creature, prepared for his Punishment, would be
very unreasonable, since the Suffering should by no means preceed the Offense.

If on the other hand we say, that these Worms were formed after the Alteration
of his Nature, by his Disobedience to the Divine Command, the Difficulty will
be yet greater; for then 'twill follow, that God began a new Creation, which is
contrary to the Tenor of the sacred Scriptures, which inform us that God,
before he created Man, produced all other Creatures; not excepting Insects.

To remove these Objections, it is asserted, That before Man's Formation, all
other Animals, Plants, etc. were created; and that Man was last formed out of
the Mud.

That in this Mud, those Worms, which were a little before created, were
implanted, and so entered in the Composition of his Body, being probably
designed by Providence, whilst he continued Innocent, to be very useful to him,
and to contribute to the Perfection of his Body; and, should he after lapse
from his Integrity, become a Punishment to him.

Now, though this may seem strange, that Worms should any way conduce to the
Benefit and Perfection of our Bodies, yet let us consider.

That those Machines, which are self-moving, as Watches, etc. are always
esteemed more Perfect and Surprising, the more they comprehend other Machines,
equally Curious, within their Structure. And is not the World accounted more
Perfect, by containing such an infinite Variety of Animals, great and small,
honorable and base, as they are called; if any of its Countries prove
destitute of Inhabitants, are they not accounted unhappy, and despicable? Why
should not, then, our little World be esteemed more complete, by being
furnished with its proper Inhabitants?

Nor would it be any Injury to our first Parent, to suppose his Body the
Receptacle of various and wonderful Insects, which, whilst he continued
Innocent, were so far from being Pernicious to him, that they rendered him more
Perfect, and redounded to his Honor. They lived quietly, and amicably with
him, and sed on the Superfluities of indigested Food only; they exceeded not
their just Limits, they abstained from preying on the Bowels, and did no Injury
to the Walls of their Enclosures, but gently licking and cleansing their
Mansions; they gratefully requited the Benefit of their Reception: Moreover, if
the Fibers of the Bowels were at any time become torpid, or oppressed with too
copious, or excrementitious Juices, which might be detrimental to the Body;
these might excite them to the brisker Discharge of their Functions; in short,
they might be no ways Noxious, but very Beneficial.

But this Felicity of Adam proved but short; for by Rebelling against his
Maker, the Natures of all Things were soon changed; and then these Worms also
became the Ministers of Divine Vengeance, as well as Lions, Tigers, Serpents,
and other destructive Animals.

FINIS.
BOOKS printed for J. BAKER, at the Black-Boy in Paternoster Row.
THE History of the Reign of King Charles the First, containing a more
particular and impartial Account of the Rebellion and civil Wars, than has yet
been published; Collected from Private Memoirs and Authentic Papers, and
compared with Clarendon, Rushworth, etc. Written in French by Monsieur De
Larrey, Counselor of the Court and Embassies, and Historiographer to the King
of Prussia. In Two Volumes.

Puffendorf's Law of Nature and Nations: Abridg'd from the Original. In which,
The Author's entire Treatise, ( de Officio Hominis and Civis) that was by
himself designed as the Epitome of his larger Work, is taken. The whole
compared with the respective last Editions of Mr. Barbeyrac's French
Translations, and illustrated with his Notes. By J. Spavan, M. A. In Two
Volumes.

News from the Dead, In a Letter from Tom. Brown, the Poet. Giving an Account
of the Arrival and Behavior of the Earl of Derwentwater, Oxborough, Gascoigne,
Parson Paul, and Justice Hall, in the Elysium Shades. In which are, Some
Learned Notes on their several Speeches.


