THE PARENT's ASSISTANT; OR, STORIES FOR CHILDREN. PART. II.......VOL. II.
CONTAINING, THE BIRTHDAY PRESENT. OLD POZ. THE MIMIC.


THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON, IN ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD. 1796.

THE BIRTHDAY PRESENT.
"MAMMA," said Rosamond, after a long silence, "do you know, what I have been
thinking of all this time?"

"No, my dear. -- What?"

"Why, mamma, about my cousin Bell's birthday; do you know what day it is?"

"No, I don't remember."

"Dear mother! don't you remember its the 22d of December; and her birthday is
the day after to - morrow? -- Don't you recollect now? But you never remember
about birth-days, mamma: that was just what I was thinking of, that you never
remember my sister Laura's birthday, or -- or -- or mine, mamma."

"What do you mean, my dear? I remember your birthday perfectly well."

"Indeed! but you never keep it though."

"What do you mean by keeping your birthday?"

"Oh, mamma, you know very well -- as Bell's birthday is kept. -- In the first
place there is a great dinner."

"And can Bell eat more upon her birthday than upon any other day?"

"No; nor I should not mind about the dinner, except the mince pies. But Bell
has a great many nice things; I don't mean nice eatable things, but nice new
playthings given to her always on her birthday; and every body drinks her
health, and she is so happy."

"But stay, Rosamond, how you jumble things together! Is it every body's
drinking her health that makes her so happy; or the new playthings, or the nice
mince pies? I can easily believe that she is happy whilst she is eating a mince
pie, or whilst she is playing; but how does every body's drinking her health at
dinner make her happy?"

Rosamond paused, and then said she did not know. "But," added she, "the nice
new playthings, mother!"

"But why the nice new playthings? Did you like them only because they were
new?"

"Not only -- I do not like playthings only because they are new, but Bell does
I believe -- for that puts me in mind -- Do you know, mother, she had a great
drawer full of old playthings that she never used, and she said that they were
good for nothing because they were old; but I thought many of them were good
for a great deal more than the new ones. -- Now you shall be judge, mamma; I Will
tell you all that was in the drawer."

"Nay, Rosamond, thank you, not just now; I have not time to listen to you."

"Well then, mamma, the day after tomorrow I can show you the drawer: I want
you to be judge very much, because I am sure I was in the right. -- And,
mother," added Rosamond, stopping her as she was going out of the room, "will
you -- not not now, but when you have time -- will you tell me why you never keep
my birthday -- why you never make any difference between that day and any
other day?"

"And will you, Rosamond -- not now, but when you have time to think about it
-- tell me why I should make any difference between your birthday and any
other day?"

Rosamond thought -- but she could not find out any reason: besides, she
suddenly recollected that she had not time to think any longer, for there was a
certain work basket to be finished, which she was making for her cousin Bell,
as a present upon her birthday. The work was at a stand for want of some
filigree paper, and as her mother was going out she asked her to take her with
her, that she might buy some. -- Her sister Laura went with them.

"Sister," said Rosamond, as they were walking along, "what have you done with
your half-guinea?"

"I have it in my pocket."

"Dear! you will keep it for ever in your pocket: you know my godmother when
she gave it to you said you would keep it longer than I should keep mine; and I
know what she thought by her look at the time. -- I heard her say something to
my mother."

"Yes," said Laura, smiling, "she whispered so loud that I could not help
hearing her too: she said I was a little miser."

"But did not you hear her say that I was very generous? and she will see that
she was not mistaken. -- I hope she will be by when I give my basket to Bell --
will not it be beautiful? -- there is to be a wreath of myrtle, you know, round
the handle, and a frost ground, and then the medallions -- "

"Stay," interrupted her sister; for Rosamond, anticipating the glories of her
work-basket, talked and walked so fast, that she had passed, without perceiving
it, the shop where the filigree paper was to be bought. -- They turned back.
Now it happened that the shop was the corner house of a street, and one of the
windows looked out into a narrow lane: a coach full of ladies stopped at the
door just before they went in, so that no one had time immediately to think of
Rosamond and her filigree paper, and she went to the window, where she saw that
her sister Laura was looking earnestly at something that was passing in the
lane.

Opposite to the window, at the door of a poor looking house, there was sitting
a little girl weaving lace. Her bobbins moved as quick as lightning and she
never once looked up from her work.

"Is not she very industrious?" said Laura; "and very honest too," added she in
a minute afterward; for just then, a baker with a basket of rolls on his head
passed, and by accident one of the rolls fell close to the little girl: she
took it up eagerly, looked at it as if she was very hungry, then put aside her
work, and ran after the baker to return it to him.

Whilst she was gone, a footman in a livery laced with silver, who belonged to
the coach that stood at the shop door, as he was lounging with one of his
companions, chanced to spy the weaving pillow, which she had left upon a stone
before the door. To divert himself (for idle people do mischief often to divert
themselves) he took up the pillow, and entangled all the bobbins. The little
girl came back out of breath to her work; but what was her suprize and sorrow
to find it spoiled: she twisted and untwisted, placed and replaced the bobbins,
whilst the footman stood laughing at her distress. She got up gently, and was
retiring into the house, when the silver-laced footman stopped her, saying
insolently -- "Sit still, child."

"I must go to my mother, sir," said the child; "besides, you have spoiled all
my lace -- I cannot stay."

"Cannot you," said the brutal footman, snatching her weaving pillow again;
"I Will teach you to complain of me." And he broke off, one after another, all
the bobbins, put them in his pocket, rolled her weaving pillow down the dirty
lane, then jumped up behind his mistress's coach, and was out of sight in an
instant.

"Poor girl!" exclaimed Rosamond, no longer able to restrain her indignation at
this injustice: "Poor little girl!"

At this instant her mother said to Rosamond -- "Come now, my dear, if you want
this filigree paper buy it."

"Yes, madam," said Rosamond; and the idea of what her godmother and her cousin
Bell would think of her generosity, rushed again upon her imagination. All her
feelings of pity were immediately suppressed. Satisfied with bestowing another
exclamation upon the "Poor little girl," she went to spend her half-guinea upon
her filigree basket. In the mean time she that was called the "little miser,"
beckoned to the poor girl, and opening the window said, pointing to the
cushion, "Is it quite spoiled?"

"Quite! quite spoiled! and I cannot, nor mother neither, buy another: and I
cannot do any thing else for my bread." -- A few, but very few, tears fell as
she said this.

"How much would another cost?" said Laura.

"Oh, a great -- great deal."

"More than that?" said Laura, holding up her half-guinea.

"Oh, no."

"Then you can buy another with that," said Laura, dropping the halfguinea into
her hand, and she shut the window before the child could find words to thank
her; but not before she saw a look of joy and gratitude, which gave Laura more
pleasure probably than all the praise which could have been bestowed upon her
generosity.

Late on the morning of her cousin's birth day, Rosamond finished her
work-basket. The carriage was at the door -- Laura came running to call her;
her father's voice was heard at the same instant; so she was obliged to go down
with her basket but half wrapped up in silver paper, a circumstance at which
she was a good deal disconcerted; for the pleasure of surprising Bell would be
utterly lost if one bit of the filigree should peep out before the proper time.
As the carriage went on, Rosamond pulled the paper to one side and to the
other, and by each of the four corners.

"It will never do, my dear," said her father, who had been watching her
operations; "I am afraid you will never make a sheet of paper cover a box which
is twice as large as itself."

"It is not a box, father," said Rosamond, a little peevishly; "its a basket."

"Let us look at this basket," said he, taking it out of her unwilling hands;
for she knew of what frail materials it was made, and she dreaded its coming to
pieces under her father's examination.

He took hold of the handle rather roughly, and starting off the coach seat,
she cried --

"Oh, sir! father! sir! you will spoil it indeed!" said she with increased
vehemence, when, after drawing aside the veil of silver paper, she saw him
grasp the myrtle-wreathed handle.

"Indeed, sir, you will spoil the poor handle."

"But what is the use of the poor handle," said her father, "if we are not to
take hold of it? And pray," continued he, turning the basket round with his
finger and thumb, rather in a disrespectful manner -- "pray is this the thing
you have been about all this week? I have seen you all this week dabbling with
paste and rags, I could not conceive what you were about -- Is this the thing?"

"Yes, sir -- You think then that I have wasted my time, because the basket is
of no use: but then it is for a present for my cousin Bell."

"Your cousin Bell will be very much obliged to you for a present that is of no
use; you had better have given her the purple jar."

"Oh, father! I thought you had forgotten that -- it was two years ago; I Am not
so silly now. But Bell will like the basket I know, though it is of no use."

"Then you think Bell is sillier now, than you were two years ago. -- Well,
perhaps that is true; but how comes it, Rosamond, now that you are so wise,
that you are fond of such a silly person?"

" I, father?" said Rosamond, hesitating; "I don't think I am very fond of her."

"I did not say very fond."

"Well, but I don't think I am at all fond of her."

"But you have spent a whole week in making this thing for her."

"Yes, and all my half-guinea besides."

"Yet you think her silly, and you are not fond of her at all; and you say you
know this thing will be of no use to her."

"But it is her birthday, sir; and I am sure she will expect something, and
every body else will give her something."

"Then your reasons for giving are because she expects you to give her
something. And will you, or can you, or should you always give, merely because
others expect, or because somebody else gives?"

"Always! -- no, not always."

"Oh, only on birth-days."

Rosamond, laughing, "Now you are making a joke of me, papa, I see; but I
thought you liked that people should be generous -- my godmother said that she
did."

"So do I, full as well as your godmother; but we have not yet quite settled
what it is to be generous."

"Why, is it not generous to make presents?" said Rosamond.

"That is a question which it would take up a great deal of time to answer. --
But, for instance, to make a present of a thing that you know can be of no use,
to a person you neither love nor esteem, because it is her birthday, and
because every body gives her something, and because she expects something, and
because your godmother says she likes that people should be generous, seems to
me, my dear Rosamond, to be, since I must say it, rather more like folly than
generosity."

Rosamond looked down upon the basket, and was silent.

"Then I am a fool! am I?" said she, looking up at last.

"Because you have made one mistake? -- No. If you have sense enough to see
your own mistakes, and can afterward avoid them, you will never be a fool."

Here the carriage stopped, and Rosamond recollected that the basket was
uncovered.

Now we must observe, that Rosamond's father had not been too severe upon Bell
when he called her a silly girl. -- From her infancy she had been humoured; and
at eight years old she had the misfortune to be a spoiled child: she was idle,
fretful and selfish, so that nothing could make her happy. On her birthday she
expected, however, to be perfectly happy. Every body in the house tried to
please her, and they succeeded so well, that between breakfast and dinner she
had only six fits of crying. The cause of five of these fits no one could
discover; but the last, and most lamentable, was occasioned by a disappointment
about a worked muslin frock. Her mother had promised her a new frock, and
accordingly at dressingtime her maid brought it to her, exclaiming -- "See here
miss! what your mamma has sent you on your birthday -- Here Is a frock fit for
a queen -- if it had but lace round the cuffs."

"And why has not it lace round the cuffs? mamma said it should."

"Yes, but mistress was disappointed about the lace; it is not come home."

"Not come home, indeed! and didn't they know it was my birthday? But then I
say I will not wear it without the lace -- I cannot wear it without the lace -- and
I will not."

The lace, however, could not be had; and Bell at length submitted to let the
frock be put on. "Come, Miss Bell, dry your eyes," said the maid who educated
her; "dry your eyes, and I Will tell you something that will please you."

"What, then?" said the child, pouting and sobbing.

"Why -- but you must not tell that I told you."

"No -- but if I am asked?"

"Why, if you are asked, you must tell the truth to be sure. -- So I Will hold my
tongue, miss."

"Nay, tell me though, and I Will never tell -- if I am asked."

"Well, then," said the maid, "your cousin Rosamond is come, and has brought
you the most beautifullest thing you ever saw in your life; but you are not to
know any thing about it till after dinner, because she wants to surprise you;
and mistress has put it in her wardrobe till after dinner."

"Till after dinner!" repeated Bell, impatiently; "I cannot wait till then, I
must see it this minute."

The maid refused her several times, till Bell burst into another fit of
crying, and the maid, fearing that her mistress would be angry with her, if
Bell's eyes were red at dinnertime, consented to show her the basket.

"How pretty! -- But let me have it in my own hands." said Bell as the maid
held the basket up out of her reach.

"Oh no, you must not touch it; for if you should spoil it what would become of
me?"

"Become of you, indeed!" exclaimed the spoiled child, who never considered any
thing but her own immediate gratification -- "Become of you, indeed! what
signifies that -- I shall not spoil it; and I will have it in my own hands. -- If
you don't hold it down for me directly, I Will tell that you showed it to me."

"Then you will not snatch it?"

"No, no, I will not indeed," said Bell; but she had learned from her maid a total
disregard of truth. -- She snatched the basket the moment it was within her
reach; a struggle ensued, in which the handle and lid were torn off, and one of
the medallions crushed inwards, before the little fury returned to her senses.
Calmed at this sight, the next question was, how she should conceal the
mischief which she had done. After many attempts the handle and lid were
replaced, the basket was put exactly in the same spot in which it had stood
before, and the maid charged the child " to look as if nothing was the matter."

We hope that both children and parents will here pause for a moment to
reflect. -- The habits of tyranny, meanness, and falsehood, which children
acquire from living with bad servants, are scarcely ever conquered in the whole
course of their future lives.

After shutting up the basket they left the room, and in the adjoining passage
they found a poor girl waiting with a small parcel in her hand.

"What Is your business?" said the maid.

"I have brought home the lace, madam, that was bespoke for the young lady."

"Oh, you have, have you, at last?" said Bell; "and pray why didn't you bring
it sooner?"

The girl was going to answer, but the maid interrupted her, saying -- "Come,
come, none of your excuses; you are a little idle good for nothing thing, to
disappoint Miss Bell upon her birthday. -- But now you have brought it, let us
look at it." The little girl gave the lace without reply, and the maid desired
her to go about her business, and not to expect to be paid; for that her
mistress could not see any body, because she was in a room full of company.

"May I call again, madam, this afternoon?" said the child, timidly.

"Lord bless my stars!" replied the maid, "what makes people so poor, I
wonders! I wish mistress would buy her lace at the warehouse, as I told her,
and not of these folks. -- Call again! yes, to be sure -- I believe you would call,
call, call twenty times for twopence.

However ungraciously the permission to call again was granted, it was received
with gratitude: the little girl departed with a cheerful countenance: and Bell
teized her maid till she got her to sew the long wished for lace upon her cuffs.

Unfortunate Bell! -- All dinnertime passed, and people were so hungry, so
busy, or so stupid, that not an eye observed her favorite piece of finery.
Till at length she was no longer able to conceal her impatience, and turning to
Laura, who sat next to her, she said -- "You have no lace upon your cuffs; look
how beautiful mine is! -- Is not it? Don't you wish your mamma could afford to
give you some like it? -- But you cannot get any if she would, for this was made
on purpose for me on my birthday, and nobody can get a bit more any where, if
they would give the world for it."

"But cannot the person who made it," said Laura, "make any more like it?"

"No, no, no!" cried Bell; for she had already learned, either from her maid or
her mother, the mean pride which values things not for being really pretty or
useful, but for being such as nobody else can procure.

"Nobody can get any like it, I say," repeated Bell; "Nobody in all London can
make it but one person, and that person will never make a bit for any body but
me, I am sure -- mamma will not let her if I ask her not."

"Very well," said Laura, coolly, "I do not want any of it; you need not be so
violent: I assure you that I don't want any of it."

"Yes, but you do though," said Bell, more angrily.

"No, indeed," said Laura, smiling.

"You do in the bottom of your heart; but you say you don't to plague me, I
know," cried Bell, swelling with disappointed vanity. -- "It is pretty for all
that, and it cost a great deal of money too, and nobody shall have any like it
if they cried their eyes out."

Laura received this sentence in silence -- Rosamond smiled. And at her smile
the ill-suppressed rage of the spoiled child burst forth into the seventh and
loudest fit of crying which had been heard upon her birthday.

"What Is the matter, my pet?" cried her mother; "Come to me, and tell me what is
the matter."

Bell ran roaring to her mother; but no otherwise explained the cause of her
sorrow than by tearing the fine lace, with frantic gestures, from her cuffs,
and throwing the fragments into her mother's lap.

"Oh! the lace, child! -- are you mad?" said her mother, catching hold of both
her hands. "Your beautiful lace, my dear love -- do you know how much it cost?"

"I don't care how much it cost -- it is not beautiful, and I Will have none of
it," replied Bell, sobbing -- "for it is not beautiful."

"But it is beautiful," retorted her mother; "I chose the pattern myself. --
Who has put it into your head, child, to dislike it? -- Was it Nancy?"

"No, not Nancy, but them, mamma," said Bell, pointing to Laura and Rosamond.

"Oh fie! don't point," said her mother, putting down her stubborn finger; "nor
say them, like Nancy; I am sure you misunderstood -- Miss Laura, I am sure, did
not mean any such thing."

"No, madam; and I did not say any such thing that I recollect," said Laura,
gently.

"Oh no, indeed!" cried Rosamond, warmly rising in her sister's defense. But no
defense or explanation was to be heard, for every body had now gathered round
Bell to dry her tears, and to comfort her for the mischief she had done to her
own cuffs.

They succeeded so well, that in about a quarter of an hour the young lady's
eyes, and the reddened arches over her eyebrows came to their natural color;
and the business being thus happily hushed up, the mother, as a reward to her
daughter for her good humor, begged that Rosamond would now be so good as to
produce her "charming present."

Rosamond, followed by all the company, amongst whom to her great joy was her
godmother, proceeded to the dressing room.

"Now I am sure," thought she, "Bell will be surprised, and my godmother will
see she was right about my generosity."

The doors of the wardrobe were opened with due ceremony, and the filigree
basket appeared in all its glory.

"Well, this is a charming present indeed!" said the godmother, who was one of
the company; " My Rosamond knows how to make presents." And as she spoke she
took hold of the basket, to lift it down to the admiring audience. Scarcely had
she touched it when lo! the myrtle wreath, the medallions, all dropped -- the
basket fell to the ground, and only the handle remained in her hand.

All eyes were fixed upon the wreck. Exclamations of sorrow were heard in
various tones; and "Who can have done this?" was all that Rosamond could say.
Bell stood in sullen silence, which she obstinately preserved in the midst of
the enquiries which were made about the disaster. At length the servants were
summoned, and amongst them Nancy, Miss Bell's maid and governess: she affected
much surprise when she saw what had befallen the basket, and declared that she
knew nothing of the matter, but that she had seen her mistress in the morning
put it quite safe into the wardrobe; and that, for her part, she had never
touched it, or thought of touching it, in her born days -- "Nor Miss Bell
neither, ma'am, I can answer for her; for she never knew of its being there,
because I never so much as mentioned it to her, that there was such a thing in
the house, because I knew Miss Rosamond wanted to surprise her with the secret
-- so I never mentioned a sentence of it -- Did I, Miss Bell?"

Bell, putting on the deceitful look which her maid had taught her, answered
boldly, No; but she had hold of Rosamond's hand, and at the instant she uttered
this falsehood she squeezed it terribly.

"Why do you squeeze my hand so?" said Rosamond, in a low voice; "What are you
afraid of?"

"Afraid of!" cried Bell, turning angrily; "I Am not afraid of any thing -- I Have
nothing to be afraid about."

"Nay, I did not say you had," whispered Rosamond; "But only if you did by
accident -- You know what I mean -- I should not be angry if you did -- Only
say so."

"I say I did not!" cried Bell, furiously; "Mamma! -- Mamma! -- Nancy! my
cousin Rosamond will not believe me! that is very hard -- It Is very rude! and I
will not bear it -- I will not."

"Don't be angry, love -- don't;" said the maid.

"Nobody suspects you, darling;" said her mother. -- "But she has too much
sensibility. -- Don't cry, love, nobody suspected you."

"But you know," continued she, turning to the maid, "somebody must have done
this, and I must know how it was done; Miss Rosamond's charming present must
not be spoiled in this way, in my house, without my taking proper notice of it.
-- I assure you I am very angry about it, Rosamond."

Rosamond did not rejoice in her anger, and had nearly made a sad mistake, by
speaking loud her thoughts -- "I was very foolish -- " she began and stopped.

"Ma'am," cried the maid, suddenly, "I Will venture to say I know who did it."

"Who?" said every one eagerly.

"Who?" said Bell, trembling.

"Why, Miss, don't you recollect that little girl with the lace, that we saw
peeping about in the passage: I Am sure she must have done it, for here she was
by herself half an hour or more, and not another creature has been in
mistress's dressing room, to my certain knowledge, since morning. Those sort of
people have so much curiosity, I Am sure she must have been meddling with it;"
added the maid.

"Oh yes, that is the thing," said the mistress, decidedly. -- "Well, Miss
Rosamond, for your comfort, she shall never come into my house again."

"Oh, that would not comfort me at all," said Rosamond; "besides, we are not
sure that she did it; and if -- " A single knock at the door was heard at this
instant: it was the little girl, who came to be paid for her lace.

"Call her in," said the lady of the house; "let us see her directly."

The maid, who was afraid that the girl's innocence would appear if she were
produced, hesitated; but upon her mistress's repeating her commands, she was
forced to obey.

The child came in with a look of simplicity; but when she saw the room full of
company she was a little abashed. Rosamond and Laura looked at her, and at one
another with surprise; for it was the same little girl whom they had seen
weaving lace.

"Is not it she?" whispered Rosa mond to her sister.

"Yes it is; but hush," said Laura, "she does not know us. -- Don't say a word,
let us hear what she will say." Laura got behind the rest of the company as she
spoke, so that the little girl could not see her.

"Vastly well!" said Bell's mother; "I am waiting to see how long you will have
the assurance to stand there with that innocent look. Did you ever see that
basket before?"

"Yes; ma'am;" said the girl.

"Yes, ma'am," cried the maid, "and what else do you know about it? -- You had
better confess it at once, and Mistress perhaps will say no more about it."

"Yes, do confess it;" added Bell, earnestly.

"Confess what, madam?" said the little girl; "I never touched the basket,
madam."

"You never touched it; but you confess," interrupted Bell's mother, that you
did see it before -- And pray how came you to see it? you must have opened my
wardrobe."

"No, indeed, madam," said the little girl; "but I was waiting in the passage,
ma'am, and this door was partly open; and looking at the maid, you know, I
could not help seeing it."

"Why, how could you see it through the doors of my wardrobe?" rejoined the
lady.

The maid, frightened, pulled the little girl by the sleeve.

"Answer me," said the lady, "where did you see this basket?"

Another stronger pull.

"I saw it, madam, in her hands," looking at the maid; "and -- "

"Well, and what became of it afterward?"

"Ma'am," hesitating, "Miss pulled, and by accident -- I believe, I saw, ma'am
-- Miss, you know what I saw."

"I do not know -- I do not know: and if I did -- you had no business there --
and mamma will not believe you, I am sure."

But every body else did, and their eyes were fixed upon Bell in a manner which
made her feel rather ashamed.

"What do you all look at me so for? -- Why do you all look so? -- And am I to
be shamed upon my birthday?" cried she, bursting into a roar of passion; "And
all for this nasty thing!" added she, pushing away the remains of the basket,
and looking angrily at Rosamond.

"Bell; Bell! Oh fie! fie! now I am ashamed of you -- that is quite rude to your
cousin," said her mother, who was more shocked at her daughter's want of
politeness than at her falsehood. -"Take her away, Nancy, till she has done
crying;" added she to the maid, who accordingly carried off her pupil.

Rosamond, during this scene, especially at the moment when her present was
pushed away with such disdain, had been making reflections upon the nature of
true generosity. A smile from her father, who stood by, a silent spectator of
the catastrophe of the filigree basket, gave rise to these reflections; nor
were they entirely dissipated by the condolence of the rest of the company, nor
even by the praises of her godmother, who to console her said -- 'Well, my dear
Rosamond, I admire your generous spirit. You know I prophesied that your
half-guinea would be gone the soonest -- Did I not, Laura?" said she, appealing
in a sarcastic tone to where she thought Laura was. -- "Where is Laura? I don't
see her."

Laura came forward.

"You are too prudent to throw away your money like your sister; your
half-guinea, I Will answer for it, is snug in your pocket -- Is it not?"

"No, madam;" answered she, in a low voice. But low as the voice was, the poor
little lace-girl heard it; and now for the first time, fixing her eyes upon
Laura, recollected her benefactress.

"Oh, that is the young lady!" she exclaimed, in a tone of joyful gratitude --
"The good! -- good young lady, who gave me the half-guinea, and would not stay
to be thanked for it -- but I will thank her now."

"The half-guinea, Laura!" said her godmother -- "What is all this?"

"I Will tell you, madam, if you please;" said the little girl.

It was not in expectation of being praised for it, that Laura had been
generous, and therefore every body was really touched with the history of the
weaving-pillow; and whilst they praised, felt a certain degree of respect,
which is not always felt by those who pour forth eulogiums. Respect is not an
improper word, even applied to a child of Laura's age; for let the age or
situation of the person be what it may, they command respect who deserve it.

"Ah, madam!" said Rosamond to her godmother, "now you see -- you see she is
not a little miser: I Am sure that is better than wasting half a guinea upon a
filigree basket -- Is it not, ma'am?" said she, with an eagerness which showed
that she had forgotten all her own misfortunes in sympathy with her sister. --
"This is being really generous, father, is it not?"

"Yes, Rosamond," said her father, and he kissed her -- "this is being really
generous. It is not only by giving away money that we can show generosity, it
is by giving up to others any thing that we like ourselves: and therefore,"
added he, smiling, "it is really generous of you to give your sister the thing
you like best of all others."

"The thing I like the best of all others, father," said Rosamond, half
pleased, half vexed; "What is that I wonder? -- You don't mean praise, do you,
sir?"

"Nay, you must decide that, Rosamond."

"Why, sir," said she, ingenuously, "perhaps it was ONCE the thing I liked
best; but the pleasure I have just felt, makes me like something else better."

OLD POZ.
LUCY, daughter to the Justice. Mrs. BUSTLE, Landlady of the Saracen's Head.
JUSTICE HEADSTRONG. OLD MAN. WILLIAM, a Servant.
SCENE I.
The house of Justice Headstrong -- a hall. Lucy watering some myrtles -- a
Servant behind the scenes is heard to say -- -- I Tell you my master is not up
-- you cannot see him, so go about your business, I say.

Lucy. Who are you speaking to William? -- Who Is that?


Will. Only an old man, miss, with a complaint for my master.


Lucy. Oh then don't send him away -- don't send him away.


Will. But master has not had his chocolate, ma'am. He will not see any body ever
before he drinks his chocolate, you know, ma'am.


Lucy. But let the old man then come in here -- perhaps he can wait a little
while -- call him.

Exit Servant. (Lucy sings, and goes on watering her myrtles -- the Servant
shows in the old man.)
Will. You cannot see my master this hour, but miss will let you stay here.


Lucy (aside.) Poor old man, how he trembles as he walks. (aloud) Sit down, sit
down, my father will see you soon; pray sit down.

(He hesitates, she pushes a chair toward him.)
Lucy. Pray sit down.

(He sits down.)
Old M. You are very good miss, very good.

(Lucy goes to her myrtles again.)
Lucy. Ah! I Am afraid this poor myrtle is quite dead -- quite dead.

(The old man sighs, and she turns round.)
Lucy. (aside.) I wonder what can make him sigh so! -- (Aloud) My father will not
make you wait long.


Old M. Oh ma'am, as long as he pleases -- I Am in no haste, no haste -- its
only a small matter.


Lucy. But does a small matter make you sigh so?


Old M. Ah miss, because, though it is a small matter in itself, it is not a
small matter to me; (sighing again;) it was my all, and I Have lost it.


Lucy. What do you mean? What have you lost?


Old M. Why, miss -- but I will not trouble you about it.


Lucy. But it will not trouble me, at all -- I mean, I wish to hear it -- so tell
it me.


Old M. Why, miss, I slept last night at the inn here, in town -- the Saracen's
head --


Lucy (interrupts him.) Hark, there is my father coming down stairs; follow me
-- you may tell me your story as we go along.


Old M. I slept at the Saracen's head, miss, and --

Exit talking.
JUSTICE HEADSTRONG'S STUDY.
(He appears in his nightgown and cap, with his gouty foot upon a stool -- a
table and chocolate beside him -- Lucy is leaning on the arm of his chair.)
Just. Well, well, my darling, presently -- I Will see him presently.


Lucy. Whilst you are drinking your chocolate, papa?


Just. No, no, no -- I never see any body till I have done my chocolate,
darling. (He tastes his chocolate.) There Is no sugar in this, child.


Lucy. Yes, indeed, papa.


Just. No child -- there is no sugar I tell you -- that is poz!


Lucy. Oh, but, papa, I assure you I put in two lumps myself.


Just. There Is no sugar, I say -- why will you contradict me, child, forever --
there is no sugar, I say.


(Lucy leans over him playfully, and with his tea-spoon pulls out two lumps of
sugar.) Lucy. What Is this, papa?


Just. Pshaw! pshaw! pshaw! it is not melted child -- it is the same as no
sugar. Oh my foot, girl! my foot -- you kill me -- go, go, I Am busy -- I Have
business to do -- go and send William to me; do you hear, love!


Lucy. And the old man, papa?


Just. What old man? I tell you what, I Have been plagued ever since I was awake,
and before I was awake, about that old man. If he cannot wait, let him go about
his business -- don't you know, child, I never see any body till I Have drank my
chocolate -- and I never will, if it was a duke, that is poz! Why it has but
just struck twelve; if he cannot wait, he can go about his business, cannot he?


Lucy. Oh, sir, he can wait. It was not he who was impatient: (she comes back
playfully) it was only I, papa, don't be angry.


Just. Well -- well, well; (finishing his cup of chocolate, and pushing the
dish away) and at any rate there was not sugar enough -- send William, send
William, child, and I Will finish my own business, and then --

Exit Lucy, dancing -- "And then! -- "and then!" JUSTICE alone. Oh this foot of
mine (twinges) -- oh this foot: Aye, if Dr. Sparerib could cure one of the
gout, then, indeed, I should think something of him -- but, as to my leaving
off my bottle of port, its nonsense, its all nonsense, I cannot do it -- I
cannot, and I will not, for all the Dr. Spareribs in Christendom, that is poz.


Enter WILLIAM. Just. William -- oh! aye -- hey -- what answer, pray, did you
bring from the Saracen's Head? -- did you see Mrs. Bustle herself, as I bid you?


Will. Yes, sir, I saw the landlady herself -- she said she would come up
immediately, sir.


Just. Ah that is well -- immediately?


Will. Yes, sir, and I hear her voice below now.


Just. Oh show her up, show Mrs. Bustle in.


Enter Mrs. BUSTLE, the landlady of the Saracen's Head. Land. Good Morrow to
your worship! -- I Am glad to see your worship look so purely -- I came up with
all peed (taking breath,) our pie is in the oven -- that was what you sent for
me about, I take it.


Just. True -- true -- sit down good Mrs. Bustle, pray --


Land. Oh your worship's always very good (settling her apron;) I came up just
as I was, only threw my shawl over me -- I thought your worship would excuse --
I Am quite as it were rejoiced to see your worship look so purely, and to find
you up so hearty --


Just. Oh I Am very hearty (coughing) always hearty, thank God for it -- I hope
to see many Christmas doings yet, Mrs. Bustle -- and so our pie is in the oven,
I think you say?


Land. In the oven it is -- I put it in with my own hands, and, please Heaven
we have but good luck in the baking, it will be as pretty a goosepye, though I
say it that should not say it, as pretty a goose-pye as ever your worship set
your eye upon.


Just. Will you take a glass of any thing this morning, Mrs. Bustle? -- I have
some nice usquebaugh.


Land. Oh no, your worship! -- I thank your worship, though, as much as if I
took it; but I just took my luncheon before I came up -- or more proper my
Sandwich, I should say, for the fashion's sake, to be sure. A luncheon will not go
down with nobody, nowadays (laughs) -- I expects hostler and boots will be
calling for their Sandwiches just now. (laughs again) -- I Am sure I beg your
worship's pardon for mentioning a luncheon.


Just. Oh, Mrs. Bustle, the word's a good word, for it means a good thing, ha!
ha! ha! (pulls out his watch) -- but pray is it luncheon time? -- why its past
one, I declare, and I thought I was up in remarkably good time, too.


Land. Well, and to be sure so it was, remarkable good time for your worship --
but folks in our way must be up betimes, you know -- I Have been up and about
these seven hours!


Just. (stretching.) Seven hours!


Land. Aye, indeed, eight, I might say, for I Am an early little body -- though
I say it that should not say it -- I am an early little body.


Just. An early little body, as you say, Mrs. Bustle -- so I shall have my
goose-pye for dinner, hey?


Land. For dinner, as sure as the clock strikes four -- but I mustn't stay
prating, for it may be spoiling if I Am away -- so I must wish your worship a
good morning. (she curtsies.)


Just. No ceremony -- no ceremony, good Mrs. Bustle, your servant.


Enter WILLIAM -- to take away the chocolate -- the Landlady is putting on her
shawl. Just. You may let that man know, William, that I have dispatched my own
business, and I am at leisure for his now -- (taking a pinch of snuff) -- hum
-- pray, William! (Justice leans back gravely) -- what sort of a looking fellow
is he, pray?


Will. Most like a sort of a traveling man, in my opinion, sir -- or something
that way, I take it.


(At these words the Landlady turns round inquisitively, and delays, that she
may listen, whilst she is putting on and pinning her shawl.) Just. Hum -- a
sort of a traveling man -- hum -- lay my books out open, at the title vagrant
-- and William, tell the cook that Mrs. Bustle promises me the goose-pye for
dinner -- four o'clock, do you hear? -- And show the old man in now.


(The Landlady looks eagerly toward the door, as it opens, and exclaims --
Land. My old gentleman, as I hope to breathe!


Enter the OLD MAN. (Lucy follows the old man on tiptoe -- the Justice leans
back, and looks consequential -- the Landlady sets her arms a-kimbo -- the old
man starts as soon as he sees her.) Just. What stops you, friend? come forward,
if you please.


Land. (advancing.) So, sir! is it you, sir? -- aye, you little looked, I
warrant ye, to meet me here with his worship -- but there you reckoned without
your host -- out of the frying pan into the fire.


Just. What is all this? -- what is this?


Land. (running on.) None of your flummery stuff will go down with his worship,
no more than with me, I give ye warning -- so you may go farther and fare worse
-- and spare your breath to cool your porridge.


Just. (waves his hand with dignity.) Mrs. Bustle, good Mrs. Bustle, remember
where you are -- silence! -- silence! -- come forward, sir, and let me hear
what you have to say.


(The old Man comes forward.) Just. Who, and what may you be, friend? And what
is your business with me?


Land. Sir, if your worship will give me leave --


(Justice makes a sign to her to be silent.) Old M. Please your worship, I am
an old soldier.


Land. (interrupting.) An old hypocrite, say.


Just. Mrs. Bustle, pray -- I desire -- let the man speak.


Old M. For these two years past, ever since, please your worship -- I was not
able to work any longer, for in my youth I did work as well as the best of them.


Land. (eager to interrupt.) You work -- you --


Just. Let him finish his story, I say.


Lucy. Aye, do, do, papa, speak for him. Pray Mrs. Bustle --


Land. (turning suddenly round to Lucy.) Miss! -- a good morrow to you, ma'am
-- I humbly beg your apologies, for not seeing you sooner, Miss Lucy.


(Justice nods to the old Man, who goes on.) Old M. But, please you worship, it
pleased God to take away the use of my left arm, and, since that, I have never
been able to work.


Land. Flummery! -- flummery!


Just. (angrily.) Mrs. Bustle, I have desired silence, and I will have it,
that is poz! -- you shall have your turn presently.


Old M. For these two years past -- for why should I be ashamed to tell the
truth, I have lived upon charity, and I scraped together a guinea and a half,
and upwards; and I was traveling with it to my grandson, in the north, with
him to end my days -- but -- (sighing.)


Just. But what? -- proceed pray to the point.


Old M. But, last night, I slept here in town, please your worship, at the
Saracen's Head.


Land. (in a rage.) At the Saracen's Head; yes, forsooth, none such ever slept
at the Saracen's Head, before, or ever shall after as long as my name's Bustle,
and the Saracen's Head is the Saracen's Head.


Just. Again! -- again! -- Mrs. Landlady, this is downright -- I have said you
should speak presently -- he shall speak first, since I Have said it -- that is
poz! Speak on, friend: you slept last night at the Saracen's Head.


Old M. Yes, please your worship, and I accuse nobody -- but, at night, I had
my little money safe, and, in the morning, it was gone.


Land. Gone! -- gone indeed in my house! and this is the way I Am to be treated;
is it so? -- I could'nt but speak, please your worship, to such an
inhuman-like, out-o'-the-way, scandalous charge, if King George, and all the
Royal Family, were sitting in your worship's chair, besides you to silence me
-- (turning to the old Man) -- and this is your gratitude, forsooth! Didn't you
tell me that any hole in my house was good enough for you, you wheedling
hypocrite, and my thanks is to call me and mine a pack of thieves.


Old M. Oh, no, no, no, No -- a pack of thieves, Heaven forbid!


Land. Aye, I thought when I came to speak we should have you upon your
marrow-bones in --


Just. (imperiously.) Silence! -- five times have I commanded silence, and five
times in vain; and I will not command any thing five times in vain -- that is poz!


Land. (in a pet, aside.) Old Poz! (aloud) -- Then, your worship, I don't see
any business I have to be waiting here -- the folks will want me at home --
(returning and whispering) -- shall I send the goose-pye up your worship, if
its ready?


Just. (with magnanimity.) I care not for the goose-pye, Mrs. Bustle -- do not
talk to me of goose-pyes -- this is no place to talk of pyes.


Land. Oh, for that matter, your worship knows best, to be sure.


Exit Landlady, angry. SCENE
JUSTICE HEADSTRONG, OLD MAN, and LUCY. Lucy. Ah now I Am glad he can speak --
now tell papa -- and you need not be afraid to speak to him, for he is very
good natured -- don't contradict him though -- because he told me not --


Just. Oh darling, you shall contradict me as often as you please -- only not
before I Have drank my chocolate, child -- hey! -- go on my good friend, you see
what it is to live in old England, where, thank Heaven, the poorest of his
Majesty's subjects may have justice, and speak his mind before the first man in
the land. Now speak on, and you hear she tells you, you need not be afraid of
me. Speak on.


Old M. I thank your worship, I Am sure.


Just. Thank me! for what, sir? I will not be thanked for doing justice, sir; so
-- but explain this matter. You lost your money, hey, at the Saracen's Head --
you had it safe last night, hey? -- and you missed it this morning. Are you
sure you had it safe at night?


Old M. Oh, please your worship, quite sure, for I took it out and looked at it
just before I said my prayers.


Just. You did -- did ye so -- hum! pray, my good friend, where might you put
your money when you went to bed?


Old M. Please your worship, where I always put it -- always -- in my
tobacco-box.


Just. Your tobacco-box! I never heard of such a thing -- to make a strong box
of a tobacco-box -- ha! ha! ha! -- hum -- and you say the box and all was gone
in the morning.


Old M. No, please your worship, no, not the box, the box was never stirred
from the place where I put it. They left me the box --


Just. Tut, tut, tut, man! -- took the money and left the box; I Will never
believe that; I Will never believe that any one could be such a fool. Tut, tut!
the thing's impossible: its well you are not upon oath.


Old M. If I was, please your worship, I should say the same, for it is the
truth.


Just. Don't tell me, don't tell me; I say the thing is impossible.


Old M. Please your worship, here is the box.


Just. (goes on without looking at it.) Nonsense! nonsense! its no such thing,
its no such thing I say -- no man would take the money and leave the
tobacco-box -- I will not believe it -- nothing shall make me believe it ever --
that is poz!


Lucy. (takes the box, and holds it up before her father's eyes.) You did not
see the box, did you, papa?


Just. Yes, yes, yes, child -- nonsense! -- its all a lie from beginning to
end. A man who tells one lie will tell a hundred -- all a lie! -- all a lie!


Old M. If your worship would give me leave --


Just. Sir -- it does not signify -- it does not signify; I Have said it, I Have
said it, and that is enough to convince me; and I Will tell you more, if my Lord
Chief Justice of England told it to me, I would not believe it -- that is poz!


Lucy, still playing with the box -- but how comes the box here, I wonder?


Just. Pshaw! pshaw! pshaw darling! -- go to your dolls, darling, and don't be
positive -- go to your dolls, and don't talk of what you don't understand. What
can you understand, I want to know, of the law?


Lucy. No, papa, I didn't mean about the law -- but about the box; because, if
the man had taken it, how could it be here, you know, papa?


Just. Hey, hey, what? -- why what I say is this, that I don't dispute that
that box that you hold in your hands is a box; nay, for aught I know, it may be
a tobacco-box -- but its clear to me, that if they left the box they did not
take the money -- and how do you dare, sir, to come before Justice Headstrong
with a lie in your mouth? -- recollect yourself, I Will give you time to
recollect yourself.


(A Pause.) Just. Well, sir, and what do you say now about the box?


Old M. Please your worship, with submission, I can say nothing but what I said
before.


Just. What, contradict me again! -- after I gave ye time to recollect yourself
-- I Have done with ye, I have done -- contradict me as often as you please, but
you cannot impose upon me; I defy you to impose upon me!


Old M. Impose!


Just. I know the law -- I know the law! -- and I Will make you know it too --
one hour I give you to recollect yourself, and if you don't give up this idle
story -- I Will -- I Will commit you as a vagrant -- that is poz! -- go, go for the
present. William, take him into the servant's hall, do you hear? -- What, take
the money, and leave the box -- I Will never believe it, that is poz!


(Lucy speaks to the old Man as he is going off.) Lucy. Don't be frightened!
don't be frightened -- I mean, if you tell the truth, never be frightened.


Old M. If I tell the truth -- (turning up his eyes.)


Old Man is still held back by Lucy. One moment -- answer me one question --
because of something that just came into my head -- was the box shut fast when
you left it?


Old M. No, miss, no! -- open -- it was open, for I could not find the lid in
the dark -- my candle went out -- if I tell the truth -- oh! --


SCENE.
JUSTICE'S Study -- the JUSTICE is writing. Old M. Well! -- I shall have but
few days more misery in this world!


Just. (looks up.) Why! why -- why then, why will you be so positive to persist
in a lie? Take the money and leave the box! obstinate blockhead! Here, William
(showing the committal), take this old gentleman to Holdfast, the constable,
and give him this warrant.


Enter LUCY, running, out of breath. I Have found it! I Have found it! I Have found
it! Here, old man; here is your money -- here it is all -- a guinea and a half,
and a shilling and sixpence, just as he said, papa.

Enter LANDLADY. Oh la! your worship, did your ever hear the like?

Just. I Have heard nothing yet that I can understand. First, have you secured
the thief, I say?


Lucy. (makes a sign to the Landlady to be silent.) Yes, yes, yes! we have him
safe -- we have him prisoner. -- Shall he come in, papa?


Just. Yes, child, by all means; and now I shall hear what possessed him to
leave the box -- I don't understand -- there is something deep in all this; I
don't understand it. Now I do desire, Mrs. Landlady, nobody may speak a single
word whilst I am cross-examining the thief.


(Landlady puts her finger upon her lips -- Every body looks eagerly toward
the door.) Re-enter LUCY, with a huge wicker cage in her hand, containing a
magpye -- the Justice drops the committal out of his hand. Just. Hey! -- what!
Mrs. Landlady! the old magpye! hey!


Land. Aye, your worship, my old magype -- who'd have thought it. -- Miss was
very clever, it was she caught the thief: Miss was very clever.


Old M. Very good! very good!


Just. Aye, darling! her father's own child! How was it, child! -- caught the
thief with the mainour, hey! tell us all -- I will hear all -- that is poz!


Lucy. Oh then, first I must tell you how I came to suspect Mr. Magype. -- Do
you remember papa, that day last summer, that I went with you to the
bowling-green, at the Saracen's Head?


Land. Oh, of all days in the year -- but I ask pardon Miss.


Lucy. Well, that day I heard my uncle and another gentleman telling stories of
magpies hiding money; and they laid a wager about this old magpye -- and they
tried him -- they put a shilling upon the table, and he ran away with it, and
hid it -- so I thought that he might do so again, you know, this time.


Just. Right, right, its a pity, child, you are not upon the bench; ha! ha! ha!


Lucy. And when I went to his old hiding place -- there it was -- but you see,
papa, he did not take the box.


Just. No, no, no! because the thief was a magpye -- no man would have taken
the money, and left the box. You see I was right -- no man would have left the
box, hey?


Lucy. Certainly not, I suppose -- but I Am so very glad, old man, that you have
got your money.


Just. Well then, child, here, take my purse, and add that to it. We were a
little too hasty with the committal -- hey?


Land. Aye, and I fear I was so too; but when one is touched about the credit
of one's house, one's apt to speak warmly.


Old M. Oh I Am the happiest man alive! You are all convinced I told you no lies
-- say no more -- say no more -- I am the happiest man! Miss, you have made me
the happiest old man alive! -- God bless you for it!


Land. Well now, I Will tell you what -- I know what I think -- you must keep
that there magpye and make a show of him, and I warrant he will bring you many an
honest penny -- for its a true story, and folks will like to hear it, I hopes
--


Just. (eagerly.) And friend, do you hear, you will dine here today? -- You Will
dine here -- we have some excellent ale -- I will have you drink my health,
that is poz! -- hey, you will drink my health, will not you, hey?


Old M. (bows.) Oh -- and the young lady's, if you please.


Just. Aye, aye, drink her health -- she deserves it -- aye, drink my darling's
health.


Land. And please your worship, its the right time, I believe, to speak of the
goose-pye now -- and a charming pie it is, and its on the table.


Will. And Mr. Smack, the curate, and Squire Solid, and the Doctor, sir, are
come, and dinner is upon the table.


Just. Then let us say no more -- but do justice immediately to the goosepye --
and, darling, put me in mind to tell this story after dinner --

(After they go out, the Justice stops.) "Tell this story" -- I don't know
whether it tells well for me -- but I Will never be positive any more -- that is
poz.


THE MIMIC.
MR. and MRS. MONTAGUE spent the summer of the year 1795 at Clifton, with their
son Frederick, and their two daughters, Sophia and Marianne -- They had taken
much care of the education of their children, nor were they ever tempted by any
motive of personal convenience, or temporary amusement, to hazard the permanent
happiness of their pupils.

Sensible of the extreme importance of early impressions, and of the powerful
influence of external circumstances in forming the character, and the manners,
they were now anxious that the variety of new ideas, and new objects, which
would strike the minds of their children, should appear in a just point of view.

"Let children see, and judge for themselves," is often inconsiderately said.
-- Where children see only a "part," they cannot judge of the "whole" -- and
from the superficial view which they can have in short visits, and desultory
conversation, they can form only a false estimate of the objects of human
happiness, a false notion of the nature of society, and false opinions of
characters. -- For these reasons Mr. and Mrs. Montague were particularly
cautious in the choice of their acquaintance, as they were well aware, that
whatever passed in conversation before their children, became part of their
education. -- When they came to Clifton, they wished to have had a house
entirely to themselves, but as they came late in the season, almost all the
lodging houses were full, and for a few weeks they were obliged to remain in a
house in which some of the apartments were already occupied.

During the first fortnight, they scarcely saw or heard any thing of one of the
families, who lodged on the same floor with them. -- An elderly Quaker, and his
sister Birtha, were their silent neighbors. -- The blooming complexion of the
lady, had indeed attracted the attention of the children, as they caught a
glimpse of her face when she was getting into her carriage to go out upon the
Downs. -- They could scarcely believe that she came to the Wells on account of
her health. -- Besides her blooming complexion, the delicate white of her
garments had struck them with admiration, and they observed that her brother
carefully guarded these from the wheel of the carriage as he handed her in. --
From this circumstance, and from the benevolent countenance of the old
gentleman, they concluded, that he was very fond of his sister -- that they
were certainly very happy, only they never spoke, and could be seen but for a
moment.

Not so the maiden lady who occupied the ground floor. -- On the stairs, in the
passages, at her window, she was continually visible, and she seemed to possess
the art of being present in all these places at once. -- Her voice was
eternally to be heard, and it was not particularly melodious. The very first
day she met Mrs. Montague's children on the stairs, she stopped to tell
Marianne, that she was a charming dear! and a charming little dear! to kiss
her, to enquire her name, and to inform her that her own name was "Mrs. Theresa
Tattle;" a circumstance of which there was little danger of their long
remaining in ignorance, for in the course of one morning at least twenty
single, and as many double raps at the door, were succeeded by vociferations of
"Mrs. Theresa's Tattle's servant!" -- "Mrs. Theresa Tattle at home?" -- "Mrs.
Theresa Tattle not at home."

No person at the Wells was oftener at home and abroad than Mrs. Tattle; she
had, as she deemed it, the happiness to have a most extensive acquaintance
residing at Clifton -- she had for years kept a register of arrivals. She
regularly consulted the subscriptions to the circulating libraries, and the
lists at the Ball and the Pump-Rooms; so, that with a memory unincumbered with
literature, and free from all domestic cares, she contrived to retain a most
astonishing and correct list of births, deaths, and marriages, together with
all the anecdotes, amusing, instructive, or scandalous, which are necessary to
the conversation of a water-drinking place, and essential to the character of a
"very pleasant woman."

"A very pleasant woman," Mrs. Tattle was usually called, and conscious of her
accomplishments, she was eager to introduce herself to the acquaintance of her
new neighbors; having, with her ordinary expedition, collected from their
servants, by means of her own, all that could be known, or rather all that
could be told, about them. The name of Montague, at all events, she knew was a
good name, and justified her courting this acquaintance. She courted it first
by nods, and becks, and smiles, at Marianne, whenever she met her; and
Marianne, who was a very little girl, began presently to nod and smile in
return; persuaded, that a lady who smiled so much, could not be ill-natured.
Besides, Mrs. Theresa's parlour door was sometimes left more than half open, to
afford a view of a green parrot. Marianne sometimes passed very slowly by this
door. One morning it was left quite wide open, she stopped to say "Pretty
Poll," and immediately Mrs. Tattle begged she would do her the honor to walk
in and see "Pretty Poll;" at the same time taking the liberty to offer her a
piece of iced plumb cake.

The next day Mrs. Theresa Tattle did herself the honor to wait upon Mrs.
Montague, "to apologize for the liberty she had taken, in inviting Mrs.
Montague's charming Miss Marianne into her apartment to see "Pretty Poll;" and
for the still greater liberty she had taken in offering her a piece of plumb
cake, inconsiderate creature that she was! which might possibly have disagreed
with her, and which certainly were liberties she never should have been induced
to take, if she had not been unaccountably bewitched by Miss Marianne's
striking, though highly flattering resemblance, to a young gentleman, an
officer, with whom she had danced; she was sorry to say, now nearly twelve
years ago, at the races in -- shire, of the name of Montague, a most
respectable young man, and of a most respectable family, with which, in a
remote degree, she might presume to say, she herself was someway connected,
having the honor to be nearly related to the Jones's of Merionethshire, who
were cousins to the Manwairings, of Bedfordshire, who married into the family
of the Griffiths's, the eldest branch of which she understood had the honor to
be cousin german to Mr. Montague, on which account she had been impatient to
pay a visit so likely to be productive of most agreeable consequences, in the
acquisition of an acquaintance, whose society must do her infinite honor."

Having thus happily accomplished her first visit, there seemed little
probability of escaping Mrs. Tattle's farther acquaintance. In the course of
the first week, she only hinted to Mr. Montague, that "some people thought his
system of education rather odd, that she should be obliged to him if he would,
some time or other, when he had nothing else to do, just sit down and make her
understand his notions, that she might have something to say to her
acquaintance, as she always wished to have when she heard any friend attacked,
or any friend's opinions."

Mr. Montague declining to sit down and make this lady understand a system of
education only to give her something to say, and showing unaccountable
indifference about the attacks with which he was threatened, Mrs. Tattle next
addressed herself to Mrs. Montague, prophesying, in a most serious whisper,
"that the charming Miss Marianne would shortly and inevitably grow quite
crooked, if she were not immediately provided with a backboard, a French
dancing master, and a pair of stocks." This alarming whisper could not,
however, have a permanent effect upon Mrs. Montague's understanding, because,
three days afterward, Mrs. Theresa, upon the most anxious inspection, mistook
the hip and shoulder which should have been the highest. This danger vanishing,
Mrs. Tattle presently, with a rueful length of face, and formal preface,
"hesitated to assure Mrs. Montague, that she was greatly distressed about her
daughter Sophy; that she was convinced her lungs were affected; and that she
certainly ought to drink the waters morning and evening; and above all things,
must keep one of the Patirossa lozenges constantly in her mouth, and directly
consult Dr. Cardimum, the best physician in the world, and the person she would
send for herself upon her death bed; because, to her certain knowledge, he had
recovered a young lady, a relation of her own, after she had lost one whole
globe of her lungs."

The medical opinion of a lady of so much anatomical precision, could not have
much weight; nor was this universal adviser more successful in an attempt to
introduce a tutor to Frederick, who, "she apprehended, must want one to perfect
him in the Latin and Greek, and dead languages, of which she observed it would
be impertinent for a woman to talk, only she might venture to repeat what she
had heard said by good authority, that a competency of the dead tongues could
be had no where but at a public school, or else from a private tutor, who had
been abroad (after the advantages of a classical education, finished in one of
the Universities) with a good family, without which introduction, it was idle
to think of reaping solid advantages from any continental tour; all which
requisites she could, from personal knowledge, aver concentrated in the
gentleman she had the honor to recommend, as having been tutor to a young
nobleman, who had now no farther occasion for him, being, unfortunately, for
himself and his family, killed in an untimely duel.

All her suggestions being lost upon these unthinking parents, Mrs. Theresa
Tattle's powers were next tried upon the children, and presently her success
was apparent. On Sophy, indeed, she could not make any impression, though she
had expended on her some of her finest strokes of flattery-Sophy, though very
desirous of the approbation of her friends, was not very solicitous to win the
favor of strangers. She was about thirteen, that dangerous age at which ill
educated girls, in their anxiety to display their accomplishments, are apt to
become dependent for applause upon the praise of every idle visitor; when the
habits not being formed, and the aftention being suddenly turned to dress and
manners, girls are apt to affect and imitate, indiscriminately, every thing
that they fancy to be agreeable.

Sophy, whose taste had been cultivated at the same time with her powers of
reasoning, was not liable to fall into these errors; she found that she could
please those whom she wished to please, without affecting to be any thing but
what she really was; and her friends listened to what she said, though she
never repeated the sentiments, or adopted the phrases, which she might easily
have caught from the conversation of those who were older, or more fashionable
than herself. This word fashionable, Mrs. Theresa Tattle knew had usually a
great effect even at thirteen, but she had not observed that it had much power
upon Sophy; nor were her documents concerning grace and manners, much attended
to. Her mother had taught Sophy, that it was best to let herself alone, and not
to distort either her person or her mind, in acquiring grimace, which nothing
but the fashion of the moment can support, and which is always detected and
despised by people of real good sense and politeness.

"Bless me!" said Mrs. Tattle to herself, "if I had such a tall daughter, and
so unformed, before my eyes from morning to night, it would certainly break my
poor heart. Thank God I am not a mother! Miss Marianne for me, if I was!"

Miss Marianne had heard so often from Mrs. Tattle that she was charming, that
she could not help believing it; and from being a very pleasing, unaffected
little girl, she in a short time grew so conceited, that she could neither
speak, look, move, or be silent, without imagining that every body was, or
ought to be, looking at her; and when Mrs. Theresa saw that Mrs. Montague
looked very grave upon these occasions, she, to repair the ill she had done,
would say, after praising Marianne's hair or her eyes, "Oh, but little ladies
should never think about their beauty you know; nobody loves any body you know
for being handsome, but for being good." People must think children are very
silly, or else they can never have reflected upon the nature of belief in their
own minds, if they imagine that children will believe the words that are said
to them by way of moral, when the countenance, manner, and every concomitant
circumstance tell them a different tale. Children are excellent physiognomists,
they quickly learn the universal language of looks, and what is said of them
always makes a greater impression than what is said to them; a truth of which
those prudent people surely cannot be aware, who comfort themselves and
apologize to parents by saying, "O but I would not say so and so to the child."

Mrs. Theresa had seldom said to Frederick Montague, "that he had a vast deal
of drollery, and was a most incomparable Mimic;" but she had said so of him in
whispers, which magnified the sound to his imagination, if not to his ear. He
was a boy of much vivacity, and had considerable abilities; but his appetite
for vulgar praise had not yet been surfeited; even Mrs. Theresa Tattle's
flattery pleased him, and he exerted himself for her entertainment so much,
that he became quite a buffoon. Instead of observing characters and manners,
that he might judge of them and form his own, he now watched every person he
saw, that he might detect some foible, or catch some singularity in their
gesture or pronunciation, which he might successfully mimic.

Alarmed by the rapid progress of these evils, Mr. and Mrs. Montague, who, from
the first day that they had been honored with Mrs. Tattle's visit, had begun
to look out for new lodgings, were now extremely impatient to decamp. They were
not people who, from the weak fear of offending a silly acquaintance, would
hazard the happiness of their family. They had heard of a house in the country
which was likely to suit them, and they determined to go directly to look at
it. As they were to be absent all day, they foresaw their officious neighbor
would probably interfere with their children. They did not choose to exact any
promise from them which they might be tempted to break, and therefore they only
said at parting, "If Mrs. Theresa Tattle should ask you to come to her, do as
you think proper."

Scarcely had Mrs. Montague's carriage gone out of hearing, when a note was
brought directed to "Frederick Montague, Esquire junior," which he immediately
opened, and read as follows:

"Mrs. Theresa Tattle presents her very best compliments to the entertaining
Mr. Frederick Montague; she hopes he will have the charity to drink tea with
her this evening, and bring his charming sister Marianne with him, as Mrs.
Theresa will be quite alone, with a shocking headache, and is sensible her
nerves are affected; and Dr. Cardimum says, that (especially in Mrs. T. T's.
case) it is downright death to nervous patients to be alone an instant; she
therefore trusts Mr. Frederick will not refuse to come and make her laugh.

"Mrs. Theresa has taken care to provide a few macaroons for her little
favorite, who said she was particularly fond of them the other day.

"Mrs. Theresa hopes they will all come at six, or before; not forgetting Miss
Sophy, if she will condescend to be of the party."

At the first reading of this note, "the entertaining" Mr. Frederick, and the
charming Miss Marianne, laughed heartily, and looked at Sophy as if they were
afraid that she should think it possible they could like such gross flattery;
but upon a second perusal Marianne observed, that it certainly was good-natured
of Mrs. Theresa to remember the macaroons; and Frederick allowed, that it was
wrong to laugh at the poor woman because she had the headache. Then twisting
the note in his fingers, he appealed to Sophy: "Well, Sophy, leave off drawing
for an instant, and tell us what answer can we send?" "Can! we can send what
answer we please." "Yes, I know that," said Frederick; "I would refuse if I
could, but we ought not to do any thing rude, should we? so I think we might as
well go." "Hey! because we could not refuse if we would, I say."

"You have made such confusion, replied Sophy, between "could n't," and "would
n't," and "should n't," that I cannot understand you; surely they are all
different things."

"Different! no," cried Frederick, "could, would, should, might, or ought," are
all the same thing in the Latin grammar; all of 'em signs of the potential
mood, you know."

Sophy, whose powers of reasoning were not to be confounded even by quotations
from the Latin grammar, looked up soberly from her drawing, and answered, "That
very likely those words might be signs of the same thing in the Latin grammar,
but that she believed they meant perfectly different things in real life."

"That Is just as people please," said her sophistical brother, "you know words
mean nothing in themselves. If I chose to call my hat my cadwallader, you would
understand me just as well, after I had once explained it to you, that by
cadwallader I meant this black thing that I put upon my head; cadwallader and
that would then be just the same thing to you."

"Then why have two words for the same thing?" said Sophy; "and what has this
to do with could and should? You wanted to prove" --

"I wanted to prove," interrupted Frederick, "that it is not worth while to
dispute for two hours about two words. Do keep to the point, Sophy, and don't
dispute with me."

"I was not disputing, I was reasoning."

"Well, reasoning or disputing. Women have no business to do either, for how
should they know how to chop logic like men."

At this contemptuous sarcasm upon her sex, Sophy's color rose. "There!" cried
Frederick, exulting, "Now we shall see a philosopheress in a passion. I Would give
sixpence, half price for a harlequin entertainment, to see Sophy in a passion.
Now Marianne, look at her brush dabbling so fast in the water!"

Sophy, who could not easily bear to be laughed at, with some little
indignation, said, "Brother, I wish," -- "There! There!" cried Frederick,
pointing to the color which rose in her cheek almost to her temples; "Rising!
Rising! Rising! Look at the thermometer. Blood heat! Blood! Fever heat! Boiling
water heat! Marianne."

"Then," said Sophy, smiling, "you should stand a little farther off, both of
you; leave the thermometer to itself for a little while; give it time to cool.
It will come down to temperate by the time you look again."

"Oh, brother," cried Marianne, "she is so good humored, don't teize her any
more; and don't draw heads upon her paper; and don't stretch her rubber out;
and don't let us dirty any more of her brushes: See! the sides of her tumbler
are all manner of colors."

"Oh, I only mixed red, blue, green, and yellow, to show you, Marianne, that
all colors mixed together make white. But she is temperate now, and I will not
plague her; she shall chop logic if she likes it, though she is a woman."

"But that is not fair, brother," said Marianne, to say woman in that way. I Am
sure Sophy found out how to tie that difficult knot which papa showed to us
yesterday, long before you did, though you are a man." "Not long," said
Frederick; "besides, that was only a conjuring trick."

"It was very ingenious, though," said Marianne, "and papa said so; and
besides, she understood the rule of three, which was no conjuring trick, better
than you did, though, she is a woman; and she may reason too, mamma says."

"Very well, let her reason away," said the provoking wit; "all I have to say
is, she will never be able to make a pudding." "Why not, pray brother," enquired
Sophy, looking up again very gravely. "Why, you know papa himself the other day
at dinner, said, that that woman who talks Greek and Latin as well as I do, is
a fool after all; and that she had better have learned something useful; and
Mrs. Tattle said she would answer for it she did not know, how to make a pudding."

"Well, but I am not talking Greek and Latin, am I?"

"No; but you are drawing, and that is the same thing."

"The same thing! O Frederick," said little Marianne, laughing.

"You may laugh, but I say it is the same sort of thing. Women that are always
drawing, and reasoning, never know how to make puddings; Mrs. Theresa Tattle
said so when I showed her Sophy's beautiful drawing yesterday."

"Mrs. Theresa Tattle might say so," replied Sophy, calmly, "but I do not
perceive the reason, brother, why drawing should prevent me from learning how
to make a pudding."

"Well, I say you will never learn to make a good pudding."

"I have learned," continued Sophy, who was mixing her colors, "to mix such
and such colors together to make the color that I want, and why should I not
be able to learn to mix flour and butter, and sugar and egg together, to make
the taste that I want?"

"Oh, but mixing will never do, unless you know the quantities, like a cook;
and you would never learn the right quantities."

"How did the cook learn them, cannot I learn them as she did?"

"Yes, but you would never do it exactly, and mind the spoonfuls rightly, by the
receipt, like a cook, exactly."

"Indeed! indeed but she would," cried Marianne eagerly, "and a great deal more
exactly, for Mamma has taught her to weigh and measure things very carefully;
and when I was ill, she always weighed my bark so nicely, and dropped my drops
so carefully; not like the cook. When Mamma took me down to see her make a cake
once, I saw her spoonfuls, and her ounces, and her handfuls; she dashed and
splashed without minding exactness, or the receipt, or any thing. I Am sure
Sophy would make a much better pudding, if exactness only is wanting."

"Well, granting that she could make the best pudding in the whole world, what
does that signify? I say she never would, so it comes to the same thing."

"Never would! how can you tell that, brother?"

"Never would! how can you tell that, brother?"

"Why now look at her, with her books, and her drawings, and all this
apparatus; do you think she would ever jump up, with all her nicety too, and
put bye all these things, to go down into the greasy kitchen, and plump up to
the elbows in suet, like a cook, for a plumb pudding?"

"I need not plump up to the elbows, brother," said Sophy, smiling, "nor is it
necessary that I should be a cook; but if it were necessary, I hope I should be
able to make a pudding."

"Yes, yes, yes," cried Marianne, warmly, "that she would, jump up and put by
all her things in a minute, if it was necessary, and run down stairs and up
again like lightning, or do any thing that was ever so disagreeable to her,
even about the suet, with all the nicety, brother, I assure you, as she used to
do any thing; every thing for me when I was ill last Winter. Oh, brother, she
can do any thing! and she could make the best plumb pudding in the whole world,
I Am sure, in a minute, if it was necessary."

THE MIMIC.
PART II.
A KNOCK at the door from Mrs. Theresa Tattle's servant, recalled Marianne to
the business of the day.

"There," said Frederick, "we have sent no answer all this time. It Is necessary
to think of that in a minute."

The servant came with his mistress's compliments, to let the young ladies and
Mr. Frederick know that she was waiting tea for them.

"Waiting! then we must go," said Frederick.

The servant opened the door wider to let him pass, and Marianne thought she
must follow her brother, so they went down stairs together, whilst Sophy gave
her own message to the servant, and quietly staid at her usual occupations.

Mrs. Tattle was seated at her teatable, with a large plate of macaroons beside
her, when Frederick and Marianne entered. She was "delighted" they were come,
and "grieved" not to see Miss Sophy along with them. Marianne colored a
little, for though she had precipitately followed her brother, and though he
had quieted her conscience for a moment, by saying, "You know Papa and Mamma
told us to do what we thought best;" yet she did not feel quite pleased with
herself; and it was not till after Mrs. Theresa had exhausted all her
compliments, and half her macaroons, that she could restore her spirits to
their usual height.

"Come, Mr. Frederick," said she, after tea, "you promised to make me laugh;
and nobody can make me laugh so well as yourself."

"Oh, brother," said Marianne, "show Mrs. Theresa Dr. Carbuncle eating his
dinner, and I Will be Mrs. Carbuncle."

Marianne. Now, my dear, what shall I help you to?


Frederick. My dear! she never calls him my dear, you know, but always doctor.


Mar. Well then, Doctor, what will you eat today?


Fred. Eat, Madam! Eat! Nothing! Nothing! I don't see any thing here that I can
eat, ma'am.


Mar. Here Is eels, sir; let me help you to some eel, stewed eel, sir, you used
to be fond of stewed eel.


Fred. Used, ma'am, used! But I Am sick of stewed eels. You would tire one of
any thing. Am I to see nothing but eels? And what is this at the bottom?


Mar. Mutton, doctor, roast mutton, if you will be so good as to cut it.


Fred. Cut it, Ma'am! I cannot cut it, I say. It Is as hard as a deal board. You
might as well tell me to cut the table, ma'am. Mutton, indeed! not a bit of
fat. Roast mutton, indeed! not a drop of gravy. Mutton, truly! quite a cinder.
I Will have none of it. Here, take it away; take it down stairs to the cook. It Is
a very hard case, Mrs. Carbuncle, that I can never have a bit of any thing that
I can eat at my own table, Mrs. Carbuncle, since I was married, ma'am. I that
am the easiest man in the whole world to please about my dinner. It Is really
very extraordinary, Mrs. Carbuncle! What have you got at that corner there,
under the cover?


Mar. Patties, sir; oyster patties.


Fred. Patties, ma'am! kickshaws! I hate kickshaws. Not worth putting under a
cover, ma'am. And why have not you glass covers, that one may see one's dinner
before one, before it grows cold with asking questions, Mrs. Carbuncle, and
lifting up covers? But nobody has any sense; and I see no water-plates any
where lately.


Mar. Do pray, doctor, let me help you to a bit of this chicken before it gets
cold, my dear.


Fred. (aside.) "My dear" again, Marianne!


Mar. Yes, brother, because she is frightened you know, and Mrs. Carbuncle
always says "my dear" to him when she is frightened; and looks so pale from side
to side; and sometimes she cries before dinner's done; and then all the company
are quite silent, and don't know what to do.

"Oh, such a little creature! to have so much sense too!" exclaimed Mrs.
Theresa, with rapture, "Mr. Frederick you will make me die with laughing! Pray go
on, doctor Carbuncle."


Fred. Well, ma'am, then if I must eat something, send me a bit of fowl; a leg
and wing, the liver-wing, and a bit of the breast; oyster sauce, and a slice of
that ham, if you please, ma'am.

Doctor Carbuncle eats voraciously, with his head down to his plate, and
dropping the sauce, he buttons up his coat tight across the breast.
Fred. Here -- A plate, knife and fork, bit o'bread, a glass of Dorchester ale!

"Oh, admirable!" exclaimed Mrs. Tattle, clapping her hands.

"Now brother, suppose that it is after dinner," said Marianne, "and show us
how the doctor goes to sleep."

Frederick threw himself back in an arm chair, leaning his head back, with his
mouth open, snoring; nodded from time to time; crossed and uncrossed his legs;
tried to waken himself by twitching his wig, settling his collar, blowing his
nose, and wrapping on the lid of his snuffbox.

All which infinitely diverted Mrs. Tattle; who, when she could stop herself
from laughing, "declared it made her sigh too, to think of the life poor Mrs.
Carbuncle led with that man, and all for nothing too; for her jointure was
nothing, next to nothing, though a great thing to be sure her friends thought
for her, when she was only Sally Ridgeway, before she was married. Such a wife
as she makes! continued Mrs. Theresa, lifting up her hands and eyes to Heaven,
and so much as she has gone through, the brute ought to be ashamed of himself
if he does not leave her something extraordinary in his will; for, turn it
which way she will, she can never keep a carriage, or live like any body else,
on her jointure, after all. She tells me, poor soul! a sad prospect after her
husband's death, to look forward to, instead of being comfortable, as her
friends expected; and she, poor young thing, knowing no better when they
married her. People should look into these things before hand, or never marry
at all, I say, Miss Marianne."

Miss Marianne, who did not clearly comprehend this affair of the jointure, or
the reason why Mrs. Carbuncle would be so unhappy after her husband's death,
turned to Frederick, who was at that instant studying Mrs. Theresa as a future
character to mimic, "Brother," said Marianne, "now sing an Italian song for us,
like Miss Croker. Pray, Miss Croker, favor us with a song. Mrs. Theresa Tattle
has never had the pleasure of hearing you sing; she is quite impatient to hear
you sing."

"Yes, indeed I am," said Mrs. Theresa.

Frederick put his hands before him affectedly; "Oh, indeed ma'am! indeed
ladies! I really am so hoarse; it distresses me so to be pressed to sing;
besides, upon my word, I have quite left off singing. I Have never sung once,
except for very particular people, this winter."


Mar. But Mrs. Theresa Tattle is a very particular person, I Am sure you will sing
for her.


Fred. Certainly, Ma'am, I allow you use a powerful argument; but I assure you
now I would do my best to oblige you, but I absolutely have forgotten all my
English songs. Nobody hears any thing but Italian now, and I have been so giddy
as to leave my Italian music behind me. Besides, I make it a rule never to
hazard myself without an accompanyment.


Mar. Oh, try, Miss Croker, for once.

[Frederick sings, after much preluding.] Violante, in the pantry,
Gnawing of a mutton bone:
How she gnawed it,
How she clawed it,
When she found herself alone.
"Charming!" exclaimed Mrs. Tattle; "so like Miss Croker, I Am sure I shall
think of you, Mr. Frederick, when I hear her asked to sing again. Her voice,
however, introduces her to very pleasant parties, and she is a girl that is very
much taken notice of, and I don't doubt will go off vastly well. She Is a
particular favorite of mine, you must know; and I mean to do her a piece of
service the first opportunity, by saying something or other that shall go round
to her relations in Northumberland, and make them do something for her; as well
they may, for they are all rolling in gold, and will not give her a penny."


Mar. Now, brother, read the newspaper like counselor Puff.

"Oh, pray do, Mr. Frederick, for I declare I admire you of all things! you are
quite yourself tonight. Here Is a newspaper, sir. Pray let us have counselor
Puff. It Is not late."

[Frederick reads in a pompous voice.] "As a delicate white hand has ever been
deemed a distinguishing ornament in either sex, Messrs. Valiant and Wise,
conceive it to be their duty to take the earliest opportunity to advertise the
nobility and gentry of Great Britain in general, and their friends in
particular, that they have now ready for sale, as usual, at the Hippocrates's
Head, a fresh assortment of the new-invented, much admired Primrose Soap. -- To
prevent impositions and counterfeits, the public are requested to take notice,
that the only genuine Primrose Soap is stamped on the outside, "Valiant and
Wise."

"Oh, you most incomparable Mimic! it is absolutely the counselor himself. I
absolutely must show you, some day, to my friend lady Batersby; you would
absolutely make her die with laughing; and she would quite adore you," said Mrs.
Theresa, who was well aware that every pause must be filled with flattery.
"Pray go on, pray go on, I shall never be tired if I were to sit looking at you
these hundred years."

Stimulated by these plaudits, Frederick proceeded to show how colonel
Epaulette blew his nose, flourished his cambric handkerchief, bowed to lady Di
Periwinkle, and admired her work, saying, "Done by no hands, as you may guess,
but those of Fairly Fair." Whilst lady Di, he observed, simpered so prettily,
and took herself so quietly for Fairly Fair, not perceiving that the colonel
was admiring his own nails all the while.

Next to colonel Epaulette, Frederick, at Marianne's particular desire, came
into the room like Sir Charles Slang.

"Very well, brother," cried she, "your hand down to the very bottom of your
pocket, and your other shoulder up to your ear; but you are not quite wooden
enough; and you should walk as if your hip was out of joint. There now, Mrs.
Tattle, are not those good eyes; they stare so like his, without seeming to see
any thing all the while."

"Excellent! admirable! Mr. Frederick, I must say you are the best Mimic of
your age I ever saw, and I Am sure lady Battersby will think so too. That is Sir
Charles to the very life. But with all that, you must know he is a mighty
pleasant, fashionable young man, when you come to know him, and has a great
deal of sense under all that, and is of a very good family. The Slangs, you
know: Sir Charles, will come into a fine fortune himself next year, if he can
keep clear of gambling, which I hear is his foible, poor young man. Pray go on,
I interrupt you, Mr. Frederick."

"Now brother," said Marianne.

"No, Marianne, I can do no more, I Am quite tired, and I will do no more," said
Frederick, stretching himself at full length upon a sofa.

Even in the midst of laughter, and whilst the voice of flattery yet sounded in
his ear, Frederick felt sad; displeased with himself, and disgusted with Mrs.
Theresa.

"What a deep sigh was there!" said Mrs. Theresa, "what can make you sigh so
bitterly? you, who make every body else laugh. Oh, such another sigh again!"

"Marianne," cried Frederick, "do you remember the man in the mask?"

"What man in the mask, brother?"

"The man -- the actor -- the buffoon, that my father told us of, who used to
cry behind the mask, that made every body else laugh."

"Cry! Bless me," said Mrs. Theresa, "mighty odd! very extraordinary! but one
cannot be surprised at meeting with extraordinary characters amongst that race
of people. Actors, by profession you know, who are brought up from the egg to
make their fortune, or at least their bread by their oddities. But, my dear Mr.
Frederick, you are quite pale, quite exhausted; no wonder; what will you have,
a glass of cowslip wine?"

"Oh, no, thank you, ma'am," said Frederick.

"Oh, yes; indeed you must not leave me without taking something; and Miss
Marianne must have another macaroon; I insist upon it," said Mrs. Theresa,
ringing the bell. "It is not late, and my man Christopher will bring up the
cowslip wine in a minute."

"But Sophy! and Papa and Mamma you know will come home just now," said
Marianne.

"Oh, Miss Sophy has her books and drawings, you know, she is never afraid of
being alone; besides, tonight it was her own choice; and as to your Papa and
Mamma, they will not be home tonight, I Am pretty sure, for a gentleman, who had
it from their own authority, told me where they were going, which is farther
off than they think, but they did not consult me; and I fancy they will be
obliged to sleep out, so you need not be in a hurry about them. We'll have
candles."

The door opened just as Mrs. Tattle was going to ring the bell again for
candles, and the cowslip wine. "Christopher! Christopher!" said Mrs. Theresa,
who was standing at the fire, with her back to the door when it opened.
"Christopher! pray bring -- Do you hear?" But no Christopher answered; and,
upon turning round, Mrs. Tattle, instead of Christopher, beheld two little
black figures, which stood perfectly still and silent. It was so dark that
their forms could scarcely be discerned.

"In the name of Heaven who, and what may you be? Speak, I conjure you! What
are ye?"

"The chimney sweepers, ma'am, an' please your ladyship."

"Chimney sweepers," repeated Frederick and Marianne, bursting out a laughing.

"Chimney sweepers!" repeated Mrs. Theresa, provoked at the recollection of her
late solemn address to them. "Chimney sweepers! and could not you say so a
little sooner? And pray what brings you here, gentlemen, at this time of night?"

"The bell rang ma'am," answered the squeaking voice.

"The bell rang! yes, for Christopher. The boy's mad, or drunk."

"Ma'am," said the tallest of the chimney sweepers, who had not yet spoken, and
who now began in a very blunt manner; "Ma'am, your brother desired us to come
up when the bell rang; so we did."

"My brother, I have no brother, dunce," said Mrs. Theresa.

"Mr. Eden, madam."

"Oh, ho!" said Mrs. Tattle, in a more complacent tone, "the boy takes me for
Miss Birtha Eden, I perceive;" and, flattered to be taken in the dark by a
chimney sweeper, for a young and handsome lady, Mrs. Theresa laughed, and
informed him, "that they had mistaken the room; that they must go up another
pair of stairs, and turn to the left."

The chimney sweeper with the squeaking voice, bowed, thanked her ladyship for
this information, said, "Good night to ye quality;" and they both moved toward
the door.

"Stay," said Mrs. Tattle, whose curiosity was excited, "What can the Edens
want with chimney sweepers at this time o'night, I wonder? Christopher, did you
hear any thing about it?" said the lady to her footman, who was now lighting
the candles.

"Upon my word, ma'am," said the servant, "I cannot say, but I Will step down
below and enquire. I heard them talking about it in the kitchen, but I only got
a word here and there, for I was hunting for the snuff-dish, as I knew it must
be for candles, when I heard the bell ring, ma'am, so I thought to find the
snuff-dish before I answered the bell, for I knew it must be for candles you
rang. But if you please I Will step down now, ma'am, and see about the
chimney-sweeps."

"Yes, step down, do, and Christopher, bring up the cowslip wine, and some more
macaroons for my little Marianne."

Marianne withdrew rather coldly from a kiss which Mrs. Tattle was going to
give her, for she was somewhat surprised at the familiarity with which this
lady talked to her footman. She had not been used to these manners in her
father and mother, and she did not like them.

"Well," said Mrs. Tattle to Christopher, who was now returned, "what is the
news?"

"Ma'am, the little fellow with the squeaking voice has been telling me the
whole story. The other morning, ma'am, early, he and the other were down the
hill, sweeping in Paradise-row; those chimnies, they say, are difficult; and
the square fellow, ma'am, the biggest of the two boys, got wedged in the
chimney; the other little fellow was up at the top at the time, and he heard
the cry, but in his fright and all he did not know what to do, ma'am, for he
looked about from the top of the chimney, and not a soul could he see stirring,
but a few that he could not make mind his screech. The boy within almost
stifling too. So he screeched, and screeched, all he could; and by the greatest
chance in life, ma'am, old Mr. Eden was just going down the hill to fetch his
morning walk."

"Aye," interrupted Mrs. Theresa, "friend Ephraim is one of your early risers."

"Well," said Marianne, impatlently.

"So, ma'am, hearing the screech, he turns and sees the sweep, and the moment
he understands the matter --

"I Am sure he must have taken some time to understand it," interposed Mrs.
Tattle, "for he is the slowest creature breathing, and the deafest in company.
Go on, Christopher. So the Sweep did make him hear?"

"So he says, ma'am; and so the old gentleman went in and pulled the boy out of
the chimney, with much ado, ma'am."

"Bless me!" exclaimed Mrs. Theresa, but did old Eden go up the chimney himself
after the boy, wig and all?"

"Why, ma'am," said Christopher, with a look of great delight, "that was all as
one, as the very 'dentical words I put to the boy myself when he telled me his
story. But, ma'am, that was what I could n't get out of him neither, rightly,
for he is a churl; the big boy that was stuck in the chimney, I mean, for when
I put the question to him about the wig, laughing like, he would n't take it
laughing like at all, but would only make answer to us like a bear, "He saved
my life, that is all I know;" and this over again, ma'am, to all the kitchen
round, that cross-questioned him. So when I finds him so stupid and
ill-mannered like (for I offered him a shilling, ma'am, myself, to tell about
the wig) but he put it back in a ways that did not become such as he, to no
lady's butler, ma'am: whereupon I turns to the slim fellow, and he is smarterer
and more mannerly, ma'am, with a tongue in his head for his betters, but he
could not resolve me my question neither, for he was up at the top of the
chimney the best part of the time; and when he came down, Mr. Eden had his wig
on, but had his arm all bare and bloody, ma'am."

"Poor Mr. Eden!" exclaimed Marianne.

"Oh, Miss," continued the servant, "and the chimney-sweep himself was so
bruised, and must have been killed."

"Well, well! but he is alive now; go on with your story, Christopher," said
Mrs. T. "Chimney sweepers get wedged in chimnies every day, its part of their
trade, and its a happy thing when they come off with a few bruises. To be
sure," added she, observing that both Frederick and Marianne looked displeased
at this speech, "to be sure, if one may be lieve this story, there was some
real danger."

"Real danger! yes, indeed," said Marianne, "and I Am sure I think Mr. Eden was
very good."

"Certainly, it was a most commendable action, and quite providential; so I
shall take an opportunity of saying, when I tell the story in all companies;
and the boy may thank his kind stars, I Am sure, to the end of his days for such
an escape. But pray, Christopher," said she, persisting in her conversation
with Christopher, who was now laying the cloth for supper, "Pray which house
was it in Paradise-row? where the Eagles, or the Miss Ropers lodge? or which?"

"It was at my lady Battersby's, ma'am."

"Ha! ha!" cried Mrs. Theresa, "I thought we should get to the bottom of the
affair at last. This is excellent! This will make an admirable story for my
lady Battersby the next time I see her. These Quakers are so sly! -- Old Eden I
know has long wanted to get himself introduced in that house, and a charming
charitable expedient he hit upon! My lady Battersby will enjoy this of all
things."


THE MIMIC.
PART III.
"NOW," continued Mrs. Theresa, turning to Frederick, as soon as the servant
had left the room, "now, Mr. Frederick Montague, I have a favor -- such a
favor to ask of you -- its a favor which only you can grant; you have such
talents, and would do the thing so admirably! and my lady Battersby would quite
adore you for it. She will do me the honor to be here to spend an evening
tomorrow. I Am convinced Mr. and Mrs. Montague will find themselves obliged to
stay out another day; and I so long to show you off to her ladyship; and your
doctor Carbuncle, and your counselor Puff, and your Miss Croker, and all your
charming characters. You must let me introduce you to her ladyship tomorrow
evening. Promise me." --

"Oh, ma'am," said Frederick, "I cannot promise you any such thing, indeed. I
am much obliged to you, but I cannot come indeed."

"Why not, my dear sir? Why not? You don't think I mean you should promise, if
you are certain your Papa and Mamma will be home."

"If they do come home I will ask them about it," said Frederick, hesitating
for though he by no means wished to accept of the invitation, he had not yet
acquired the necessary power of saying NO decidedly.

"Ask them!" repeated Mrs. Theresa, "my dear sir, at your age, must you ask
your Papa and Mamma about such things?"

"Must! no ma'am," said Frederick; "but I said I would; I know I need not,
because my father and mother always let me judge for myself about every thing
almost."

"And about this I am sure," cried Marianne; Papa and Mamma you know, just as
they were going away, said, "If Mrs. Theresa asks you to come, do as you think
best."

"Well then," said Mrs. Theresa, "you know it rests with yourselves, if you may
do as you please."

"To be sure I may, madam," said Frederick, coloring from that species of
emotion which is justly called false shame, which often conquers real shame,
"to be sure, ma'am, I may do as I please."

"Then I may make sure of you," said Mrs. Theresa, "for now it would be down
right rudeness to tell a lady you will not do as she pleases. Mr. Frederick
Montague, I Am sure, is too well bred a young gentleman to do so impolite, so
ungallant a thing!"

The jarcon of politeness and gallantry is frequently brought by the silly
acquaintance of young people, to confuse their simple morality and clear good
sense. A new and unintelligible system is presented to them, in a language
foreign to their understanding, and contradictory to their feelings. They
hesitate between new motives and old principles; from the fear of being thought
ignorant, they become affected; and from the dread of being thought to be
children, act like fools. But all this they feel, only when they are in the
company of such people as Mrs. Theresa Tattle.

"Ma'am," Frederick began, "I don't mean to be rude, but I hope you will excuse
me from coming to drink tea with you tomorrow, because my father and mother
are not acquainted with lady Battersby, and may be they might not like --

"Take care, take care," said Mrs. Theresa, laughing at his perplexity, you
want to get off from obliging me, and you don't know how. You had very nearly
made a most shocking blunder, in putting it all upon poor lady Battersby. Now
you know its impossible Mr. and Mrs. Montague could have in nature, the
slightest objection to my introducing you to my lady Battersby at my own house;
for don't you know, that besides her ladyship's many unexceptionable qualities,
which one need not talk of, she is cousin, but once removed to the Trotters of
Lancashire, your mother's great favorites. And there is not a person at the
Wells, I Will venture to say, could be of more advantage to your sister Sophy, in
the way of partners, when she comes to go to the balls, which it is to be
supposed she will some time or other; and as you are so good a brother, that is
a thing to be looked to, you know. Besides, as to yourself, there is nothing her
ladyship delights in so much as in a good mimic; and she will quite adore you!"

"But I don't want her to adore me, ma'am," said Frederick, bluntly; then
correcting himself, added, "I mean for being a mimic."

"Why not, my love, between friends can there be any harm in showing one's
talents, you that have such talents to show? She Will keep your secret, I Will
answer for her; and, added she, you need n't be afraid of her criticism, for
between you and I, she is no great critic, so you will come. Well, thank you,
that is settled. How you have made me beg and pray; but you know your own value,
I see, as you entertaining people always do. One must ask a wit, like a fine
singer, so often. Well, but now for the favor I was going to ask you."

Frederick looked surprised, for he thought that the favor of his company was
what she meant; but she explained herself farther.

"The old Quaker who lodges above, Old Ephraim Eden, my lady Battersby and I
have so much diversion about him, he is the best character, the oddest
creature! If you were but to see him come into the rooms with those stiff
skirts, or walking with his eternal sister Birtha, and his everlasting broad
brimmed hat, one knows him a mile off. But then his voice, and way, and all
together, if one could get them to the life, they would be better than any thing on
the stage; better even than any thing I Have seen tonight; and I think you would
make a capital Quaker for my lady Battersby; but then the thing is, one can
never get to hear the old Quiz talk. Now you who have so much invention and
cleverness; I have no invention myself, but could not you hit upon some way of
getting to see him, so that you might get him by heart. I Am sure you, who are
so quick, would only want to see him, and hear for half a minute, to be able to
take him off, so as to kill one with laughing. But I have no invention.

"Oh, as to the invention," said Frederick, "I know an admirable way of doing
the thing, if that was all. But then remember, I don't say I will do the thing,
for I will not. But I know a way of getting up into his room, and seeing him,
without his knowing I was there."

"O tell it me, you charming clever creature!"

"But remember, I do not say I will do it."

"Well, well, let us hear it, and you shall do as you please afterward."

"Merciful goodness!" exclaimed Mrs. Tattle, "do my ears deceive me? I declare
I looked round and thought the squeaking chimney sweeper was in the room!"

"So did I, Frederick, I declare," cried Marianne, laughing, "I never heard any
thing so like his voice in my life."

Frederick imitated the squeaking voice of this chimney sweeper to great
perfection.

"Now," continued he, "this fellow is just my height; the old Quaker, if my
face were blackened, and if I were to change clothes with the chimney sweeper,
I Will answer for it he would never know me."

"Oh, its an admirable invention, I give you infinite credit for it!" exclaimed
Mrs. Theresa. "It shall, it must be done: I Will ring, and have the fellow up
this minute."

"Oh, no; do not ring," said Frederick, stopping her hand, "I don't mean to do
it. You know you promised that I should do as I pleased; I only told you my
invention."

"Well, well, but only let me ring and ask whether the chimney sweepers are
below: you shall do as you please afterward."

"Christopher, shut the door; Christopher," said she to the servant, who came
up when she rang, "Pray are the sweeps gone yet?"

"No, ma'am."

"But have they been up to old Eden yet."

"Oh, no, ma'am; nor be not to go till the bell rings, for Miss Birtha, ma'am,
was asleep, laying down, and her brother would n't have her wakened on no
account whatsomever; he came down his self to the kitchen to the sweeps though;
but would n't have, as I heard him say, his sister waked for no account. But
Miss Birtha's bell will ring, when she wakens, for the sweeps, ma'am, it was she
wanted to see the boy as her brother saved, and I suppose sent for 'em to give
'em something charitable, ma'am."

"Well, never mind your suppositions," said Mrs. Theresa, "run down this very
minute to the little squeaking chimney sweep, and send him up to me. Quick, but
don't let the other bear come up with him.

Christopher, who had curiosity as well as his mistress, when he returned with
the chimney sweeper, prolonged his own stay in the room by sweeping the hearth,
throwing down the tongs and shovel, and picking them up again.

"That will do, Christopher; Christopher, that will do I say;" Mrs. Theresa
repeated in vain. She was obliged to say, "Christopher you may go," before he
would depart.

"Now," said she to Frederick, "step in here to the next room, with this
candle, and you will be equipped in an instant. Only just change clothes with the
boy; only just let me see what a charming chimney sweeper you would make; you shall
do as you please afterward."

"Well, I Will only change clothes with him just to show you for one minute."

"But," said Marianne to Mrs. Theresa, whilst Frederick was changing his
clothes, "I think Frederick is right about" --

"About what, love?"

"I think he is in the right not to go up, though he can do it so easily, to
see that gentleman, I mean on purpose to mimic and laugh at him afterward; I
don't think that would be quite right."

"Why, pray, Miss Marianne?"

"Why, because he is so good natured to his sister. He would not let her be
wakened."

"Dear, its easy to be good in such little things; and he will not have long to be
good to her neither; for I don't think she will trouble him long in this world
any how."

"What do you mean?" said Marianne.

"That she will die, child."

"Die! die with that beautiful color in her cheeks! How sorry her poor, poor
brother will be. But she will not die, I Am sure, for she walks about, and runs
up stairs so lightly! O you must be quite entirely mistaken, I hope."

"If I Am mistaken, Dr. Panado Cardimum's mistaken too then, that is my comfort.
He says, unless the waters work a miracle, she stands a bad chance; and she
will not follow my advice, and consult the doctor for her health."

"He would frighten her to death, perhaps," said Marianne. "I hope Frederick
will not go up to disturb her."

"Lud, child, you are turned simpleton all of a sudden, how can your brother
disturb her more than the real chimney sweeper?"

"But I don't think its right," persisted Marianne, "and I shall tell him so."

"Nay, Miss Marianne, I don't commend you now; young ladies should not be so
forward to give opinions and advice to their elder brothers unasked; and Mr.
Frederick, and I, I presume, must know what is right, as well as Miss Marianne.
Hush! here he is! O the capital figure, cried Mrs. Theresa! Bravo! bravo! cried
she, as Frederick entered in the chimney sweeper's dress, and as he spoke,
saying,

"I Am afraid, please your ladyship, to dirty your ladyship's carpet."

She broke out into immoderate raptures, calling him "her charming chimney
sweeper!" and repeating that she knew before hand the character would do for
him.

She instantly rung the bell, in spite of all expostulation -- ordered
Christopher to send up the other chimney sweeper -- triumphed in observing,
that Christopher did not in the least know Frederick when he came into the
room; and offered to lay any wager that the other chimney sweeper would mistake
him for his companion. -- And so he did: and when Frederick spoke, the voice
was so very like, that it was scarcely possible that he should have perceived
the difference.

Marianne was diverted by this scene, but she started, when in the midst of it
they heard a bell ring.

"That Is the lady's bell, and we must go," said the blunt chimney sweeper.

"Go, then, about your business, and here is a shilling for you to drink, my
honest fellow. I did not know you were so much bruised when I first saw you --
I will not detain you. Go," said she, pushing Frederick toward the door.

Marianne sprang forward to speak to him, but Mrs. Theresa kept her off; and
though Frederick resisted, the lady shut the door upon him by superior force;
and having locked it, there was no retreat.

Mrs. Tattle, and Marianne, waited impatiently for Frederick's return.

"I hear them," cried Marianne. "I hear them coming down stairs."

They listened again, and all was silent.

At length they heard suddenly a great noise of many steps, and many voices in
confusion in the hall.

"Merciful!" exclaimed Mrs. Theresa, "it must be your father and mother come
back."

Marianne ran to unlock the room door, and Mrs. Theresa followed her into the
hall.

The hall was rather dark, but under the lamp a crowd of people. All the
servants in the house were gathered together.

As Mrs. Theresa approached, the crowd opened in silence, and she beheld in the
midst Frederick, blood streaming from his face; his head was held by
Christopher, and the chimney sweeper was holding a basin for him.

"Merciful! Gracious Heaven! what will become of me!" exclaimed Mrs. Theresa.
"Bleeding! good God! he will bleed to death! Can nobody think of any thing that
will stop blood in a minute? A key -- a large key down his back; a key -- has
nobody a key? Mr. and Mrs. Montague will be here before he has done bleeding. A
key! Cobwebs! a puff-ball! for mercy's sake! Can nobody think of any thing that
will stop blood in a minute! Gracious me! he will bleed to death, I believe!"

"He Will bleed to death! O my brother!" cried Marianne, catching hold of the
words, and terrified, she ran up stairs, crying, "Sophy! O Sophy! come down
this minute, or he will be dead! my brother's bleeding to death. -- Sophy! Sophy!
come down, or he will be dead!"

"Let go the basin, you," said Christopher, pulling the basin out of the
chimney sweeper's hand, who had all this time stood in silence, "you are not
fit to hold the basin for a gentleman."

"Let him hold it," said Frederick, "he did not mean to hurt me."

"That Is more than he deserves. I Am certain sure he might have known well
enough it was Mr. Frederick all the time, and he would no business to go to fight
-- such a one as he, with a gentleman."

"I did not know he was a gentleman," said the chimney sweeper, "How could I?"

"How could he indeed?" said Frederick, "he shall hold the basin."

"Gracious me! I Am glad to hear him speak like himself again, at any rate,"
cried Mrs. Theresa. "Lord bless us! and here comes Miss Sophy too."

"Sophy!" cried Frederick, "Oh, Sophy! don't you come -- don't look at me,
you will despise me."

"My brother! where! where!" said Sophy, looking, as she thought, at the two
chimney sweepers.

"Its Frederick," said Marianne, "that is my brother."

"Miss Sophy, don't be alarmed," Mrs. Theresa began, "but gracious goodness, I
wish Miss Birtha" --

At this instant, a female figure in white appeared upon the stairs; she passed
swiftly on, whilst every one gave way before her.

"Oh, Miss Birtha!" cried Mrs. Theresa, catching hold of her gown to stop her
as she came near Frederick, "Oh, Miss Eden, your beautiful India muslin! --
take care of the chimney sweeper, for Heaven's sake." -- But she pressed
forwards.

"Its my brother; will he die?" cried Marianne, throwing her arms round her,
and looking up as if to a being of a superior order, "Will he bleed to death?"

"No, my love!" answered a sweet voice, "do not frighten thyself."

"I Have done bleeding," said Frederick.

"Dear me, Miss Marianne, if you would not make such a rout," cried Mrs.
Tattle. "Miss Birtha, its nothing but a frolic. You see Mr. Frederick Montague
only in a masquerade dress. Nothing in the world but a frolic, ma'am. You see
he stops bleeding. I was frightened out of my wits at first; I thought it was
his eye, but I see it is only his nose; all is well that ends well. Mr.
Frederick, we'll keep your counsel. Pray, ma'am, let us ask no questions, its
only a boyish frolic. Come Mr. Frederick this way, into my room, and I Will give
you a towel, and some clean water, and you can get rid of this masquerade
dress. Make haste, for fear your father and mother should pop in upon us."

"Do not be afraid of thy father and mother, they are surely thy best friends,"
said a mild voice. It was the voice of an elderly gentleman who now stood
behind Frederick.

"Oh, sir! Oh, Mr. Eden!" said Frederick, turning to him --

"Don't betray me! for goodness sake, say nothing about me," whispered Mrs.
Tattle.

"I am not thinking about you -- Let me speak," cried he, pushing away her
hand, which stopped his mouth, "I shall say nothing about you, I promise you,"
said Frederick, with a look of contempt.

"No, but for your own sake, my dear sir, your Papa and Mamma! Bless me! is not
that Mrs. Montague's carriage?"

"My brother, ma'am," said Sophy, "is not afraid of my father and mother's
coming back. Let him speak -- he was going to speak the truth."

"To be sure, Miss Sophy, I would n't hinder him from speaking the truth; but
its not proper, I presume, ma'am, to speak truth at all times, and in all
places, and before every body, servants and all. I only wanted, ma'am, to
hinder your brother from exposing himself. A hall, I apprehend, is not a proper
place for explanations."

"Here," said Mr. Eden, opening the door of his room, which was on the opposite
side of the hall to Mrs. Tattle's, "Here is a place," said he to Frederick,
"where thou may speak the truth at all times, and before every body."

"Nay, my room's at Mr. Frederick Montague's service, and my door's open too.
This way, pray," said she, pulling his arm.

But Frederick broke from her, and followed Mr. Eden.

"Oh, Sir, will you forgive me!" cried he.

"Forgive thee! -- and what have I to forgive?"

"Forgive, brother, without asking what," said Birtha, smiling.

"He shall know all," cried Frederick; "all that concerns myself, I mean. Sir,
I disguised myself in this dress; I came up to your room tonight on purpose to
see you, without your knowing it, that I might mimic you. The chimney sweeper
-- where is he?" said Frederick, looking round, and he ran into the hall to see
for him -- "May he come in? he may -- he is a brave, an honest, good, grateful
boy. He never guessed who I was; after we left you, we went down to the kitchen
together, and there I, fool that I was, for the pleasure of making Mr.
Christopher and the servants laugh, began to mimic you. This boy said, he would
not stand by and hear you laughed at; -- that you had saved his life; -- that I
ought to be ashamed of myself; -- that you had just given me half-a-crown: --
and so you had; -- but I went on, and told him, I Would knock him down if he said
another word. -- He did -- I gave the first blow -- we fought -- I came to the
ground -- the servants pulled me up again. -- They found out, I don't know how,
that I was not a chimney sweeper -- the rest you saw. And now can you forgive
me, Sir," said Frederick to Mr. Eden, seizing hold of his hand.

"The other hand, friend," said the Quaker, gently withdrawing his right hand,
which every body now observed being much swelled, he put it in his bosom again
-- "This hand and welcome," said he, offering his other hand to Frederick, and
shaking his with a smile.

"O that other hand!" said Frederick, "that was hurt I remember. -- How ill I
have behaved -- extremely ill. -- But this is a lesson that I shall never
forget as long as I live. I hope for the future I shall behave like a
gentleman."

"And like a man -- and like a good man, I am sure thou will," said the good
Quaker, shaking Frederick's hand affectionately, "or I am much mistaken friend
in that black countenance."

"You are not mistaken," cried Marianne, "Frederick will never be persuaded
again by any body to do what he does not think right; and now, brother, you may
wash your black countenance."

Just when Frederick had got rid of half his black countenance, a double knock
was heard at the door. It was Mr. and Mrs. Montague -- who went into the hall
to meet them.

"What will you do now?" whispered Mrs. Theresa to Frederick, as his father and
mother came into the room.

"A chimney sweeper! covered with blood!" exclaimed Mr. and Mrs. Montague.

"Father, I am Frederick," said he, stepping forward toward them as they stood
in astonishment.

"Frederick! my son!"

'Yes, mother, I Am not hurt half so much as I deserve; I Will tell you -- "

"Nay," interrupted Birtha, "let my brother tell the story this time, thou have
told it once, and told it well -- no one but my brother could tell it better."

"A story never tells so well the second time, to be sure," said Mrs. Theresa,
"but Mr. Eden will certainly make the best of it."

Without taking any notice of Mrs. Tattle, or her apprehensive looks, Mr. Eden
explained all that he knew of the affair in a few words, "your son," concluded
he, "will quickly put off this dirty dress -- the dress has not stained the
mind -- that is fair and honorable. When he felt himself in the wrong, he said
so; nor was he in haste to conceal his adventure from his father; this made me
think well of both father and son. I speak plainly, friend, for that is best.
But what is become of the other chimney sweeper? he will want to go home," said
Mr. Eden, turning to Mrs. Theresa.

Without making any reply, she hurried out of the room as fast as possible, and
returned in a few moments, with a look of extreme consternation,

"Good Heaven! here is a catastrophe, indeed! -- now indeed, Mr. Frederick,
your Papa and Mamma, have reason to be angry. A new suit of clothes! -- the
barefaced villain! -- gone! -- no sign of them in my closet, or any where --
the door was locked -- he must have gone up the chimney, out upon the leads,
and so escaped; but Christopher is after him. I protest, Mrs. Montague, you
take it too quietly. -- The wretch! -- a new suit of clothes, blue coat and
buff waistcoat. -- I never heard of such a thing! -- I declare, Mr. Montague,
you are vastly good now not to be in a passion," added Mrs. Theresa.

"Madam," replied Mr. Montague, with a look of much civil contempt, "I think
the loss of a suit of clothes, and even the disgrace that my son has been
brought to this evening, fortunate circumstances in his education. He will, I
am persuaded, judge and act for himself more wisely in future; nor will he be
tempted to offend against humanity, for the sake of being called, "The best
Mimic in the World."

END OF VOL. II.

