INDIAN ZOOLOGY.

SECOND EDITION.



LONDON.

Printed by HENRY HUGHS for ROBERT FAULDER.

MDCCXC.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS work, or rather fragment, was begun in the year 1769. The descriptive
part fell to my share: the expense of the plates was divided between Mr. BANKS,
now Sir JOSEPH BANKS, Baronet; JOHN GIDEON LOTEN, Esquire a governor in Ceylon; and
myself. Twelve only were engraved and published: soon after which, the
undertaking appeared so arduous that the design was given over. It would be
injustice to Mr. LOTEN not to say, that the etchings are taken from his fine
collection of drawings made in India: for he alleviated the cares of life with
the delicious pursuits of the study of NATURE. I prevaled on my two friends to
unite with me in presenting the learned JOHN REINHOLD FORSTER with the plates.
I also bestowed on him three others, engraven at my own expense, before the
work was dropped. These were never published in England; but when Dr. Forster
left our island, he took the whole with him, and in 1781 printed, at Halle, in
Saxony, an edition very highly improved, and translated into Latin and German.
He prefixed to it a most elaborate lucubration de Finibus et Indole Aeris,
Soli, Marisque INDICI; described the subjects of the three additional plates;
and inserted, after the description of the fifteenth plate, a most learned
dissertation on the genus of the BIRDS OF PARADISE, and on the PHOENIX. He
added several notes; and at the end presented his readers with a Faunula of the
quadrupeds and birds of the extensive region of INDIA and its islands.

The last year, Mr. Robert Faulder, at New Bondstreet, bookseller, applied to
me for permission to reprint this very imperfect performance. I consented; but
advised him by all means to get the additions by Dr. Forster translated, and an
improved Faunula to be formed from the best authorities which could be
procured: but, having myself abjured all future publications, referred him for
that labor to any gentlemen willing and able to do justice to the performance.
I took the liberty of pointing out three friends, of indisputable abilities,
and of whose Tind services I had long and useful experience.

Dr. AIKIN, of Yarmouth, in Norfolk, with great cheerfulness undertook the
translations: Mr. JOHN LATHAM, of Dartford, Kent, justly celebrated for
extending the study of ORNITHOLOGY far beyond any naturalist of our days; and
the Rev. Mr. HUGH DAVIES, rector of Aber, in Caernarvonshire, underwent the
task of arranging the very numerous subjects of the INDIAN FAUNULA. The more
laborious part, relative to the Insects, fell to the share of Mr. LATHAM: the
rest to that of Mr. DAVIES. A more complete enumeration was never formed,
considering the extent of the country; and the materials imported into our
islands. Science has of late years found its way into our most distant
possessions; and we gather its fruits: the Faunula is a suffcient proof of the
richness of the harvest. Collectors at home, or in the distant Indostan, will
find considerable benefit from this part of the work. It will direct their
researches, or instruct them in the arrangement of the new acquisitions. If my
past labors can in any shape contribute in the left to the amusement of the
individual, or to the public in general, the reflection cannot fail bestowing
on me the most pleasing sensation.

THOMAS PENNANT.
Downing, March 1, 1791.
CONTENTS.
ESSAY ON INDIA Page 1 INDIAN ZOOLOGY, p. 29. I. Sciurus Macrourus. The
Long-Tailed Squirrel 31 II. Falco Melanoleucos. Black and White Falcon 33 III.
Otus Bakkamoena. The Little Horn Owl 34 IV. Trogon Fasciatus. The Fasciated
Couroucou 36 V. Cuculus Pyrrhocephalus. The Red-Headed Cuckoo 38 VI. Picus
Miniatus. The Red Woodpecker 39 VII. Perdix Bicalcaratus. Double-Spurred
Partridge 40 VIII. Columba Melanocephala. The Black-Capped Pigeon 41 IX.
Muscicapa Flammea. Flammeous Flycatcher 43 X. Motacilla Sutoria. The Tailor
Bird 44 XI. Tantalus Leucocephalus. The White-Headed Ibis 47 XII. Gallinula
Phanicurus. The Red-Tailed Water-Hen 49 XIII. Anser Melainotos. The
Black-Backed Goose 50 XIV. Anas Poikilohynchus. Spotted-Billed Duck 52 XV.
Anhinga Melanogaster. The Black-Bellied Anhinga 53 XVI. Squalus Tigrinus. The
Tiger Shark 55 XVII. Labrus Zeylanicus. The Ceylon Wrasse 56
INDIAN FAUNULA, p. 57. Class I. QUADRUPEDS.
Div. I. Hoofed 59 Sect I. Whole-Hoofed 59 II. Cloven-Hoofed 59
II. Digitated 61 Sect I. Anthropomorphous 61 II. Rapacious. Canine Teeth 62
III. Without Canine Teeth 63 IV. Without Cutting Teeth 64 V. Without Teeth 65
III. Pinnated 65 IV. Winged 65
Class II. BIRDS.
Div. I. Land Birds 67 Order I. Rapacious 67 II. Pies 68 III. Passerine 75 IV.
Columbine 80 V. Gallinaceous 81
Div. II. Water Fowl 82 Order VII. Cloven-footed 82 VIII. Pinnated Feet 85 IX.
Web-footed 85

Class III. AMPHIBIA.
Ordo I. Reptilia 87 II. Serpents 88
Classis IV. PISCES.
Ordo I. Branchiostegi 91 II. Chondropterygii 92 III. Apodes 93 IV. Jugulares
93 V. Thoracici 94 VI. Abdominales 96
Classis V. INSECTA.
Ordo I. Eleuterata 99 II. Ulonata 111 III. Synistata 112 IV. Agonata 115 V.
Unogata 117 VI. Glossata 118 VII. Ryngota 136 VIII. Antliata 139
Classis VI. VERMES.
I. Intestina 141 II. Mollusca 141 III. Testacea 143 IV. Lithophyta 160 V.
Zoophyta 161

PLATES.
TITLE PAGE. The common Bird of Paradise, with a View of Dory Harbor in New
Guinea.

I. Long-Tailed Squirrel; and the Tree, Eugenia Malaccensis, to face Page 31
II. Black and White Falcon. The Tree, Rhamnus Jujuba. 33 III. Little Horn Owl.
The Plant, Gloriofa Superba. 34 IV. Fasciated Courocou. The Plant, Nummularia
Lactea Minima. Rumph. Amboin. 36 V. Red-Headed Cuckoo. 38 VI. Red Woodpecker.
39 VII. Double-Spurred Partridge. 40 VIII. Black-Capped Pigeon. 41 IX.
Flammeous Flycatcher. 43 X. Tailor Bird. 44 XI. White-Headed Ibis. 47 XII.
Red-Tailed Water-Hen. 49 XIII. Black-Backed Goose. 50 XIV. Spotted-Billed Duck.
52 XV. Black-Bellied Anhinga. 53 XVI. Fig. 1. Tiger Shark. 55 Fig. 2. Ceylon
Wrasse.
INDIAN ZOOLOGY.
N. B. The birds represented in plates 3, 6, and 8, are, by an oversight in the
letter press, said to be figured of the natural size: the real measures are as
follow, viz.

PI. 3. The bird measures about 7 inches. PI. 6. The length of the bird is
about 9 inches. PI. 8. The bird is rather more than 9 inches long.
Page 40. For BICALCARATUS read BICALCARATA. -- The length of this species is
about 13 inches.

AN ESSAY ON INDIA, ITS BOUNDARIES, CLIMATE, SOIL, AND SEA.
Translated from the Latin of JOHN REINHOLD FORSTER, By JOHN AIKIN, M. D.
THE name of India is probably derived from Hind, or Hindu, the appellation of
the people inhabiting it, which the Spaniards and Portuguese, the first
navigators to India, were accustomed to write Gentu. The Greeks, who penetrated
through Persia into India, received from the Persians the name of Hind, as that
of the nation; but they also improperly called Indus, the river named by the
inhabitants Sind or Sindo. In a later age, the Romans termed the country,
India, the people, Indians, but the river also, Indus; yet they were not
unacquainted with the name of Sindi. The Arabians and Persians again employed
the names of Sind, and Hind, which occur frequently in their writings. After
the Portuguese began to navigate for the purpose of exploring new regions, many
of them suspected, that if they were to steer directly westward, they would at
length arrive at the farthest islands in the vicinity of India; and because
they conceived these islands to lie before those Indian regions (ante illas)
they gave them, in the geographical charts made before the discovery of
America, the name of Antilles; and that India, which they supposed situated
behind the Antilles, they named the West Indies, because it might be reached by
sailing westward. Hence appears the reason why in our age the name of Indies is
so widely extended.

THAT India whence the animals now to be described are taken, is East India.
But even here there is much variation as to the countries to which this name is
proper and peculiar. In the first place it is maintained, that India is only
wherever the Hindu nation inhabits, or the country called by the Persians,
Hindostan, which is comprehended between the rivers Sind and Ganges, closed to
the north by the ridge of Imaus or Caucasus; and on the south surrounded by the
ocean; so that the whole peninsula on this side the Ganges, belongs to
Hindostan.

BUT in a more extended sense, the peninsula beyond the Ganges also is a part
of India. And its limits are much more extensive, if under this second
signification of India are reckoned all the islands of the Indian sea, from the
east and north of Madagascar, as far as New Holland, and thence eastward to the
Philippine islands, together with New Guinea; and it is principally with this
meaning that the English and Dutch sailors use the word India, and Mr. PENNANT
seems to have adopted it in his account of the animals, of India.

FROM what has been said, it will be evident that a disquisition concerning the
climate, soil, and seas of India, thus largely understood, will be a matter of
much difficulty.

MOUNT Imaus, MOUNTAINS.
arising in the very borders of Persia, and whose northern ridge separates
India from Bokara or Bactria, from Cashimire or Caspatyrus, from the kingdom of
Tibet, and from the Chinese province of Yunnan, terminates at length in the
kingdom of Tonquin, and runs out into other branches. At the root of this
mountain the temperature of the air is very various; for in the winter season
the country is buried in snow and frost, not, however, for a long time. Those
summits alone from which the Sind and Ganges are principally fed, are covered
with perpetual snow. Yet even the plain tract at the mouths of the Ganges is
not entirely free from frost during winter, since the inhabitants collect ice
artificially prepared, for cooling liquors in the heat of summer, GREAT HEATS.
although Fahrenbeit's thermometer never sinks below 42. But in the summer
season the inhabitants undergo the most intense heats, arising to the 114th,
nay even to the 120th degree of Fahrenbeit's thermometer; so that men are
scarcely able to breathe, plunge into water up to the chin, and ascend the
higher trees that they may inhale a somewhat cooler breeze; whilst they whose
occupations oblige them to endure the hot air abroad, not unfrequently fall
suddenly dead. The birds too are often killed by the heat, while flying, or
sitting on trees, and fall to the ground.

THEN, as the flat country is inundated about the solstice by the swollen waters
of the Ganges, which returning into their channel, leave many stagnant pools,
the exhalations raised by the sun's heat form a body of intensely hot vapor,
extremely noxious, so as to occasion putrid fevers of the highest malignity,
which frequently prove fatal within three hours.

LET us now pass into the peninsula of India on this side the Ganges, and
examine the nature of its climate and soil. This part of India is divided into
two parts by the ridge of mountains called Gatte; and while summer reigns on
one side, winter prevails on the other. This chiefly proceeds from the winds,
which, from October to April, blow constantly from the north; and from April to
October, from the south. For the space of some weeks before this change, there
is generally scarcely any wind; but at the commencement of the change, such
tempests arise as to cause great damage to mariners. On the eastern side of the
peninsula, called the coast of Coromandel, the sky from April to October is
constantly serene without a shower, but from October to April is the rainy
season. On the western or Malabar coast, on the contrary, there is no rain from
October to April, but very heavy rains fall from May to September. During the
fair season, intense heat infests the whole coast; but in the rainy season, the
temperature is at intervals more moderate, and at that time all the rivers
swell, and their streams are partly distributed through the fields for the
purpose of fertilising them, and partly are received into ponds or great
receptacles, where the water is preserved with care, to be let into the fields
at proper periods.

THE region of India beyond the Ganges has nearly the same climate with the
peninsula on this side; RIVERS.
but it is particularly well watered by large rivers. Of these we shall first
mention the Bahramputter (Burrampooter) which flows through the whole country
of Tibet from the very confines of Cashimire, and, after it has crossed the
kingdom of Assam, enters that of Bengal at Rangamatty, and at length, just upon
the coast of the Indian sea, mixes its waters with those of the Ganges, in an
equally copious, stream, and thus enters the sea in a common channel. Next, the
rivers Ava, Pegu, and Tenasserim, rising in the Tibet mountains, after watering
the kingdoms whose names they bear, enter the bay of Bengal on the western side
of the peninsula.

THE Menam and Menam-kom, or Siam and Cambodia rivers, flow down from the
mountains which part the province of Yunnan in China, from India. All the above
rivers, the Bahramputter excepted, take their course through large valleys,
enclosed on each side by ridges of hills. On the approach of the sun to the
tropic of Cancer, the snow on these mountains is dissolved, and all these
valleys are overflowed, like Egypt by the Nile. When the rivers return into
their channel, the moistened countries are sown chiefly with rice, which yields
a very rich increase. The kingdoms of Cochinchina, and Tonquin, are bounded to
the east by the sea, and to the west by a ridge of mountains separating them
from the kingdoms of Cambodia, and Laos. From this ridge many rivers descend,
which, after they have watered the country for a short tract, mingle with the
sea.

THE soil of all India hitherto described is rich; and, SOIL.
by the cultivation of the populous nations, which from the remotest ages have
inhabited these regions, and addicted themselves to agriculture, is rendered
extremely fertile. And, by reason that so many nations, and such various
species of animals, have for such a course of ages putrefied with the
vegetables of this fruitful land, the soil, lixiviated with water and mixed
with ashes, affords to Europe a great quantity of nitre, the principal
ingredient of its gunpowder. Rice is chiefly sown in moist situations, and
supplies these people, who live a Pythagorean life, with a food of easy
preparation, and extremely cheap. There is another kind of rice, which grows
even on the hills, and spares the cultivators the labor of watering.

THE marshes are covered with thick beds of reeds; and, MARSHES.
near the mouths of the largest rivers, overgrown with impenetrable groves of
mangles. Among the cultivated tracts, here and there dry spots are observed,
covered with briars and thickets. The parts neglected by human culture are full
of woods, which abound with the most beautiful and singular birds, especially
parrots, peacocks, pigeons, and others infinitely diversified with the gayest
and most varied plumage; together with herds of antelopes, tribes of monkeys,
and numbers of lions and tigers. The elephant, and rhinoceros, also inhabit
these forests, which scarcely ever lose their leaves, but are always verdant,
and perpetually loaded with fruits of one kind or another.

NATURE wears a different form in the islands of the Indian sea. ISLANDS.
But, that we may the better understand the nature of the climate, and the
temperature of the atmosphere, it will be of particular use to consider the
course of the winds which prevail in these seas. WINDS.
Between both tropics the wind almost. constantly blows from the east; and at
the equinoxes, about the line, the course of the wind is directly from east to
west. For the sun in the daytime heats the air; and about noon, when it is
vertical, the atmosphere glows with heat, and therefore is rarefied; at the
same time, the sun, seeming rapidly to move from east to west, on account of
the diurnal revolution of the earth, causes noon successively in different
regions. Toward evening, when the sun is in the west, the air from both sides
of the globe, as likewise from the east, rushes toward the west, and follows
the sun, in order to balance the rarefaction of the heated atmosphere: this
current of air is the east wind. The greater the distance from the equinoctial
line in each hemisphere, the more the wind inclines to the north or south. Now,
when the sun arrives at the tropic of Cancer, the east wind follows it; but the
east-north-east and north-east extend beyond the tropic of Cancer into the
northern hemisphere, whilst, on the contrary, the east-south-east, and
south-east scarcely reach farther than the equinoctial line. And when the sun
recedes to the tropic of Capricorn, the east wind follows it there too; but the
east-north-east, and north-east scarcely reach beyond the line, rarely to the
tropic; while the east-south-east, and south-east spread far into the southern
hemisphere. These observations are generally true concerning the winds within
the tropics, and especially in the great Atlantic and Pacific oceans.

EVERY where within the tropics, on approaching within three or four leagues of
land, a breeze is met with blowing from sea to land, from nine in the morning
to sunset; and from land to sea, from about ten at night to sunrise. These
observations also hold in general with respect to the winds in the vicinity of
lands within the tropics.

IN the Indian sea, from October to April, the east-north-east, and
north-north-east winds prevail as far as the line. But during the same season,
from the line southwards to about the 14th degree, the west, west-south-west,
and south-west are the prevailing winds; and beyond this space, the
east-south-east, and south-east. From April to October, in the northern
hemisphere, the west, west-south-west, and south-west winds reign: to the south
of the equinoctial, as far as about the 12th degree, the east, and
east-south-east; and beyond that point, the east-south-east, and south-east.
These prevailing winds are by sailors termed the Monsoons; and from them some
inferences may be drawn as to the temperature of the air. The winds which blow
across great tracts of land heated by the sun's rays, acquire a great degree of
heat; and the greater space they pass over, the more scorching they prove. But
wherever winds blow over the sea, they are cooled by the evaporation of the
water: hence all shores and islands, though situated under the hottest sun,
enjoy the benefit of temperate sea breezes.

IF we mean to consider too nature of the soil in the Indian islands, ORIGIN OF
THE ISLANDS.
we must attend to their twofold form and origin. Some are lofty, and if of
moderate size, they have generally a conical shape. On examination of the
mountain and strata in this case, it will presently be obvious that the whole
island has emerged from the bottom of the sea through the force of subterranean
fire; for all parts are full of volcanic remains. Actually burning mountains
are likewise not uncommon in these islands. All the high islands which I have
surveyed between the tropics, in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, were found to
contain scoriae, eructated ashes, and liquefied matter, the manifest vestiges
of intestine fires. And that the same takes place with regard to the islands of
the Indian sea, is rendered probable by so many volcanoes yet to be seen among
them, by the testimony of various navigators and eyewitnesses, and by the
stones, evidently resembling scoriae and melted rock, brought from thence. It
is wonderful that ashes thrown up from volcanoes, and other scoriaceous matters
comminuted and mixed with the earth, should constitute a soil inferior to none
in fertility; but it is certain that most plants thrive most luxuriantly in
this soil, and that trees of all kinds grow in it to a stupendous magnitude.

THERE are within the tropics other islands, low, and little elevated above the
surface of the sea. All of this kind are the workmanship of zoophyte vermes,
which raise on all sides from the bottom of the sea their mansions of a
calcareous matter, whence at length are formed rocks and stony shallows very
dangerous to navigators. Since for the most part easterly winds are frequent in
these seas, these animalcules, as if actuated by instinct, endeavor to exclude
the waves driven by the winds, by means of their stupendous works; and
therefore, carrying on the artful structure of their calcareous or stony
habitations, they extend them in long arms, which at last unite in a circle,
within which they include a portion of calm untroubled sea. On the opposite or
windward side, the waves continually throw up fragments of corals, which,
accumulating by degrees, form a mound against the force of the billows, and on
that part the sea is rendered gradually shallower; whilst on the other side,
immediately under the arms raised by the zoophytes, the sea is of astonishing
depth; and not unfrequently a part of the work remains open, for the ingress
and egress of the tide. In the coral banks themselves, sand is collected by the
waves, which afford soil and aliment for the seeds of shore plants brought
thither by the sea; and these plants at length perishing, gradually create and
accumulate a vegetable mould. If by chance a cocoa-nut be carried by the sea to
these spots, it germinates, and grows into a tall tree, bearing and
disseminating many nuts, some of which again germinating, soon form a
palm-grove, affording shade to birds, and other animals, and supplying
navigators, driven to the place by stress of weather, with a grateful food and
liquor. The bay included within the arms constructed by the zoophytes is a
receptacle for fishes which require a calm unagitated sea, and thus another
food from the animal kingdom is presented to strangers. The shallows, too,
afford quiet and desirable situations to molluscae, and shellfish of all
kinds, and contribute much toward supplying the inhabitants of the islands
with a variety of food.

THE greater islands of the Indian sea, Ceylon, Borneo, Java, Sumatra, Celebes,
Luconia, Mindanao, Ceram, Gilolo, Waighen, and the isle of Papua or New Guinea,
are all mountainous, and full of burning or extingushed volcanoes. They are
covered with evergreen woods and reed-grounds, luxuriant in various tropical
fruits, productive of all kinds of spices, USEFUL TREES, etc
and of many drugs valuable in medicine and the arts, especially Camphor,
Benzoin, Gamboge, Sanders, the Amomums, Costus, Zedoary, Galangal, the Peppers,
Snakeroot, Dragons-blood, and many others which need not here be enumerated.
These islands, enriched with so many and great advantages, are everywhere
inhabited by various animals; their woods and thickets are thronged with
innumerable birds; their seas abound in fishes of all kinds, the greatest part
of which have never been examined by naturalists; and what vast treasures of
shellfish their shores, marine rocks, and the bottom of their seas contain,
may be gathered from hence, that for at lest a century that these seas have
been frequented by Europeans, they have continually been offering somewhat new
to the curiosity of men whose avarice or vanity has prompted them to collect
such stores from all parts. Nor are these regions destitute of inhabitants,
differing from each other in color, shape, manners, dress, religion, and
language. For some tribes in the interior recesses of the woods and mountains
preserve their ancient savage state, treat all strangers as enemies, and devour
the slain; others, adopting gender manners, and formed to commerce, and even to
submission, become daily more civilized.

THUS much, concerning the limits, climate, soil, and seas of India, I thought
necessary to prefix, in order to render what follows more perspicuous.

ON THE BIRDS OF PARADISE, AND THE PHOENIX.
THE Birds of Paradise are a genus of birds scarcely as yet sufficiently known
to the ornithologists, because few of them are imported into Europe, and those,
too, mutilated in their feet, wings, and other parts, or distorted by having a
stick thrust within their skins, and thus too much lengthened. No real
naturalist ever had the fortune to see a live Bird of Paradise, or to have
observed their manners and economy Sir JOSEPH BANKS did me the favor of
communicating the drawing of the common Bird of Paradise, brought alive to
England, drawn from the life. T. P.
; for they inhabit a region visited by very few Europeans, since scarcely any
but sailors and merchants are permitted to penetrate into the remotest east,
the country of the Paradise-birds. The history of this genus is therefore still
full of falsities, or rather buried in such darkness, that we can scarcely hope
to gain more and truer information concerning them, till some person, by a
journey into these parts, is enabled, by his own observations and experiments,
to give the public some accounts more ample and exact than we hitherto possess.

IT is most certain that these birds were never known to the ancients; and
whatever the Egyptian priests delivered concerning their Phoenix, has little
agreement with the Bird of Paradise. But, that there may not be the left doubt
remaining on these points, we shll collect what has been said by the ancients
concerning the Phoenix, and, after the passages are brought in view, briefly
examine them. Herodotus, the father of history, relates (1. ii. 73.) that the
Phoenix is a bird of the shape and size of an eagle, decorated with
gold-coloured and purple wings; but he frankly confesses that he had never seen
the bird, but knew it only by its picture. Pliny (1. x. c. 2.) confirms that
the Phoenix is of the size of an eagle, with the splendor of gold around his
neck; the rest of the body purple; having a blue tail spotted with rose-colored
feathers; combs adorning his face, and a crest of feathers, his head. This was
the ancient opinion concerning the form and colors of the Phoenix; but the
same Pliny relates from Manilius, that the conversion of the great year
corresponds with the life of this bird, from which period the same course of
seasons, and position of the heavenly bodies, is renewed; and that this takes
place about noon on the day that the sun enters Taurus. Horapollo delivers the
same notion respecting the Phoenix. "They (the Egyptian priests) meaning to
signify the conversion of the great year, paint the Phoenix." These notions are
then to be explained from the theology of Egypt.

THE Sun, which produces the seasons, is the Egyptian OSIRIS, a deity whose
name has the same signification; for Oeisch-iri in the Egyptian tongue, is the
maker of seasons. But almost all the male gods, especially, of the Egyptians,
expressed the virtues and powers of the Sun. Hence, the vernal sun, when it is
peculiarly vigorous, and operates with most power, according to the discipline
of the Egyptian priests, was Hercules, whom they therefore called Dsemmenuti,
the virtue of God, or of the Gods. The same Hercules, according to Athenagoras
(pro Christianis, p. 18.) or, as Damascus has it ((...) ap. Wolff. Anecdot.
iii. p. 254.) "that principle was named, time void of old age, and likewise
Hercules." Nor is it to be omitted, that in the obelisk of king Ramesses, the
sun is called the lord of seasons, which in the Egyptian language is Sesoeisch,
or Sesoosis.

THE annual revolution of the sun makes a year of twelve months; but the
Egyptian year, long, was only 365 days; whence, every fourth year, four true
solar years exceeded as many Egyptian years a single day, which they were not
accustomed to intercalate. Hence the seasons of the year wandered through the
whole Egyptian year; and hence of the solar years as first fixed by Julius
Ceasar the dictator, 1460 equal 1461 vague Egyptian years. On this account, the
Egyptian priests were accustomed to call four years with the day of
intercalation, the year of God; and 1461 vague Egyptian years made the great
year of God, that is, of the Sun. And they taught, that at this great period,
the conversion of the great year took place, at which also the Phoenix
regenerated -- flew from Arabia to the city of the sun, and deposited his
father's body on the altar.

IT will now appear, why the Orphics, in hymn xi. to Hercules 3. address him by
the title of various-formed father of time. And Plutarch, in his treadle on
Isis and Osiris, asserts, "that the Egyptians fable Hercules to be placed in
the sun, and to revolve with it." For, from these premises, it might justly be
said, with Nonnus of Panopolis, 1. xl. p. 683, "that Hercules rolls round the
whole earth in the glittering orb of the sun, and carries round with him the
year, the son of time." Every common year, therefore, is a year of God; and the
great year, the son of time, which, in the Egyptian language, would be
Dsphenoeisch, and, on account of the harshness of the first letter, the Creels
would make it (...), Phoenix. This origin of the name adds strength to my
opinion, since it is perfectly agreeable to the doctrine of the Egyptians
concerning these things, and at the same time exactly expresses all the sacred
fables of their priests relative to the Phoenix.

THAT the fabulous Phoenix of the Egyptians has nothing in common with the
Birds of Paradise, will be sufficiently manifest from what has been said; yet
it is not altogether without reason that we have here treated on the Phoenix;
for the first Portuguese navigators to the Indian islands called the Birds of
Paradise, passaros da sol, Birds of the sun, in the same manner as the
Egyptians had regarded the Phoenix as a symbol of the annual revolution of the
sun, and the conversion of the great year. The inhabitants of the isle of
Ternate call these birds Manu-co-Dewata; Birds of God. The French, English, and
Germans have adopted the name of Birds of Paradise. All these names seem to
attribute somewhat of a celestial origin to the birds. The name Manu-co-Dewata
has induced some writers of natural history to call the bird Manucodiata
(Edwards, t. 110. Marograv. Brasil, 207. Raii Synops. Av. 21. n. 7. Brisson
Ornithol. ii. p. 130.) and the illustrious count de Busson, by cutting off part
of the name, has made from it his Manucode. Valentyne (vol. iii. p. 306, 313.)
has treated at length of the Birds of Paradise. The Portuguese first saw them
in Gilolo, Papua, and New Guinea. Many idle fables have been propagated
concerning these birds; among which are to be reckoned, that they have no feet,
are always on the wing, pass their lives in the air and feed on this element;
on which account the inhabitants of these countries are accustomed to cut off
their feet. But the people of the Aru islands have taught the Dutch in Banda
better; and it is sound that the feet are cut off in order that the birds may
be more easily preserved dry. The Indians, too, pay little regard to the feet,
because they use the skins of the Birds of Paradise only to adorn their helmets
in their games and mock combats. But the Aruans, 70 or 80 years ago, brought
these birds with their feet. Pigasette, who accompanied Ferdinand Magalhaens in
his voyage, testified from ocular demonstration, about 1525, that they were not
without feet. But the length and peculiar structure of the scapular feathers,
prevent them from sitting on trees in windy weather; and if they are once blown
down to the ground, they are utterly unable to raise themselves again by their
wings. When taken by the natives, they are immediately killed, because their
food is unknown, and they defend themselves courageously with their very strong
beaks.

OF the Birds of Paradise there are about six species The Faumla will produce
many more.
. 1. The great Paradise-bird of Aru. 2. The lesser Paradise-bird of Papua. 3.
and 4. Two black species. 5. The white Paradise-bird. 6. The unknown
Paradise-bird. 7. The lesser King-bird, which is also to be reckoned among the
Paradise-birds.

I. PARADISEA APODA. GREATER BIRD OF PARADISE. Latham Syn. ii. 474. Index, i.
194.
THE greater Paradise-bird is generally about two feet in length. Head, small:
beak, the length of the head, hard, pale-coloured. Head and nape of the neck,
yellow. Space round the eyes, black. Neck, beautifully resplendent with very
soft, shining, emerald-coloured feathers: those of the breast, equally soft, of
a pale yellowish-grey. Large chesnut-coloured wings. Back covered with the
scapulars elongated, stiff, narrow, pale brown, very much resembling the loose
feathers of the ostrich. These expand while the bird flies; and therefore it is
easy for him to remain in the air. On the sides of the breast and belly are
bundles of feathers, much shorter than the anterior ones, stiff, gold-coloured.
From the rump arise two stiff feathers of great length, naked in the shafts,
terminated with radiated plumes. Several birds of these countries are furnished
with such long feathers, as the Belurus (Pylstaart) of Amboyna, the Alcedo
Sariwak, and a species of Papuan parroquet. In size it little exceeds the
blackbird. Feet short, with four strong toes. The inhabitants of Ternate call
this species Burong Papua, Papua birds; and sometimes Manu-co-dewata, and also
Soffu, or Sioffu. The Amboynese call them Manu-key-aru, birds of the islands
Key and Aru, because the people of these islands bring them to Banda and
Amboyna for sale. The Aruans give them the name of Fanaan. In fact, these birds
are not found in the island Key, which is about 50 miles eastward of Banda, but
are met with in the Aru islands (which are 15 miles further to the east than
Key) at the dry season of the western monsoon, and return to New Guinea at the
commencement of the rainy season, as soon as the east wind begins to blow. They
fly in flocks of about 30 or 40, led by a bird which the Aruans call KING, but
which is altogether distinct from the lesser Bird of Paradise. This leader is
black with red spots, and constantly flies higher than the rest, which never
separate from it, but immediately when it settles, settle too; whence they
frequently perish, for if the leader settles on the ground, they are not able
to rise on account of the peculiar structure of their feathers. Nor can they
fly with the wind, for in that case their very long loose feathers would be
totally disordered: they therefore always fly against the wind, and carefully
abstain from flight in a storm, which often throws them to the ground.

WHILE flying they are noisy, like starlings; but their cry rather resembles
the croaking of ravens, and is particularly audible, when in windy weather the
encumbrance of their feathers brings them into imminent danger of falling to
the ground. In the Aru islands they perch on the highest trees, especially on
those of the small-leaved Waringha with red fruit, on which they chiefly
subsist ( Ficus Benjamina? Hort. Malab. iii. f. 35. Rumph. Amboin. iii. f. 90.)
They are taken by the inhabitants with bird-lime, snares, or blunt arrows. But
though many fall alive into the fowlers hands, they are immediately killed, and
after embowelling, and generally cutting off their feet, they are fumigated
with sulphur, and dried; in which state they are sold, for half a dollar in
Banda, but in Aru they may be purchased for a large nail or piece of iron. The
Dutch ships frequenting the sea between New Guinea and Aru (a distance of 18 or
20 miles) not unfrequently see flocks of Paradise-birds crossing the sea from
one to the other of these places, but always against: the wind. If a more
tempestuous gale than usual rises during their flight, they seek the upper and
calmer regions of the air, and thus continue their course. The natives fasten
these birds to their helmets in place of crests, in real and mock sights; and
often tie the whole or part of the skins to their swords. During the eastern
monsoon their very long feathers fall; and in the western monsoon, within the
space of four months, as the Aruans report, they are replaced by new ones.

II. PARADISEA APODA. LESSER. Latham Syn. ii. 474. Index, i. 194. b.
THE lesser Paradise-bird of Papua. This species is about twenty inches in
length. Beak, lead-colored, paler toward the apex. Eyes, small, and surrounded
with black. Neck, emerald-colored. Head, and back of the neck, dusky-yellowish.
Wings, small and chesnut-colored. Breast and belly, brown. Back,
yellowish-grey. Long scapulars, about a foot in length, and paler than in the
former species; which is in general to be observed of all the splendid colors
in this species. The long bare feathers of the tail are constantly rejected by
the inhabitants. In other respects, this species has every thing in common with
the former. These birds also follow a leader; which, however, has more of a
dark purple in his wings; but this leader is distinguished from the 3d and 4th
black kinds. The Papuan inhabitants of the island Missowal, (Mixoal, Maysel)
relate that these Paradise-birds never migrate, but build nests in the highest
trees, where they are found by the Alfubris. The beak and neck are longer in
the male than in the female. By the people of Ternate, and Tidore, this bird is
called Toffu or Burong Papuwa, Papua-bird. By the Papuans it is named Shag or
Shague. The people of East Ceram give it the name of Samaleik; but in the isle
of Sorghile, in New Guinea, it is called Tshakke. It was formerly believed that
these birds were found in Gilolo or Halamahera, and the adjacent islands to the
south and south-east; but it is now certain that they are peculiar to the
Papuan isles. These extend from the southern extremity of Gilolo, and northern
coast of Ceram, as far as the western part of New Guinea. The largest of them
are Missowal (Maysol) lying to the north of Ceram; and Salawatti, or Salawat,
situated near the country or island of Serghile, in New Guinea. This last, in
the earliest Portuguese maps, is improperly called Ceram, and is separated from
New Guinea. These Paradise-birds perch on the highest trees of the mountainous
region, and are killed with blunt arrows by the people of Missowal. Others
relate, that the natives medicate the water of which the birds are used to
drink, with the India-berries (Menisperman Cocculus Linn.) whereby they are
rendered so stupid as to be taken by the hand. These birds commonly feed on the
fruit of the Tshampeda-tree, which they persorate with their bills, and thus
extract the kernels. It is fabled by some, that when these birds become weak
with age, they fly a great height toward the sun, till they fall down dead.
The Papuans, after killing and embowelling them, dry the cavity with a hot
iron, and enclose them in a joint of bamboo, in order the better to preserve
them.

III. and IV.
THE black Paradise-birds. The larger variety of these is sold by the natives
without wings and feet, and therefore is very difficult to be described with
accuracy. The remains are generally stretched out on a stick to the length of
four spans. The feathers of the head, neck, and belly are black, silky, and
mixed with a radiant hue of purple and gold. Beak, blackish, an inch long. From
both sides spring bunches of feathers, somewhat similar to quill-feathers, but
in reality very different from them, for this species is always offered to sale
with the wings cut off. The feathers in these bunches are extremely soft, with
broad webs like peacocks feathers, of a fine shining green, and all reverted;
whence Valentyne suspects that they become reverted in the bamboo joints in
which they are enclosed by the natives. Tail, wedge-shaped. Tail feathers next
the abdomen, hairy; upper ones, longer, and pointed; those immediately beneath
these, above a span and a half in length, stiff, with loose doubly compound
rays, black above, shining below. The birds of this variety are brought only
from the part of New Guinea called Serghile. The inhabitants carry the skins
dried upon sticks by smoke, and enclosed in bamboo joints, to the island
Salawat, and exchange them for hatchets and coarse cloths. The Papuans call
them Shagawa, and also, Paradise-birds from Serghile: in Ternate and Tidore,
they are called Soffu-kokotu, Black Paradise-birds. Serghile is the most
northern part of New Guinea, running out to a sharp promontory, situated beyond
or to the east of Gilolo and the Papua island, and facing the north.

BESIDES the greater black Paradise-bird, there is a lesser variety. Its
feathers are equally long, but not so thick; black above, not shining. This
variety is also destitute of the shining peacock feathers found in the first.
It likewise wants the three long pointed tail-feathers, which are proper to the
greater kind. The Alfubris, or inhabitants of the mountainous part of the isle
of Messowal, shoot these birds with arrows, and sell them to the people of
Tidore.

V. PARADISEA ALBA, Latham Index, i. 197. b. WAYCHIHU. The same.
THE white Paradise-bird is the rarest of all the species, and has two
varieties, one entirely white, the other black and white. The first is very
rare, and in habit much resembles the Paradise-bird of Papua. The second
variety has its forepart black, and back-part white, with twelve slender
crooked almost naked feathers. This kind is the rarest of all, and is procured
only through the people of Tidore, because it is found in those Papuan isles
only which are little frequented, particularly in Wayghihu (called also Wadju,
Wardju, and Waygiu.) Some suspect that they are imported from Serghile, in New
Guinea.

VI.
IN 1689, a new species of black Paradise-bird was first seen at Amboyna,
brought from Missowal, about a foot in length, with a shining purplish hue.
Head, middle-sized; bill, straight; back, as in the other species, adorned with
purple-blue feathers, but under the wings, and on the belly, yellowish, as in
the apodous species. Back of the neck, mouse-colored, greenish In this kind it
is observable, that on the scapulae are bundles of green-edged feathers, which
can be erected at pleasure, like wings. In place of a tail, it has twelve
black, naked, setaceous and thready shafts, like pendulous feathers. Feet
strong, with sharp claws. Head small; eyes encircled with black.

VII. PARADISES REGIA. KING. Latham Syn. ii. 475. Index, i. 194.
THE last species is the King-bird, which some reckon among the Paradise-birds;
but, according to Valentyne, it is totally different from them. LINNAEUS and
BUFFON, however, refer them to the Paradise-birds, chiefly induced by the shape
of the bill, and the feathers peculiar to this genus. This bird is about seven
inches in length, and somewhat exceeds a titmouse in bulk. Head, and eyes
(which are surrounded with a black circle) small. Beak, straight. Crown of the
head, flame-colored: nape of the neck, blood-colored: neck and breast, chestnut,
with a band of bright emerald. Wings, large for the body; quill-feathers black,
with rays spotted and streaked with shining red. Tail, straight, short, and
brown. Intermediate tail-feathers, long, thread-shaped, black, exceeding the
rest a palm in length, with a lunated feathered tip, of a shining green above,
brown below. Belly, spotted: from the sides proceed bundles of broad-rayed
feathers, one part of the rays, green, the other, brown. Back, blood-brown,
glossy like silk. Feet, like those of a lark; three toes before, one behind.

THIS bird never associates with the other species of Paradise-birds, but flies
about the lonely thickets, wherever it sees red berries, nor ever fits upon
tall trees.

IN Aru it is called Wowi Wowi: in the Papua isles, Sopclo-o. The Dutch name it
Kings-bird. It is chiefly brought from Aru-Sopolo-o; and especially from
Wodjir, a well-known town of this island. The Aruans say they have never seen
its nest; but suspect that it is a stranger from New Guinea, and there brings
up its young, but never leaves Aru during the dry season of the western
monsoon. It is taken in snares made of Gummatty, or with birdlime prepared from
the Sukkom or bread-fruit (Artocarpus communis Forced. Charact.)

IT is embowelled and dried, and sold in Banda. The Aruans put it in their
helmets in their mock fights, and the game Tobakalil.

THE illustrious BUFFON, or rather his friend Guencau de Montbeillard,
describes six Paradise-birds in his Hist. of Birds, tom iii. edit. in 4to: and
torn v. edit. in 12mo, p. 207, 238. These birds seem also to be delineated in
Daubenton's splendid Planches Enluminces, No 254, 496, 631, 632, 633, 634.
Sonner at likewise describes and delineates the same six birds. We shall now
therefore briefly compare these six birds with what we have above described at
length from Valentyn, vol. iii.

I. L'oiseau de Paradis, is Valentyn's, I. Paradisea major Aruena; and the
Paradisea apoda Linn.

II. Le Manucode, is Valentyn's, 7. Avis regia; Paradisea regia Linn.

III. MAGNIFICENT. Latham Syn. ii. 477. Index, i. 195. Le Magnisique, on
Manucode a bouquets, may seem in some respect referable to Valentyn's Paradisea
minor Papuana; though I consess it much differs from it.

IV. SUPERB. Latham Syn. ii. 479. Index, i. 196. Le Superbe, on Manucode noir,
as delineated in the Planches Enlum. seems to be either a young bird, or a hen,
or taken at the moulting season; for Valentyn's 3. Paradisea nigra major, has
long setaceous feathers in the tail; and the Hist. of Birds, as well as
Daubenton's Le Superbe, are without them. What Gueneau de Monbeillard observes,
however, is not to be overlooked; that the specimens in the royal Paris museum
are ill kept, and have lost these long feathers by accident.

V. GOLD-BREASTED. Latham Syn. ii. 481. Index, i. 196. Le Sisilet, ou Manucode
a six filets. I can scarcely help thinking that this is Valentyn's, 4.
Paradisea nigra minor, which by chance or design had lost its long filaments
near the ears.

VI. BLUE-GREEN. Latham Syn. ii. 482. Index, i. 197. Le Calybe, seems to be an
obscure species.

THE other Paradise-birds of Valentyn are not yet sufficiently ascertained. It
is greatly therefore to be wished, that a naturalist should undertake a journey
into New Guinea, and the Papua isles, since these regions seem full of new and
unexplored natural wonders. In the meantime we hope that these observations
concerning the Birds of Paradise will not be unacceptable to those who are
desirous of an accurate knowledge of the works of Nature.

INDIAN ZOOLOGY.
THE LONG-TAILED SQUIRREL.

I. SCIURUS MACROURUS. THE LONG-TAILED SQUIRREL.
Sciurus. Zeylanicus pills in dorso nigricantibus, Raii Syn. Quad. 215. Sc.
Macrourus, Gmelin. Lin. i. 148.
THIS species is found in Ceylon and Malabar. In the Cingalese tongue it is
called Dandoelana; and, LONG-TAILED-SQUIRREL.
from the noise it makes, Roekea.

It is about three times the size of the European squirrel.

THE ears are tufted with black hairs: the end of the note is pink-coloured:
the cheeks, legs, and belly, are of a dull yellow: between the ears is a yellow
spot: the crown of the head, and the back, are black: from each ear is a
bifurcated line or the same color, pointing down the cheeks: the upper part of
the feet is covered with black hairs: the lower part naked and red.

THE tail is near twice the length of the body, of a light ash-color, and
extremely bushy. The part next the body quite surrounded with hairs: on the
remainder the hairs ore separated, and lie flat.

THE tree is the JAMBU Rumph. Amboin. i. 121. tab. 37. EUGENIA MALAC.
EUGENA MALACCENSIS, Sp. Pl. 672. Fl. Zeyl. No 187. It is the most excellent of
the Indian fruits, delicious in taste, grateful in smell, pleasing to the eye,
and salubrious in its effects.

ITS native place is Malacca; and is only cultivated in Goa and Amboina, on
account of its fine qualities, its roseate scent and color, and its happy
faculty of allaying the rage of thirst in the burning fevers of the torrid zone.

THE BLACK and WHITE FALCON.

II. FALCO MELANOLEUCOS. BLACK AND WHlTE FALCON.
F. Melanoleucos, Gmelin. Lin. i. 274. Latham, i. 81. Index Ornith, i. 36.
INHABITS Ceylon: its length is sixteen inches, BLACK AND WHITE FALCON.
its weight about ten ounces.

THE bill is black: the irides of a reddish yellow: the orbits marked with
white specks. The head, neck, back, scapulars, quil-feathers, and some of the
middle coverts of the wings, are black; the rest of the coverts, those of the
tail, the tail itself, the breast and belly, are of a pure white.

THIS species is called in the Cingalese, Kaloe Koeroelgoya. We are uncertain
whether it is trained for the amusement of falconry, as some other kinds are,
by the natives of Ceylon.

THE tree is the Vidara of Rumphius, ii. 17. tab. 36. RHAMNUS JUJUBA.
the Rhamnus jujuba, Sp. Pl. 282. Fl. Zeyl. No 89. It bears an eatable fruit,
of very little flavor.

III. OTUS BAKKAMOENA. THE LITTLE HORN OWL.
Strix indica, Gmelin. Lin. i. 289. Latham, i. 127. Index Ornith. i. 56. No 14.
THIS elegant species is found in Ceylon; LITTLE HORN OWL.
is called there Bakkamoena, and is a scarce species even in that island.

IT is represented of its natural size. The irides are scarlet: the horns take
their origin from the base of the bill, and point to the side of the head: on
their inner side they are dusky, on their exterior white.

THE bill is dusky, surrounded with long bristles: the circle of feathers round
the eyes is of a very pale ashcolor: the external circle of a yellowish brown.

THE head of a deep ash color: the back dusky: coverts of the wings gray,
marked with narrow, lines of black, pointing downwards: the quil-feathers
regularly barred with black and white: the breast buff-colored, marked with
small sagital black spots: the legs feathered half way down the naked part of a
reddish yellow.

THE plant is one of the most beautiful of the Indies; GLORIOSA SUPERBA.
THE LITTLE HORNED OWL.
but at the same time its roots are the most venomous. It is found in Ceylon
and Malabar, and, on account of its charming appearance, is called by Linnaus,
GLORIOSA SUPERBA, Sp. Pl. 437. By the natives it is styled Najajala and
Nyaghala, possibly from its being possessed of a poison as potent as that of
the serpent Naja, or Cobra de Capello, whose bite is the most fatal of any yet
known.

IV. TROGON FASCIATUS. THE FASCIATED COUROUCOU. Read, on the plate, THE
FASCIATED COUROUCOU.

Trogon fasciatus, Gmelin. Lin. i. 405. Latham, ii. 492. Index Ornith. i. 200.
THIS species is rarely, FASCIATED COUROUCOU.
found in the isle of Ceylon, where the Cingalese call, it Rantvan-kondea. A
species bearing some resemblance to it is described by M. Brisson, iv. 165, by
the name Le Couroucou Cendre; but the bend on the breast, which distinguishes
the Indian species, evinces it to differ from that of Cayenne.

ITS length was ten inches and an half: DESCRIPTION.
the weight one ounce five-eighths.

THE bill black, thick, strong, and arched; the base beset with bristles: the
orbits naked, and of a deep blue: the irides yellow.

THE head and neck of a very deep dusky blue, fading into a paler as it
approaches the breast.

ACROSS the breast is a fascia or band of white; beneath that the whole
under-side is of a bright reddish orangecolor.

THE FACIATED COUROUCOU.


THE back is tawny; the coverts of the tail gray; the coverts of the wings, and
the scapulars, elegantly barred with narrow undulated lines of black and white;
the quil-feathers dusky, striped with white on their outward webs.

THE tail is very long, tipped with black, and composed of feathers of unequal
lengths; the exterior feathers being much the shortest.

THE legs and feet small and dusky: the toes disposed two backward and two
forward, as in the woodpecker tribe.

THE plant is the Nummularia lactea minima. Rumph. NUMMULARIA.
Amboin. lib. ix. c. 78.

V. CUCULUS PYRRHOCEPHALUS. THE RED-HEADED CUCKOO.
Cuculus Pyrrhocephalus, Gmelin Lin. i. 417. Latham, ii. 544. Index Ornith. i.
222
THE Cingalese give this species the name of Malkoha: THE RED-HEADED CUCKOO.
it inhabits the woods, and lives on fruits

ITS length is sixteen-inches: its weight four ounces.

THE bill is much arched. strong, and of a greenish-yellow color: the crown of
the head, and part of the cheeks, are of a bright crimson, entirely surrounded
by a band of white. The hind part of the head and neck black, marked with small
white spots: the fore part of the neck entirely black.

THE back and wings black: the tail very long, composed of feathers of unequal
lengths; their lower part black, the ends white.

THE breast and belly white: the legs of a pale blue.

THE RED HEADED CUCKOO.


THE RED WOODPECKER.

VI. PICUS MINIATUS. THE RED WOODPECKER.
Picus Miniatus; Gmelin. Lin. i. 432. Latham, ii. 595. Index Ornith. i. 241.
MR. Loten shot this on the Highlands of Java. It is called by the Malayans,
THE RED WOODPECKER.
Toekan, or the Carpenter, a name they give to woodpeckers in general, from the
noise these birds make in boring trees, which resembles that made by a workman.

IT is drawn the size of life. The bill is of a dusky blue: the head of a deep
dull red, and adorned with a long crest pointing backwards: on the chin is a
spot of yellow.

THE hind part of the neck, the back, the coverts, and secondary feathers of
the wings, are of the color of red lead: the fore part of the neck is of a
rose-color: the belly white.

THE quil-feathers black, marked with large white spots: the coverts of the
tail green: the tail consist of sharp-pointed feathers, like the European kind,
and is of a deep blue.

VII. PERDIX BICALCARATUS. DOUBLE-SPURRED PARTRIDGE.
Perdix Bicalcarata, Gmelin Lin. ii. 759. Forster Ind. Zool. 25. Ceylon
Partridge, Lathham, iv. 758. Index Ornith. ii. 674.
THE bill of the MALE is red: DOUBLE SPURRED PARTRIDGE.
from that to the region of the eyes is a naked red space. The head is varied
with black and white streaks. The whole neck, above and below, is black,
elegantly marked with sagittal lines, the points tending upwards. The thighs
white. The primaries dusky, edged with rufous. The back covered with rufous
feathers, dusky on each side of their shafts. Tail dusky. Legs red, on each a
pair of strong sharp spurs.

THE head of the female is cinereous. The color of the back and belly rufous,
brightest below. The tail dusky. Legs red and unarmed.

THESE were taken near Colombo. The Cingalese call them Haben-Kukella.

MandF. DOUBLE SPURRED PARTRIDGE.


THE BLACK CAP'D PIGEON.

VIII. COLUMBA MELANOCEPHALA. THE BLACK-CAPPED PIGEON.
Columba Melanocephala, Gmelin. Lin. i. 781. Latham iv. 654. Index Ornith. ii.
610.
THIS most elegant species is painted the size of life. BLACK-CAPPED PIGEON.
It was found on the ground in the isle of Java, HEAT OF THE TORRID ZONE.
having dropped down dead in one of those hot days that are known only in the
torrid zone, when the fowls of the air often perish, unable to respire; when
lions, leopards, and wolves, immerge themselves up to their nostrils in the
water, to preserve themselves from the scorching fun Boone's Account of the
Climate and Diseases of Senegal.
; and when even men themselves have been forced to ascend the highest trees, in
order to draw in a more temperate air Phil. Transact. 1767.
.

SUCH a day occasioned the discovery of this species.

THE fore part of the head, the cheeks, DESCRIPTION.
and beginning of the breast, were white: the hind part of the head black: the
chin yellow.

THE rest of the neck, the breast, upper part of the belly, the back, coverts,
and secondary feathers of the wings, of a fine green: the quil-feathers of a
dark purple.

THE lower belly and vent feathers of a fine yellow: the outside of the thighs
green; the inside white; the lower side of the tail crimson: the legs red.

MandF FLAMMEOUS. FLYCATCHER.

IX. MUSCICAPA FLAMMEA. FLAMMEOUS FLYCATCHER.
Muscicapa Flammea, Gmelin. Lin. ii. 942. Forster Ind. Zool. 25. Flammeous
Flycatcher, Latham, iii. 338. Index Ornith. ii. 474.
THE bill, head, neck, fore part of the back, FLAMMEOUS FLYCATCHER.
and lesser coverts of the wings, black: rest of the back bright orange or
flame-color: primaries partly black, partly orange: breast and belly of the
last color, sinking into pale yellow toward the lower belly: tail dusky yellow
toward the point: legs black.

THE upper part of the head, and whole back, of the supposed female, is
ash-colored: about the cheeks and throat dusky: breast orange: belly white:
across the primaries a flammeous band, bounded above and below with black: tail
black above.

THESE are inhabitants of Ceylon.

X. MOTACILLA SUTORIA. THE TAILOR BIRD. Motacilla Sutoria, Gmelin. Lin. i. 997.
Latham iv. 515. Index Ornith. ii. 551.
TAILOR BIRD.
HAD Providence left the feathered tribe unendowed with any particular
instinct, WONDROUS INSTINCT.
the birds of the torrid zone would have built their nests in the same
unguarded manner as those of Europe; but there the lesser species, having a
certain prescience of the dangers that surround them, and of their own
weakness, suspend their nests at the extreme branches of the trees; they are
conscious of inhabiting a climate replete with enemies to them and their young;
with snakes that twine up the bodies of the trees, and apes that are
perpetually in search of prey; but, heaven-instructed, they elude the gliding
of the one, and the activity of the other.

AN Indian forest is a scene the most picturesque that can be imagined; AN
INDIAN FOREST.
the trees seem perfectly animated; the fantastic monkies give life to the
stronger branches; and the weaker sprays wave over your head, charged with
vocal and various-plumed inhabitants. It is an error to THE TAILOR BIRD.
say that nature has denied melody to the birds of hot climates, and formed
them only to please the eye with their gaudy plumage: Ceylon abounds with birds
equal in song That of what the Portuguese call Dominiquin, is particularly fine.
to those of Europe, which warble among the leaves of trees, grotesque in their
appearance, and often laden with the most delicious and salubrious fruit.
Birds of the richest colors cross the glades, and troops of peacocks complete
the charms of the scene, spreading their plumes to a sun that has ample powers
to do them justice. The landscape, in many parts of India, corresponds with the
beauties of the animate creation: the mountains are lofty, steep, and broken,
but clothed with forests enlivened with cataracts Those of the island of
Celebes are distinguished for their magnificent scenery, at appears from the
drawings in possession of Mr. Loten.
of a grandeur and figure unknown to this part of the globe.

BUT to give a reverse of this enchanting prospect, which it is impossible to
enjoy with a suitable tranquillity; you are harassed in one season with a
burning heat, or in the other with deluges of rain: you are tormented with
clouds of noxious insects: you dread the spring of the Tiger, or the mortal
bite of the Naja.

THE brute creation are more at enmity with one another than in other climates;
and the birds are obliged to exert unusual artifice in placing their little
broods out of the reach of an invader. Each aims at the same end, NEST.
though by different means. Some form their pensile nest in shape of a purse,
deep, and open at top; others with a hole in the side; and others, still more
cautious, with an entrance at the very bottom, forming their lodge near the
summit This instinct prevales also among the birds on the banks of the Gambia,
in Africa, which abounds with monkies and snakes: others (for the same end)
make their nest in holes of the banks that over-hang that vast river. Purchase.
ii. p. 1576.
.

BUT the little species we describe, DESCRIPTION.
seems to have greater diffidence than any of the others: it will not trust its
nest even to the extremity of a slender twig, but makes one more advance to
safety by fixing it to the leaf itself.

IT picks up a dead leaf, and, surprising to relate, sews it to the side of a
living one The live leaf in the print is that of the Mango tree. A nest of this
bird is preserved in the British Museum.
, its slender bill being its needle, and its thread some fine fibers; the
lining, feathers gossamer, and down. Its eggs are white. The color of the bird
light-yellow: its length three inches, its weight only three-sixteenths of an
ounce, so that the materials of the nest, and its own size, are not likely to
draw down a habitation that depends on so slight a tenure.

WHITE HEADED IBIS.

XI. TANTALUS LEUCOCEPHALUS. THE WHITE-HEADED, IBIS.
Tantalus Leucocephalus, Gmelin. Lin. i. 649. Latham, v. 116. Index Ornith. ii.
706.
IN size it is much superior to our largest curlews. The bill is yellow,
WHITE-HEADED IBIS.
very long, and thick at the base, and a little incurvated: the nostrils very
narrow, and placed near the head: all the fore part of the head is covered with
a bare yellow, DESCRIPTION.
and seems a continuance of the bill; and the eyes are, in a very singular
manner, placed very near its base.

THE rest of the head, the neck, back, belly, and secondary feathers, are of a
pure white; a transverse broad band of black crosses the breast: the
quil-feathers, and coverts of the wings, are black: the coverts of the tail are
very long, and of a fine pink color;, they hang over and conceal the tail.

THE legs and thighs are very long, and of a dull flesh-color; the feet
semi-palmated, or connected by webs as far as the first joint.

THIS bird was taken in the isle of Ceylon, PLACE.
and kept tame for some time at Colombo; it made a snapping noise with its bill
like a stork; and, what was remarkable, its fine rosy feathers lost their color
during the rainy season.

RED TAIL'D WATERHEN

XII. GALLINULA PHOENICURUS. THE RED-TAILED WATER-HEN.
Rallus Phoenicurus, Gmelin. Lin. i. 715. Latham, v. 259. Index Ornith. ii. 770.
THIS species is very common in Ceylon, RED-TAILED WATER-HEN.
where it is called Kaloe-kerewaka, and seems the same kind that is so often
figured on the Indian papers.

ITS length is nine inches; DESCRIPTION.
its weight seven ounces and a quarter.

IT has the form of the European kind: the bill a little thicker, of a greenish
cast, tinged with red; on the forehead is a flesh-colored spot.

THE hind part of the head and neck, the back and coverts of the wings, are
black: the quil-feathers black, marked with large spots of a bluish cast.

THE crown of the head, the cheeks, and whole underside of the body, as far as
the vent, are of a pure white: the vent feathers, and the tail, of a
ferruginous red.

THE-legs and feet long, and of a dirty green, tinged with red.

XIII. ANSER MELANOTOS. THE BLACK-BACKED GOOSE.
Anser Melanotos, Gmelin. Lin. i. 503. Latham, vi. 449. Index Ornith. ii. 839.
NOTWITHSTANDING the isles of the East Indies swarm with crocodiles,
BLACK-BACKED GOOSE.
which are animals of insatiable voracity, catching at every living creature
that frequents their element, yet no country, abounds more with aquatic birds;
nature has happily given them a quickness of fight, and an instantaneous
locomotive power, which enables them to elude the jaws of an enemy, which, it
is well known, cannot turn without the utmost difficulty. It is by a fine
instinct that the lesser and more agile species of ducks frequent, in flocks
innumerable, the shores, the mouths of rivers, and the marshy parts of the
isles, and are, with the crocodiles, joint tenants of the waters; while the
larger and more clumsy fowl avoid those places, and, dividing into small
families, haunt only the lakes and streams that lie Which Knox, in hit History
of Ceylon, p. 3, says, the crocodiles never approach.
in the deep recesses of the BLACK BACKED GOOSE.
lofty and craggy mountains, protected by the cataracts that prevent the
approach of their enemy.

TAME ducks abound so greatly in the isles, INDIAN FOWLING.
that the capture of the wild sort is much neglected. Decoys are unknown there:
the commonest, method of taking them is this: A man goes into the water with a
pot or a hollow calabash on his head, and walks or swims so low as to conceal
his whole body: the birds, imagining the gourds to be brought down
accidentally, suffer the fowler to approach them; he pulls them by the legs
under water, fastens them to a girdle he wears for that purpose, and then
proceeds in his sport. This method is also practiced in China, Du Halde Hist.
China, i. 314.
and was doubtless introduced there, and into India, from Egypt, the original
seat of science.

THE species of goose we now describe, DESCRIPTION.
is extremely common in Ceylon, and is equal in size to our wild goose: the
bill is long, and black; at the base is a knob, which in old birds is very
large.

THE head and neck are white, marked with small black spots: the breast and
belly of a pure white: the back and wings are black, but the ends of the
primary feathers of a fine variable green.

THE tail is sharp-pointed and black: the legs of the same color.

XIV. ANAS POIKILORHYNCHUS. SPOTTED-BILLED DUCK.
Anas Poikilorhyncha, Gmelin. Lin. i. 535. Forster, Ind. Zool. 23.
Spotted-billed Duck, Latham, vi. 487. Index Ornith. ii. 850.
SPOTTED-BILLED DUCK
THE bill of this species is black, tipped with yellow, DESCRIPTION.
and marked on each side of the base with a red spot: a white line passes from
thence to and beyond the eye. The cheeks, and under side of the neck and body,
white, more and more clouded from the chin to the vent, which is totally black:
the wings, back, and tail, are black; each feather slightly edged with white;
some of the tertials wholly white: the speculum of a variable green, bounded
above and below with a narrow line of white.

THIS is the common wild duck of Ceylon; and, if I recollect right, is not
inferior in size to the English wild duck.

SPOTTED BILL DUCK.



XV. ANHINGA. MELANOGASTER. THE BLACK-BELLIED ANHINGA.
Plotus Melanogaster, Gmelin. Lin. i. 580. Latham, vi. 624. Index Ornith. ii.
895.
WE give it this epithet, BLACK-BELLIED ANHINGA.
to distinguish it from an American species with a silvery belly Found in
Brasil Vide Marcgravs, Hist. Brasiliae, 218.
.

THIS kind is found in Ceylon and Java, but is not peculiar to those islands; a
variety, if not the some, being met with in Senegal Planches Enlianinies, 107.
.

IT fits on the shrubs that hang over the water; and, in a country where every
one's ideas are filled with serpents, often terrifies the passengers by
shooting out its long slender neck, which, in their first surprise, they take
for the darting of some fatal reptile.

ITS body is about the size of that of a common duck, DESCRIPTION.
but the neck extremely long: the bill strait, long, and sharp-pointed; the
upper part of a pale blue, the lower reddish.

THE eye is very piercing.

THE head and neck and upper part of the breast are of a light-brown; each side
of the head, and the upper part of the neck, marked with a broad white line.

THE crop is very large.

THE back, scapulars, and coverts of the wings, are marked lengthways, in equal
portions, with stripes of black and white.

THE quil-feathers, belly, thighs, and tail, of a deep black; the tail
remarkably long and slender.

THE legs and feet of a pale green; the four toes united by webs, after the
manner of those of the corvorant.

TIGER SHARK
ZEYLON WRASSE

XVI. SQUALUS TIGRINUS. THE TIGER SHARK.
Squalus. Tigrinus, Gmelin, Lin. i. 1493. Bloche, i. 19. No 4. Gronov. Mus. i.
No. 136. Seb. Mus. iii, 105. tab. 34. fig. i. Herman, tab. Assin. p. 302,
Forster, Ind. Zool. 24.
THE head of this shark ends obtusely, TIGER SHARK
being of an equal thickness: DESCRIPTION.
the nostrils are at the end of the nose: at each corner of the mouth, is a
strong beard: the fins of the back are rounded and contiguous: it is of the
division that has the anal fin. The ground-color is dusky: the body marked with
white bands passing from the back, toward the belly: the fins are spotted with
the same color.

THIS species grows to the length of fifteen feet, and is said to feed on the
testaceous and crustaceous animals of the sea.

XVII. LABRUS ZEYLANICUS. THE CEYLON WRASSE.
Labrus Zeylanicus, Gmelin. Lin. i. 1287. Forster, Ind. Zool. 24. Labrus
Polyodon, Seb. Mus. iii. p. 96. tab. xxxi. fig. 7.
CEYLON WRASSE.
THIS species resembles in form the elegant European species, DESCRIPTION.
the L. Pavo, and L. Iulis. The head is blue: the coverts of the gills green,
marked with purple lines: the whole body of a rich green: the dorsal and anal
fins purple, edged with pale sky-blue: on the middle of the pectoral fin is an
oblong purple spot, environed with light blue: the tail is lunated, the base
blue: the two side rays (which appeared by the drawing to be strong) purple;
the intervening rays yellow. The size, about a foot and a half.

INHABITS the seas of Ceylon and Java: is called by the Cingalese,
Dschirau-Malu: by the Dutch, Papegaay Visch, or Parrot-fish; and is eaten by
the common people.

THE INDIAN FAUNULA.
FAUNULA INDICA.
CLASS I. QUADRUPEDS.
DIV. I. HOOFED.
SECT. I. WHOLE-HOOFED.
GENUS. I. HORSE.
1. GENEROUS. HIST. QUAD. vol. i. No 1. 2. Dshikketi. -- 2. 3. Ass, wild and
tame. -- 3.
SECT. II. CLOVEN-HOOFED.
II. OX.
1. Great Indian. 6. -- A. 2. Little. 6. -- B. 3. Buffalo. -- 8. 4. Dwarf. 8.
-- A. 5. Anoa. 8. -- B. 6. Guavera. 8. -- C.
III. Sheep.
1. Common. -- II. 2. Wild. -- H. p. 38. 3. Camera. -- F. p. 35.
IV. GOAT.
1. Domestic. No 13. a. p. 53. 2. Caucasan? -- 14.
V. ANTELOPE.
1. Algazel. -- 21. 2. Indian. -- 22. 3. Indostan. -- 26. 4. White-footed. --
27. 5. Common. -- 31. 6. Smooth-horned. b. -- p. 80. 7. Chinese? -- 36.
VI. DEER.
1. Spotted Axis. -- 47. 2. Middle-sized A. -- 48. 3. Great A. -- 48.* 4.
Porcine. -- 49. 5. Rib-faced. -- 50.
VII. MUSK.
1. Indian. -- 56. 2. Guinea. -- 57.
VIII. CAMEL.
1. One-bunched. -- 58.
IX. HOG.
1. Common. -- 61. 2. Baby-roussa. -- 65.
X. RHINOCEROS.
1. One-horned. -- 67.
XI. ELEPHANT.
1. Great. -- 70.
DIV. II. DIGITATED QUADRUPEDS.
SECT. I. ANTHROPOMORPHOUS.
XII. APE.
TAIL-LESS.
1. Orang-outan No 72. 2. Satyr. Scbreberr, 64. tab. ii. B. 3. Long-armed. --
74. 4. Lesser L. armed. -- 74. a. 5. Shaggy. Lev. Mus. 6. Golok. Phil. Tr. lix.
72. 7. Pygmy. -- 73. 8. Barbary? Erxleben, 14.
** WITH SHORT TAILS. BABOONS.
9. Little. -- 83. 10. Pig-tail. -- 85. 11. Lion-tailed. -- 83.
*** WITH LONG TAILS. MONKIES.
12. Purple-faced. -- 89. 13. Talapoin. -- 99. 14. Egret. -- 101. 15. Monea. --
102. 16. Chinese. -- 104. 17. Cochin-china? -- 107. 18. Tawny. -- 108. 19.
Philippine. -- 115.

XIII. MAUCAUCO.
1. Tail-less. No 128. 2. Loris. -- 129. 3. Tarsier. -- 133. 4. Flying. -- 135.
SECT. II. RAPACIOUS. CANINE TEETH
XIV. DOG.
1. Faithful. -- 136. 2. Bengal. De Buffon, v. tab. xxxiv. 3. Schackal. -- 145.
XV. CAT.
1. Lion. -- 151. 2. Tiger. -- 152. 3. Panther. -- 153. 4. Leopard. -- *154. 5.
Lesser Leopard. -- 155. 6. Hunting. -- 156. 7. Bengal. -- 164. 8. Lynx. -- 170.
and vol. ii. p. 565. 9. Persian L. -- 173. 10. Serval. -- 169.
XVI. BEAR.
1. Brown. -- 174.
XVII. BADGER.
1. Indian. -- 180.
XVIII. OPOSSUM.
1. Molucca. -- 182. 2. Javan. -- 183. 3. Phalanger. -- 190.
XIX. WEESEL.
1. Ichneumon. No 211. 2. Civet. -- 223. 3. Zibet. -- P. 348. 4. Fossane. --
225. 5. Zeylan. Gmelin. Lin. Syst. 89. 6. Malacca. Sonnerat Voy. ii. 144. 7.
Fasciated. The same, ii. 193.
SECT. III. WITHOUT CANINE TEETH, GENERALLY HERBIVOROUS.
XX. CAVIA.
1. Surinam. HIST. QUAD. vol. ii. -- 238.
XXI. HARE.
1. Common. -- 241. 2. Rabbet. -- 244. 3. Ogotona. -- 249.
XXII. PORCUPINE.
1. Crested. -- 253. 2. Long-tailed. -- 254.
XXIII. SQUIRREL.
1. White-legged. -- 266. g. 2. Ceylon. Ind. Zool. tab. 1. -- 267. 3. Javan. --
269. 4. Bombay -- 270. 5. Ruddy. -- 271. 6. Fair. -- 276. 7. Paim. -- 279. 8.
Plantane. -- 280. g. 9. Great. Gmelin. Lin. Syst. 149. -- 281. Dschinschi.
Cmelin. Lin. Syst. 151. FLYING.
10. Salient No 81. 11. Arrow. Gmelin. Lin. Syst. 154.

XXIV. JERBOA.
1. Middle. -- 292. b. 2. Torrid. -- 294.
XXV. RAT.
1. Brown. -- 298. 2. Moule. -- 301. 3. Oriental. -- 304.
XXVI. SHREW.
1. Persuming. -- 337. 2. Murine. -- 340.
XXVII. HEDGEHOG.
1. Tendrac -- 357
SECT. IV. WITHOUT CUTTING TEETH.
XXVIII. SLOTH.
1. Ursi-form. 2. Two-toed. -- 360.
SECT. V. WITHOUT TEETH.
XXIX. MANIS.
1. Short-tailed. -- 368.
XXX. ANT-EATER.
1. Obscure. Last paragraph. No 372. 2. Talgoi. -- p. 50.
DIV. III. PINNATED QUADRUPEDS.
XXXI. WALRUS.
1. Indian. -- 374.
XXXII. MANATI.
1. Whale-tailed. -- 390.
DIV. IV. WINGED QUADRUPEDS.
XXXIII. BAT.
1. Ternate. -- 393. 2. Cordated. -- 397. 3. Striped. -- 404. 4. Molucca. --
405.
CLASS II. BIRDS.
DIV. I. LAND BIRDS.
ORDER I. RAPACIOUS.
THIS Catalogue is taken from MR. LATHAM'S SYNOPSIS OF BIRDS, in Seven Volumes,
Quarto (including the Supplement); and from his IINDEX ORNITHOLOGGICUS, the
most complete Work in its kind which I am acquainted with.

GENUS. I. VULTURE.
1. BENGAL. LATH. I. 19. SYN. pl. 1. 2. Pondicherri. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. p. 182.
pl. 104. VII. 6. 3. Indian. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. 183. pl. 105. -- 6. 4. Gingi.
Sen. Voy. Ind. ii. 184. -- 7 5. Cheriway. Jacquin. Vog. pl. 4. -- 5. 6.
Secretary. Phil. Trans, lxi. p. 55. tab. 2. I. 20. pl. 2.
II. FALCON.
1. Cheela. VII. 33. 2. Kite. Br. Zool. I. 61. 3. Indian. -- 34.*d. 4.
Pondicheiri. Pl. Enlum, 416. -- 41. 5. Javan. Index Orn. p. 27. 6. Maritime.
Licht.Mag. iv. 2, 6. 10. 7. Red Indian. Will. p. 81. t. 9. I. 69. 8. Crested
Indian. I. 80. 9. White-crested. -- 82. 10. Pied. lnd. Zool. I. 81.and VII.20.
11. Behree. VII. 35. 12. Brown. Brown III. Zool. 6. t. 3. I. 96. 13. Criard.
VII. 38. 14. Bengal. Edw. Birds, iii. pl. 108. I. 112.
III. OWL.
* EARED.
1. Ceylon. Brown III. p. 8. t. 4. I. 120. VII. 41. 2. Coromandel. VII. 44. 3.
Bakkamuna. Ind. Zool. I. 127.
** WITHOUT EARS.
4. White. Br. Zool. -- 138. 5. Javan. Licbt. Mag. iv. 2. 10. Index 64 Orn. p.
64. -- 64

ORDER II. Pies.
IV. SHRIKE.
1. Malabar. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl. III. VII. 56. pl. 108. 2. Forked-tail. Pl.
Enl. 189. I. 158. 3. Luzonian. Bris. ii. pl. 18. f. 1. -- 172 4. Antiguan. Son.
Voy. pl. 70. -- 171. 5. Crested-red. Edw. Birds, pl. 54. -- 170. 6. Jocose. Pl.
Enl. 508. -- 175 7. Bengal. Edw. Birds, pl. 190. -- 175 8. White. Son. Voy. pl.
72. -- 189. 9. White-billed. Pl. Enl. 9. f. 1. -- 181. 10. Dominican. Son. Voy.
pl. 26. -- 181. 11. Panayan. Ibid. pl. 70. -- 182. 12. Boulboul. VII. 57. 13.
Spotted. J. R. Forster.
V. PARROT.
1. Gingi. Pl. Enl. 239. I. 209. 2. Amboina red. Pl. Enl. 240. I. 210. 3.
Blue-headed. Pl. Enl. 192. -- 211. 4. Indian. Edw. pl. 292. -- 237 5. Osbeck's.
-- 237 6. Red-breasted. Edw. pl. 232. -- 212. 7. Black-crowded. Seba, i. pl.
63. f. 4. -- 213. 8. Papuan. Sen. Voy. pl. 111. -- 215. 9. Bornean. Edw. pl.
173. -- 216. 10. Molucca Lory. Pl. Enl. 519. -- 274. 11. Coccmeous Lory. Pl.
Enl. 143. -- 217. 12. Black-capped Lory. Edw. pl. 170. -- 273 13. Beautiful
Lory. -- 217. 14. Crimson Lory. Pl. Enl. 518. -- 273 15. Gueby Lory. Pl. Enl.
684. 219. 16. Ceram Lory, and Varieties -- 269, 270-1. 17. Variegated Lory. --
220. 18. Purple-capped Lory. Edw. 171. and Pl. Enl. 119. -- 271. 19. Lory
Parakeet. Edw. 174. -- 221. 20. Bontian. -- 323 21. Crimson-vented. -- 229. 22.
Varied-winged. Son. Voy. pl. 43. -- 234 23. Lace-winged. Pl. Enl. 287. -- 244.
24. Alexandrine. Edw. pl. 292. -- 234. 25. Purple-ringed. Albin. ii. pl. 18. --
236. 26. Mustachoe. Pl. Enl. 517. -- 238 27. Blossom-headed. Pl. EnI. 144. --
239. 28. Rose-headed. Edw. pl. 233. -- 239. 29. Red-winged. Edw. pl. 236. --
246. 30. White-collared. Genesis Birds, 59. -- 251. 31. Black Cockatoo, Edw. pl.
316. -- 260. 32. Red-crested C. Edw. pl. 160. -- 257. 33. Red-vented C. Brown's
III. pl. 5. -- 258. 34. Great Whire C. Pl. Enl. 263. -- 256. 35. Red and White
C. -- 260. 36. Hawk-headed. Edw. pl. 165. -- 266. 37. Red Molucca Lory. Pl.
Enl. 519. I. 274. 38. Grand Lory. Pl. Enl. 683. -- 275 39. Cochin China. VII.
65. 40. Green and Red Chinese Edw. pl. 231. I. 278. 41. Great-billed. Pl. Enl.
713. -- 278. 42. Amboina Gramineous. Pl. Enl. 862. -- 279 43. Manilla Green.
Bris. iv. pl. 22. f. 2. -- 296. 44. Eastern. VII. 64. 45. Amber. -- 65. 46.
Golden-winged. Edw. pl. 293. I. 309. 47. Blue-rumped. VII. 66. 48. Red and
Green. Edw. pl. 6. I. 311. 49. Sapphire-crowned. Edw. pl. 293. -- 312. 50.
Philippine. Pl. Enl. 520. -- 311. 51. Black-winged. Brown III pl. 8. -- 316.
52. Collared. Son. Voy. pl. 39. -- 317 53. Luzonian. Son. Voy. pl. 40. -- 318
VI. HORN-BILL.
1. Rhinoceros. Edw. pl. 281. B. -- 342. VII. 69. 2. Helmet. Edw. pl. 281. C.
-- 343. 3. Philippine. Pet. Gaz. 28.f. 6. and 31.f. 1. -- 345. 4. Pied. Son.
Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 121. -- 349. VII. 69. 5. Indian. Pl. Enl. 283. -- 351. 6.
Panayan. Pl. Enl. 780, 781. -- 353. 7. Manilla. Pl. Enl. 891. -- 354. 8. White.
-- 357. 9. Wreathed. Damp. Voy. iii. pl. 3. -- 358. VII. 70. 10. Gingi. Son.
Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 121. VII. 71.
VII. CROW.
1. Philippine. Pl. Enl. 603. I. 381. 2. Short-tailed. Pl. Enl. 258. -- 398. 3.
Philippine Sh. tailed. Pl. Enl. 89. -- 398. A. 4. Bengal Sh. tailed. Edw. pl.
324. -- 399. 5. Molucca Sh. tailed. Pl. Enl. pl. 257. -- 395. c. 6. Malacca Sh.
tailed, Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 110. VII. 81. 7. Malabar Sh. tailed. Id. p. 191.
-- 82. A.
VIII. ROLLER.
1. Bengal. Pl. Enl. 285. I. 410. 2. Senegal. Edw. pl. 327. -- 408. 3.
Oriental. Pl. Enl. 619. -- 411. 4. Indian. Edw. pl. 326. -- 412. 5. Fairy. VII.
87. 6. Grey-tailed. -- 86.
IX. ORIOLE.
1. Golden. Br. Zool. II. 449. 2. Black-headed. Edw. pl. 77. -- 451 3. Yellow.
Edw. pl. 186. -- 451. B. 4. Indian. Aldrov. Av. i. pl. in p. 862. -- 452. D.
X. GRAKLE.
1. Minor Grakle. Edw. pl. 17. -- 455. VII. 90. 2. Greater Minor. -- 457. 3.
Bald. Pl. Enl. 200. -- 457. 4. Paradise. Pl. Enl. 219. -- 458. 5. Dial. Edw.
pl. 181. -- 465.
XI. PARADISE.
1. Great. Edw. pl. 110. -- 471. 2. King. Edw. pl. 496. -- 475. 3. Magnificent.
Pl. Enl. 631. -- 477. 4. Creittd. Will. Orn. 92. Index Orm. p. 195. 5. Gorget.
II. 478. pl. 20. 6. White-winged VII. 92. 7. Superb. Pl. Enl. 632. II. 479. 8.
Gold-breasted. Pl. Enl. 633. -- 481. 9. Golden. Edw. pl. 112. -- 483. 10.
Blue-green. Pl. Enl. 634. -- 482. 11. White. Index Orn. p. 107. 12. 12.
Setaceous. Gerin. Orn. t.65. f. 1.? 197.12.b.
XII. CARUCUI.
1. Fasciated. Ind. Zool. II. 492. 7. and b. 2. Spotted. Brown. III. pl. 13. --
491 3. Blue-cheeked. VII.93 4. Indian. -- 94
XIII. BARBET.
1. Philippine.Pl. Enl. 331. II. 500. 2. Black-throated. Son. Voy. pl. 34. --
511. 3. Great. Pl. Enl. 871.? VII. 95. 4. Green. Pl. Enl. 870. II. 504. 5.
Red-crowned. Brown. III. pl. 14. -- 505 6. Indian VII. 97. 7. Zeylan. Brown.
III. pl. 15. II. 506. VII. 95. 8. Gerini? Gar. Orn. ii. pl. 181. Index Orn. p.
207.
XIV. CUCKOO.
1. Indian spotted. Edw. pl. 59. II. 516. 2. Chinese spotted. Pl. Enl. 764. --
519 3. Black. Pl. Enl. 274. VII. 99. 4. Coromandel crested. Pl. Enl. 872. II.
520. 5. Bengal. Brown III pl. 13. -- 525 6. Sacred. Pl. Enl. 294. -- 526. 7.
Panayan. Son. Voy. pl. 79. -- 527. 8. Grey-headed. VII. 102. 9. Sonnerat's. --
102. 10. Yellow-bellied. Pl. Enl. 814. II. 527. 11. Paradise. Brif. iv. pl. 14.
A. f. 1. -- 529 12. Collared. Pl. Enl. 274. -- 529 13. Red-headed. Ind. Zool.
-- 544
XV. WRYNECK.
1. Wryneck. Br. Zool. -- 548.
XVI. WOOD-PECKER.
1. Little spottd. Br. Zool. II. 566. b. g. 2. Cardinal. Son. Voy. pl. 35. --
576. 3. Brown. PL Enl. 748. f. 2. -- 577 4. Goa. Pl. Enl. 696. -- 582. 5.
Bengal. Edw. pl. 182. -- 580. 6. Ceylon. Naturforseb. xiii. pl. 1. -- 581. b.
7. Philippine. Pl. Enl. 691. -- 581. 8. Manilla. Son. Voy. pl. 36. -- 583 9.
Half-billed. -- 586. 10. Red-winged. Ind. Zool. -- 595 11. Malacca. VII. III.
XVII. KING-FISHER.
1. Cape. Pl. Enl. 590. II. 610. VII. 114. 2. Black and White. Edw. pl. 9. --
612. 3. Great Bengal. Pl. Enl. 894. -- 616. B. 4. Ten-rou joulon. Pl. Enl. 757.
-- 617. 5. White-collared. Bris. iv. pl. 37. f. 2. A. -- 620. 6. Green-headed.
Pl. Enl. 783. -- 620. 7. Collared. Son. Voy. pl. 33. -- 623. D. 8.
Black-capped. Son. Voy. pl. 31. -- 625. A. 9. Coromandel. Son. Voy. Ind. ii.
pl. 118. Ind. Orn. p. 252. 10. Red-headed. Genesis Birds. pl. 5. -- 629. and A.
11. Purple. Pl. Enl. 778. f. 2. -- 630. 12. Bengal. Br. Zool -- 631. 13.
Crested. Pl. Enl. 756. -- 632. 632. b. 14. Eastern. Bris. iv. pl. 37. f. 1. A.
-- 633 15. Ternate. Pl. Enl. 116. -- 634 * THREE-TOED.
1. Tridactylous. Son. Voy. pl. 32. Index Orn. i. 260. 645.

XVIII. NUT-HATCH.
1. Long-bill. VII. 118.
XIX. TODY.
1. Variegated. II. 659.
XX. BEE-EATZR.
1. Indian. Edw.pl. 183. -- 670. 2. Philippine. Bris. iv. pl. 43. f. 2. -- 672.
C. 3. Philippine. Pl. Enl. 57. -- 674 4. Yellow. Will. Orn. pl. II. -- 676. 5.
Coromandel. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 119. VII. 120. 6. Yellow-throated. II. 678.
7. Red-headed. Brif. iv. pl. 44. f. 3. A. -- 679 8. Molucca. -- 684 Common.
European. -- 667
XXI HOOPO.
1. Crested. Br. Zool II. 687. VII. 122. 2. Crested Promerops. Seb. i. t. 30.
f. 5. -- 691. 3. Red-billed Pr. VII. 124. pl. 110. 4. Blue. -- ibid.
XXII. CREEPER.
1. Familiar? Br. Zool. II. 701. 2. Manilla. -- 706. A. 3. Red-breasted. Pl.
Enl. 246. -- 706. 8. 4. Brown and White. Edw. pl. 26. -- 707. A. 5. Luzonian.
Son. Voy. pl. 30. D. -- 708. B. 6. Philippine. Pl. Enl. 576. 1. -- 711. 7.
Collared. Edw. pl. 265. -- 709. 8. Ceylon. -- 713. A. 9. Gray. Pl. Enl. 576. f.
2. -- 714. 10. Little. Pl. Enl. 576. f. 3. -- 714. A. 11. Lotenian. PL Enl.
575. f. 2. 3. -- 715 12. Green-gold. Seb. Th. pl. 69. f. 5. -- 716. 13.
Asiatic. Index Orn. i. 288. 14. Red-backed. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 117. f. 1.
VII. 132. 15. Red-spotted. Edw. pl. 81. II. 736 16. Indigo. VII. 130. 17.
Yellow-bellied. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 116. f. 1. -- 131 18. Tusted. -- 132 19.
Red-billed. -- 133 20. Yellow-winged. -- 133 21. Long-billed. -- 133 22.
Macassar. Seb. i. pl. 63. f. 1. II. 741. 23. Indian. Seb. ii. pl. 19. f. 2. --
741 24. Amboina. Seb. ii. pl. 62. f. a. -- 741
ORDER. III. PASSERINE. XXIII. STARE.
1. Contra. Edw. pl. 187. III. 5
XXIV. THRUSH.
1. Pagoda. -- 30. VII. 140. 2. Malabar. -- 30. VII. 140. 3. Chinese. Bris. ii.
pl. 23. f. 1. -- 36. 4. Philippine. -- 38. 5. Surat. -- 38. 6. Pensive. Pl.
Enl. 636. 564. -- 53 7. Hermit. Pl. Enl. 339. -- 54 8. Pigeon. -- 64. 9.
Dominican. Pl. Enl. 627. 2. -- 58. 10. Songster. Son. Voy. pl. 73. -- 59 11.
Malabar. -- 60. 12. Ceylon. Edw. pl. 321. -- 62. 13. Orange-headed. VII. 145.
14. Indian. Pl. Enl. 564. 1. III. 66. 15. Gray. -- 67. 16. Mindanao. Pl: Enl.
627. 1. -- 69. 17. Long-tailed. III. 72. pl. 39 18. Amboina. Seb. i. pl. 62. f.
4. -- 73 19. Yellow-crowned. Brown III. pl. 22. -- 74. VII. 143. 20.
Ash-rumped. Pl Enl. 273. 2. -- 74 21. Gingi. VII. 144. 22. Dauma. -- 145 23.
Black and Scarlet. -- 146 24. Rose-colored. Edw. pl. 20. -- 142 Rock. European.
III. -- 57
XXV. COLY.
1. Panayan. Son. Voy. pl. 74. -- 103. 2. Indian. VII. 147.
XXVI. GROSBEAK.
1. Gold-backed. Brown III. pl. 25. III. 115. 2. Cardinal. Mus. Carls. fase ii.
t. 41. -- 118.b. 3. Boeton. Seb. i. pl. 60. f. 4. -- 119. 4. Madagafcar. Pl.
Enl. 134.2. -- 119. 5. Java. Edw. pl. 41. 42. -- 129 6. Philippine. Pl. Enl.
135. 2. -- 129 7. Bengal. Edw. pl. 189. -- 133 8. Sumatran. Mus: Carls. fase.
iii. t. 71 Index Orn. 384. 9. Yellow? -- 139 10. Yellow-rumped. -- 140. 11.
Malacca. Edw. pl. 355. -- 140. 12. Molucca. Pl. Enl. 139. 2. -- 141. 13. Cowry.
Edw. pl. 40. -- 142. 14. Brown? -- 147 15. Lineated? Brif. iii. pl. 17. 1. --
149 16. Red-billed. Edw. pl. 271. 2. -- 151. 17. Cinereous. Edw. pl. 179. 2. --
154. 18. Indian. VII. 155. 19. Malabar. III. 154. 20. Orange-bellied. Edw. pl.
83. 1. III. 157. 21. Prasine. Mus. Carls.fase. iii. t. 73. Index Orn. i. 396.
22. Dwarf. Jacq. Vog. p. 28. pl. 13. -- 158
XXVII. BUNTING.
1. Long-tailed. Will. Orn. t. 45. -- 181 2. Panayan. Pl. Enl. 647. -- 184 3.
Familiar. -- 194 4. Red-rumped. Pl. Enl. 101. 2. -- 208 5. Blue-faced. Bris
iii. Pl. 7.s. 4. -- 209 6. Green. -- 209 7. Astatic. VII. 160
XXVIII. TANAGRE.
1. Amboina. Seb. i. pl. 38. f. 6. III. 244.
XXIX. FINCH.
1. Lovely. VII.168. 2. White-breasted. Pl. Enl. 224. 2. III. 268. 3. Collared.
Edw. pl. 272. -- 280 4. Blue-bellied. Edw. pl. 131. -- 310 5. Amandavad. Edw.
pl. 355. 1. -- 311 6. Brown. Pl. Enl. 115. 2. -- 312 7. Maia, or Cuba. Pl. Enl.
109. 2. fem. -- 315 8. Ceylon. -- 317 9. Lunar. Mill. III. pl. 30. -- 320 10.
Green-rumped. -- 320
XXX. FLY-CATCHER.
1. Pied. Br. Zool. Edw. pl. 30. -- 324 2. Coromandel. -- 331 3. Flammeous.
Ind. Zool. -- 338 4. Cinnamon. IV. 447. 42. 5. Tusted. III. 334 6. Red-vented.
Brown III. pl. 31. III. 335 7. Variety. Yellow-vented. -- ibid. 8. Guava. Son.
Voy. pl. 28. -- ibid. 9. Yellow-breasted. Brown III. pl. 82. -- 336 10. Green.
-- 336 11. Black. Son. Voy. pl. 27. 2. -- 338 12. Philippine. -- 339 13. Azure.
Pl. Enl. 666. 1. -- 339 14. Blue-head. Son. Voy. pl. 26. 1. -- 339 15.
Yellow-throat. Son. Voy. pl. 26. 2. -- 340 16. Paradise. Edw. pl. 113. -- 345
17. Javan. Mus Carls. fase. iii. t. 75. Index Orn. ii. 490. 18. Cambaian -- 490
XXXI. LARK.
1. Sky? Br. Zool. IV. 368. 2. Malabar. Son. Voy. Ind. ii, pi. 113. 1. -- 379
3. Gingi. Son. Voy. Ind. ii.pl. 113. 2. -- 380
XXXII. WAGTAIL.
1. White? Br. Zool. -- 395 2. Collared. Son. Voy. pl. 29. -- 396 3. Pied. Raii
Syn. pl. 1. f. 1. -- 397 4. Javan. Br. Zool. var. 398. -- 399. 5. Indian. --
399 6. Yellow. Br. Zool. Timor. -- 401. 6. A. 7. Green. Brown III. pi. 23. --
403.
XXXIII. WARBLER.
1. Luzonian. PI. Enl. 235. 1. 2. -- 451. 2. Coromandel. 452. 3. Philippine.
PI. Enl. 185. 2. -- 453 4. Wheat-ear. Br. Zool. -- 465 5. Pink. Brown III. pl.
33. -- 473 6. Olive. Brown III. pl. 14. IV. 473. 7. Green. Edw. pl. 79. -- 474.
8. Cingalese. Brown III. pl. 32. -- 474. 9. Superb. -- 501. pl. 53. 10. Blue
headed. Son. Voy. t. 27. I. Index Orn. ii. 545. 11. Gold-crested Wren. Br.
Zool. III. 508. 12. Tailor. Ind. Zool. -- 515. 13. Black-necked. VII. 187. 14.
Cambaian. Index Orn. ii. 554. 15. Guzurat. Ibid. 16. Asiatic. Ibid. Yellow
Wren. Br. Zool. IV. 512.
XXXIV. MANAKIN.
1. Little. -- 526.
XXXV. TITMOUSE.
1. Malabar. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 114. I. -- 555. 2. Indian. Mus. Carls.
fasc. ii. t. 50. Index Orn. ii. 572.
XXXVI. SWALLOW.
1. Panayan. Son. Voy. pl. 76. -- 565. 2. Red-headed. -- 571. 3. Indian. --
571. pl. 56. 4. Esculent. Bris. ii. pl. 46. f. 2 A. -- 578. Chimney. Br. Zool.
-- 560.
XXXVII. GOAT-SUCKER.
I. Asiatic. VII. 195. 2. Indian. -- 196.
ORDER IV. COLUMBINE.
* TAIL EVEN AT THE END. XXXVIII. PIGEON.
1. Domestic. PL. Enl. 466. IV. 605. 2. Laced. -- 610. 3. White-wniged. Edw.
pl. 76. -- 617. VII. 197. 4. Great-crowned. Edw. pl. 338. -- 620. 5.
Lesser-crowned. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 100. -- 622. 623. pl. 58. 6.
Grey-headed. Son. Voy. pl. 66. -- 623. 7. Yellow-faced. Brown III. pl. 20. --
624. 8. Purple-shoulder. VII. 201. 9. Asiatic. -- 202. 10. Green-winged. Edw.
pl. 14. IV. 625. 11. Jamboo. -- 627. 12. Red-crowned. Son. Voy. pl. 67. -- 628.
13. Parrot. Pl. Enl. 138. Son. Voy. pl. 65. -- 629. 630. 14. Aromatic. Pl. Enl.
163. -- 631. 15. Nicobar. Pl. Enl. 491. -- 642. 16. Common Turtle. Pl. Enl.
394. -- 644. 17. Luzonian T. Son. Voy. pl. 22. -- 646. 18. Collared. Pl. Enl.
244. -- 648. 19. Gray. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 102. -- 649. 20. Barred. Edw. pl.
16. -- 650. VII. 200. 21. Surat. Index Orn. ii. 609. 22. Cambayan. -- 652. 23.
Malabar. -- 652. 24. Green. Pl. Enl. 142. -- 653. 25. Black-capped. Ind. Zool.
-- 654. 26. Javan. Pl. Enl. 177. -- 654. 27. Blue crowned. -- 655. -- 657. 28.
Red-breasted. Son. Voy. pl. 21. 29. Sanguine. Son. Voy. pl. 20. -- 657. 30.
Malacca. -- 661.
** LONG AND CUNEIFORM TAILS.
31. Amboina. Brif. i pl. 9. f. 3. IV. 665. 32. Bantam. Mus. Carls. fasc. iii.
t. 67. Index Orn. ii. 615.

ORDER V. GALLINACEOUS.
XXXIX. PEACOCK.
1. Crested. Pl. Enl. 433. 434. IV. 668. pl. 60.
XL. TURKEY.
1. Horned. Edw. pl. 16. -- 680.
XLI. PHEASANT.
1. Wild Cock. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl. 94. 95. -- 698. 2. Colored. VII. 210. 3.
Impeyan. -- 208. pl. 114.
XLII. PARTRIDGE.
1. Ceylon. Ind. Zool. IV. 758. VII. 222. 2. Francolin. Edw. pl. 246. -- 759.
3. Hackled. -- 766. pl. 66. 4. Red. Pl. Enl. 150. 231. -- 767. 5. Gingi. --
773. 6. Pondicherri. -- 774. 7. Fasciated. -- 221. 8. Asiatic. Index Orn. ii.
649. 9. Indian. -- 752. 20. 10. Javan. Brown III. pl. 17. -- 775. 11. Common
Quail. Pl. Enl. 170. -- 779. 12. Chinese. Edw. pl. 247. -- 783. 13. Noisy.
Will. Orn. pl. 29. -- 787. 14. Coromandel. -- 789. 15. Manilla. Son. Voy. pl.
24. -- 790. 16. Cambaian. Index Orn. ii. 655.
* TRIDACTYLOUS.
1. Luzonian. Son. Voy. pl. 23. IV. 792.
XLIII. BUSTARD.
1. Indian. Edw. pl. 250. -- 804. 2. Passarage. VII. 228. 3. White-chinned.
Mill. III. pl. 33. IV. 806.
XLIV. CASUARY.
1. Galeated. PI. Enl. 313. V. 10. pl. 72.
DIV. II. Water Fowl.
ORDER. VII. Cloven-Footed.
XLV. SPOON-BILL.
1. Luzonian. Son. Voy. pl. 51. Index Orn. ii. 668. b
XLVI. JABIRU.
1. Indian. VII. 23.
XLVII. HERON.
* CRANES.
1. Sibirian Crane. Pallas It. ii. t. 1. v. 37. 2. Indian Crane. Edw. 45. --
38. 39. 3. Common Crane. Pl. Enl. 769. -- 40. 4. Japan Crane. V. 42. 5.
Gigantic. -- 45. VII. 232. pl. 115.
** HERONS.
6. Philippine Heron. Pl. Enl. 898. -- 72. 7. Coromandel. Pl. Enl. 910. -- 75.
A. 8. Cinnamon. -- 77. 9. Malacca. Pl. Enl. 911. -- 78. 10. Violet. Pl. Enl.
906. -- 97. 11. Louhaujung. VII. 238. 12. Yellow-necked. -- 239.
*** BEC-OUVERTS
13. Pondicherry. Pl. Enl. 932. V. 101. 14. Coromandel. Son. Voy. Ind. ii. pl.
p. 219. -- 102.

XLVIII. IBIS.
1. White-headed. Ind. Zool. -- 116. 2. Manilla. Son. Voy. pl. 47. -- 117. 3.
Black-headed. VII. 240.
XLIX. CURLEW.
1. Luzonian. Son. Voy. pl. 48. V. 122.
L. SNIPE.
1. Woodcock? Br. Zool. -- 129. 2. Common Snipe. Br. Zool. -- 134. 3. Cape.
VII. 244. E. 4. Bengal. Albin. iii. pl. 90. V. 140. D. 5. Madras. Raii Syn. t.
I. f. 2. -- 141. 6. White Indian. V. 141.
LI. SAND-PIPER.
1. Goa. Pl. Enl. 807. -- 165.
LII. PLOVER.
1. Golden? Br. Zool. -- 193. 2. Long-legged. Br. Zool. -- 195. VII. 252. 3.
Philippine. Son. Voy. pl. 46. -- 205. C. 4. Wattled. Pl. Enl. 880. -- 216. 5.
Indian. VII. 254.
LIII. RUNNER. CUESORIUS. LATHAM Index, ii. 751.
1. Coromandel Pl. Pl. Enl. 892. V. 217.
LIVE. PRATINCOLE.
1. Maldivian. -- 224 2. Coromandel. -- ibid. 3. Madras. -- ibid.
LV. RAIL.
1. Philippine. Pl. Enl. 774. -- 230. 2. Striated Ph. Brif. v. pl. 14. f. 2. --
232. C. 3. Dusky. -- 232. B. 4. Banded. Brif. v. pl. 15. f. 1. -- 233. 5.
Brown. Pl. Enl. 773. -- ibid. 6. Ceylon. Brown III. pl. 37. -- 235.
LVI. JACANA.
1. Luzonian. Son. Voy. pl. 45. -- 245. 2. Indian. VII. 257.
LVII. GALLINULE.
1. Madras. Raii Syn. t, I. f. 4. V. 253. 2. Purple. Edw. pl. 87. -- 254. 3.
Green. -- 257. 4. Red-tailed. Ind. Zool. -- 259. 5. Crested. -- 267.
ORDER VIII. PINNATED FEET.
LVIII. GREBE.
1. Little. Pl. Enl. 945. -- 290. A.
ORDER IX. WEB-FOOTED.
LIX. ALBATROS.
1. Wandering. Edw. pl. 88. -- 304.
LX. SKIMMER.
1. Black. Pl. Enl. 357, VI. 347.
LXI. TERN.
1. Caspian. Index Orn. ii, 804. b. 2. Philippine. Son. Voy. pl. 85. VII. 267.
3. Panayan. Son. Voy. pl. 84. VI. 363. 4. White. Portlock Voy. pl. p. 312. --
363.VII. 266.
LXII. PETREL.
1. Stormy. Edw. pl. 90. -- 411.
LXIII. DUCK.
1. Chinese? Pl. Enl. 374. -- 447. 2. Black-backed. Ind. Zool. -- 449. 3.
Barred-head. VII. 177. 4. Greyhead. Brown. III. pl. 41. 42. VI. 458. 5.
Spotted-bill. Ind. Zool. -- 487. 6. Falcated. Pl. Enl. 930. -- 517. A. 7.
Pink-headed. VII. 276. pl. 119. 8. Coromandel. Pl. Enl. 949. 950. VI. 556. 9.
Manilla. Son. Voy. t. 54. -- 557.
LXIV. PELECAN.
1. White. Edw. pl. 92. -- 575. 2. Roseate. Son. Voy. pl. 54. -- 579. 3.
Manilla. Son. Voy. pl. 53. -- 583. 4. Philippine. Brif. vi. pl. 46. -- 583.
LXV. DARTER.
I. Black-bellied. Ind. Zool. -- 624.
CLASS III. AMPHIBIA.
ORDO I. REPTILIA.
GENUS. I TESTUDO.
IMBRICATA. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 80. fig. 9. Squamata. Bont. Java. 82. Lutaria.
Amen. Acad. i. p. 139. No 23. Serpentina. Mus. Ad. Fr. 2. p. 36. Indica.
Schneid. Schild, p. 355. No 14.
II. RANA.
Gibbosa. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 71. fig. 4. 5. Ventricosa. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 74.
fig. I. Venulosa. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 72. fig. 4. Marginata. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. p.
47.
III DRACO.
Volans. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 86. fig. 3.
IV. LACERTA.
Gangetica. Edw. Act. Aug. 49. p. 639. t. 19. Monitor. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 86.
fig. 2. 2. Bicarinata. Mauritanica. b. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 108. fig. 2. 7.
Iguana. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 95. fig. I. 2. Calotes. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 86. fig. 6.
Superciliosa. Seb. Mus, i. tab. 94, fig. 4. Scutata. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 109.
fig. 3, 4, Amboinensis, and Var. b. Lacustris. y. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 12. fig.
7. Vittata. Houtt. Act. Ulissing. 9. t. 2. Gecho. Forsk. Fn. Arab. p. 13. No 4.
Chameleon. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 82. fig. 2. 4. 5. Agilis. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 79.
fig. 5. Tequixin. Plica. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 96. fig. 1. Serpens. Bipes. Seb.
Mus. i. tab. 53. fig. 8.
ORDO II. SERPENTS.
V. BOA.
Hipnale. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 34. fig. 2. Constrictor. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 36.
fig. 5.
VI. COLUBER.
Clotho. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 93. Lutrix. Plicatilis. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 57. fig.
5. Alidras. Buccatus. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab. 19. fig. 3. Javanus. Seb. Mus. i.
tab. 10. fig. 2. Berus. b. d Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 9. fig. 8. Typhlus. Reginae.
Aeculapii. Afa /. Ad. Fr. i. 13. fig. 3. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab. II. fig. 2.
Rhombeatus. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab. 24. fig. 2. Miliaris. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. p. 27.
Albus. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. p. 24. t. 14. fig. 2. Agilis. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab. 21.
fig. 2. Lacteus. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab. 18. fig. 1. Pallidus. Ibid. tab. 7. fig.
2. Caecus. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 90. fig. 1. Naja. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 44. fig. 1.
Padera. Mus. Ad. Fr. ii. p. 44, Canus. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. p. 31. t. 11. fig. 1.
Zeylonicus. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 100. fig. 4. Laticaudatus. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab.
16. fig. 1. Atrow b. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 43. fig. 4. 5. Saturninus. Mus. Ad. Fr.
i. tab. 9. fig. 1. Candidus. Ibid. tab. 7. fig. 1. Scaber. Ibid. tab. 10. fig.
1. Carinatus. Exoletus. Ibid. tab. 10. fig. 2. Triscalis. Pelias. Ocellatus.
Seb. Mus ii. tab. I. fig. 3. 8. Hitambocia. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 33. fig. 6.
Tigrinus. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 15. fig. 2. Molurus. Ahaetulla. Catesb. Car. ii.
tab. 47. Petalarius, Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab. 9. fig. 2. Filiformis. Ibid. tab. 17.
fig. 2. Minervae. Ibid. p. 36. Cinereus. Ibid. p. 37. Mucosus. Ibid. tab. 23.
fig. I. Caerulescens. Ibid. tab. 20. fig. 2.
VII. ANCUIS.
Meleagris. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 21. fig. 4. Scytale. Ibid. tab. 2. fig. 1. 4.
Arer. Ibid. tab. 73. fig. 3.
VIII. CAECILIA.
Tentaculata. Ibid. tab. 25. fig. 2. Glutinosa. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab. 4. fig. I.
CLASSIS IV. PISCES.
ORDO I. BRANCHIOSTEGI.
GENUS. I. OSTRACION.
TRIQUETER. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 24. fig. 6. 12. Trigonus. Artedi Genesis 56. syn.
85. Bicaudalis. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 24. fig. 3. Tricornis. Quadricornis. Edw.
Glean, tab. 284. fig. 1. Cornurus. Will. Ichth. t.I. 13. fig. 1. Tuberculatus.
Arted. Genesis 55. syn. 84. Cubicus. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 24. fig. 4. 5.
II. TETRODON.
Testudineus. Amaen. Acad. i. tab. 14. fig. 3. Electricus. Act. Aug. lxxvi. p.
382. tab. 13. Oblongus. Bloch. Ausl. Fisch. ii. t. 146. fig. I. Ibid. fig. 2.
Rostratus. Hispidus. Aman. Acad. iv. p, 207. No 23.
III. SYNGNATHUS.
Tetragonus. Bloch. Ausl. Fisch. i. t. 121. fig. 1. Hyppocampus. Will. Ichth.
tab. I. 25.
IV. PEGASUS.
Draconis. Grow. Zooph. tab. 12. fig. 2. 3. Volans. Mus. Ad. ii. p. 56. Natans.
Bloch. Ausl. Fisch. i. t. 121. fig. 2. 3.
V. CENTRISCUS.
Scutatus. Gron. Mus. ii. tab. 7. fig. 3. Valitaris. Pall. Spic. Zool. viii.
tab. 4. fig. 8.
VI. BALISTES.
Tomentosus. Gron. Mus. i. tab. 6. fig. 5. Verrucosus. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab. 27.
fig. 4. Biaculeatus. Will. Ichth. App. tab. 10. fig. 2. Aculeatus. Seb. Mus.
iii. tab. 24. fig. 15. Vetula. Catesh. Carol. ii. tab. 22. Capriscus. Seb. Mus.
iii. tab. 24. fig. 16. Punctacus. Nieuhof. Ind. ii. p. 275. Kleinii. Klein.
Miss. Pisc. iii. tab. 3. fig. 12.
VII. CYCLOPTERUS.
Lumpus. b. g. Brit. Zool. iii. p. 103. No I. Nudus. Mus Ad. Fr. i. tab. 27.
fig. I.
ORDO II. CHONDROPTERYGII.
VIII. SQUALUS.
Catulus. Brit. Zool. iii. p. 90. No 9. Tigrinus. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 34. fig.
I. Glaucus. Brit. Zool. iii. p. 84. No 5. Canicula. Brit. Zool. iii. p. 88. No
8. Zygaena. Rondel. Pisc. i. p. 389. Acanthias. Brit. Zool. iii. p. 77. No 2.
Indicus. Gron. Mus. i. No 133.
IX. RAJA.
Pastimca. Brit. Zool. iii. p. 71. No 6.
ORDO III. APODES.
X. MURAENA.
Colubrina. Pall. n. nord. Beytr. ii. t. 2. fig. 3. Anguilla. Brit. Zool. iii.
p. 142. No 12.
XL GYMNOTUS.
Notopterus. Pall. Spicil. Zool. vii. tab. 6. fig. 2.
XII. TRICHIURUS.
Indicus. Will. Ichth. App. tab. 3. fig. 3.
XIII. OPHIDIUM.
Aculeatum. Will. Ichth. App. tab. 10. fig. I.
ORDO IV. JUGULARES.
XIV. CALLIONYMUS.
Ocellatus. Pall. Spic. Zool. viii. tab. 4. fig. 13. Sagitta. Ibid. fig. 4. 5.
XV. GADUS.
Lota. Brit. Zool. iii. p. 163. No 14.
XVI. BLENNIUS.
Cristatus. Gron. Mus. i. No 75. Cornutus. Fasciatus. Bicch. Ausl Fisch. ii. t.
162. fig. I. Supercihosus. Gron. Mus. n. tab 5. fig. 5. Mustelans.
XVII. KURTUS.
Indicus. Bloch. Ausl. Fisch. ii. tab. 169.
ORDO V. THORACICI.
XVIII. ECHENEIS.
Neucrates. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 33. fig. 2.
XIX. CORVPHAENA.
Pentadactyla. Block Ausl. Fisch. ii. t. 173. Fasciolata. Pall. Spicil. Zool.
viii. tab. 3. fig. 2. Velifera. Ibid. fig. I.
XX. GOBIUS.
Schlofferi. Ibid. tab. I. fig. I. 4. Bodaerti. Ibid. tab. 2. fig. 4. 5.
Cyprinoides. Ibid. tab. I. fig. 5.
XXI. COTTUS.
Grunniens. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 23. fig. 4. Scaber. Bloch. Aust. Fisch. ii tab.
180. Monopterigius. Bloch. Ausl Fisch. ii. t. 178. fig. I. 2.
XXII. SCORPAENA.
Horrida. Gron. Zooph. tab. II. 12. 13. fig. I. Volitans. Will. Ichth. App.
tab. 2. fig. 3. Antennata. Bloch Ausl. Fisch. iii. t. 185. Didactyla. Pall.
Spic. Zool. vii. tab. 4. fig. I. 3.
XXIII. ZEUS.
Insidiator. Bloch. Ausl. Fisch. iii. tab. 192. fig. 2. 3. Gallus. Seb. Mus.
iii. tab. 26. fig. 34. Ciliaris. Block Ausl. Fisch. tab. 191.
XXIV. PLEURONEC TES.
Tricodactylus. Art. Genesis 18. syn. 33.sp. 60. Zebra. Block Ausl. Fisch. iii.
tab. 181.
XXV. CHAETODON.
Canescens. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 25. fig. 7. Acuminatus. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. tab.
33. fig. 3. Pinnatus. Ibid. fig. 6. Cornutus. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 25. fig. 6.
Argrnteus. Amaen. Acad. iv. p. 249. Rostratus. Orbis. Ibid fig. 17 Bloch. Ausl.
Fisch. iii. tab. 102. fig. 2. Nigricans. Act. Angl. 1784. ii. tab. 12.
Lineatus. Seb. Mus. tab. 25. fig. I. Triostegus. Broussonet Ichth. Dec. i. t.
4. Macrulepidotus. Seb. Mus. iii. t. 25. f. 8. Argus. Will. Ichth. App. p. 2.
t. a. f. 2. Srriatus. Seb. Mus, iii. tab. 25. fig. 9. Arcuanus. Ibid. tab. 26.
fig. 23. Vagabunqus. Ibid. tab. 5. fig. 18. Ciliaris. Edw. Glean, tab. 283.
fig. 4. Saxarilis. Bloch. Ausl. Fisch. iii. t. 206. fig. 1. Rotundus. Mus. Ad.
Fr. i. p. 64. Lanceolatus. Edw. Av. tab. 210. Dux. Block. Ausl. Fisch. iii.
tab. 195. Pavo. Ibid. tab. 198. fig. 1. Vespertilio. Ibid. tab. 199. fig. 2.
Unimaculatus. Ibid. tab. 201. fig. I. Bicolor. Ibid. tab. 206. fig. I.
Ocellatus. Ibid. tab. 211. fig. 2. Bengalensis Ibid. tab. 213. fig. 2.
Octofasciatus. Ibid. tab. 215. fig. I. Annularis. Ibid. tab. 215. fig. 2.
Fiber. Ibid. tab. 212. fig. 2. Teria. Ibid. tab. 199. fig. I. Forsk. Fn. Arab.
p. 60. No 82.
XXVI. SPARUS.
Insidiator. Pall. Spic. Zool. tab. 5. fig. I. Palpebratus. Pall. n. nord.
Beytr. ii. t. 4. fig. I. 2. Spinus. Mus. Ad. Fr. ii. p. 74 *.
XXVII. SCARUS.
Schlofferi. Pall. Spic. Zool. viii. p. 41.
XXVIII. LABRUS.
Lunaris. Gron. Mus. ii. tab. 6. fig. 2. Trichopterus. Pall. Spic. Zool. viii.
p. 45. Zeylanicus. Ind. Zool, tab. 13. fig. 3. Ferrugineus. Paroticus. Mus. Ad.
Fr. ii. p. 76. Linearis. Amaen. Acad. i. p. 315.
XXIX. PERCA.
Polymna. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 26. f. 20. 24. Cottoides. Mus. Ad. Fr. ii. p. 84.
Stigma. Radula. Aman. Acad. i. p. 313.
XXX. TRIGLA.
Minuta.
ORDO VI. ABDOMINALES.
XXXI. SILURUS.
Ascita. Mus. Ad. Fr. i. p. 79. t. 30. fig. 2. Costarus. Gron. Mus. ii. tab. 5.
fig. 1. 2.
XXXII. TEUTHIS.
Hepatus. Catesb. Carol. ii. tab. I. fig. I. Java. Valent. Ind. iii. p. 339.
fig. 410.
XXXIII. SALMO.
Gasteropelecus. Anostomus. Pall. Spic. Zool. viii. t. 3. fig. 4. 5. Gron. Mus,
ii. tab. 7. fig. 2.
XXXIV. FlSTULARIA.
Chinensis. Pet. Gaz. tab. 68. fig. I. Paradoxa. Pall. Spic. Zool. viii. tab.
4. fig. 6.
XXXV. ESOX.
Brasiliensis. Brown Jam. tab. 45. fig. 2. Gymnocephalus.
XXXVI. POLYNEMUS.
Paradiseus. Edw. Av. tab. 208.
XXXVII. CLUPEA.
Thrissa. Brousson. Ichth. i. tab. 10. Mystus. Amaen. Acad. v. tab. fig. 12.
XXXVIII. CYPRIMUS.
Tinea. Brit, Zool. iii. p. 306. No 3. Will. Ichth. t. 2. 5.
CLASSIS V. INSECTA.
ORDO I. ELEUTERATA.
LUCANUS.
ALCES. Fab. Sp. Ins. No I. Petiv. Gazoph. tab. 47. f. 15. Gazella. Fab.
Mantis. p. I. Oliv. Coleopt. (Lucan) pl. 4. f. 13. a. b. Lama. Pl. 3. f. 8.
Carinatus. Lin. S. N. No 5.
SCARABAEUS.
Alcides. Feb. Sp. Ins. No 2. Oliv. Col. (Scar.) pl. I. f. 2. Gideon. Lin. 3.
pl. 11. f. 102. Centaurus. 4. pl. 11. f. 104. Oromedon. 5. pl. 18. 165.
Aeigeon. 6. pl. 26. f. 119. Dichotomus. Lin. 9. pl. 17. f. 156. Claviger. 10.
pl. 5. f. 40. a. b. Pan. 12. pl. 5. f. 35. pl. 23. f. 30. b. Simson. 19. pl.
15. f. 142. Geryon. 25. pl. 24. f. 208. Quadrispinosus. 36. pl. 19. f 179.
Quadridens. 37. pl. 12. f. 108. a. b. Fnema. Fab. Mant. Ins. No 12. Rhinoceros.
L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 40. pl. 18. f. 166. Coronatus. No 47. pl. 12. f. 110.
Hircus. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 52. Piceus. 55. Oliv. Col. (Scar.) pl. 24. f. 211.
Aygulus. 57. pl. 13. f. 120. and pl. 4. f. 28. a. b. Analis. Fab. Mant. Ins.
64. Unifasciatus. Gmel. Lin. No 182. Schall. Hall. Naturs. I. p. 240. Scaber.
L. Fab. Spec. Ins. 72. Oliv. Ccl. pl. 23. f. I. C. Pygmaeeus. Gmel. Lin. 186.
Sch. II Not. f. 1. p. 239. Longimanus. L. Fab. Sp. Inf. 73. Oliv. Col. pl. 4.
f. 27. Verer. Mant. App. p. 377. Barbarus. Spec. Ins. No 83. Marginellus. 88.
pl. 13. f. 116. Sabaeus. 99. a. b. pl. 9. f. 85. Pithecius. 102. pl. 9. f. 73.
Seniculus, 103. pl. 7. f. 56. a. b. Ammon. 105. pl. 12. f. III. Rhadamistus.
109. pl. 14. f. 136. Lar. Mantiss. Ins. 124. a. b. Bifasciatus. Spec. Ins. III.
pl. 13. f. 119. Capucinus. 113. pl. 2. f. 12. pl. 25. f. 12. b. Boas. Mant.
Ins. 129. Bonasus. Spec. Ins. 114. pl. 6. f. 43. a-c. Bucephalus. 117. pl. 4.
f. 26. pl. 10. f. 92. b. Lancifer. L. 119. pl. 4. f. 32. Spinisey. 131. pl. 12.
f. 112. Fricator. Mant. Ins. 140. Miliaris. Sp. Ins. 141. pl. 18. f. 164.
Koenigii. 145. pl. 9. f. 77. Pallipes. 153. Aenus. Sp. Ins. 156. Oliv. Coleop.
(Scar.) pl. 14. f. 128. a. b. Catta. Fab. Mand. No 115. pl. 23. f. 201. Auglas.
pl. 24. f. 212. M^lampus. pl. 17. f. 159. Tullus. pl. 19. f. 88. b. and pl. 11.
f. 98. Hesperus. p. 14. f. 129. S^^^atus. pl. 21. f. 189. and 1 f. 10. f. 93.
Erraticus. Lin. S. Not. No 29. Faun. Suec. No 383. TROX. Horridus. Fab. Sp.
Ins. No 3. Oliv. Col. (Trox.) pl. 1. f. 2.
MELOLONTHHA.
Serrata. 2. Oliv. Col. (Melol.) pl. 1. f. 5. Lanigera. 10. pl. 4. f. 39. a. b.
Glabrat 12. pl. 9. f. 80. Dorsalls. 17. Rusicoills. 24. pl. 9. f. 111.
Erythrocephala. 23. pl. 7. f. 80. Rauca. 37. pl. 6. f. 62. Ferruginea. 38. pl.
7. f. 82. Probolcidea. 49. pl. 8. f. 96. Podagrica. 52. pl. 5. f. 51.
Mutabilis. 60. pl. 3. f. 24. Vittata. 74. pl. 8. f. 94. Candida. No 8. pl. 8.
f. 98. Femoralis. 41. pl. 9. f. 110. Pubeseens. 57. pl. 6. f. 71. 7. p. 43. f.
5. Unicolor. Gmel. Lin. 313. Fuesl. Arc. Ins. Ciliatus. 314. f. 6. Sepicola.
Lin. S. Not. 55. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 24. Syriacus. Lin. S. Not. No 56. Mus. Lud.
Ulr. 25. Leei. Gmel. Lin. 427. N. At. Stockb. 8. 178 f. 3. No 3. 4.
TRICHIUS.
Indus. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 2. Oliv. Col. (Ceton.) pl. 6. f. 40. Viridulus. 6. pl.
6. f. 86.
CETONIA
Chinensis. 2. pl. 2. f. 5. a b. Nigrita. 3. pl. 10. f. 92. Splendida. 31. pl.
4. f. 21. Elegans. 32. pl. 4. f. 25. Aurichalcea. 43. pl. 9. f. 78. Orichalca.
Lin. S. N. iii. App. p. 224. Maculata. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 46. pl. 7. f. 66.
Versicolor. 52. pl. 4. f. 23. Veriagata. 55. pl. 5. f. 31. b. and 30.
Quadripunctata. Fab. Mant. No 12. pl. 10. f. 93. Capucina. 16. Ephippium. 31.
Drur. Ins. 3. pl. 44 f. 3. Bisida. Oliv. Col. (Cet.)No 43. pl. 2. f. 9.
Crucisera. 44. pl. 5. f. 29. Impressa. 45. pl. 8 f. 71. Caerulea. 55. pl. 5. f.
31. a. Caerulea. Gmel. Lin. 382. Fuesl. Arch. In pl. 4. tab. 19. f. 30.
Bimucronata. 384. P^ll. Ic. Ins. Russ. 1. tab. A. f. 13.
HISTER.
Maximus. Lin. S. Not. No OIiv. CoI. ( pl. t.) pl. 1. f. 2. Major. L. Fab.
Spec. Ins. No 2. pl. 1. f. 4. a. b.
APATE.
Capucinus. 4. Sch. El. t. 28.
DERMESTES.
Lardarius. L. Fab. Spec. Ins. 1. Schaef. Ic. pl. 42. f. 3. Pellio. 5. pl. 42.
f. 4. Ruficollis. 15. Thumb. N. Sp. Ins. 1. p. 8. f. 7. Marginatus. Gmel. Lin.
44. pl. 7. f. 6. Piceus. 45. p. 8. Viridis. 48. p. 9.
BRUCHUS
Cacao. No 6. Theobromae. L. 7. Analis. 9. Abdominalis 13.
TRITOMA.
Vittata. Fab. Mant. No 4.
HISPA.
Bihamata. Lin. S. Not. No 3.
SILPHA.
Indica. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 3. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 38.
OPATRUM.
Cinereum. Gmel. Lin. 11. Fuesl. Arch. Ins. 4. tab. 21. A. a.
COCCINELLA.
Dimidiata. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 5. Cingulata. Fab. Mant. No 24. Sexmaculata. Spec.
Ins. No 20. Septempunctata, L. 21. Schaf. Ic. tab. 9. f. 7. Centumpunctata.
Gmel. Lin. 118. Fuesl. Arch. Ins. 4. tab. 22. f. 13. Transversalis. Fab. Spec.
Ins. 24. Sparsa. Gmel. Lin. 120. 7. tab. 42. f. 11. 28-punctata. 48. Minuta.
54. Thumb. N. Sp. Ins. 1. p. 11.
CASSIDA.
8-punctata. Fab. Mant. No 18. Marginata. L. Sp. Ins. No 25. Natursorsch. No 9.
t. 2. Dorsata. Mantiss. 33. Bicornis. L. Sp. Ins. 29. Amaen. Ac. 6. p. 393. 9.
Spinisex. L. 31. p. 392. 7. Trisasciata. Mant. 46. Annulata. Spec. Ins. 39.
Naturf. 9. t. 2. f. 6. Bipunctata. L. 49. Alatrata. Lin. S. Not. No 18.
Angustata. Gmel. Lin. No 31.
ALURXUS.
Femoratus. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 2. Drur. Ins. 2. tab. 34. f. 5.
CHRYSMELA.
14-punctata. L. 13. Fervi^e. 22. Uudulata. L. 41. Amoen. Ac. 6. p. 393. 14.
Nitidi. Mant. No 64. Cruenta. Spec. Ins. 82. Sternicornis. Gmel. Lin. 147.
Schal. Hall. Not. 1. t. 1. f. 1. Gigas. 153. Fuest. Arch. Ins. 4. t. 23. f. 2.
Indica. 155. f. 5. Malaccensis. 249. Horn. Shr. Berl. Not. 8. t. 1. f. 9.
Fascicornis. (Altica.) 66. f. 1.
CRYPTOCEPHALUS.
Koenigii. Fab. Sp. Ins. 45. Martinius. Gmel. Lin. No 74. Schal. Hall. Not. 1.
p. 278. Peregrinus. 77. Fuesl. Arch. Ins. 4. t. 23. f. 25. Multicolor. 246.
Horn. shr. Berl. Not. 8. t. 1. f. 6. Sumatranus. 247. f. 4. Coffae. 248. f. 7.
Orientalis. 249. f. 3. Bataviensis. 250. f. 12. Javanus. 251. f. 2. 5. 8. 11.
CISTELA.
Analis. Fab. Sp. Ins. 8.
CRIOCERIS.
Cincta. 5. Palliata. 6. Act. Hall. 1. p. 279. Picta. Mantiss. 12. Testacea.
20. 4-pustulata. 23. Impressa. 24. Abdominalis. Gmel. Lin. 130. Ochracea. 180.
Fuesl. Arch. Ins. 7. t. 44. f. 9. p. q.
EROTYLUS.
Giganteus. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 1. De Geer, Ins. 5. tab. 16. f. 8. Longimanus.
Mant. No 11.
LAGRIA.
Abdominalis. Fab. Mant. No 14. Inda. Lin. S. Not. No 121. Mus. Lud. UIr. 41.
CURCULIO.
Palmarum. L. Sp, Ins. No 1. Oliv. Col. (Curc.) pl. 2. f. 16. Indus. L. 5. Be
Geer, Ins. 5. pl. 15. f. 22. Paganus. 6. Hemipterus. L. 8. pl. 15. f. 25.
Melanocardius. L. 10. Sulz. Ins. 4. tab. 4. f. 11. Barbirostris. 65. Seb. Mus.
4. tab. 95. f. 5. Frigidus. Fab. Mant. App. p. 381. Mucoreus. L. Fab. Sp. Ins.
No 74. Muf. Lud. Ulr. 53. Pusio. L. 75. 46. Stigma. L. 79. 48. Hebes. 80.
Annulatus. L. 81. 51. Reticulatus. 85. Stultus. Mant. No 117. Anchoraco. L
Spec. Ins. 118. De Geer, Ins. 5. tab. 15. f. 4. Argyreus. L. Spec. Ins. 128.
Mus. Lad. Ulr. 54. Curvipes. Mant. 183. Lacerta. Spec. Ins. 161. Frigidus.
Mant. App. p. 381. Emeritus. L. Spec. Ins. 190. 56. Cinnamomi. Gmel. Lin. 275.
Fuesl. Arch. Ins. 5. t. 24. f. 20. h. i. Globosus. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 193. Drur.
Ins. 1. pl. 32. f. 4. Apterus. L. 206. De Geer. Ins. 5. tab. 16. f. 1.
Viridanus. 219.
ATTELABUS.
Indicus. Mant. No 5. Thunb. N. Spec. Ins. 3. pl. 68. f. 81. Cyancus. 15.
CLERUS.
Apiarius. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 9. Schrf. Ic. pl. 48. f. 11. Cyaneus. Mant. No
15.
PRINUS.
Trochlearis. Lin. S. Not. p. 622. Armillatus. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 21. Oliv.
Col. (Prion.) pl. 5. f. 17. Rostratus. Mant. No 3. Spinosus. 26.
CERAMBYX.
Gigas. Fab. Mant. No 20. Fasciatus. Spec. Ins. No 23. Barbicornis. L. 24. Mus.
L. Ulr. 68. Rugicollis. Mantiss. 40. Holosericeus 45. Longicollis 46. Sentis.
Lin. S. Rat. p. 626. 23. Ferrugineus. 25. Platypus. Gmel. Lin. No 132. De Geer,
Ins. 7. l. 49. f. 3.
LAMIA.
Vaginator. Fab. Mant. No 8. Grisator. 12. Nigricornis. Spec. Ins. 10.
Ariolaror. 14. Reticulator. 16. Rotator. 32. Lusia. Fab. Mant. No 35. Molitor.
Spec. Ins. 42. Rubus. L. 44. De Geer, Ins. 5. t. 13. f. 16. Scabrator. 46.
Sentis. Lin. S. Not. No 23. Ferruginous. 25. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 70. Depressus. 26.
Schr. Ins. 8. f. 10.
STINOCORUS.
Cyaneus. Fab. Spec. Ins. No 2. Forced. Cent. Ins. 40. (palliatus.) Rusticus.
19.
SAPERDA.
Vittata. 11.
CALLIDUM.
Barbatum. 12. Compressum. Mant. 21. Glaucum. Spec. Ins. 41. Annulare. Mant.
59. Venustum. Gmel. Lin. 298. Fuesl. Arch. Ins. 5. t. 26. f. 12. Indicum. 299.
f. 16.
LEPTURA.
Linearis. Lin. S. Not. No 25. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 77.
LAMPYRIS.
Cincta. Fab. Sp. Ins. 6. Depressa 18. Compressa. Gmel. Lin. No Thunb. N. Sp.
Ins. 4. p. 80.
PYROCHROA.
Nigripes. Mantiss. 5.
LYMEXYLON.
Testaceum. Fab. Spec. Ins. No 1.
CUCUJUS.
Rusus. Gmel. Lin. No 10. Swed. Act. Stock. 8. No 3. 21.
CANTHARIS.
Melanocephala. Fab. Spec. Ins. 13. Tropica. Lin. S. Not. No 19. Gron. Zooph.
515. t. 14. f. 7.
ELATER.
Flabellicornis. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 1. Dr. Ins. 3. pl. 47. f. 1.? Speciosus.
L. 2. Luridus. 3. Fuscipes. 9. Melanocephalus. 38. Notatus. 45. Pallipes. Fab.
Ins. Mant. 46.
BUPRESTIS.
Gigantea. L. 3. Petiv. Gaz. t. 147. f. 16. 17. Vittata. 4. Ignita, L. 12. t.
20. f. 8. Aenea. 15. Sternicornis. L. 17. Grew, Mus. t. 13. Chrysis. L. 18. De
Geer, Ins. 4. t. 17. f. 25. Fulminans. Mantiss. 29. Impressa. Spec. Ins. 27.
Scabra. 30. Plebeia. 41. Impressa. Mant. 61. Bimaculata. Spec. Ins. 45. Sulz.
Ins. 57. t. 6. f. 15. 4-maculata. 46. Tristis. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 47. Mus.
Lud. Ulr. 93. Nobilis. L. 49. Stricta. Lin. S. Not. No 4. 87.
CICINDELA.
Longicollis. Fab. Mamiss. No 1. Grossa. Spec. Ins. No 1. Cyanea. Mant. 2.
Bicolor. Spec. Ins. No 2. Sexpunctata. 14. 4-lineata. 15. Biramosa. Mantiss.
20. Thunb. N. Sp Ins. 1. pl. 26. f. 40. Catena. Spec. Ins. 18.
HYDROPHILUS.
Olivaceus. 2.
DYTICUS.
Limbatus. Sp. Ins. 5. Rusicollis. Mant. No 6. Fasciatus. Fab. Sp. Ins. 7.
Vittatus. Spec. Ins. 10. Griseus. 12. Aciculatus. Gmel. Lin. 64. Fuest. Arch.
Ins. 5. p. 123. No 4. Zeylanicus. 83. Gron. Mus. 2. p. 164. No 552.
GYRINUS.
Spinosus. 4.
CARABUS.
6-guttatus. 6. Reflexus. 20. Angulatus. Fab. Spec. Ins. 21. Levigatus. 28.
Attelaboides. 30. Trilineatus. 31. Bimaculatus. L. Fab. Spec. Ins. 45. Sulz. H.
Ins. t. 7. 4. 5. Cinctus. 62. Flexuosus. 66. Indicus. Gmel. Lin. 153. F Fuesl.
Arch. Ins. 6. t. 29. f. 11. Splendid us. 154. p. 138. No 41. Marginellus. 155.
p. 138. No 42.
PIMELIA.
Striata. 1. Gibba. Mantiss. 3. Fasciata. Spec. 18.
SCARITES.
Bucephalus. Gmel. Lin. No 20. t. 29. f. 16. 1.
BLAPS.
Striata. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 5. Crenata. 6.
TENEBRIO.
Laminatus. Mantiss. 1. Punctulatus. 2. Abbreviatus. Spec. Ins. 6.
HELPOS.
Maura. 5. Dentipes. 12.
MYLABRIS.
Fasciata. 1. Algirica. L. 3. Indica. Gmel. Lin. 16. 6. t. 30. f. 6. Undulata.
18. 8. t. 48. f. 3. Bifasciata. 21. t. 48. f. 2.
LYTTA
Syriaca. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. 3. Fuest. Arch. Ins. 6. t. 30. f. 1. Ruficollis.
Gmel. Lin. 13. 8. t. 48. f. 4.
STAPHYLINUS.
Aureus. Mantiss. 1.
ORDO II. ULONATA.
BLATTA.
Gigantea. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 1. Drur. Ins. 2. t. 36. f. 2. Indica. 8.
Petiveriana. 13. Peliv. Gaz. t. 71 f. 1. Orientalis. L. 14. Schaef. Ins. t. 88.
f. 2. 3. Ruficollis. Mantiss. 22. Aterrima. Gmel. Lin. 32. Fuesl. Arch. Ins. 8.
t. 49. f. 9.
MANTIS.
Gigas. L. Fab. Spec. Ins. 1. Petiv. Gaz. t. 60. f. 2. Necydaloides. L. 2.
Roes. 2. Gryl. t. 19. Atrophica. 3. Pall. Spic. sasc. 9. t. 5. f. 1. Bispinosa.
4. Linearis. Mont. 9. Gongyloides. L. Sp. Ins. 8. Drur. Ins. 1. t. 36. f. 2.
Pauperata. 9. Strumaria. L. 11. Roes. Ins. 2. Gryll. t. 2. Tricolor. L. 12.
Mus. Lud. Ulr. 117. Cancellata. 13. Siccisolia. L. 14. Roes. Ins. 2. Gryll. t.
17. Pectinicornis. L. 15. Drur. Ins. 1. t. 50. f. 1. Urbana. 26. Pulchra.
Mantiss. 34.
ACHETA.
Gryllotalpa. Spec. Ins. 1. Roes. Ins. 2. Gryll. t. 14. 15. Monstrosa. Fab. Sp.
Ins. No 2. Drur. lns. 2. t. 42. f. 1. Orientalis. 7.
LOCUSTA.
Citrisolia. L. 1. Roes. Ins. 2. Gryll. t. 16. f. 1. Elongata. L. 10. t. 18. f.
7. Femorata. Fab. Mant. 12. Ocellata. L. Sp. Ins. 12. Seb. Mus. 4. t. 73. f. 7.
8. Triops. L. 16. Coronata. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. 16. 17. De Geer. Ins. 3. t. 38. f.
5. Melanoptera. L. 18. Coriacea. L. 19. Mus. Ad. Fr. 136. Spinulosa. L. 28.
Edw. Av. 2. t. 285. f. 3. 4. 5. Indica. Gmel. Lin. No 116. Fuesl. Arch. Ins. 8.
t. 53. f. 2. Unicolor. Lin. S. Not. No 3. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 119. Carinata. 6. 122.
Lamellosa. 21. Roes. Gryll. t. 18. f. 7? Rugosa. 25. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 132.
Aquilina. 27. 133. Fastigiata. 29. 135.
GRYLLUS.
Succinctus. I Fab. Sp. 2. Amen. Ac. 6. p. 398. 36. Rericulatus. 7. Serripes.
Mantiss. 8. Turcicus. 10. Punctatus. Sp. Ins. 14. Drur. Ins. 2. t. 41. f. 4.
Haematopus. L. 16. De Geer. Ins. 5 t. 40. f. 10. Perspicillacus. L. 50. Amaen.
Ac. 6. p. 398. 34.
ORDO III. SYNISTATA.
MONOCULUS.
Polyphemus. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 1. Rumph. Mus. 21. t. 12.
ONISCUS.
Linearis. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 8. Pall. Spic. fasc. 9. t. 4. f. 11.
SEMBLIS.
Fuscata. 4.
TERMS.
Fatale. L 1. De Geer, Ins. 7. t. 37. f. 1.2.
MYRMELEON.
Pardalis. 2. Punctatum. Mant. 7.
ICHNEUMON.
Pedator. Spec. Ins. 52. Polycerator. 63. Punctatus. 104.
SPHEX.
Fervens. L. 12. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 406. Erythrocephala. 14. Argentata. Mantiss. 6.
Maderaspatana. Spec. Ins. 16. Compressa, 19. Ciliata. Mantiss. 24. Vespiformis.
Fab. Sp. Ins. No 23. Analis. 27. Affimilis. Mantiss. 33. Tropica. L. Spec. Ins.
37. 408. Maura. Mantiss. 38. Auraca. 45. Nigrita. Spec. Ins. 45. Villosa. 47.
Flava. 48. Flavicornis. 50. Indostana. Lin. S. Not. No 7. 407. Indica. 26. 408.
TIPHIA.
Collaris. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 8. Dorsata. Mantiss. 11. Ruficornis. 12.
SCOLIA.
4-pustulata. Sp. Ins. 13.
CHRYSIS.
Splendida. I. Oculata. 4.
BEMBEX.
Repanda. Mantiss. 6. Interrupta. 8.
VESPA.
Cincta. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 1. Sulz. Ins. t. 27. f. 5. Cornuta. L. Sp. Ins. 7.
Drur. Ins. 2. t. 48. f. 3. Calida. L, 23. 4-punclata Mantiss. 55. Hebraea. 58.
Flavescens. Sp. Ins. 50. Petiolata. 56. Esuriens. Mantiss. 75.
CRABRO.
Cornutus. Fab. Mant. No 3. Repandus. 5. Interruptus. 10.
ANDRENA.
Cincta. Sp. Ins. 8. Zonata. L. 11. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 415.
APIS.
Plumipes. 35. Bicolor. Sp. Ins. 55. Villosa. 56. Florea. Mantiss. 87.
Smaragdula. 91. Cordata? Lin. S. Not. 15. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 414.
NOMADA.
Histrio. Fab. Sp. Ins. 1.
FORMICA.
Smaragdina. No 2. Compressa. Montiss. 2. Cinerascens. 12. Elongata. 13.
Elevata. Sp. Ins. 16. Bihamata, 29. Dr. Ins. 2. t. 38. f. 7. 8. Maxillosa. 37.
MUTILLA.
Indica. Lin.S. Not. 3. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 419.
ORDO IV. AGONATA.
CANCER.
Raninus. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. 1. Rumph. Mus. t. 7. f. T. V. Ceratopthalmus. Mant.
6. Herbst. Cancr. 174. t. 1. f. 8. 9. Globus. Sp. Ins. 6. Craniolaris. L. 7.
Rumpb. Mus. t. 10. f. A. B. Porcellanus. Mantiss. 11. Herbst. Cancr. 92. 12. t.
2. f. 18. Corallinus. 23. Rumpb. Mus. t. 8. f. 5. Floridus. L. Sp. Ins. 16.
Herbst. Cancr. t. 3. f. 39. Vocans. L. 17. Petiv. Gaz. t. 78. f. 5. Maculatus.
L. 21. Rumph. Mus. t. 10. f. 1. Maenas. L. 25. t. 6. f. 0. Dormia. L. 27. t.
11. f. 1. 6-dentatus. Fab. Mantiss. No 43. Rumph. Amb. t. 1. f. 5. Feriatus L.
Sp. Ins. 2 28. Mus. t. 6. f. P. Pagurus. L. 29. t. 11. f. 4. Aeneus. L. 32.
Seb. Mus. 3. t. 19. f. 17. Eornicatus. Sp. Ins. App. p. 502. Ochtades. Mantiss.
55. Herbsi. Canc. t. 8. f. 54. Ovis. 66. f. 74. Cylindrus. Sp. Ins. 35.
Chabrus. L. 36. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 438. Muricatus. Mantiss. 67. Herbst. Cancr. f.
75. Erinaceus. 71. Superciliosus. L. 72. Seb. Mus. 3. t. 18. f. 11. Punctatus.
L. Sp. Ins. 44. Rumph. Amboin. t. 10. f. 6. 7-spinosus. Mant. 75. Horridus. L.
Sp. Ins. 51. Rumpb. Mus. t. 9. f 1. Longimanus L. 55. t. 8. f. 2. Longipes. L.
56. t. 8. f. 4. Spinifer. L. 57. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 447.1
PAGURUS.
Latro. L. 1. Rumph. Mus. t. 7. f. 4. Diogenes. L. 3. t. 5. f. K. L. Hungarus.
Mantiss. 4. Herbs, Cancr. t. 122. Miles. 6. f. 114. Clypeatus. 7.
HIPPA.
Adactyla? Fab. Mantiss. No 1. Dorsipes. L. 3. Rumph. Mus. Variolosa. 5.
SCYLLARUS.
Arctus. L. Sp. Ins. 1. t. 2. f. 6. D.
ASTACUS.
Homarus. L. 3. t. 1. f. A. Emeritus. L. Sp. Ins. 16. Gron. Zooph. 1000. t. 17.
f. 8. 9.
SQUILLA.
Mantis. L. 1. Rumph. Mus. t. 3. f. 2. Scyllarus. L. 2. Seb. Mus. 3. t. 20. f.
6. Ciliata. Mantiss. 3. Chiragra? Sp. Ins. 3. Rumph. Mus. t. 3. f. F.
ORDO V. UNOGATA.
LIBELLULA.
Indica. Fab. Sp. Ins. 8. Drur. Ins. 2. t. 46. f. 1. Fasciata. L. 17. Edw. Av.
t. 174. Americana. L. 23. Histrio. Mantiss. 24. Variegata. Lin. S. Not. 18.
Amaen. Ac. 6. p. 412. No 86.
AGRION.
Ciliata. Fab. Sp. Ins. 3. Linearis. 5. Drur. Ins. 2. t. 48. f. 1.
JULUS.
Stigma. 8. Carnisex. 9. Scbroet. Ahh. 1. t. 3. f. 7. Indus. L. 10. Petiv. Gaz.
t. 74. f. 3. Fuscus. L. 11. Seb. Mus. 2. t. 24. f. 4. 5.
SCOLOPENDRA.
Morsitans. L. 5. Petiv. Gaz. t. 13. f. 3. Dorsalis. 7. Clypeata. 8.
Phosphorea. L. 11.
ARANEA.
Argentata. Fab. Sp. Ins. 18. Lusca. 51.
PHALANGIUM.
Caudatum. L. 7. Seb. Mus. 1. t. 70. f. 7. 8.
SCORPIO.
Aser. L. 3. Roes. Ins. 3. t. 65.
ORDO VI. GLOSSATA.
PAPILIO.
* EQUITES TROES.
Paris. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. 2. No 1. Drur. Ins. 1. t. 12. f. 1. Theseus. 3. Cram.
Ins. 15. t. 180. B. Polytes. L. 4. 8. t. 90. B. Hector. L. 5. 12. t. 141. A.
Romulus. t. 43. A. Helenus. L 7. 13. t. 153. A. B. Antenor. 8. Drur. Ins. 2. t.
3. f. 1. Troilus. L. 9. 1. t. 11. f. 2. 3. 5? Palinurus. Fab. Mantiss. No 10.
Deiphobus. L. Sp. Ins. 2. No 10. Cram. Ins. 16. t. 181. A. B. Pelaus. 12. 15.
t. 177. A. B.C. Pammon. L. 16. 12. t. 141. B. Achates. 19. 16. t. 182. A. B.
Polydorus. L. 20. 11. t. 128. A. B. Memnon. L. Var. 23. t. 222. A. B. Priamus.
L. 21. 2. t. 23. A. B. Remus. 22. 1. t. 10. A. B.and 11. A. B. Agenor. L. 25.
3. t. 32. A. B. Amphrisius. Mantiss. 23. 19. t. 219. A. Alcandor. t. 40. A. B.
D. E. Sarpedon. L. Spec. Ins. 28. 11. t. 122. D. E. Amphimedon. 31. 17. t. 194.
A. Aeneas. L. 32. 3. t. 29.C. -- F. Lysander. 33. 2. t. 24. E.? Polymnestor.
35. 5. t. 53. A. B. Panthous. L. 36. 11. t. 123. 124. Remus. Mantiss. 24. 12.
t. 135. A. 136. A. Pandarus. L. Spec. 37. Mus. Lad. Ulr. 198. Astenous. 38.
Cram. Ins. 17. t. 195. A.
** EQUITES ACHIVI.
Ripheus. Fab. Mantiss. No 43. Cram. Ins. t. 385. A. B. Pyrrhus. L. Sp. Ins. 2.
No 41. t. 220. A. B. Tiridares. 43. t. 161. A. B. Aeclus. Mnntiss. 50. t. 317.
A. B. Fabius. Sp. Ins. No 47. Codes. Mantiss. 53. Leilus. L. Sp. Ins. 48. t.
85. C. D. Ulysses. L. 52. t. 121. A. B. Patroclus. L. 53. t. 109. A. B.
Diomedes. L. 54. t. 122. A. Varanes. 55. t. 160. D. E. Alcibiades. Mantiss. 65.
Pompilius. 66. t. 37. A. B. Sinon. Sp. Ins. 59. Drur. Ins. t. 22. f. 3. 4.
Anthcus Cram. Ins. t. 235. B. C. Chiron. 60. t. 200. D. E. Curious. Mantiss. 71
Periander. 74. Codius. Sp. Ins. 69. t. 179. A. B. Mencstheus. 74. t. 142. A. B.
Xuthus. L. 75. t. 73. A. B. Cresphontes. Sp. Ins. 77. Cram. Ins. t. 89. A. B.
Orontes. L. 80. t. 83. A. B. Aegistus. t. 241. C. D. Agamemnon. L. 81. t. 106.
C. D. Aegistheus. L. No 82. t. 200. A. B. C. Empedocles. Mantiss. 94. Euryalus.
Sp. Ins. 83. t. 74. A. B. Phidippus. L. 85. t. 69. A. B. Nisus. 84. t. 150. A.
B. Aurelius. 86. t. 168. A. B. Demoleus. L. 89. t. 231. A. B. Medon. L. 89. t.
205. B.C. Philoctetes. L. 93. t. 20. A.B.C. Nireus. L. 93. t. 187. A. B.
Amphimachus. 94. t. 84. A. B.? Amphitrion. 96. t. 157. A. B. Gambrisius. Fab.
Mantiss. 113. t. 43. F. G. Drusius. t. 229. A. 23. A. Demophon. L. Sp. Ins. 97.
t. 158. A. -- E. Eiurypylus. L. 106. t. 122. B. C. Astenous. t. 208. A. B.
Sabinus. Sp. Ins. Ap. p. 502. t. 289. A. -- D. Jason. Lin. S. Not. No 38. Mus.
Lud. Ulr. 210.
*** HELICONII.
Calliope. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. 107. Cram. Ins. t. 246. C. Melite. L. 108. t. 153.
C. D. Mopsa. L. 109. t. 190. D. Mneme. L. 110. t. 190. C. Lybia. 111. t. 177.
C. D. Violae. I. 112. t. 298. D. E. Terpsichore. L. 113. t. 298. A. B. C.
Serena. 114. ttt, 268. A. B. Urania. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 117. Mus. Lud. Ulr.
225. Psidii. L. 124. Cram. Ins. t. 257. P. Aspasia. Mantiss. 145. Aegle. Sp.
Ins. 125. t. 126. C. D.? Thalia. L. 130. t. 246. A. Euryta. L. 131. t. 233. A.
B. Aedea. L. 132. Clerck. Ic. t. 41. f. 2. Antiocha. L. 134. Cram. Ins. t. 38.
E. F. Erato. L. 146. t. 119. A. Assarica. t. 363. A. B.
*** PARANASSII.
Quirina. 152. Piera. L. 153. t. 291 C. D. Pasithoe. L. 154. t. 258. E. F.
Andromeda. 158. Idea. L. 160. t. 193. A. B.
*****DANAI CANDIDI.
Brassicae. L. 161. y. 271. E. f. Napi. L. 163. Albin. Ins. t. 52. F. G.
Valeria. Cram. Ins. t. 85. A. Libythea. 172. Creona 175. t 95. C -- F. Nerissa.
t. 44. A. Demopbile. L. 177. Clerck. Ic. t. 28. f. 4. Crocale. Cram. Ins. t.
55. C. D. Hecabe. L. 178. t. 124. B. C. Drusilla. t. 110. C. Paulina. t. 110.
E. F. Xiphia. 180. Hedyle. t. 186. C. D. Eucharis. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 181. Cram.
Ins. t. 352. CD.E. f. Jugurtha. t. 187. E. F. Alcmeone. 186. t. 141. E.
Oenippe. t. 229. B. C. Pyramhe. L. 188. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 245. Catilla. t. 229. E.
F. Leucippe. 189. Cram. Ins. t. 36. A. -- C. Thetis. t. 238. F. G. Callirhoe.
190. Pl. Enlum. t. 91. f. 1.2. Mesentina. t. 270. A. B. Glaucippe. L. 191.
Cram. Ins. t. 164. A. -- C. Zelmira. t. 320. C. -- F. Euippe. L. 192. t. 91. D.
-- G.? Coronnis. 193. t. 44. B. C. Hyparete. L. 194. Clerck. Ic. t. 38. f. 2.
3. Evagete. Cram. Ins. t. 221. F. G. Scylla. L. 203. t. 12. C. D. Coronea. 201.
t. 68. B. C. Cornelia. Mmitiss. 229. Agathina. t. 237. D.E. Judith. 230.
Belisamae. t. 258. A. B. C. D Amata. Sp. Ins. 204. Aenippe. t. 157. C. D.
Cypraea. Mantiss. 232. Hitaria. t. 339. E. F. Danae. Sp. Ins. 205. Sesia.
Mantiss. 234. t. 217. C. D. E. Rahel. 235. Ada. t. 363. C. D. Messalina. 236.
Zeuxippe. t. 362. E. F. Gnoma. Sp. Ins. 217. t. 361. C. D. Drya. 218. t. 120.
C. D. Philea. L. 221. t. 173. E. F. Dorimenes. t. 387. C. D. Acasta. Lin. S.
Not. No 83. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 250. Encedonia. 90. 244. Arsalte. 91. Clerck. Ic. t.
23. f. 2. Damone. 93.
DANIA FESTIVI.
Midamus. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. 227. Cram. Ins. t. 266. A. B. Claudius. Mantiss.
261. t. 266. C. Climene. t. 389. E. F. Liberius. Sp. Ins. 229. t. 210. G. H.
Syphax. 234. t. 233. C. D. Eyialeus. Mantiss, 267. t. 189. D. E. Eualthe. Sp.
Ins. 235. t. 17. E. F. Caenrus. L. 239. Mus. Lud Ulr. 271. Genutia. Cram. Ins.
t. 206. C. D. Pinthaeus. L. 242. t. 258. Chrysippus. L. 245. t. 118. B. C.
Hegesippus. 248. t. 180. A. Nicaeus. 255. t. 12. G. H. Gripus. 255. t. 183. C.
D. Xanthus. L. 257. t. 183. A. B. Arccsilaus. Mantiss. 305. Eribotes. Sp. Ins.
267. Morvus. 270. t. 48. A. B. Cocytus. Mantiss. 316. Obrinus. L. Sp. Ins. 275.
t. 338. C. D. Ancaeus. L. 276. t. 49. E. F. Jairus. 281. t. 6. A. B. Philocles.
L. 285. t. 184. D. E. F. Aeropus. L. 287. t. 111. F. G. Mineus. 294. t. 84. C.
D. Baldus. 306. Zetes. Lin. S. Not. No no. Clerck. Ic. t. 43. f. 1. Encdadus.
112. Mus Lud. Ulr. 354. Eribote. Lin. S. Not. No 115. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 233.
Perius. 116. 261. Philomelus. 123. Amaen. Ac. 6. p. 404. 60.
*NYMPHALES GEMMATI.
Polynice. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 310. Cram. Ins. t. 195. D. E. Almana. L. 311. t.
58. F. G. Asterie. L. 312. t. 58. D. E. Oenone. L. 313. t. 35. A. C. Erigone.
t. 62. E. F. Lemonias. L. 314. t. 35. D. F. Villida. Mantiss. 366. Glycene.
379. Orithya. L. Sp. Ins. 315 t. 32. E. F. Remulia. t. 232. F. G. Feronia. L.
318. t. 192. E. F. Lampetia. L. Mantiss. 378. t. 148. D. D.t. 349. A.B.
Roxelana. Sp. Ins. 320. t. 141. C. D. Minerva. 327. t. 116. E. F. Laomedia. L.
333. t. 8. F. G. Cardui. 364. t. 26. E. F. Atlita. Mant. 388. Libye. L. Sp.
Ins. 334. Sultz. Ins. t. 17. f. 7. Justina. Cram. Ins. t. 326. C. Hedonia. L.
335. t. 69. C. D. Arsince. L. 345. t. 160. B. C. Panthera. Mantiss 407.
Pipleis. L. Sp. Ins. 368. t. 60. A. B. Claudia. 369. Naturforch. 9. t. 2.
Bankia. 371. Cram. Ins. t. 26. A. B. and 291. I. Leda. 376. t. 196. C. D.
Rohria. Mantiss. 446. Arcensia. Cram. Ins. t. 292. D. E Constantia. t. 133. A.
B. Polydecta. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 373. t. 144. E. F. Iphira. 379. t. 209. C. D.
Tolumnia. 374. t. 130. F. G. Erminia. t. 176. A. B. Morna. 375. Polibete. t.
234. D. E. and 235. C. D. Juliana. Fab. Sp. Ins. App. p. 503. t. 280. A. B.
Egista. t. 281. CD. Helie. Lin. S. Not. No 152. Clerck. Ic. t. 34. f. 3. Arete.
Cram. Ins. t. 313. E. F.
**NYMPHALES PHALERATI.
Ida. Cram. Ins. t. 42. C. D. and 374. C. D. Cydippe. L, Fab. Sp. Ins. 388. t.
62. A. B. Penthesilia. 390. t. 145. B.C. Melita. t. 28. D. F. Cyane. 392. Drur.
Ins. 1. t. 4. f. 1. Vitellia. Mantiss. 474. Cram. Ins. t. 349. E. F. Antilope.
t. 183. E. F. Protogenia. Sp. Ins. 395. t. 189. F. G. Atalanta. 397. t. 84. E.
F. Var. Charonia. 398. t. 47. A.B. C. Polychloros. L. 404. t. 330. C. D. Var.
Juvcnta. t. 188. B. Dirce. L. 407. t. 212. C. D. Hippoclus. t. 222. C. D. C.
Aureum. L. 410. t. 19. E. F. Ariadne. L. 412. t. 144. G. H. Proserpina. t. 218.
C. D. Bolinae. L. 414. t. 65. E. F. Lisionasse. Cram. Ins. t. 205. A. B.
Clytia. L. Sp. Ins. 415. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 296. Thyonneus. Cram. Ins. t. 222. E.
F. Archesia. Sp. App. p. 504. t. 219. D. E. Amathea. L. Spec. Ins. No 416. t.
209. A. B. Undularis. Sp. App. p. 504. t. 256. A. B. Monina. Mantiss. No 502.
Lamis. t. 238. E. Allica. No 510. t. 280. E. F. Leucothoe L. Sp. Ins. 421 t.
203. E. F.? Melicerta. 423. t. 211. E. F. Heliodore. Mantiss. 516. Ilithuia.
Sp. Ins. 426. t. 213. A. B. Pelea. Mantiss. 523. Erymanthis. t. 238. F.G.
Venilia. L. Sp. Ins. 431. t. 219. B. C. Alimena. L. 432. t. 221. A. B. C.
Phoerusa. L. 433. t. 130. B. C. Manilia. t. 259. A. B. Hippona. 434. t. 90. C.
D. Adonia. t. 259. C. D. Agatha. Mantiss. 530. Neaerea. L. Sp. Ins. 441. t. 75.
C. D. Aceste. L. 442. t. 121. E. F. Porphyria. t. 259. E. F. Eurinome. 443. t.
70. A. Neste. t. 256. E. F. Dissimilis. L. 444. t. 82. C. D. Assimilis. L. 445.
154. A. Similis. L. 446. t. 30. D. Lotis. t. 230. D. E. Lais. 448. t. 110. A.
B. Valentina. t. 327. C. D. Egialea. 449. t. 92. D. Alcippe. t. 389. G. H.
Panope. 450. t. 65. C. D. Villida. Cram. Ins. t. 349. C. D. Hippia. Mantiss.
545. Martha. 555. Elea. Sp. Ins. 460. t. 242. D. E. Cytherea. L. 474. Clerck.
Ins. t. 39. f. 3. Phalantha. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 485. Drur. Ins. 1. t. 21. f. 1.
2. Tipha. Lin. S. Not. No 164. Clerck. Ic. t. 32. f. 3. Canace. 173. Drur. Ins.
1. t. 15. f. 1. 2. Idmone. 182. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 310. Elea. 183. Drur. Ins. 2. t.
17. f. 5. 6. Janassa. 185. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 294. Nauplia. 1. 97. Clerck. Ic. t.
46. f. 1. 2. Hypermnestra. 198. Amaen. Ac. 6. p. 407. 69. Nesaea. 199. Mus.
Lud. Ulr. 302.
PLEBEII RURALES.
Amor. Fab. Sp. Ins. 491. Vulcanus. Cram. Ins. t. 208. E. F. Lisias. Mantiss.
615. Etolus. 620. Ganymedes. Sp. Ins. 500. t. 40. C. D. Sphinx. 511. t. 46. F.
G. Hyacinthus. 516. t. 36. C. D. Iarbus. Mantiss. 648. Baeticus. L. Sp. Ins.
529. Ernst. Pap. d' Eur. t. 37. f. 76. Strephon. 531. Atymnus. Mantiss. 662.
Cram. Ins. t. 331. D. E. Aeolus. Sp. Ins. 535. Pl. Enlum. t. 18. f. 6. 7.
Simaethis. 537. Drur. Ins. 1. t. 1. f. 3. Ixion. 540. Nedymond. Cram. Ins. t.
299. E. F. Rosimon. 541. Laius. t. 319. D. E. Amyntor. 543. t. 159. D. E.
Triopas. Cram. Ins. t. 310. G. H. Eumolphus. t. 299. G. H. Hylax. Fab. Sp. Ins.
559. Midas. 564. Melampus. t. 362. G. H. Aesopus. 565. Drur. Ins. 2. t. 9. f.
3. 4. Phairus. 566. Cram. Ins. t. 238. C. Aratus. t. 365. A. B. Cephus. 576.
Petavius. t. 365. C. D. Haraldus. Mantiss. 744. Ubaldus. t. 390. L. M. Neleus.
L. Sp. Ins. 581. Crerck. Ic. t. 45. f. 2. Bochus. Cram. Ins. t. 391. C. D.
Priassus. L. 591. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 319. Polybe. Lin. S. Not. No 218. Amaen. Ac.
6. p. 404. 58. Timantes. 241. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 322. Peleus. 249. Clerck. Ic. t.
45. f. 5.
PLEBEII URBICOLE.
Exclamationis. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 595. Augias. L. 597. Amen. Ac. 6. p. 410. 80.
Colon. 598. Alcithoe. Cram. Ins. t. 80. C. D. Alexis. 619. Thrax. L. 620. 6. t.
68. E. Dan. Mantiss. 798. Chromus. t. 284. E. Ladon. t. 284. G. Gnetus. Fab.
Sp. Ins. No 624. Pl. Enl. t. 18. f. 8. 9. Polydetus. L. 627. Cram. Ins. t. 159.
F. G. Coridon. t. 340. C. D. E. Phidias. L. 632. t. 41. C. D. Japetus. t. 365.
E. F. Maimon. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 635. Cram. Ins. t. 22. C.? Forestan. t. 391. E.
F. Menalcas. 639. Celaemis. t. 393. A. B. Spio. L. 645. Mus Lud. Ulr. 330.
Menes. t. 393. H. I. Pygmicus. 646. Butes. Lin. S. Not. No 261. Clerck. Ic. t.
46. f. 6. Phaleros. 272. Cereus. 273.

SPHINX.
Asiliformis. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 6. Nerii. 11. Cram. Ins. t. 224. D. Hypothoiis.
t. 285. D. Dentata. 16. t. 125. G. Ancaeus. t. 355. A. Alope. Mautiss. 19. t.
301. G. Ophekes. t. 285. B. Ello. L. Sp. Ins. 17. Drur. Ins. 1. t. 27. f. 3.
Acteus. Cram. Ins. t. 248. A. Atropos. L. 23. t. 78. A. and 237. A. Phorbas.
25. t. 55. B. Chiron. t. 137. E. Pagana. 29. Oldenlandiae. 37. Phalaris. t.
149. A. Lycetus. 38. t. 61. D. Panopus. t. 222. A. B. Boerhaaviae. 39. Sultz.
Ins. t. 20. f. 3. Eson. Cram. Ins. t. 226. C. Minus. Mantiss. 44. Drancus. t.
132. F. Porcellus. L. Sp. Insl. 44. Ernst. Pap. t. 112. No 161. Convolvuli. L.
46. Cram. Ins. t. 225. D. Celerio. L. Sp. Ins. 50. Cram. Ins. t. 125. E.
Nessus. t. 226. D. Crantor Fab. Sp. Ins. No 51. t. 104. A. Alecto. L. 52. t.
137. D. Gnoma. 53. t. 152. A. Menephron. t. 285. A. Hespera. 54. Faro. t. 285.
C. Bums. Mantiss. 62. Vampyrus. 66. Ocypete? Lin. S. Not. No 4. Mus. Lud. Ulr.
344. Megara. 21. Clerck. Ic. t. 47. f. 2. Tisiphone. 23. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 359.
Brennus. Cram. Ins. t. 398. B.
SESIA.
Ixion. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 2. t. 68. F. Odomaculata. 8. Hippotes. t. 286. A.
Haemorrhoidalis. 13. t. 52. C. D.? Fenestrata. 15. t. 251. D.
ZYGAENA.
Grus. t. 368. A. Diptera. 44. Aurata. t. 264. A. Creusa. Lin. S. Not. No 39.
Clerck. Ic. t. 46. f. 3.? Cysseus. Cram. Ins. t. 355. B. Atereus. t. 400. A.
Bombyliformis. t. 400. C.
BOMBYX.
Paphia. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 4. t. 147. A. B. Laocoon. t. 117. A. B. C.
Mylitta. 7. t. 146. A. Fabia. t. 250. B. Luna. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. 15. Cram. Ins.
t. 31. A. B. Fenestra. L. 18. Clerck. Ic. t. 55. f. 1. Polybia. Cram. Ins. t.
369. A. Penelope. 19. t. 45. A. Jana. t. 396. A. Perspicua. L. 21. Mus. Lud.
Ulr. 373. Conspicillator. Cram. Ins. t. 97. A. B. Militaris. L. 22. t. 29. B.
Numana. t. 227. A. 228. A. Eugenia. t. 398. M. Promula. 34. t. 72. D. Aconyta.
t. 131. A. Quadricinta. Maniss. 44. Barbara. t. 368. B. Lusca. 49. Niceta. t.
368. C. Hibisci. Sp. Ins. 45. Glauca. t. 368. D. Imperialis. 62. Drur. Ins. 1.
t. 9. f. 1. Lunata. Cram. Ins. t. 369. C. Crassicornis. 63. Silvandra. t. 369.
D. Pasinuntia. t. 367. H. Nuda. Mantiss. 105. Evergista. t. 369. E. Hyphinoe.
t. 154. B. Flava. Sp. Ins. 82. Petosiris. t. 397. D. Rutila. Mantiss. 131.
Chrysorrhea. Spec. Ins. 102. Roes. Ins. 1. ph. 2. t. 22. Nitidula. Mantiss.
153. Cyane. Sp. App. p. 506. Cram. Ins. t. 267. D. Crotalariae. Sp. Ins. 126.
1. t. 5. C. D. Ricini. 127. Lectrix. 132. t. 192. C. Sanguinolenta. 128. t.
183. D. Lepida. Cram. Ins. t. 130. E. Francisca. Mantiss. 200. Monycha. t. 131.
C. Jesuita. Sp. Ins. 145. Lactinia. t. 133. D. Gloriosae. 150. Brorea. t. 312.
E. Crim. 151. Punctigera. Lin. S. Not. 151. Clerck. Ic. t. 50. f. 3.
NOCTUA.
Strix. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. 3. Cram. Ins. t. 145. A. Ulula. 9. t. 174. E. Materna.
L. 16. t. 174. A. B. Irynx. Mantiss. 10. Mineus. t. 131. D. Crepuscularis. L.
Fab. Sp. Ins. 11. t. 159. A. Irrorata. Fab. Sp. App. p. 506. Lyncea. 506.
Sinuata. 507. Squalida. Fab. Mant. No 13. Vespertilio. 16. Retorta. t. 116. D.
Illibata. Sp. Ins. 13. Obscura. t. 274. B. Umminia. Sp. App. p. 506. t. 267. F.
Inara. t. 239. E. Scrobiculata. Sp. Ins. No 14. Carenea. t. 269. E. F.
Dioscoreae. 15. t. 30. A. -- C. Materna. 16. t. 174. A. B. Hypermnestra. t.
323. A. B. Cephise. t. 227. B. Paphos. Mantiss. 24. Chione. Sp. Ins. 16. Saga.
Mantiss. 29. Bajularia. Sp. Ins. 23. Cram. Ins. t. 172. C. Astrea. 21.
Convoluta. 30. t. 208. D. Membliaria. t. 269. C. D. Ficus. 33. Lusca. Mantiss.
49. Manlia. 36. t. 92. A. Caricae. 34. t. 133. E. 242. A.B. Leonina. 38.
Fulvia. L. 43. Clerck. Ic. t. 55. f. 6. Avida. Fab. Mantiss. 68. Triangulum.
74. Arcuata. 75. Vulpina. Sp. Ins. 50. Tigrina. 52. Mezentina. Cram. Ins. t.
323. F. Cyllaria. t. 251. C. D. Geometrica. 53. Stolida. 54. Undata. 60.
Ammonia. t. 250. D. Vittata. No 61. Hyppasia. t. 250. E. Frugalis. 62. Flava.
63. Stigmatizans. 64. Alphea. t. 250. F. Equestris. 65. Javana. t. 274. C.
Dorsalis. Mantiss. 103. Luminosa. t. 274. D. Rejecta. Sp. Ins. 66. Achatina. t.
273. E. 288. A. Elata. 67. Archesia. t. 273. F. G. Mercatoria. 79. Cram. Ins.
t. 62. C. D. Timais. t. 275. B. Rapta. Mantiss. 120. Orosia. t. 275. D.
Partita. Sp. Ins. 80. Melanthus. t. 286. B. Pagana. 90. Joviana. t. 399. B.
Orichalcea. 92. Clytia. t. 399. G. Signata. 96. Dominica. t. 399. H. Peponis.
97. Nitidula. Mantiss. 153. Sinuata. Sp. Ins. 116. Amphix. t. 134. C.
Histrionica. 117. Perithea. t. 172. D. Pelles. Lin. S. Not. No 104. Mus. Lud.
Ulr. 388. Interrupta. 116. Cram. Ins. t. 185.
PHALAENA.
Strigaria. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 12. t. 133. C. Undaria. 20. Monilaria. 23.
Rondelaria. 24. Macularia. 27. t. 129. C. Ocularia. 38. Perdica. t. 178. F.
Hesperia. t. 251. B. Flavaria. Fab. Mant. No 32. Margaritaria. t. 367. K.
Tripunctaria. L. Sp. Ins. 47. t. 22. E. Caudata. 64. t. 104. D. Lateraria.
Mantiss. 77. Lactucina. t. 273. B. C. Venaria. Sp. Ins. 52. Cram. Ins. t. 29.
A. Zemire. t. 367. 1. Obliquaria. Mantiss. 81. Rosalia. t. 368. F. Ernestina.
t. 369. F. Sangarida. t. 381. D. Caudata. Sp. Ins. 64. t. 104. D. Fasciata. 65.
Vulpenaria. t. 400. O. P. Arcuata. Matitiss. 104. Pampliilia. t. 368. G.
Liturata. 109. Coleta. t. 368. H. Irrorata. Sp. Ius. 77. Carinenta. 78. t. 128.
F. Eusebia. t. 369. G. H. Flaveolata. 91. t. 83. C. Fimbriata. t. 398, 0.
Janata. L. 121. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 398. Expectata. 123. Cribrata. 133. Cram. Ins.
t. 208. C. G. Marginata. t. 400. 1. Aestuata. L. 149. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 397.
Capitata. 148. Sulphurata. 152. Flavata. t. 307. C. Violata. Mantiss. 238.
Securata. 242. Canenta. t. 250. C. Perspectara. Sp. Ins. 163. Vitrata. Mautiss.
255. Revidata. 258. Derogata. Sp. Ins. 166. Ejectata. 167. Sagittalis. Fab. Sp.
Ins. 179. Amando. Cram. Ins. t. 247. E. Fuscalis. Fab. Sp. Ins. 182. Pueritia.
Cram. Ins. t. 264. E. Angustalis. Mantiss. 309. Procopia. t. 368. E.
Recurvalis. Sp. Ins. 192. Dentalis. 198.
PYRALIS.
Koenigiana. 65.
TINEA.
Cryptella. 25.
ORDO VII. RYNGOTA.
FULGORA.
Diadema. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 3. Seb. Mus. 4. t. 77. f. 7. 8. Truncata. L. 11.
Amen. Ac. 6. p. 399. 40. Hyalinata. 12. Festiva. 13.
MEMBRACIS.
Spinosa. 5. Sulz. Ins. t. 9. f. 6. Taurus. 10.
TETTIGONIA.
Fornicata. Gmel. Lin. 11. Mus Lud. Ulr. 156. Fasciata. Fab. Mantiss. f. Stoll.
Cicad. 1. t. 4. f. 17. Spinosa. 6. Vaginata. 7. Conspurcata. Sp. Ins. 13.
Repanda. L. 16. De Geer, Ins. 3. t. 33. f. 1. Testacea. Mantiss. 23. Stoll.
Cicad. 1. t. 8. f. 41. C.
CICADE.
Perspicillata. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 1. Ocellata. 2. De Ceer, Ins. 3. t. 33. f. 2.
Cunicularia. L. 11. Lanara. L. 12. Drur. Ins. 2. t. 37. f. 11. Tomentosa. 13.
Barbata. 14. Hyalina. 31. Lyncea. 37.
NOTONECTA.
Nivea. 3. Indica. Mantiss. p. 534.
NEPA.
Annulata. Spec. Ins. 2. Rustica. 3. Fusca. Mantiss. 4. Stoll. Cimic. 2. t. 1.
f. 1. Rubra. L. 6. 2. t. 7. V. Maculata. Sp. Ins. No 6. Linearis. L. 7. Schaef.
Icon. t. 5. f. 5. 6.
CIMEX.
Nobilis. L. 2. Stoll. Cimic. 1 t. 1. f. 1. Clavipes. Fab. Mantiss. 5.
Maculatus. 11. Rusticus. 26. Lunatcs. Sp. Ins. 9. 2. t. 13. f. 84. Valilii. 32.
Histrio. Gmel. Lin. 12. Grandis. 171. Thunb. N. Sp. Ins. 2. No 31. f. 46.
Taurus. Sp. Ins. 34. Dentatus. 43. Spinidens. Mantiss. 61. Hamatus. 80. Scaber.
Gmel. Lin. 30. Amaen. Ac. 6. p. 400. 43. Pugnator. Fab. Mantiss. 84.
Thoracicus. Gmel. Lin. 262. Stoll. Cimic. t. 8. f. 55. A. Hastatus. Fab.
Mantiss. 88. Analis. Gmel. Lin. 263. t. 10. f. 72. B. Tenebrosus. Fab. Mentiss.
93. Sulcatus. Gmel. Lin. 271. t. 6. f. 47. Fulvicornis. Fab. Mantiss. 94.
Pustualatus. Gmel. Lin. 281. Geer, Ins. 3. t. 34. f. 2. Femoratus. Fab. Sp.
Ins. 77. Aurantius. Mantiss. 116. Stoll.Cim. 1. t. 6. f. 39. Punctum. 117. 2.
t. 6. f. 40. Nigripes. Sp. Ins. 92. Drur. Ins. 2. t. 36. f. f. Torquatus. 93.
Guttatus. Man tiss. 121. Viridulus. L. Sp. Ins. 95. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 172.
Peregrinator. Gmel. Lin. 40. 173. Beryllus. Mantiss. 127. Javanicus. Gmel. Lin.
332. Stoll. Cim. t. 11. f. 2. 6-punftatus. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. 105. Mus. Lud. Ulr.
175. Brunneus. Gmel. Lin. 334. Rubrofasciatus. Fab. Mantiss. 140. Ruficornis.
Sp. Ins. 114. Gramineus. Mantiss. 161. Histrio. 167. Pictus. Sp. Ins. 117.
Faber. Mantiss. 181. Cruciatus. Sp. Ins. 122. Indus. L. 140. Mus. Lud. Ulr.
176. Civilis. Mantiss. 186. Familiaris. 190. Varicornis. 194. Malabaricus. Fab.
Sp. Ins. No 147. Koenigu 156. Stell, Cimic. 2. t. 1. f. 5. Mendicus. 158.
Cruentus. Mantiss. 214. Augur. Sp. Ins. 167. Mactans. Sp. Ins. 168.
Erythrozonias. Gmel. Lin. 456. De Geer, Ins. 3. t. 35. f. 12. Sordidus. Fab.
Mantiss. 231. Calens. L. Sp. Ins. 213. Gronov. Zooph. 712. Gronovii. L. 214.
711. Cingulatus. Mantiss. 287. Pedestris. Sp. Ins. 224. Fossarum. 226. Filum.
232. De Geer, Ins. 3. t. 35. f. 16.
REDUVIUS.
Gigas. 1. Marginatus. 7. Sanctus. Mantiss. 12. Pilicornis. 19. Collaris. Sp.
Ins. 15. Sexguttatus. 17. 4-guttatus. 18. Aurantius. Punctum. 19. Bipunctatus.
Fab. Mantiss. No 30. Fuscipes. 33. 5-spinosus. Sp. Inf. 27.
ORDO VIII. ANTLIATA.
BIBIO.
Lar. 10. Sphinx. Mantiss. 20. Troglodyta. Sp. Ins. 20.
SYRPHUS.
Crassus. Mantiss. 7. 4-lineatus. 24.
MUSCA.
Jejuna. 2.
ASILUS.
Maculatus. Sp. Ins. 21.
MYOPA.
Cincta. 4.
BOMBYLIUS.
Maculatus. 7.
PEDICULUS.
Humanus. L. 1. Soboef. Elem. t. 95 Pubis. L. 2. Red. Exper t. 19. f. 1.
Vulturis. 4.
ACARUS.
Elephantinus. L. Fab. Sp. Ins. No 1. Scbrank. Beytr. t. 6. f. 14. 15. Indus. L
12.
CLASS VI. VERMES.
I. INTESTINA.
N. B. From our ignorance of the productions of India in. this Class, we are
obliged to omit many Genera.

GORDIUS.
M Edinensis. Sloone Jam. ii. 190. tab. 233. fig. 1.
SIPUNCULUS.
Saccatus. Amoen. Acad. iv. 454. tab, 3.
II. MOLLUSCA.
DORIS.
Verrucosa. Seb. Mus. ii. tab. 61. fig. 5.
NEREIS.
Noctiluca. Amoen. Acad. iii. 203. tab. 3. Gigantea. Seb. Mus. i. tab. 81. fig.
7.
ACTINIA.
Swalloo. An edible Species collected in the Molucca Isles.
HOLUTHURIA.
Priapus. Amoen Acad. iv. 255.
SEPIA.
Octopodia. Br. Zool. iv. No 44. tab. 28. Of a monstrous size in India.
MEDUSA.
Porpita. Amen. Acad. iv. 255. tab. 3. fig. 7.8.
ASTERIAS.
* ENTIRE.
Luna. Adman. Acad. iv. 256. tab. 3. fig. 14.
** STELLATED.
Reticulata. Linck. tab. 41. fig. 72. tab. 0.3. fig. 36. Nodosa. Seb. Mus. iii.
tab. 5. fig. 7. 8. Laevigata. Grew. Mus. tab. 8. fig. 1.2.
*** RADIATED.
Ciliaris. Linck tab. 40. fig. 70. tab. 37. and 56, Pectinata Linck. teb. 37.
fig. 64. 66. Multiradiata. Linck. tab. 21. fig. 33. Caput Medusae. Seb. Mus.
iii. tab. 9. and tab. II. Rumph. Mus. 41. tab. 16.

ECHINUS.
Esculentus. Rumpb. Mus. 31. tab. 13. B. Globuius. M.L.U. 706. Sphaeroides.
Gratilla. M.L.U. 707. Lixula. Ibid. Diadema. Rumph. Mus. tab. 14. B. Lucunter.
Gualt. Test. tab. 107. fig. C. Atratus. Rumpb. Mus. iii. tab. 13. fig. 2.
Lacunatus. Ibid. tab. 14. fig. 2. Rosaceus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 14. fig. 2.
Orbiculus. Gualt. tab. 7. fig. B.
III. TESTACEA:
DIV. I. MULTIVALVIA.
CHITON.
Aculeatus. Rumph. Mus, tab. 10. fig. 4. Squammosus. M.L.V. 465*. Punctatus.
Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 1. fig. 13.
LEPAS.
Diadema. Rumph. Mus. tab. 14. fig. H. Anarifera. Argenville, tab. 2.6. fig. F.
G. Testudinaria. Rumph, Mus. tab. 40. fig. K.
PHOLAS.
Dactylus, BORN. 14. I must: not omit my acknowlegements to the magnificent
work on Shells by the Chevalier Ignatius a Born, for very considerable
additions to this Catalogue. RUMPHIUS, justly styled the PLINY, must have the
preference in every authority, as the great collector of most of the articles
referred to.
DIV. II. BIVALVIA.
MYA.
Vulsella. Rumph, Mus. tab. 90. fig. H.
SOLEN.
Vagina. Rumpb. Mus. tab. 45. fig. M. Cultellus Ibid. fig. F. Radiatus. Ibid.
fig. E. Anatinus. Ibid. fig. O. Bullatus. Ibid. tab. 44. fig. N. Virens.
TELLINA.
* OVATAE.
Gargadia. Rumph. Mus. tab. 43. fig. N. Lingua Felis. tab. 45. fig. G. Virgata.
tab. 45. fig. H. Angulata. Lift. Conch, tab. 394. fig. 241. Gari. tab. 45. fig.
D. Foliacea. tab. 45. fig. K. Laevigata. tab. 45. fig. I. Rostrata. Argenville,
tab. 22. fig. O. Truncata.
** SUBORBICULATAE.
Remies. Rumpb. Mus. tab. 43. fig. 1. Reticulata. fig. E. Scobinata. Gualt.
tab. 76. fig. E.

CARDIUM.
Cardissa. Rumph. Mus. tab. 42. fig. E. Retusum. Born. 41. tab. III fig. 1.2.
Hemicardium. tab. 44. fig. H. Medium. M.L.U. 485. No 34. Tuberculatum. Rumph.
Mus. tab. 48. fig. H. Fragum. tab. 44. fig. G. Unedo. tab. 44. fig. F.
Isocardia. tab. 48. fig. 9. Aeolicum. Bonan. ii. fig. 91. Rusticum Rumph. Mus.
tab. 44. fig. K.
MACTRA.
Plicataria. Sprengleri Gualt. tab. 85. fig. F. Trunculus Bonan. lv. tab. 4.
fig. 3. 4. Scortum Argenville, tab. 21. fig. L.
DONAX.
Pubescens. M. L. U. 493. No 49*. Trunculus. BORN. lv. tab. iv. fig. 3.4.
Scortum liii. tab. iv. fig. 1.
VENUS.
Gallina. Bonan. ii. tab. 64. 65. Flexuosa. Rumph. Mus. tab. 43. fig. O.
Chione. tab. 42. fig. 9. Meretrix. Argenv. tab. 21. fig. F. Laeta Gualt. tab.
28. fig. V. Castrensis. Rumph. Mus tab. 42. fig K. Fimbriata. tab. 43. fig. F.
Squammosa. tab. 44. fig. M. *** IMPUBERES ORBICULATAE.
Tigerina. tab. 43. fig. H. Prostrata. M.L.U. 504. No 66*. Incrustata List.
Conch, tab. 310. fig. 146. Tigerina Secunda Rumph. Mus. tab 43. fig. H
Pectinata. tab. 42. fig. D. Scripta. tab. 43. fig. C. Edentula. M. L. U. 508.
No 74*. Punctata. Rumph. Mus. tab. 43. fig. G.
**** IMPUBERES OVALES. SUPRA RIMAAI SUBANGULATE.
Litrerata. Rumph. Mus. tab. 43. fig. B. Rotundata. M.L.U. 509. No 76*.
Decussata. M.L.U. 509. No 77. Virginea.

SPONDYLUS.
Regius. Rumph. Mus. 156. No 8. Plicatus. tab. 47. Ostrea Electrica. Gaderopus.
tab. 47. fig. E. 48. fig. 1. 2.
CHAMA.
Gigas. tab. 43. fig. A. B. Hippopus. tab. 42. fig. C. Lazarus. BORN. 83. tab.
5. fig. 12. 13. 14. Arcinella. BORN. Davila, tab. 27. fig. T. Gryphoides.
Bonan. ii. fig. 22.
ARCA.
*MARGINI INTEGERRIMO, NARIBUS RECURVATIS.
Noae. tab. 44. fig. P.
**MARGIN CRENATO.
Anriquata. tab. 44. fig. 1. Decussata. Bonan. ii. fig. 60. Pallens. M. L. U.
520. No 95. Tortuosa. Rumph. Mus. tab. 47. fig. K. Rhombea. List, Conch. tab.
244. fig. 75. Pectunculus. tab. 239. fig. 73.

OSTREA.
*PECTINES AURICULATT, AEQUILATERES.
Striatula. M. L. U. 523. No 101. Minuta. 524. No 102. Pleuronectes. Rumph.
Mus. tab. 45. fig. A. B. Radula. tab. 44. fig. A. Plica. tab. 44. fig. O.
**PECTINES AURICULA ALTERA INTUS CILIATO-SPINOSA.
Pallium. tab. 44. fig. B. C. Nodosa. tab. 48. fig. B. Lima. tab. 44. fig. D.
Cucullata. Born. 114. tab. vi. fig. 11. 12.
***RUDES, OSTREAE DICTAE.
Malleus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 47. fig. H. Edulis.? Bonan. 108. tab. 70. Perna.
Isogonum. Gualt. tab. 97. fig. A. Ephippium. Rumph. Mus. tab. 47. fig. B.

ANOMIA.
Placenta. Lister Conch, tab. 104. fig. B. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 90. fig. 8. 9.
MYTILUS.
**PARASITICI UNGUIBUS AFFIXI.
Crista Galli. tab. 47. fig. B. Frons. Argenville, tab. 19. fig. D.
**PLANI COMPRESSI.
Margariceferus. Rumpb. Mus. tab. 40. fig. F.
***VENTRICOSIUSCULL.
Lithophagus. tab. 46. fig. F. Bilocularis. M. L. U. 540. No 133. Edulis. List.
Ang. 182. fig. 28. Pictus. Born. 107. tab. vii. fig. 6. 7. Modiolus. Rumpb.
Mus. tab. 46. fig. B.

PINNA.
Rudis. tab. 46. fig. L. Pedinata. Gualt. tab. 79. fig. A. Saccata. Rumpb. Mus.
tab. 46. fig. N. Digitiformis. M. L. U. 546. No 146. Lobara. 547. No 147.
Incurvata. Born. Rumpb. Mus. tab. 46. fig. M. Muricata. Rumpb. Mus. tab. 46.
fig. M.
DIV. III. TURBINATA.
ARGONAUTA.
Argo. Rumph. Mus. tab. 18. fig.
NAUTILUS.
Pompilius. Ruvish. Mus. tab. 17. fig. A. C. D. Spirula. tab. 20. fig. 1.
CONUS.
Marmoreus. tab. 32. fig. N. I. Imperialis. tab. 34. fig. H. I. Literatus. tab.
31. fig. D. Generalis. tab. 33. fig. V. Virgo. tab. 31. fig. I. K. Capicaneus.
tab. 33. fig. K. Miles. tab. 33. fig. W. **SPIRA PYRAMIDATA.
Summus Admiralis. tab. 34. fig. B. C. D. Ebaeus. tab. 32. fig. B. B. Glaucus.
tab. 33. fig. G. G. Monachus. tab. 33. fig. C. C. Minimus. Argenville, tab. 12.
fig. A. Betulinus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 31. fig. C. Stercus Muscarum. tab. 33. fig.
3. A. A. Nussatella. tab. 33. fig. E. E. Textile. tab. 32. fig. O. P. Aulieus.
tab. 33. fig. 3. Striatuj. tab. 31. fig. F. Magus. tab. 32. fig. 2. Tragulinus.
tab. 31. fig. V. Ermineus. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 42. fig. 31. 34. 35. 40. Varius.
Argenville, tab. 12. fig. R. Spectrum. Rumph. Mus. tab. 32. fig. 1. Tulipa.
tab. 34. fig. K. L. Geographus. tab. 31. fig. G.

CYPRAEA.
Mappa. tab. 38. fig. B. Arabica. Rumpb. Mus. tab. 38. fig. M. Carneola. tab.
38. fig. K. Testudinaria. tab. 38. fig. C. Talpa. tab. 38. fig. I. Caput
Serpentis. tab. 38. fig. F. Mauritiana. tab. 38. fig. E. Vitellus. tab. 38.
fig. L. Tigris. tab. 38. fig. A. Lynx. Lister Conch. tab. 683. fig. 30.
Isabella. Rumph. Mus. tab. 39. fig. G. Onyx. tab. 38. fig. B. Hirundo. Lister
Conch. tab. 674. fig. 20. Born. 184. tab. viii. fig. II. Asellus. Rumph. Mus.
tab. 39. fig. M. Cribrana. Lister Conch. tab. 695. fig. 42. Moneta. Rumpb. Mus.
tab. 39. fig. C. Annulus. tab. 39. fig. D. Caurica. tab. 38. fig. P. Dracaena.
tab. 39. fig. E. Erosa. tab. 39. fig. A. Helvola. tab. 16. fig. 17. Ocellata.
Lister Conch. tab. 696. fig. 43. Pediculus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 39. fig. P.
Nucleus. tab. 39. fig. 1. Staphylaea. Born. 194. tab. viii. fig. 18. Cicercula.
Rumph. Mus. tab. 39. fig. K. Globulus. tab. 39. fig. N.
BULLA.
Ovum. tab. 38. fig. Q. Birostris. Lister Conch. tab. 711. fig. 66. Verrucosa.
Rumph. Mus. tab. 38. fig. H. Naucum. tab. 27. fig. H. Ampulla. tab. 27. fig. G.
Pbysis. Lister Conch, tab. 715. fig. 75. Amplustre. Born. tab. ix. fig. I.
Ficus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 27. fig. K. Rapa. Rumph. Mus. tab. 27. fig. E.
Terebellum. tab. 36. fig. S. Virginea. Lister Conch. tab. 12. fig. 7. tab. 15.
fig. 10. Achatina. Born. tab. x. fig. 1. 2.
VOLUTA.
Auris Midae. Rumph. Mus. tab. 33. fig. H. H. Oliva. tab. 39. fig. 3. Et
Plurimae Variet. Vide Born. 214. 215. Gibbosa.? Lister Conch. tab. 723. fig.
10. Hispidula. Born. y. List. Conch. tab. 722. fig. 9. Bullata. tab. 83. fig.
11. Dactylus. tab. 812. fig. 23. Scabricula. Gualt. tab. 53. fig. D.
Sanguisuga. Rumph. Mus. tab. 29. fig. V. Caffra. Gualt. tab. 53. fig. E.
Vulpecula. Rumph. Mus. tab. 29. fig. R. Plicaria. Gualt. tab. 54. fig. F.
Episcopalis. Rumph. Mus. tab. 29. fig. K. Mitra Papalis. tab. 29. fig. I.
Capitellum. Gualt. tab. 37. fig. A. Muricata. Martin Konch. iii. tab. 99.
Ceramica. Rumph. Mus. tab. 24. fig. A. tab. 49. fig. L. Pyrum. tab. 36. fig. 7.
Aethiopica. tab. 31. fig. B. A. Olla. Gualter. tab. 29. fig. A.
BUCCINUM.
*AMPULLACEAE.
Galea. Rondel. Test. p. 106. Perdix Rumph. Mus. tab. 27. fig. C. Pomum. tab.
27. fig. B. Sulcosum. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 68. fig. 14. 15. Dolium. Rumph. Mus.
tab. 27. fig. A.
**CASSIDEA.
Echinophorum. Rumph. Mus. tab. 27. fig. 1. Comutum. tab. 23. fig. 1. Rufum.
tab. 23. fig. 1. Tuberosum. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 73. fig. 10. 11. Flammeum.
Rumph. Mus. tab. 23. fig. 2. Pullus. tab. 23. fig. C. Areola. tab. 25. fig. B.
and 1. Granulatum. tab. 25. fig. C.
***CASSIDEA LABRO MURICATO.
Erinaceus. tab. 25. fig. D. 6. 7. Glaucum. tab. 25. fig A. Vibex. tab. 25.
fig. E. Papillosum. tab. 29. fig. M. Glans. tab. 29. fig. P.
****CALLOSA AD COLUM. REFLEXAM.
Arcularia. tab. 27. fig. M.
*****COLUM. QUASI ABROSA, PAANA.
Harpa. tab. 32. fig. K. L. Persicum. tab. 27. fig. E. Smaragdulus. Argenville,
tab. 6. fig. P.
******GLABRA.
Spiratum. Rumph. Mus. tab. 49. fig. C. D. Glabratum. Argenville. tab. 9. fig.
G.
*******ANGULATA.
Undosum. Rumph. Mus. tab. 29. fig. O. Bezoar. Argmville, tab. 15. fig. G.
********TURRITA, LAEVIA, SUBULATA.
Maculatum. Rumph. Mus. tab. 30. fig. A. Subulatum. tab. 30. fig. B.
Crenulatum. tab. 30. fig. E. Strigilatum. tab. 30. fig. H. Duplicatum. Bonan.
iii. fig. 110. Lanceatum. Rumph. Mus. tab. 30. fig. O. Dimidiatum. tab. 30.
fig. C.

STROMBUS.
*DIGITATI.
Chiragra. tab. 35. fig. A. B. Scorpius. tab. 36. fig. K. Lambis. tab. 35. fig.
E. F. H. Millepeda. tab. 36. fig. I.
**LABRO LOBATO.
Lentiginosus. tab. 37. fig. Q. Gallus. tab. 37. fig. 5. Auris Dianae. Rumph.
Mus. tab. 37. fig. R. Luhuanus. tab. 37. fig. S. Gibberulus. tab. 37. fig. V.
***LABRO AMPLIATO.
Epidromis. tab. 36. fig. M. Canarium. tab. 36. fig. N. Vittatus. tab. 37. fig.
X. Urceus. tab. 37. fig. T.

MUREX.
*SPINOSI.
Haustellum. tab. 26. fig. E. Tribulus. tab. 26. fig. G. Cornutus. tab. 26.
fig. 5. Brandaris. tab. 26. fig. 4.
**FRONDOSI.
Tripterus. Martin Konch. iii. tab. 111. fig. 1033. Triqueter. fig. 1038.
Ramosus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 26. fig. D. Saxarilis. tab. 26. fig. C. a.
***VARICOSI.
Rana. tab. 26. fig. G. el. Varietas. Lister Conch. tab. 949. fig. 44. Lampas.
Rumph. Mus. tab. 28 fig. C. Olearium. Bonan. iii. fig. 289. Femorale. Rumph.
Mus. tab. 26. fig. B. Pyrum. Rumph. Mus. tab. 26. fig. E. Rubecula. Gualt. tab.
49. fig. 1. Anus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 24. fig. F.
****ECHINATI SINE ROSTRO.
Hippocastanum. tab. 24. fig. 4. Mancinella. tab. 24. fig. 5. Ricinus. tab. 24.
fig. E. Senticosus. tab. 29. fig. N. Melongena. tab. 24. fig. E. Rapiformis.
Lister Conch, tab. 894. fig. 14. Lacerus. Idem. tab. 958. fig. 11.
*****INERMES ROSTRO ELONGATO.
Babylonius Rumph. Mus. tab. 29. fig. L. Javanus. Bonan. iii. fig. 79. Colus.
Rumph, Mus. tab. 29. fig. F. Morio. Bonan. iii. fig. 357. Cochlidium.
Argenville, tab. 9. fig. A. Spirillus. Martin Konch. tab. 115. fig. 1069.
Aruanus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 28. fig. A. Tritonis. tab. 28. fig. B.
******TURRITI SUBULATI ROSTRO BREVI.
Vertagus. tab. 30. fig. K. Sulcatus. Bonan. iii. fig. 68. Aluco. Romph. Mus.
tab. 30. fig. O. Coronatus. tab. 30. fig. N. Radula. Bonan. iii. fig. 327.

TROCHUS.
*UMBILICATI.
Niloticus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 21. fig. A. Maculatus. tab. 21. fig. c. Bonan.
iii. fig. 27. 28. Perspectivus. tab. 27. fig. L. Solaris. tab. 20. fig. K.
**IMPERFORATI.
Vestiarius. Lister Conch. tab. 650. 51. fig. 46. 48. Labio. Rumph. Mus. tab.
21. fig. E.
***TURRITI.
Telescopium. tab. 21. fig. 12.

TURBO.
*SOLIDI, IMERFORATI.
Cochlus. tab. 19. fig. 4. Petholacus. tab. 19. fig. D. 5. 6. 7. Chrysostomus.
tab. 19. fig. E. Pagodus. tab. 21. fig. D. Calcar. tab. 20. fig. 1. Rugosus.
Bonan. iii. fig. 12. Marmoratus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 19. fig. A. B.
**PERFORATI, SOLIDI.
Pica. tab. 21. fig. A. Argyrostomus. tab. 19. fig. 3. Margaritaceus? Bonan.
iii. fig. 11. Delphinus. Bonan. iii. fig. 31. Distortus. Rumph. Mus. tab. 20.
fig. H. Scalaris. Wentel-trap. tab. 49. fig. A.

HELIX.
*TESTA ANCIPITI.
Scarabeus. tab. 27. fig. 1.
**ANFRACTIBUS CARINATIS.
Ringens. Bonan. iii. fig. 330. 331. Carocolla. Argenville, tab. 8. fig. D.
***UMBILICATAE ANFRACTIBUS ROTUNDIS.
Cornea. Br. Zool. iv. tab. 83. fig. 126. Ampulkcea. Rumph. Mus. tab. 27. fig.
Q. Cretacea. Born. tab. xvi. fig. 1. 2. Ungulina. Rumph. Mus. tab. 27. fig. R.
Janthina. tab. 20. fig. 2.
****OVATAE IMPERFORATAE.
Amarula. tab. 33. fig. F. F. Haliotoidea. tab. 90. fig. R.

NERITA.
*UMBILICATAE.
Canrena. Bonan. iii. fig. 228. 224. et Argenville, tab. 7. fig. C. Glaucina.
Brit. Zool. iv. tab. 87. fig. 141. Rufa. Rumph. Mus. tab. 22. fig. D. Vitellus.
Rumph. Mus. tab. 22. fig. A. Albumen. tab. 22. fig. B. Mamilla. tab. 22. fig.
F.
**IMPERFORATAE, EDENTUTAE.
Cornea. Argenville, tab. 7. fig. M.
***IMPERFORATAE, DENTATAE.
Pulligera. Lister Conch. tab. 143. fig. 37. Pennata. tab. 604. fig. 29.
Polita. a. tab. 600. fig. 7. b Bonan. iii. fig. 221. g Rumph. Mus tab. 22. fig.
1. Peloronta. tab. 22. fig. K. Albicilla. tab. 22. fig. 8. Grossa. tab. 22.
fig. N. Chamaleon. tab. 22. fig. L. Undata. tab. 22. fig. 4. Exuvia. tab. 22.
fig. 9.

HALIOTIS.
Midae. Argenville, tab. 3. fig. A. Striata. Martin Konch. i. tab. 14. fig.
138. Marmorata. Argenville, tab. 3. fig. B. Asinina. Rumph. Mus. tab. 40. fig.
E. F.
PATELLA.
*LABIATAE.
Equestris. tab. 40. fig. P. O.
**ANGULATAE.
Saccharina. Rumph, Mus. tab. 40. fig. B.
***MUCRONATAE.
Lutea. Born. 424. tab. 17. fig. 8.
****INTEGERRIMAE VERTICE OBTUSO.
Testudinaria. Argenville, tab. 2. fig. P. Radiata. Born. tab. 18. fig. 10.
Compressa. Lister Conch. tab. 541. fig. 25. Fusca. Bonan. i. fig. 4.

DENTALIUM.
Elephantimim. Rumph. Mus. tab. 41. fig. 1. Dentalis. tab. 41. fig. C. Entalis.
Bonan. i. fig. 9. Politum. Gualt. tab. 10. fig. F. Aprinum. LINNAEI. Eburneum.
LINNAEI.
SERPULA.
Lumbricalis. Rumph. Mus. tab. 41. fig. 1. Polythalamia. tab. 41. fig. D. E.
Arenaria. tab. 41. fig. L. Anguina. tab. 41. fig. 2. Muricata. tab. 41. fig. H.
Penis. tab. 41. fig. 7.
TEREDO.
Navalis. Planc. Conch. 17. No 2.
SABELLA.
Scruposa. LINNAEI.
IV. LITHOPHYTA.
TUBIPORA.
Musica. Ellis Zooph. page 144.
MADREPORA.
Fungites. page 149. Pileus. Rumph. Amb. vi. t. 88. f. 2. 3. Labyrinthiformis.
Ellis Zooph. page 160. No 34. Favosa. page 167. No 61. Polygama. Amoen. Acad.
iv. tab. 3. fig. 15. Fascicularis. Ellis Zooph. page 151. No 5. Porites. page
172. No 77. Damicornis. Rumph. Amb. vi. tab. 86. fig. 3. Muricata. Ellis Zooph.
page 171. No 76. Oculata. Seb. Mus. iii. tab. 116. fig. 1. 2.
Infundibuliformis. Gualt. Test. tab. 42. Fastigiata. Ellis Zooph. page 152. No
8. Ascillaris. page 153. No 11. Anthophyllites. page 151. No 4. Cristata. page
158. No 27. Aspera. page 156. No 21. Cinerascens. page 157. No 26. Daedalea.
page 163. No 43. Scabrosa. page 156. No 22.
MILLEPORA.
Alcicornis. Sloan. Jam. i. tab. 17. fig. 1. Fascialis. Ellis Cor. tab. 30.
fig. A. a. b. Cellulosa. tab. 25. fig. D. d. Polymorpha. tab. 27. fig. C.
V. ZOOPHYTA. ISIS.
Hippuris. Ellis Zooph. page 105. No 2. Ochracea. page 105. No l.
GORGONIA.
Abies. page 103. No 6. g. page 99. No 1. Aenea. Rumph. Amb. vi. tab. 80. fig.
2. Antipaches. tab. 77. Pectinata. Ellis Zooph. page 85. No 9.
SPONGIA.
Flabelliformis. Rumph. Amb. vi. tab. 80. fig. 1. Fistularis. Sloan. Jam. i.
tab. 24. fig. 1. Aculeata. Rumph. Amb. vi. tab. 90. fig. 2. Tubulosa. Seb. Mus,
iii. tab. 97. fig. 2. Tomentosa. Ellis Zooph. page 187. No 7.
SERTULARIA.
Pennaria. Lin. Syst. page 1313. No 26. Pennatula. Ellis Zooph. page 56. No 31.
VORTICELLA.
Conglomerata. Amoen. Acad. iv. tab. 3. fig. 1.
FINIS.

