OBSERVATIONS On a particular Kind of SCARLET FEVER, That lately prevailed in
and about ST. ALBAN's. In a LETTER to Dr. MEAD.

By NATHANAEL COTTON, M.D.

LONDON, Printed for R. MANBY and H.S. Cox, on Ludgate Hill. MDCCXLIX.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
SIR, St. Alban's Feb. 12, 1748-9.
I Take the liberty to send you a few observations on a particular kind of
Scarlet Fever, that has lately obtained in this place, and some towns
adjacent. The only circumstances, which can entitle this sheet to the trouble
of your perusal, are the novelty of the subject, and a careful representation
of facts. Nor shall I obtrude upon you any vague conjectures, or precarious
hypotheses, relating to the causes of this disease; much less take up your
valuable moments in the pursuit of useless, unmeaning quotations from other
authors.

About the latter end of Sept. 1748. a Scarlet Fever began to appear in this
town. At first children only were seized with it; but afterward it attacked
adults. The manner of seizure was not always one and the same. There was some
diversity herein; as likewise in the symptoms, and stages of the disease. Its
period also was sometimes various in various patients. And as there was a
difference in the time, so likewise there was in the manner of its terminating.

In general, the first symptoms were sickness, vomiting and purging. But these
symptoms seemed pretty much confined to children. A sore throat either attended
these discharges of the intestinal tube, or immediately followed. The Tonsils,
Parotids, and maxillary glands hastily swelled to a considerable degree. In
some, the Tonsils only were inflamed and swelled; in some a swelling of the
Parotids accompanied the inflammatory tumors of the Tonsils; in some, all the
glands abovementioned tumefied at the same time. Upon looking into the mouth,
there were frequently seen, especially after the disease was a little advanced,
ulcuscula, scattered up and down the fauces, which were pretty broad upon, and
about the Tonsils, superficial, (at least all, that I saw, were superficial)
and covered with a whitish slough. The eyes appeared watery, and the
countenance, particularly the eyelids were puffed up, as in the Measles. In
many, the neck, arms, and hands were puffed up, and swelled likewise. And it is
not improbable, that the trunk of the body was also swelled, if we could as
easily have discerned such a general enlargement, as we could the enlargement
of a particular member. In some, a cough also accompanied the preceding
symptoms. But there was a great difference as to the cough: for in some, it was
slight, and rather abated, as the disease advanced; while in others, it
increased, and grew severer each day than the preceding.

The scarlet Efflorescence differed as to degree, and time of its appearance.
In some it appeared immediately on the attack of the disease; and That, not
always gradually, as many eruptive disorders do; but in some it was sudden,
universal, and of an intense red; as intensely red sometimes upon its first
appearance, as when the disease was further advanced. In some, there intervened
one or more days between the first sickening, and the scarlet efflorescence;
and in some, this efflorescence was partial, and gradual in its advances. The
legs and thighs were spotted up and down with spots of various dimensions, some
as large, or larger than a sixpence, while the trunk of the body was covered
with such an infinite number of them, and so closely set together, that no
interstices appearing, the body was in some persons as red almost, as if it had
been dipped in blood. In others again the scarlet efflorescence was trifling as
to the degree of color; and so very slightly was the skin tinged, that the
disease was known, more from the collateral symptoms, than from the
efflorescence. Yet the sameness of some symptoms, happening in a family to one
or two, where the rest had the disease complete, abundantly satisfied me as to
the genius of the distemper.

From this diversity of symptoms, I have found some practitioners inclined to
think, that this disease could not with propriety be called a scarlet fever.
But I imagine, that such disputes are about words only. For although there is a
considerable difference between the present scarlet fever, and that milder one,
which Sydenham describes; yet if an increased number of symptoms, and a more
exasperated degree thereof, would authorize a physician to alter the name of
the difease, I fear, that confusion would be the consequence of such a liberty.
For the same reasons, the small Pox might suffer a change in its name; because
there is not so great, or a greater difference between a former, and the
present Scarlet Fever, than there is between small pox and small pox; more
especially if the comparison be made between the mildest degree of the
distinct, and the most violent degree of the confluent sort. But if a man
consults Morton, as well as Sydenham, he will find, that the febris scarlatina
of the former differs greatly from the febris scarlatina of the latter, as to
the appearance, degree, and period of the disease. For however mildly Sydenham
represents this distemper, Morton scruples not emphatically to term it a
plague; and his reasons are the severity of some of the symptoms. In his
eleventh case, toward the close, speaking of a patient, he has these words, a
peste, inquam, evasit. And afterward he goes on thus, quantum tonsillas,
uvulam, fauces, nares, et quamdiu intumuisse vidi! quam turgida nonnunquam
labia! et quam sordida scabie obducta et exulcerata ab eadem causa animadverti!

I might observe, that this scarlet eshorescence not only differed as to degree
in different persons, but in one and the same person, there was often this
diversity. The efflorescence on the face, neck, and breast was even with the
superficies of the skin ( ^rysipelas-like) at least so far as the eye could
discover; while in other parts, the eruptions were more prominent, and carried
the exact appearance of a Rash, (with this difference only, that they were very
red) and the cuticle felt with all the asperity of Fishskin, that spectacle
cases and the like are frequently made of.

I now proceed to the Fever, which in most was high, that is to say, intense
thirst, and the sensation of a burning heat upon the skin, were the prevailing
complaints of the greater part of those, who labored under the disease. But
even with all this extraordinary heat and increased celerity of the blood's
motion, the tongue was commonly moist, furred but slightly, and here and there
a person not very thirsty. Some underwent extreme anxiety and inquietude; some
were delirious for four, or more days together, without one lucid interval or
slumber, incessantly talking incoherently. Others were comatous, and when
awaked to drink, immediately relapsed to sleep again. Only a few complained of
head-achs; and even some of those, who were afterward most delirious, did not
complain of previous pain in the head. Several were sleepless whole days and
nights successively, without any delirium. Almost all complained of great
dejection of spirits, and sudden loss of strength, which leads me to speak of
the pulse.

The Pulse in general was very quick, and very small; which circumstance, in
conjunction with lowness of spirits, and impaired strength, contributed a good
deal to embarrass the method of cure. For however the inflammatory disposition
of the blood might seemingly call for Bleeding, the untoward symptoms
abovementioned seemed either to forbid this discharge, or to permit it in such
small quantities, that little service could reasonably be expected from it. And
in fact I found that bleeding, though recourse was had to it at the beginning,
was very little beneficial toward the cure of the fever, though often
serviceable to the inflamed throat. But of bleeding more hereafter. Let me here
add, that there were a few, whose pulse was quick, and not weak; and in this
case, I ordered plentiful bleeding, and even repeated it, if the difficulty of
deglutition was considerable. I remember two patients particularly, the one
about eleven years of age, the other about eighteen, each of whom I blooded the
second and third day of the disease. The first bleeding was followed with
little, or no benefit to either of them. The next day, finding their tonsils
still greatly swelled and inflamed, and apprehending danger of suffocating in a
few hours, I directed a further quantity of blood to be taken away, which
presently abated these complaints. Their blood was sizey each time of bleeding.
But though in these, and a few more persons, the blood was sizey, yet in others
it was not so, notwithstanding they were bled after the disease was pretty far
advanced: for it is well known, that even in the small pox, and many other
inflammatory diseases, the blood, when taken away at the beginning, is
frequently not sizey, though found to be so, upon bleeding some days afterward.
Nor can I recollect, that any ill effect followed upon bleeding, where I
directed it. Though there frequently occurred cases, where the smallness of the
pulse, and lowness of the spirits deterred me from it. But then these
circumstances were so obvious and glaring, that they could not escape an
inattentive practitioner.

The urine was seldom high colored, not even the urine of adults; it was
generally the complexion of water saturated with a paler clay. And when the
fever abated, the urine, as usually, separated, and deposited a thick
clay-coloured sediment. In some indeed, who were remarkably delirious, the
urine was limpid and pale, as is common under such circumstances; but, as the
patient mended, the urine had a better color and consistence, and threw down a
plentiful sediment.

There was some diversity in the terminating of this disease, both as to the
time and manner. When it was not very violent, it terminated, in some measure,
on the fourth or fifth day; that is, the disease at that period had arrived to
its height, and was on the decline. In few or none did the fever leave the
patient so totally, but it recurred once, twice, or more, the evenings
following; and grew so mild at each return, as to be little more, than barely
noticed: at which time too, all the glandulous swellings commonly vanished. But
in some, although the fever evidently remitted of its severity on the fourth, or
fifth day, its returns were of more hours duration, and higher in degree; and a
large share of inquietude continued, even to the eighth, or ninth day. In one
person particularly, the delirium continued after the fever was off, the skin
cool, the efflorescence dying away, and the pulse slow and regular. In another,
when the fever was past its height, the Parotids began to swell for the first
time, and continued to enlarge for three days successively; when suddenly they
subsided, in a night's time, one half of their increased magnitude. In two
persons, after the fever was quite removed, and the appetite for food returned,
the tumor of the Parotids still continued, which daily increased in their bulk,
and gradually grew harder, till a fortnight or three weeks afterward, the
right Parotid of the one, and the left Parotid of the other suppurated largely.

The distemper left a great many very low spirited, complaining of an ill taste
in their mouth, with loss of strength, and a slowly recovering appetite. The
cuticle of almost all peeled off, as in other scarlet fevers; and many
complained for a long time, that their bodies were as sore within, as without.
Such a sensibility indeed they suffered, as rendered them quite unhappy.

In some the nervous system was shattered to such a degree, that the dejection
of spirits, which had accompanied the disease through all its stages, still
continued, when the distemper was over; and the patient dreaded the approach of
the evening with an unusual kind of horror, assuring me, that the shadows which
were consequent upon the lighting up of candles, affected their minds with
extravagant terrors and perturbations. And I well remember, that in a child
near three years old, this circumstance was so very remarkable, that upon the
candles entering the room, and the shadows arising thereupon, the boy appeared
with a ghastly stare; and cried with a vehemence not to be pacified, on
discovering the moving shades on the walls of the chamber.

I now proceed to the cure, the method whereof was different in different
patients. When the disease began with sickness and purging, as it generally
did, I commonly ordered a salt of wormwood mixture, with the testaceous powders
in it; upon which the vomiting and diarrhoea usually stopped, and truly I
hardly remember, that they ever returned again. Then if the inflammation and
swelling of the tonsils, and parts adjacent required, and the pulse permitted,
I directed bleeding, and repeated it as the symptoms indicated. If this method
did not take speedy effect, I ordered a vesicatory between the shoulders; and
for internals, I commonly prescribed draughts of sperma ceti and nitre, with
plentiful dilution, by means of barley-gruel, white wine whey, and other
liquors. Sometimes too I ordered linctuses, gratefully acidulated with spirit
of vitriol, or in lieu of linctuses, black current jelly; in order to keep the
parts soft and flexible, and to remove or abate that aridity, which is an
attendant of inflamed parts, especially such as are exposed to the air; and the
tonsils may be justly regarded in this view, because the nostrils being
generally stopped, the patient was obliged to inspire through his mouth.

And by this method alone the distemper, when not violent, went through its
stages with success. But if subsultus tendinum, deliria, and other threatening
symptoms appeared, I immediately applied blisters likewise to the arms. And if
symptoms were not obviated hereby, but the pulse also began to sink, I directed
a vesicatory to the head, and exchanged the nitre for warmer medicines, such as
the pulvis bezoardicus, contrayervae comp, and confectio cardiaca.

If the ulcers on the tonsils and fauces were fouler than common, detersive and
astringent gargarisms were found to be of service, by contributing much to
bring away the sloughs, and facilitate deglutition.

If the fever ran high, and the body was very costive, I ordered an emollient
clyster. But the observations made on bleeding held true likewise here. For the
usual weakness of the patient, and depression of spirits, seemed to hint, that
these intestinal discharges were the less necessary; and the scarlet
efflorescence seemed likewise to forbid a too great laxity being brought upon
the intestines.

And now I shall conclude, by throwing together a few general observations,
which could not conveniently be classed under the foregoing articles.

Opiates had no beneficial influences to remove watchfulness. This perhaps is
not to be wondered at, during the febrile ebullition; though Sydenham recommends
paregorics under the worst symptoms, that he has mentioned of this disease.
But in three persons or more, where the fever was in great part, or altogether
off, I gave opiates aromatized; to one, that I might calm the delirium; and to
others, that I might procure sleep after many nights watching. But all to no
purpose.

I bled one patient, whose pulse was tolerably strong, to remove the delirium
and loquacity, that still continued, after the fever was seemingly gone. But no
benefit arising in a few hours after bleeding, I ordered blisters to the arms,
administered more cordial medicines than before; and that night the patient
slept several hours without waking, and afterward mended apace.

The blood had no size upon it, the serum was a bright citron, and bore a due
proportion to the crassamentum, as in health.

In others, under pretty much the same circumstances, as the foregoing, but
where the pulse was not so strong indeed, I omitted bleeding, and prescribed
vesicatories, and generous medicines, but no sleep ensued hereupon.

I was called to a child of four years old, the second day of the disease. He
appeared quite bereaved of sense, almost suffocated, and at the point of death.
Immediately I ordered him to be blooded to six ounces, speedily after which he
revived, and came to himself. The child was naturally subject to enlarged
Tonsils. But this symptom of strangling hastily came on, I think, within the
space of half an hour, or thereabouts. On the fourth day, at two in the
afternoon, it returned again with greater severity, if possible, than before;
though several blisters that had been applied, discharged most copiously. The
Tonsils were swelled to that degree, as threatened every minute to preclude all
admission of air. Whereupon a Surgeon was called in, who attempted to relieve
the child, by making incisions on these glands. And so far the operation
answered the end, that the boy who appeared before in danger every moment of
being suffocated, lived 'till about seven in the evening. The operation was
followed by a pretty deal of blood, and a little purulent matter, which was
very offensive to the smell.

There were two things remarkable in blistering; the one was, that oftentimes
no good effect accrued hereby to the fever, though the pulse by these means was
generally raised, and the difficulty of deglutition somewhat abated. The
spirits too were improved by these applications. And indeed in a disease so
seemingly threatening, perhaps it would be imprudent to omit these
applications. For although the fever did not yield to them, so as to shorten its
stages; yet it is probable, that symptoms were hereby prevented from rising to
a more dangerous height. And in general it was true, that few were delirious,
whose complaints of the throat obliged them to the early application of
blisters. However this observation did not always hold good; for there were a
few, who had blisters timely applied, and nevertheless, a subsequent delirium
not prevented.

Another remark worth noticing, was the great length of time, that the blisters
continued to discharge. In some, for eight or ten days successively, and in
some, much longer.

In general, few sweated plentifully, till toward the conclusion of the cure;
i. e. till the fever was past its height. The younger the patients, the
earlier, and the more they sweated, and so vice versa.

The appearance of the efflorescence seemed to command but little regard, as to
the method of cure. For I have seen some persons raving, with the eruption
fully out, and intensely red; and I have seen others equally delirious, with
the eruption sparing and pale. So that latterly I did not much consult the
appearance of the efflorence, but I ordered bleeding etc. as other
circumstances indicated.

It is a general law in eruptive disorders, that the more liberally the
eruption comes out, the securer is the patient rendered thereby. And yet so
little did this rule hold true here, that in two patients, who died, the
efflorescence was universal, and florid to the last. And in one of them, that
anxietas circa praecordia, which is usually most urgent in other eruptive
fevers, before the eruption breaks out, was in this case as exquisite, when the
efflorescence had attained its highest color, as before the efflorescence made
its appearance.

Under the article of cure, I should have observed, that the universal soreness
within, which multitudes complained of, was alleviated much by solutions of
sperma ceti, light oleaginous mixtures, broths, etc. and when the cough
continued, bleeding and asses milk removed this complaint.

But the most troublesome symptom, which occurred after the fever was removed,
was that great dread upon the spirits mentioned before, which occasioned the
unhappy patient to fear the approach of the evening. Here no nervous medicines,
as they are called, seemed to take any immediate effect. But air and a
restorative diet gradually restored the person to better spirits.

From the whole, that I have advanced upon this disease, I think it appears,
that general rules of cure were precarious and uncertain; and that particular
rules were not ascertainable, on account of the various appearances, and
symptoms of the disease, and the various constitutions of various patients. And
this perhaps furnishes a hint, why mankind are so often disappointed in the
perusal of medicinal writers. We are apt to expect too much from them; indeed
more, than it is possible for the art to supply. When authors write generally
upon these subjects, they seldom write very usefully; and when they write
particularly, we grow weary of their prolixity. And perhaps, after the pains of
turning over a variety of volumes, we still find, that the particular case we
wanted, is either not mentioned at all, or too partially and superficially, to
serve our purposes.

So that it is in Medicine, as in Navigation. Rules may be laid down, and
Charts exhibited; but when a man has made himself master of all these, he will
often find himself among shelves and quicksands; and must at last have recourse
to his own natural sagacity, to extricate himself out of these difficulties.

When obscurities arise, and emergencies press, every practitioner knows, how
poor and insufficient all systematic authors are; and how tedious, and
oftentimes unavailing the best observators. The necessity therefore, and
superiority of a physician's own judgment, in many cases, to the writings of
others, Your practice and Your success most abundantly testify. I am, with the
greatest respect,

SIR, Your very obedient Humble Servant, N. COTTON.

BOOKS printed for, and sold by R. MANBY and H. S. COX, Booksellers, at the
Prince's-Arms, over against the Old-Bailey on Ludgate Hill, LONDON.
I. MEdicina Britannica: Or, a Treatise on such physical Plants, as are
generally to be found in the Fields or Gardens in Great Britain: Containing a
particular Account of their Nature, Virtues and Uses. Together with the
Observations of the most learned Physicians, as well ancient as modern,
communicated to the late ingenious Mr. Ray, and the learned Dr. Sim. Pauli.
Adapted more especially to those, whose Condition or Situation of Life deprives
them, in a great Measure, of the Helps of the Learned. By Tho. Short, of
Sheffield, M. D. The Second Edition. To which is added an Appendix: containing
the true Preparation, Preservation, Uses and Doses of most Forms of Remedies
necessary for private Families. 8vo.

II. A General System of Surgery, in three Parts. Containing the Doctrine and
Management, 1. Of Wounds, Fractures, Luxations, Tumors, and Ulcers of all
Kinds. 2. Of the several Operations performed on all Parts of the Body. 3. Of
the several Bandages applied in all Operations and Disorders. The Whole
illustrated with thirty eight Copper Plates, exhibiting all the Operations,
Instruments, Bandages and Improvements, according to the modern and most
approved Practice. To which is prefixed, an Introduction concerning the Nature,
Origin, Progress and Improvement of Surgery; with such other Preliminaries as
are necessary to be known by the younger Surgeons; being a Work of thirty Years
Experience. Translated into English from the Latin of Dr. Laurence Heister,
Professor of Physic and Surgery in the University of Almstadt, Fellow of the
Royal Society at London, and of the Royal Academy at Paris. The Third Edition,
4to.

III. Medical Essays and Observations, published by a Society in Edinburgh. The
Third Edition, revised and corrected by the Authors. In 6 Vols. 12mo.

IV A Treatise on all the Diseases incident to Women; containing an Account of
their Causes, Differences, Symptoms, Diagnostics, Prognostics, and Cure. By
John Astruc, Physician to his present Majesty the King of France, etc. Regius
Professor at Paris, and Author of a Treatise on the venereal Disease.
Translated from a Manuscript Copy of the Author's Lectures read at Paris, 1740.
8vo.

V. An Account of some new Experiments and Observations on Joanna Stephens's
Medicine for the Stone: with some Hints for reducing it from an empirical to a
rational Use. With Remarks on Dr. Hales's Experiments on the same Subject, and
some additional Experiments on the comparative Efficacy of diverse other
Medicines, as Lithontripticks. Presented to the Royal Society Jan. 14. 1741-2.
By J^hy Rutty, M. D. The second Edition, corrected and enlarged with diverse new
Experiments and practical Observations. Also an Account of the several new
Cases. To which is subjoined, an Account of the Effect of Soap Lees taken
internally, in the Case of James Jurin, M. D. with an Appendix concerning a new
Medicine for the Stone and Gravel. 8vo.

VI. Commercium Litterarium ad Rei Medicae et Scientiae naturalis incrementum
institutum, quo quicquid novissime observatum, agitatum, scriptum, vel peractum
est succincte dilucideque exponitur. Ab Anno 1732. usque 1744. Accedunt
Praefatio and Indices necessarii. 4to. 14 Vols.

VII. Philosophical Experiments; containing useful and necessary Instructions
for such as undertake long Voyages at Sea. Showing how Seawater may be made
fresh and wholesome, and how fresh Water may be preserved sweet; how Biscuit,
Corn, etc. may be secured from the Weavel, Maggots, and other Insects; and
Flesh preserved in hot Climates, by salting Animals whole. 8vo.

VIII. An Account of some Experiments and Observations on Tar-Water; wherein is
shown the Quantity of Tar that is therein, and also a Method proposed to abate
that Quantity considerably, and to ascertain the Strength of the Tar-Water.
Which was read before the Royal Society, 8vo.

IX. Synopsis Medicinae; or a summary View of the whole Practice of Physic.
Being the Sentiments of the most celebrated Authors in all Ages, relating to
Diseases, their Causes and Cures. With most Cases in Surgery and Midwifry. To
which are added, some Observations very rare and uncommon; and a curious
Treatise on all Sorts of Poisons. In 2 vols. 8vo. By John Allen, M. D. and F.
R. S. translated by himself from the last Edition of his Latin Synopsis, with
very large Improvements. The Third Edition corrected.


