Bellum Medicinale, OR The PRESENT STATE of Doctors and Apothecaries in LONDON.

Being Remarks upon a Letter from a Merchant-Dispensary Physician to himself,
and his Answer.

In a Letter from a Chemist in the City to a Country Physician, with the
Physician's Answer.

Wherein the ancient and most effectual way of Practice is proposed, as the
best means to put an End to the Contest.

Siste gradum, and specta. Non hic ludicra petuntur
Praemia, sed Vestri Loculi de Sanguine certant.
Postica dum penetrat Syrinx crepitantibus illinc
Ventis, Lucelli non malus Odor ait.
LONDON.

Printed for M. Fabian at Mercers-Chappel in Cheapside, and sold by A. Baldwin
in Warwick Lane, 1701.

CHAP. I.
SIR,
HAVING no other News, I am tempted to send you, with some Remarks upon it, a
Discourse that lately came to my Hands, subscribed from a Merchant in London,
to a Dispensary Physician, with the Physician's Answer. The Subject of the
Discourse being, The present State of Physic and Surgery; at my entrance upon
it I could not judge the Author less than a Drugster, as knowing no other
Merchants so nearly concerned with Physic. But reading on, and finding him
complain of the Luxuriant Use of Medicines, it was natural to conclude he had
been some great Sufferer. But coming at length to the Physician's Answer, and
finding that so like the Product of one and the same Ingeny; I was tempted to
think the Merchant broke, and lately turned Physician; or the Physician wanting
Business, to have newly took up the Trade of a Merchant. But I had no sooner
perused the whole Treatise, than I found out the Mystery and Bottom of the
Business to be no less than a War proclaimed by one Company of Merchants
against another for interloping; or (to be plain) the Apothecaries having been
trading in that part, which the Physicians count their proper Province, the
Doctors as an Act of Hostility retaliate, and are turned Apothecaries.

What may be the consequence of this Breach of the Peace, time must manifest;
but I hope, Sir, you who are known to be a disinterested Person, and as such a
more proper and fit Judge of the Grounds and Management of the War, may
insinuate something that may be a more proper Medium to compose the Difference,
or at least more advantageous to the People, who must bear the Charge of the
War, than any thing has been said, or is likely to be done by either Party.

Here are forty six Doctor-Apothecaries, against a thousand Apothecary-Doctors,
which is great Odds. But the Apothecaries say, it is the Doctors Fear that
multiplies them beyond the true Number: Be it so, the Doctors show their Valor
the more, since they are resolved to engage; and I don't know but if they can
bring in the East India Companies as Auxiliaries, as they seem to threaten, by
insinuating the Merchants Concern and Acquaintance with their Affairs, they
will be capable to ruin more than 1000 Clister-pipe Men Horse and Foot; the
Doctors themselves being all 46 Commission-Officers: Tho the Apothecaries say
one half of them are as unfit for their Profession as other Folks; it is only
the Virtue of L. and M. makes them the same Doctors in the Common Cause, and
able to say, Nos Poma.

Well, the Merchant-Physician, or Doctor-Apothecary (which he pleases) exhibits
diverse Articles against the Apothecary-Doctors, as a just Cause of taking up
Arms, having received them at an Evening-Muster at the College, after Orders
given concerning a large Confluence of Sick and Maimed, some Merchants no doubt.

In the Preface to the Discourse he asserts,

' First, That the Apothecaries have often reproached the Physicians, that the
Poor were left to their Care, and that they neglected the Pharmaceutick Part,
or Preparation of Remedies now lodged in themselves. But the Doctor is
convinced that the Dispensary is the greatest Relief to the Poor, who have the
best Advice and best Physic at very small Expense. The Physicians are often
considering the Drugs, carefully viewing the common Preparations, improving
them, and adding others which they think or judge more useful.'

Remark. It must be confessed, that the Physicians have not been reproached
without Cause, they have not hitherto been used to give Advice to large
Confluences of sick Persons Gratis: having no Remedies to sell to them that had
no Fees to give, the Poor have been forced to go to them that had, or wholly to
let Nature alone to struggle with its Diseases. Nor have the Physicians only
neglected, but been ignorant of the Pharmaceutick Part. Neither can the
Apothecaries any more than the Physicians pretend themselves complete herein,
being generally alike ignorant of the chief and most artful Part, Pyrotechny,
leaving its most effectual Preparations to the Care of those, whose Care is
only how they may make them, not most adapted to the Cure of Diseases, but to
their best Advantage; professing no Skill in Diseases, or the Virtues of what
they make in order to remove them.

But the Dispensary, tho it be an Acknowledgment of the Faults the Physicians
have been reproached with, is not the greatest relief to the Poor; nor have we
more than their own Words to assure us that they will, yea or can afford the
best Advice, and the best Medicines cheaper than other Physicians.

That they can give the best Advice is but their own immodest Boast; but that
they are so soon become the best skilled in Pharmaceuticks, tho with the
Assistance of a few poor Apothecaries amongst them, we know it is very unlikely,
if not impossible; or that they can consider the Drugs, much farther than to
know them by Sight, since they have but lately dealt that way; nor are they
much more likely to improve or add to the common Preparations. But,

' Secondly, He says the Citizens often complain to the Physicians of the very
chargeable Bills of the Apothecaries, and declare their Jealousy of a
Combination, in multiplying Medicines and Doses needlessly. But the Dispensary
relieves the first by selling almost at the first Cost, or 18 in 20 cheaper
than the Apothecaries. And the Dispensary Physicians being under no Engagements
with the Apothecaries, cure with one or few Prescriptions in less difficult
Cases, and with no more than necessary in the more dangerous (avoiding all
Medicines acting on Nature with more or less Violence) the more hazardous
extreme: The Charge under 10 or 20 s. in a Fever or the Smallpox, instead of so
many Pounds; many require not more than three or four Shillings worth, which by
subdividing into Boles, Pouders and Draughts, come in a Bill to four or five
Pounds.'

Remark. The Apothecaries Bills no doubt have been larger or smaller according
to the Proportion of their Consciences; it cannot fairly be supposed, they have
been all alike culpable: but it is no wonder the People have complained of the
dearness of the Wares, where the Brokers have been so well paid for advising to
the Bargain; two Charges must needs look great, where one had been enough, and
Advice and Medicines too might have been afforded at the Charge of either. A
Combination between Doctors and Apothecaries, where there was a mutual
Dependence, was but natural; Manus Manum fricat. But now it is past doubt,
since the Dispensary Physicians declare, they are at present under no
Engagements to the Apothecaries.

But the Dispensary Physicians say, they are now resolved to be honest, and
sell their Remedies almost at the first Cost. Almost and hard by, etc. but if
they sell so cheap, and use but few Prescriptions, I doubt they will not be
oversparing in their Visits, or lower their Fees which may make amends, tho
they give their Physic unvalued; but how can we be assured, that they will, or
rather that they can cure with one, few, or no more than are necessary?
Prescriptions I do not know, unless they first demonstrate by their Practice
that their Skill is greater than other Physicians, which is yet to be done. But
they discover their Discretion more than their Skill, in avoiding the more
active Medicines. It Is dangerous meddling with Edg-Tools, by those that have not
been used to handle them: a Bone Knife is fit for Children, that they may not
cut one another; but if Physicians should venture to use more active Remedies,
Distempers might terminate one way or other too soon, to require many Visits,
and consequently fewer Fees would be gotten. But Gentlemen may have the Small
Pox, or Fever cured for ten or twenty Shillings, which we must understand in
Medicines, and that sometimes is very dear, when as these Disea^es commonly are
cured by Nature without Assistance: Many Diseases they say for three or four
Shillings; but what these Diseases are, it were good also to know, whether
Toothache or Corns; and what Fees are required besides, and whether the
Dispensary Men will trust. But,

' Thirdly, says he, the Apothecaries have kept the Doctors many Years under
the dread of their Power, who they say command in all Families, and can bring
in and turn out whom they please; they govern as a Tyrant his Subjects, making
them obedient by grievous Taxes; so that they dare not consult a Physician,
unless at the last Extremity. Physicians would govern their Patients by their
own Reason: The Patients have the Liberty of cheap Physic, and of consulting
at a beginning of a Distemper, secure from expense which shall surprise. The
Physicians would prevent their own Ruin, chiefly from their best Success.'

'This has hitherto been the Case of the Faculty; if they conquered a
Distemper, the Remedy (tho not the manner of using it) becomes the Apothecaries
Nostrum, and the Doctor is left to invent more. The Dispensary complies with
the two Proposals of the Apothecaries, removes the Peoples Complaint and
Jealousy of a Cheat put on them by all Physicians, and gives the License to him
to use his own Method and Prescripts, to his Patients Advantage and his own.'

'The Apothecary cannot complain he is injured: for as he seizes on the
advising Part, as a Dependency he would annex to the Shop-Trade; the other from
the Example brings them both together, the better to serve the Public. If the
Apothecary proves an Ambo-dexter, feels the Pulse with one hand, and makes
Medicines with the other; why may not the College please the People with the
same Dexterity? unless (which is reasonable in the Case of Life and Health) the
Apothecaries will wholly practice the judicial Part, and leave the ministerial,
of making Medicines, to the Physician.'

Remark. It is a shame for Physicians to confess, that the Apothecaries have
kept the Doctors many Years under the Fear of their Power, or that they should
command in all Families: indeed it seems natural for the People to ask the
Apothecary, who is the most skilful Physician, he being more capable to judge
than the People; and on this account they have had a Capacity to recommend such
as they thought would prescribe best either for the Patients or the
Apothecaries Disease, which soever lay with most pain on his Mind: but how they
should make them obedient by taxing hard, I do not see, unless one evil being
less than two, they choose to submit themselves wholly to the Apothecarys Care,
if not fearing the Fees more than the Bill, yet being sure both would be much
heavier; so that only Extremity or Experience of the Apothecarys insufficiency
could make them see other Counsel.

It were certainly well if Physicians could govern the Patients by Reason, and
that of their own stock, as well as give 'em Medicines of their own preparing,
without putting 'em in fear of large Fees, or dear Physic; then no doubt they
would consult 'em sooner.

And it were very well, if Physicians would not only prevent their own ruin,
but their Patients also by their good success; and that he that has the best
success might have most business, which can hardly be whilst Physicians are
D^pendants.

How Apothecaries should get any certain Nostrum's from Physicians Prescripts,
I don't easily see, since they have been so Numerous, and compounded in almost
every Case, that the Physician himself must needs be ignorant what did the
Cure: but if the Apothecary was so sagacious as to see what wrought the Effect,
how could he be so dull as not to learn the manner of using it?

Whether the Dispensary will remove the peoples Complaints and Jealousy, does
not yet appear; or whether the Dispensary Doctors, and their Apothecarys will
be less combined, and more honest than others, or more for either the
Physicians or Patient's advantage.

But, if the Apothecary cannot complain that he is injured by the Dispensary,
which only follows his Example, in bringing the Advising and Shop-trade
together, to the better service of the Public; certainly, the Dispensary
Physician can with as little reason complain of the Apothecary, for setting him
the Good Example, in better serving the Public: If the Apothecary was the
first Ambo-dexter that the Doctor thought worthy to imitate, why should he be
so angry at the Master that gave him so fair a Copy? And if it be so reasonable
in cases of Life and Death, to practice only the Judicial part, why may not the
practicing Apothecary leave the making of Medicines only to his Man, whom he
himself has instructed, as well as the Dispensary-Physician to his Apothecary
at the College, who perhaps must instruct his Masters?

'But the Dispensary (adds he) has been impeached with the Barbarous design, of
destroying the Apothecarys Company. But they scorn the Imputation, and declare
the greatest Esteem of those of the Society, who (like the Gentleman near the
College) Moribus Antiquis, are as Eminent for their care in preparing the best
Medicines, as for their integrity and modesty, in not invading the Profession,
or abusing and destroying the People.'

Remark. If the Dispensarys multiply, and the People believe they are the only
sure relief to the sick, the Apothecarys must fall, unless those few who like
the Gentleman near the College, Antiqua Ignorantia, are the more to be trusted
for good Medicines, because they dare not pretend to understand the Use of them.

'But says he, The Apothecarys destroy themselves by their Numbers, multiplying
from 1000 to as many more in eight years, without any prospect of checking the
superfluous increase; they must therefore accuse their own unhappy Conduct, who
are insensible of its fatal Consequences.'

Remark. If the Apothecaries are so likely to be destroyed Suis Copiis, what
need of so much noise at them? let them go quietly down: but unless they
multiply more than other men, I don't see how their number can destroy them any
more, than the Multiplying of any State or Kingdom can destroy it. But it is
not barely the Multiplying, or destruction of the Apothecarys, that troubles
the Dispensary, so much as what follows.

'That they avow with assurance, that they have or will take all the Practice
of Physic into their own hands, reserving only 5 or 6 great Men, to take on
themselves the Odium of the Deaths of their Patients.'

'The Surgeons fare not better than the Faculty, they are reserved for the
difficult Cases, robbed of the more Common, by which they only can acquire
Skill and Dexterity for the more important.'

'The Poor are undone in every sickness, etc.'

'The Dispensary pretends to preserve those who are more numerous than the
Apothecarys, and it will be the Alma Matter to the Physicians, from the two
Universitys, who will be capable to exercise the Learning they have acquired
there.'

Remark. This is the Grand fault of the Apothecaries, that they undertake to
practice: Let them have been as great Knaves as they would, if they had never
meddled in any thing that had been to the Dishonor, or rather and more
especially to the Disadvantage of the Doctors (for now Plurimus auro venit
Honos) they might have ruined themselves without pity I do not question: And
those Men that are content to take on them the Odium of the Deaths of the slain
amongst them, or to excuse their own faults by the Apothecaries mistakes, have
the Honor of being well paid no doubt. Tho the Surgeons lose some of the small
Jobs by the Apothecarys Officiousness, they do not so much complain; but they
fit them as well as the Dispensary, commonly making their own Medicines, and if
they lose the Ordinary Cases, yet they arc the more used to the Difficult. But

The Poor suffer most truly in every Disease, Corporeal or Crumenal, whether
Poor Doctors, Apothecarys, Surgeons or People; and Poor we are first to be
cared for, whatever the Pretense be of the Dispensary's being the Alma Matter,
where the Physicians from the two Universities may exercise their Learning with
the Pestle, and beat out great matters in Pharmacy.

'But the other Objection of the unobserving People, whose memory may not serve
'em well, is that the Apothecarys sell as cheap. It is granted if they will,
but do they not by their own and the Doctors Artifices in dividing, sell an
Electuary of 12 d in boles for 12 half Crowns, etc. we will not quarrel at
their 11 pence in the Shilling profit, but would only prevent the return of it
40 t^mes in 24 hours, when the Patients advantage the least part of the
Design.'

Remark. The People don't remember (we doubt) that the Doctors told them they
sell cheaper than the Apothecarys; it is granted they may if they will: but by
the conjoint Artifices of the Doctors yet their Confederates, in dividing they
enhance the price of an Electuary from 12 pence to 12 Shillings; but they could
never have done it, if they had not sound their advantage by the Doctors
frequent Repetatur's, tho I hardly believe every half hour, tertia vel quarta
quaque hora being commonly the most.

But the last and vilest Objection is, 'That the Subscribers to the Dispensary
are not as Eminent as the Physicians, the Apothecaries Favorites: It Is owned
they can make famous or infamous by a few Cabals and Visits; but is there any
part of Physic, even Poetry, which these Gentlemen cannot pretend to as well as
the other, who distrust their own merit by courting their favor, putting
themselves in their service, and plying them, as Porters a Shop of the Largest
Business?'

Remark. The Eminence of Physicians now adays, does not indeed result from real
Worth or Accomplishment, but may arise from the Report of Men, that talk even
like the Apothecaries. But the Dispensary, and the other Physicians (I believe)
are indifferently the same, some wise and some otherwise: but that Poetry
should be counted a part of Physic, and with a even, as if it were the Culmen
Artis, would have been a strange fancy till of late. I think Mr. Colebatch, and
his Antagonist (however their Acids and Alkalies stood affected) agreed in
this, that tho Poetry is a very pretty accomplishment, yet a Poet and a
Physician are vastly different. Letter to a Gentleman concerning Alkaly and
Acid.

But it must be acknowledged, that to get Business is a valuable part of
Physic; and to have written a Poem has not long since for some time commended
some late Doctors more than all their Cures, and other fine Qualifications.

'But it was not till after a long Discourse (he says further) that our Doctor
or Merchant, could penetrate into the more abstruse and secret design of the
Dispensary.'

Remark. Now comes the Mystery, which he was not (being but a Pupil) to be
presently let into, or capable of apprehending. But 'twas owned at last by
those, the most proper Judges, that the People in the more common Ilnesses
recover easily by the Strength of Nature, or one or two proper Directions. In
these a great but useless Expense must pay the attendance of the Apothecary,
who has no Gratuity given him, but must satisfy himself by the Number of
things he can prevail on the sick to take.'

In other Diseases with danger, when Nature is weak or raging, and has only one
Crisis (of its own choosing chiefly) by which it can be saved, many hot or
cooling Doses unhappily given, or diverting the Crisis by tampering, brings
certain destruction: by this unfortunate, but in vogue Management, 'twas
asserted that the far greater numbers are killed by Physic, who would
undisturbed have surely recovered without any.'

'The Dispensary Practice will soon demonstrate that the Remedy to this
pernicious Practice can be only had from it self, secure from this inhumane art
of growing Rich, etc.'



Remark. There are several things very observable in this secret and absiruse
Design.

1. That in usual and common Diseases, people would recover by the Strength of
Nature. 2. That even in these Diseases, something must be done, or there is
nothing to be got. 3. That he that takes no Fees cannot be well paid for looking
on the Patient, unless he can persuade him to take a great deal of Physic. 4.
In Diseases that are dangerous, when Nature is weak or raging, it can be saved
only by one Crisis. 5. That many doses of Physic given, whether hot or cold,
will divert the Crisis, and bring certain destruction. 6. That great Numbers
are killed by Physic, which would have recovered without any. 7. That the
Remedy of this pernicious Practice can be had only from the Dispensary. In
these particulars, we have more couched than at first one would be readily
aware of, and the Oracle that gave this abstruse account has showed an
uncommon sagacity, which will never permit me to think there are not Men of
great parts in the Dispensary.
The Grand design of these Sophi is to get those Patients that will recover by
the strength of Nature, or whose Diseases will terminate by a Crisis without
Physic, that is, all the common and most numerous Disorders, with the acute
Diseases, which is certainly the most advantageous Practice: And doing nothing
but a small matter, for a Color of Merit, that people may not think they give
Fees for nothing, will not quickly expend the Drugs, and Medicines in the
Repository; but a small Stock will carry on the Shop-trade, tho they should
sell as cheap as they pretend: but this is not all, there is commonly more
credit got by curing those Diseases that need no cure, or will terminate soon
by the efforts of Nature; for when the Patient is well, the Disease was this or
that grievous Malady: one or two proper Directions, that is, what will do
neither good nor hurt, must be given to satisfy the Patients and their Friends,
or else the Fees will hardly satisfy the Doctor. Tho it is the Opinion of one
of the Company, that a Physician in many cases, especially in the Small pox,
deserves his Fees better for directing nothing, than for doing so (see Dialogue
between Alkaly and Acid, page 71.) But I cannot conceive, why the Dispensary
practice of doing nothing, should be the only Remedy for these Diseases; and
why an Apothecary or other Physician, may not cure by the same Method. But the
People being afraid of Fees in small or common Diseases, are apt to run to
Apothecaries; so the Doctors lose the most easy, speedy and advantageous
Business: But Apothecaries being as willing to grow rich as any, make them pay
dear for a Multitude of unnecessary and pernicious Medicines, and so the People
suffer wherever they go.

Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdim, unless the Blessing of Poverty
prevent. 'But they may expect (says he) this will be debated between the
Physicians of the Apothecaries Party, and the Peoples; the one side relying on
the Maxim, si Populus vult decipi decipiatur, the other on the Magna Charta of
all Communities, Salus Populi suprema Lex.'

Remark. If the College of Physicians are divided, we may expect the House
cannot stand; but I think it is no just censure, that the Physicians that are
not of the Dispensary, are of the Apothecaries Party, in opposition to the good
of the People; for I know some that have less to do with the Apothecaries than
the Dispensary, who are only become Apothecaries themselves, or confederate
with some Apothecaries of their own: nor does it appear that the Welfare of the
People, and not their own advantage, is the only thing they aim at, or is more
sought by them than by diverse others.

'When it shall become sensible (adds he) how the Public is imposed on in the
expense in Sickness, and in Life it self, the Laws which now punish Offenders,
etc. will at last interpose the Cure of more latent and enormous Crimes. The
Faculty will have the Protection it demands, after the Performance of the
stipulated Conditions; the Dispensary will have the public regard, or observe
its Enemies punished with Fines more than the 100 Marks, or the other more
severe, the loss of Life, from Medicines in the exorbitant Quantities as
destructive as Poison.'

Remark. Here the Dispensary is very uppish, and threatens its Enemies with
Fines, and Death; which I confess will be a greater Argument against their
Enemies, than any they have yet given.

But what they mean by loss of Life from Medicines in exorbitant Quantities, as
destructive as Poison, I do not know, unless they design to get an Act that
whoever will not regard the Dispensary shall be poisoned by large Doses of
Physic: but the Legislators ought to be very well satisfied, in the stipulated
Conditions, that they be not only published, but that they be performed e're
they make Laws against either the People, or all other Physicians.

CHAP. II.
BUT we come now to the Merchants Letter, where first he informs us, 'that he
had a Fever, which was cured by the Dispensary Method of giving but sew
Medicines, and those seldom given.'

Remark. This I confess is a good Method, if the Medicines are good; but there
may certainly be a Fault as well in giving too little as too much: and I
believe many Medicines prove ineffectual on this very account, and the right
Method does not lie in giving little or much, but just enough, which a Man may
judge of without being of the Dispensary. 'But this Caution gave him greater
Confidence in the Art, with the Assurance he had of the Medicines being
faithfully prepared and dispensed at the College.'

Remark. What Assurance the Merchant was capable of receiving, that the
Medicines are faithfully prepared and dispensed at the College, I know not; but
I do not see what the People can have to satisfy them, more than their Words,
which other Apothecaries also are ready to give, tho it be but a small Proof.

'But when the Doctor allowed him to sit up and receive his Friends, they gave
him an account (says he) of the new Revolution in Physic, and generous Design
of the Dispensary, which they were extremely satisfied with. They told him,
this Contest between the honest Physicians of the Dispensary (thus it seems
they are distinguished, tho the Word has lately lost its value) and the
Apothecaries supported by their Confederates the Anti-College Physicians, was
as much the common Discourse as the Difference between the two Companies, or
the great Factions which divide the Nation. But,'

''Twas not easy for them to find out the Reason and Pretense of this
Controversy; but they who had been advised by the Dispensary, and used their
Medicines, could more easily discover the true Causes of the Separation, than
the Citizens, who yet lie under great Errors and Prejudices in this Affair: And
the Case according to the Opinion of the whole Company is according to these
following Particulars.'

Remark. This whole Company of Visitants no doubt were all Merchants concerned,
and advised by the Dispensary (tho some sort of Patients) and not ignorant
Citizens, or else they would not have had so great Satisfaction in the
Generosity of the Dispensary Design, and have seen so much into the Causes of
their Quarrel with other Physicians and Apothecaries. But, I never heard so
much I confess of their Factions as of those that divide the Nation, or that
the Dispensary Men are the only honest Physicians: and tho they assume to
themselves the Name of Honest in opposition, and distinction from all other
Doctors and Apothecaries; yet I think they cannot be very proud of it, since
the Word honest has lately lost its value as they confess, and so their
Honesty is of no great account.

But that the Apothecaries are supported by the Anti-College Physicians, I
believe is a slip of the Pen; it should have been Anti-Dispensary Physicians,
for none use Apothecaries so much as those of the College.

But let us hear the Particulars.

'The honest Physician is obliged by the Trust reposed in him by the Patient,
and his Interest in the Success, to take care that the Medicines are effectual,
and faithfully dispensed: if the Instruments are not good, the effect of the
Advice is lost; by a mistake in weight or measure, the Life of the Patient is
destroyed.'

Remark. What the Merchant says here is certainly very true, but the Dispensary
Physician cannot with any Modesty assert himself the only honest Physician, if
the word be took in its usual Sense; and others are as much obliged in
Conscience and Interest as he; and I have known an honest Apothecary faithfully
dispense an effectual Medicine according to the reputed honest Doctor's
Prescript, to the destruction of the Patient; who had he known the Case, would
never have done according to the Doctor's Order, nor have let the deadly
mistake in the Dose, which was merely the Doctor's, have its effect.

'But the Apothecary (adds he) neglects his Duty to the Physician and the Sick;
is rarely in his Shop, prepares few Medicines, but buys them under great
uncertainties; trusts raw Apprentices to select the Ingredients, and measure
the Proportion in the Prescript.'

Remark. This cannot justly be said of the Apothecaries in general, some of
them are as honest as any in the Dispensary no doubt, and not guilty of these
Crimes. But,

'The People, he says further, who are not acquainted with the Dispensary, of
two Evils choose the least as they think, by using the Apothecaries, believe
they save the Doctors Fees; tho the Medicines brought in in little Parcels,
etc. rise to a greater Sum 3 in 4 in most Cases, than both Advice and Physic
in most Diseases.'

Remark. This I believe is too often true, but ought not to be a universal
Charge; and it has been too often found that the Doctor has taken more for Fees
than was necessary for Physic and Advice too. But says he,

'The Associate part of the College, seeling the Apothecarys power in Families,
readily come in, or are forced to serve under 'em, on condition they forward
the increase of the Bill, and raise their Ability to advise, to an equal pitch
with their own: by both which the Apothecaries interest is more confirmed and
improved.'

Remark. This is a very great Scandal to the greatest part of the College, none
being excepted but the Dispensary; but they have one commendation these others
want, viz. that they raise the Ability of the Apothecarys to advise equal with
their own, which shows they are not so selfish as others; and if the Apothecary
be as able to advise, I see no reason why he should not: And by this the
Peoples interest will be confirmed and improved as well as the Apothecaries.

But he continues, 'The Design is therefore to revive the former Practice of
Physic, particularly that of Lower and Sydenham, who had greater success with
fewer Remedies than now are forced upon the People: or rather to expose the
Method the Physicians and Apothecaries use to themselves and Friends, of
avoiding carefully the Excess by which innocent things become destructive.'

Remark. The Practice of Lower and Sydenham cannot well be called the former
Practice, nor is the methed of Practice so much altered since their time, nor
could I ever hear of their extraordinary success above other Physicians; I
believe they used but few Medicines, for to do them justice they knew not many,
having none of the profoundest skill in Pharmacy: But having great Names,
perhaps in some cases great Expectations might alter the Patients, with a very
small matter beside. But if the Design be to expose the Method Physicians and
Apothecaries use to themselves and Friends, of carefully avoiding the Excess,
etc. it is a Commendation, and they will be willing to be exposed, whether
Dispensary Doctors, Apothecaries or others. He adds,

'But the Dispensary designs to convince the People by their experience, that
the most useful and effectual Remedies are of no great Price.'

Remark. But then it must be taken for granted, that they have the most useful
and effectual Remedies, which we know they have not; tho they offer to sale
their Arcana's in their Bill lately dispersed. Nor will I grant that the most
useful and effectual Remedies are of small value, or ought to be sold for a
mean Price, unless the Fee makes amends.

He goes on saying, 'The Public will soon be sensible that the Expense in
almost all Diseases per Diem will be of one, two or three Shillings, instead of
so many Pounds, etc. and that their Distempers will sooner yield to a few well
prepared College-Medicines, than to the decayed, vicious, and adulterate of the
Shops; and the Physicians Reward and Remedies too come far short of the Total
of a long Bill.'

Remark. It is a hard matter to say what the daily Expense of all Diseases will
be; but it is the usual Method of Traders to pretend to undersell one another,
to get custom; but they propose Advantage by it: and we must understand this
rate is to the Poor. But how any will be assured Diseases will yield to
College-Medicines sooner than to others, or that they will be well prepared, I
know not, or how they can say shop-Medicines are decayed, vicious, and
adulterate, yet those in the College-Shops will never be so.

But says he, 'The Dispensary cannot fail of universal Approbation, when the
People reflect that they have in many Cases used the Method they recommend,
preparing in their Houses the white Decoction, Infusions of Rubarb and Senna,
etc. or using the common Cordial Waters, Spirits, and Tinctures bought of the
Druggist, Chemist, or Wholesale shops.'

Remark. The Dispensary (or Merchant for 'em) now assures it self, and that
infallibly, of a universal Approbation, when once the People reflect that they have not only imitated the Apothecaries keeping Shops and selling Medicines, but
used even the peoples Method (which must needs be good) in preparing the white
Decoction, Infusion of Senna; Grand Remedies, and wisely prepared no doubt! but
Cordial Waters, Spirits and Tinctures bought of the Druggist, Chemist, or
Wholesale shops, they cry down in the Apothecary, but imitate in the People.

'But when its Use (he says further) shall become more public, their generous
Charity and regard to Mankind will be loudly applauded; and the Advantages from
it to this City allowed to be greater than all the Royal munificent Hospitals
in Europe.'

Remark. Ingens Gloria calcar habet, I see; but Charity and Philanthropy
usually begin at home, and where it appears it ought to be applauded.

That the Dispensary may possibly be of more Advantage to the City than all the
Hospitals in Europe except its own, I readily believe; but whether it will be
any to it, or themselves, is yet doubtful.

'This is the short view (says he) I could take of the present and future State
of Physic (obvious to every one that will confider his own interest, or not be
very unwilling to be informed) but because it is an affair of the greatest
Concern of our Life, your Friends oblige me to consult you, and report to 'em
your Opinion of the grievous Distemper, and the most probable methods of curing
it, with an unanimous Resolution to support and encourage a Design, by which
all Conditions of Men are equally obliged.'

Remark. This is the view which that Merchant and his Friends could take; but
how this present and future State of Physic is so obvious, and in relation to
the Dispensary an affair of the greatest importance, I don't see. Well, but the
Merchant is obliged to consult the Physician, with a promise of the unanimous
Resolution of the Merchants to support and encourage the Design: but I am
afraid since the Merchants have been lately found guilty, and punished for
promoting Designs, they will not be so free or able for the future to oblige
all Conditions of Men.

But, we come to the Dismal Account which the Merchant received from the
Physician of the Barbarous treatment of the Sick, so far as his Memory would
serve him.

'That we are imposed on more than any other Nation in all the Arts that relate
to Life and Health.'

Remark. We are like to be imposed on still, if some other Method be not
established than that the Dispensary proposes, being no way assured we shall
not be imposed on by them.

'That the common and most useful Remedies are put upon the People at a Rate,
in most fifty times, in many one hundred times more than their intrinsic
value.'

Remark. The common Remedies are not the most useful, nor are the most useful
put upon the People; but the intrinsic value of the most useful Remedies are
not known to the Dispensary, they being ignorant of them.

'That the exorbitant Expense ruins the Poor, and deters them and the Rich from
a just care of their Health, to avoid oppressive Treatment, subsequent
Diseases.'

Remark. Exorbitant Expense, if the Poor can expend it, will ruin 'em no doubt;
but I should think the Fear of it should not deter 'em or the Rich from, but
fright 'em to a just Care of their Health: yet if the just Care of Health be to
fee a Doctor, or go to an Apothecary, I am apt to think either of them will be
somewhat chargeable.

'To hide these Exactions from the People, the Apothecaries allow none to
practice with 'em but who betray their Profession, countenance a vast quantity
of Physic destructive, and support exorbitant Rates in the Bills: Physicians
are brought into all Families by them, and writing well is the Language for
writing very long Prescriptions.'

Remark. That some of the Apothecaries are guilty of some of these practices I
don't question, but I think they charge too General; indeed, I have heard the
term of Writing Well thus interpreted, and have heard that 2 or 3 Apothecaries
have engaged with a young Physician to cry him upon condition he would thus
write well: but such things ought to be discovered, who and when, and punished.

'The Esteem of the Profession is sunk by the Scandal of all the Deaths in the
Town thrown on Physicians, who are rarely consulted but when the Case is made
desperate by the Apothecaries, and the Patient takes the Prognostic of Death
from the Change of Advice, and is deprived of that assurance which is the
greatest support in Sickness.'

Remark. The Esteem of those that profess to save Lives must needs sink where
they are thought to do nothing, or to kill; and wherever the Work lies between
two, one will blame the other. I have heard the Apothecary say, such a one died
Secundum Artem; and the Dr. is not always wanting to blame (or at least
insinuate a Fault in) the Apothecary: but the Reason why persons so rarely
consult the Physicians is their own fault, because they will not proportion
their Fees to the Capacities of the Patients, or more commonly advise freely.
Fox a Patient to be afrighted with Death, in some cases is very prejudicial, in
some beneficial: a well grounded Assurance much promotes some Cures, and the
Confidence of an ignorant Physician many times does more than his Prescripts,
or even than those of the more knowing.

'That the Study of Art is neglected, because the Diseases are by ill treatment
forced into unnatural Symptoms, and differ from all those your Authors treat
of: there are in the Books of Physic no cases managed by an Apothecary by
almost one common random Method; your Writers have been careful in this to
conceal the infamy of the People and your Profession.'

Remark. A true account of Cases duly managed, no doubt is of great use and
benefit to Students in Physic, but I believe there are but few such Authors.

But, he that cannot judge of a Disease by what he sees in the Patient, has not
made any great proficiency in natural Knowledge; and it is a shame that
Physicians should confess the Study of Art is neglected, tho there were no
Books; it was at first practiced without any such helps. But it had been well,
if the late Writers had been careful to discover the ill Practice of those
People of the Profession, tho to their infamy, that we might know what would
not succeed, and what Rocks and Shelves to avoid, and not choose to make up
their Observations only with Cases more creditable.

But he goes on, 'It is now ten years since a Committee of the honest Part of
the College exposed these Grievances to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
and had convinced 'em of the necessity of removing the oppression the Public
had long felt; and it was concluded the Physicians should rate the Price of
Medicines in their Prescriptions. This was haughtily rejected by the Company at
a Meeting in their Hall some Months after; a small Number of the Younger
Apothecaries offering to comply, were compelled with threats to retract their
promises. The Committee of the Aldermen and Commons (the Apothecaries flying
from that as necessary as reasonable Proposal) desired that the College would
provide a Repository of Medicines, which will and may have, and may justly
claim (af^^r twenty thousand Bills made up there) their Regard and Protection.'

Remark. By the honest Part of the College we must understand, the 46
Dispensary Doctor-Apothecaries; but how the rest will take it, to be without
distinction counted the Dishonest part of the College, we may easily judge. It
is now no new thing for some Physicians to cry down all others, even in their
Morals, that they themselves may be better thought on: But how even that honest
part of the College could honestly pretend to rate the Medicines they should
have prescribed, I don't know, when they neither know the Cost nor Art of the
Preparations; besides, unless it were the honest part of the College, they
might oblige the Apothecaries as well in rating as in prescribing. Now the
Apothecarys might well reject this Proposal, that a parcel of Men that did not
understand Trade (being not then turned Merchants) should rate their Goods; and
certainly those that were willing to comply, must be very young, to suppose
this Proposal either reasonable, necessary or possible; but the Dispensary
Doctors having so very much business need not be discontented, or so earnestly
crave protection; 20000 Bills one with another might well arise to 2000 l. and
the Fees make, more than that Sum neat profit, which would protect them
sufficiently from the attacks of 1000 Clisterpipe Men.

But he says further, 'The Laws of the last Age saw and provided against these
vile Abuses; but our Laws are subject to the same Diseases as our selves, are
fallen into the infirmity of old Age, and to be regardless of others concerns.'

Remark. If the Laws are diseased, 'twill be well if the Dispensary can prepare
powerful Remedies to cure them; but old Age I doubt will be beyond their cure,
even in themselves, tho they regard only their own concerns.

'You allowed (adds he) the Faculty could not want the Art of relieving it
self, but one Party turns its force against another, like a vicious Composition
of Ingredients of opposite Qualities has no virtue to subdue the Epidemick
Malignity.'

Remark. I grant the Faculty has always studied the Art of relieving it self,
and so have the Company; and because these have been most expert in it, the
Faculty complains: But the Faculty indeed is a vicious Composition, whose
malignity lies upon the People, it was never well compounded; even the
Dispensary Ingredients are not without vice, nor will the Fermentation among
them amend (I doubt) but rather exalt the Malignity, or the People ever be free
from vile abuses till there be a new and better Prescript. He further adds,

'The great increase of Apothecaries is evidently the cause of all the present
Grievances to the Profession of Physic, to themselves and the People. They are
become 1000, ten to one Physician; the regulated Citys abroad allow no more
than can make up the Physicians Directions one to ten. The Consequence of so
great a Number cannot be avoided, 900 cannot possibly keep good Medicines in
their Shops; most of the Compositions, and most of the Simples often moved in
little quantities, are subject to evaporate their most active Parts, to corrupt
and become vapid and sour, or rotten and stinking. Who will believe the simple
Waters, Tinctures, Spirits, Pouders of volatile parts, Syrups, Electuaries, etc.
can wait and keep well, till they have their turn to be used, when the Shops
are as numerous as the sick? they must be thrown away and supplied anew, if the
Customer cannot be imposed upon, but that will be sooner than a new
Preparation.'

Remark. It now appears that it is the number of Apothecarys that most grieves
the honest Professors of Physic, and their own grief is first felt; the
Apothecaries being a great many, get a great deal of the easiest business,
which the Profession would have otherwise had: but if they are ten to one
Physician, the College are not all Physicians; and if they were but one to ten,
I believe they could not make up the Physicians Prescriptions, which are
commonly large enough. But the number of Apothecaries is not the chief cause
that they cannot keep good Remedies, but that the learned Doctors have given
them such a large and illcompil'd Farrago of Medicines, that they will not keep
good. They must have a great Catalogue of simple Waters, which signify nothing
but to mix things as a Vehicle, many of which can be made but once a Year, and
will not keep a Month without being corrupted, when Dr. Bates's Hydropeg. or
common Spring or distilled Water is as good; likewise of Syrups, many of which
are also made but once a Year, and are apt to ferment, grow four, or be filled
with Flies, and which is worse, are good for nothing but to clog the Stomach of
sick People. The same may be said of the numerous Classes of Conserves, and
Electuaries made up with Sugar and Honey. Pouders are of very different
Natures, some incorruptible, others soon spoiled, and others never good: but
Tinctures and Spirits may be kept long enough unchangeable, tho ever so
volatile; and if they lose any thing of strength, a little larger Dose will do.

But a Dispensatory might easily be made of fewer and more effectual Remedies
not easily corruptible, were Physicians or Apothecaries well skilled in the
Materia Medica and Pharmacy; but until they are, were there ever so few
Apothecaries, the sick will be abused, while they are obliged to keep foolish
things that one Doctor in 10 or a 100, or in the whole Town perhaps, has a
fancy to use now and then.

'But the numbers of the Apothecaries (says he) like Hawkers are always
visiting the Families, and recommend the taking Trade in easiest cases; in
others they quicken the use of Boles, and Draughts. They are rarely seen in
their business of the Shop: The Prescript of the Doctor and Apothecary himself
is left to be made up by the raw heedless Boy, that has not the Discretion of
his Master; whose utmost care is required, when the Patients Life is lost by
almost every Mistake.'

'The vomitive, corrosive, chemical Liquors or Pouders, may be taken instead of
the Cordials of the same Colors: Can the Boy bring his Mind to a steadiness,
to number his Drops of Laudanum, or violent Acids, to weigh half a grain of
Opium, Elaterium, or judge the Patient must die by the Apozem, boiled after this
or that Decoction, or that a Copper Vessel shall make the Preparation
poisonous?'

Remmark. The number of Apothecaries will not much alter the Case, if the
Numbers of Doctors and other People increased alike; but if they would hauk
only for the Doctors, we should not have the Numbers complained of; and if they
were sewer, they would trust as much to Boys or some other Servants having more
Business: but being many, and the Business divided among them, they may the
better attend themselves. Many Faults are no doubt committed by Boys, in
mistaking things and their Doses, and sometimes in not being able to read or
understand the Doctor's bad Hand or Latin, or correct his Mistakes as to the
Dose, or things prescribed together, or the Nature of the Medicine, which some
Masters have done e're now, and thereby saved the Life of the Patient, of which
Instances might be given. But says he,

'The honest Apothecaries also complain and lament the Difficulties, which by
the exorbitant Numbers are brought on the People and themselves; that their
Medicines cannot be vented while good and fit for use.'

Remark. It seems there are some honest Apothecaries then, even in the Opinion
of the Dispensary-Doctors, and no doubt they are alike honest to themselves,
and wish there were fewer of the Company, that they might have better Trade;
and if they were as factious as the College, they might destroy one another,
and the great ones devour the little ones. The spoiling of their Medicines is
from their extravagant Numbers and undurable Qualities (as before said) not the
Number of their Makers.

He adds, 'that they and their Servants are basely used as Porters, to fetch
and carry Boles and Glasses, and have not leisure in their Shops to prepare and
compound any thing, but buy abroad.'

Remark. They are Porters to the Doctors then, and why not to the honestest,
who ought to send their Bills to them to encourage their Honesty, and not take
the Trade out of their Hands, by setting up Shops of their own? But if they
have not leisure for all their Business, it is a sign they have too much trade.
But further, 'They are forced to advise against their Conscience, commanded by
the Nurses and People to own themselves as skilful as other Apothecaries (who
undertake any thing) that they may not forfeit their Business.'

Remark. These honest Apothecaries it seems are the least skilful, or else it
could not go against their Consciences to own themselves as wise as others. But
it is pity, they should be so forced into Business by their Customers Commands,
the honest Doctors would willingly take it off their honest Hands. A gain,

'That to live themselves, they must endanger the Life of their Customer; give
more than they would use themselves in the same Case. They reflect with Horror
at first, that they violate the Laws of their Country; subject to Fines,
adjudged Felons, if they mistake the Virtue or Dose of the Medicines; obliged
to set exorbitant Prices to the Poor and Servants, that the Wealthy may not
discern the Difference: they are in the sad Condition of the French King, in
the absurd Description in King Arthur, who was wont to make his Meals on the
raw Limbs of his poor Subjects.'

Remark. This is a sad Character of the honest Apothecarys, that they are such
Sinners against their own Consciences. I cannot understand how they came to be
in so much Favor with the Dispensary, as to be still termed Honest, unless it
be for fetching or carrying, or for their Ignorance, whereby it is supposed
they will be capable of doing their Duty, or rather the Doctors less hurt in
Practice: Or is it likeness-sake? But to add to their Crimes, they wantonly
devour the People alive, which if it be true, it is a Sign their Consciences
are not much concerned; and what are the rest if the honest are so bad? Yet I
can hardly believe, any ever made this Confession. But further they say (if we
may believe the Merchant)

'That the odd Confusion of their Business perplexes them, to be one Hour
wiping the blistered Part, and clapping on Melilot, then giving a Clyster; next
considering what to advise in a malignant Fever, then in the Convulsions of a
Child. The last must be done by the basest Perfidiousness of stealing off the
File, this or that Physician's Bill they imagine to hit the Case, and save him
the Trouble of seeing the Patient.'

Remark. Still more Commendations of the honest Apothecaries, sure these are
some near the College, perfidious in stealing Bills off the Files; no, I
believe the Crime lies in saving the Doctor the Trouble, I would say Profit, of
seeing the Patient: but why he must steal a Bill for a convulsive Child rather
than any other Case, I don't understand, unless this Merchant's Talent lies in
curing Convulsions. But if the Confusion of the Business so perplexes them, why
have the Doctors so perplexed it? why have they never called for the Surgeons,
or Butchers to take off the Skins of the Patients, and supply them with
Melilot, and some fitter Persons to administer behind? But if these things are
so great, and perplexing a Confusion, why does the Dispensary undertake the
same?

'But it is obvious (he goes on) the prodigious Number of Apothecaries will in a
few Years naturally increase to more than twice as many, and so on; will oblige
them to increase the greater vent of Physic, and higher Prices; they will not
be wanting in perpetual Encroachments on the Faculty, they will be plying to
raise and support their Interest, etc. they will assume the cure of many
thousands yearly that would have been sooner well without Physic; they will
struggle first with their own Fraternity, then the Members of the College,
except their Confederates; they will not bear or commend any Method, but where
Physic is ordered every Hour, etc.'

Remark. It Is the Number of Apothecaries sticks in this Tradesman's Stomach,
more than their Honesty, he plainly shows, not because they will be so many
Porters and raise the Rates of Drugs, but because they will encroach on the
Faculty, and get the Credit of many Cures, which were done merely by not
killing, by which some Doctors might have raised a considerable Reputation.

But whether they will have the wit to learn of the Doctors, to struggle with
then own Fraternity, I question, and of which this is meant, the honest
Apothecaries or the others: but if they grow so numerous, and the College take
no Care to enter Auxiliaries, I fear they will be too hard for the College,
both honest and dishonest too, if their Interest engage them against all. But
still to inhance the Crimes of the (Honest) Apothecaries. They will not suffer
any Character of a Physician to pass without an Allay or Antidote, who will not
justify his Practice, and all his Medicines with the Air and Assurance of a
Common Knight of the Post, and take the Death of the Patient on himself. Any
Citizen who will think, may discern the Reason of the perpetual Dissensions of
the College: one Party would raise its Reputation by serving the Public
faithfully, the other oppose all Projects of that kind to merit the Favor of
the Apothecaries.

The Apostates from their own Profession are not to be informed that the
Dignity of the Faculty must sink, when they are forced to delude the People by
applauding the unskilful or pernicious Treatment; and the Doctor for his Fee
has the Reproaches of the House and Funeral, when he dares not inform them the
Patient had the fatal Stroke already given him, that the mistake of the
Apprentice in substituting one thing for another, or a wrong Proportion was the
true Cause of a violent not natural Death. When we rarely treat a Distemper at
its beginning, commonly the only time to interpose between Nature and the
Disease to any purpose, are called to no purpose in the end, when all is in
Confusion the Vigor of Nature spent, or oppressed with as many Doses as Hours
in 8 or 10 Days, and chiefly employed in worn out and vitiated Constitutions.



Remark. All Apothecaries are certainly wicked Fellows, if the honest ones are
so bad, and the word Honest has indeed lost its value; but they do but imitate
the Doctors, who will not give them a good Character, unless they will comply
with their Interest. But it is a great Scandal to the College that they suffer
such Members amongst them, that have no more Faith or Honor thin Knights of
the Post; that will justify what they don't know, viz. the Apothecaries
Medicines and Honesty: and the Doctors are imprudent too as well as wicked, or
else they never would take the Deaths of the Patients on themselves, or the
Cure of them they know past cure. But it is not so obvious to the Citizens,
that the Dispensary Doctors are all such as would raise their Reputation only
by faithfully serving the Public; and that all the rest oppose all such
Designs to get the Favor of the Apothecaries; that they are all base Apostates
from their Profession, etc. Now I think it would show but little Honesty in a
Physician after his Patient's Death, to tell the Patient's Friends he was
killed, or incurable before he undertook him, or that the Medicines were no^
good, and that the Boy mistook, when of such things (tho they too often happen)
the Doctor is commonly ignorant. But when this honest Merchant was well enough
to go abroad, he tells us,

'That he was recommending the Advantages of the Dispensary, and the Integrity
of the Physicians Subscribers, but was surprised to hear many express a
Prejudice against it, without desiring to know the Design of it; a notable
Company about a Tea-table had been exclaiming, and said, theyd go the old way
till it came more in fashion, since they did not know how many had been killed
by the Apothecaries, they were easy not to find out new Occasions of Trouble,
etc.'

Remark. These were Merchants no doubt of the old Company, that were contented
to trade upon the old Foundation, they had settled their Heads by a Dish or two
of Tea, and were willing to see others make out their Pretensions. They were
not willing to accuse the Apothecaries of Murder, unless they could prove it,
lest they should bring themselves into Trouble. But,

'In other Visits, he was startled at the many scandalous Reports against the
Subscribers to the Dispensary. The first, says he, they contemned as malicious
and senseless Impostures; they, had too much Poetry in them for Truth. The
other appeared ridiculously little, and very easily refuted. That their Physic
is as dear as the Apothecaries, when we experience the Difference of 18 or 19
in 20 Shillings, their Goodness justified by the Subscribers Care in the Choice
of every Drug, which they buy at the highest Prices; their Reputation
answerable for every defect. That they have not Servants sufficient, when they
can increase their Number; and the want of Hands supposes the growing Business
equal to defray the charge of more. But if the Subscribers want the University
Education or Capacity for their Employment, they may consult the Apothecaries
List of the College, and find better if they can. If they destroy all the
Patients, and the Apothecaries and their Confederates never want Success, the
want of Advocates will prevent the Trial, and nonsuit the Debate. If the
Remedies are not good, the abused People will seasonably complain; if they have
no Business, the Dispensary will have none, and will be but a Collection of
Pots and Glasses, and the Servants sufficient to show the useless Repository.'

Remark. The Merchant in his further Adventures, meets with startling Reperts
against the Dispensary, no doubt he is concerned in supplying them with Drugs.
I could wish he had given us the Poetical ones, they might have been a
Diversion, if not by their Wit, yet by their Folly; but what is the matter?
Poetry is so contemptible now, which before he boasted of in the Dispensary as
a Qualification with an Emphasis, even Poetry, to bring up the Rear in those
that commend or belong to a Physician; now Poetical and False go together. But
he should have confuted these great and harder Objections, as well as he has
the little ones, to which he has answered very well, if the Merchant can avouch
what he has said, that they will always sell at the rate set down, which I am
sure will be less than they cost.

That the Dispensary always employ those that have Skill, Mr. Acid, or some
other Apothecary-Doctors among them to buy the Drugs, and not trust their Boys.
That they will confess every defect: That their growing Business shall not
perplex them, as it does the Apothecaries. That their Members, whether they
came from the Shop, or the Schools, have University Learning, and as much
Capacity for Physicians as they pretend to. That they will not destroy so many
Patients as Apothecaries and other Doctors. But above all, that the Patients
will be sensible of the Abuses in Physic, and always complain when abused.

But he tells us further.

'That the People will in a little time apprehend, that their Interest as to
Health and Expense is the Subject of the Controversy, and that every one is
both Judge and Party, and can give a definitive Sentence as far as he is
concerned. And here is no Law to be enacted by Majority of Voices, or restraint
to be put on the Liberty of any particular Person; he need not express a
childish Dread, as if he were to be kidnapt away.'

To be plain, I am afraid the People will not soon experience that their Health
and Expense, but their Expenses, is the Subject of the Controversy; but we know
every one is not capable of being a Judge, or so unhappy as to be a Party. The
People do not see the Depths of Satan in these things, and whence the fair
Invitations proceed.

Gentlemen, we do not come to impose on you, you are at your Liberty, you need
not be afraid of us, we come to seek your Health, and to do for you that which
others cannot: Gentlemen, take our Remedies, our famous Orvietan, and other
Arcanas at a very small Price; here you have the whole Pack of 12 Remedics for
the Price of one Shilling, which is inconsiderable to so great Benefits you
will receive thereby; we are to be spoken with, etc. This is plausible, and
takes even upon a Stage. Tom. Saffold by repeated Invitations and Assurances
got an Estate. But,

'The Apothecaries (he tells us) complain with no Decorum, and the worst Grace
imaginable: You (to please the People) make your selves like the Apothecaries,
you are become Doctor-Apothecaries; they have been these 40 years
Apothecary-Doctors.'

'But the Doctors restore the ancient and cautious Practice, by providing
effactual Remedies, and preventing deadly Mistakes.'

'The Apothecary leaves his concern to the wholesale Trade and his Boy, is
always abroad giving Advice. Can any two things be more alike in Appearance?
Can they be justly displeased with you, who give your Care and Countenance to
the trade of making Medicines, as the Apothecary in return puts a value upon
yours, in pleasing himself with the Practice of Physic?'

'They reply, they are forced to it by the Peoples Importunity; so you are to
send your Prescriptions to the College, by those who like a good Medicine at
the intrinsic value: they are afraid the Dispensary will ruin the Apothecaries
Trade, who are every day industriously destroying your Profession. You are
invaded with vast Numbers like a Russian Army, who slay without Quarter,
reserving a few Slaves to be cut off, if they bear not their Chains easily, or
scruple any work they are put upon.'

Remark. The Apothecaries are graceless Fellows, they don't use the Decorum
they ought in comparing the Doctors to themselves, and do not handsomely
distinguish between Doctor- Apothecaries and Apothecary-Doctors; but it is
certain, they both not only act after the like Method, but for the same Ends
endeavor to please the People; and if the Doctor-Apothecaries restore the
ancient Practice, they do but imitate the Apothecary-Doctors, in taking care of
the Preparation, as well as the Administration of Medicines: but whether either
do enough to prevent all deadly mistakes, is much to be questioned.

The Apothecary leaves his concern to his Boy, but is seldom without the
oversight, and assistance of his Man, who understands his Business, as well as
the Doctor's Man at the College, or St. Martins-Lane. The one may very well do
one Matter's Business, as well as the other serves 46: And he himself
understands Pharmacy better than any of the 46 Doctors, not excepting him who
was bred under the acute Master at Worcester. But it is pity, either of them
are forced to so much Business. If I could persuade People to Temperance and
Sobriety, they should not so complain of much Business forced upon them.

The Reason why the Apothecary-Doctors value the Doctor-Apothecaries Business,
and Vice versa, no doubt is, because it is good to have two Strings to one Bow,
or to have Customers come in at both Doors.

But the Doctor-Apothecaries sell Medicines at the Intrinsic Value, which the
Apothecary-Doctors cannot afford: but if the Doctor-Apothecaries would also
sell Advice at the Intrinsic Value, they would certainly ruin their
Antagonists; they are alike Fishers, but with different Baits, one catches by a
Pretense of Advice at the Intrinsic Value, viz. little or nothing, but makes
them pay so much the more for the Medicines; the other the Medicines almost at
Intrinsic Value, viz. little or nothing, but expects his Gain in the Fees: and
which Bait will take best being doubtful, they are between Hopes and Fear whose
endeavors will ruin the other. But the Russian Army of the Apothecaries makes
the Swede tremble, yet encouraged by good Generals, they are not without hopes
of Victory, and Resolution never to be taken Prisoners.

'But (in other Conversations he says) he had better Success, he persuaded not
a few to consult those of the Society at the approach of the Spring, and has
had their Thanks, with large accounts of the difference of the old and new
Practice of Physic. So many Converts in my Neighborhood brought on me the
Resentments of my former Apothecary.'

'He expostulated to me the ill Consequence to their Trade, with bitter and
envenomed Reflections on the Dispensary, and the Promoters of it. You shall
judge from his manner of arguing, We govern all the Families; they believe us in
every thing, etc. When the Men are abroad, or not in the Sick-Chamber, we
recommend whom we please, and decry the opposite Party: Do you believe we will
spare any of them? and hastily plucked out a scandalous List printed at the
desire of the Master and Wardens, where our honest Physicians are distinguished
by Marks from their Honest Slaves; which being promiscuous in the College
Order, he blundred thrice, and showed for Villains those of their own
Confederacy. But after some time he recovered, and told me, they were resolved
to maintain the Reputation of what they had done many Years, since there have
not been more than 5 Physicians raised but by serving us; We call them topping
Physicians, because we put them on the People as we please. There are of
several Sortments and different Abilities, who pass by our Artifices for the
greatest Men: Has not one risen considerably by our Favor, who has employed
much of his time in writing 3 Folio Poems, exploded by his Brother Poets and
Physicians for the vilest Bombast, every Expression relating to Physic or
Philosophy proved to be trifling, absurd and false, and judged so even by us?
Do not several of the College come over, and betray all that passes? The rest
are afraid, and dare not be honest and just to their Patients. Will we pardon
him who cures a Fever for one or two Pounds, when our Friends will raise the
Bill to 10, 20, or 40 Pounds? He that brings in the Fiddler, will make him play
what Tunes, and as often as he pleases. Does the Dispensary pretend to impose on
the Public, that we are not useful out of our Shops; who give Clysters, dress
Blysters, and bleed when it is easy? etc. I would not farther concern my self,
but only put him in mind, that one Sex was accommodated without them, and the
other was the business of the Surgeon, who attends to these and the greater
Cases of Surgery abroad, without impediment to any part of his Profession.
Besides, Blisters often inflamed or corroded, to evacuate more freely, require
more than the common treatment. I had been made sensible how that excellent and
most useful Art of Surgery was invaded by these bold pretenders to every thing
they do not understand; they bleed, without suspecting the Nerve or Artery may
lie in the way. They apply to Inflammations and Tumors, and keep in the putrid
matter, till the sinuous Fistula or rotten Bone gives pain loud enough to call
for the Surgeon.'

Remark. This Merchant I perceive was Broker to the Company, or Spokesman to
persuade the People to buy the Doctors Remedies, and had got, as he says, many
promises to consult them at the time when People are persuaded they ought to
take Physic whether they need it or no, which is certainly easy Practice; and
no doubt the People had cause to thank him for advising them to those that
would give the least: People that are well had certainly better pay for Advice
to go to sh -- t when they have need, than for the directing a Purge or two;
and they must needs find a difference in the Practice, that being easier than
this.

No wonder the Apothecary, like a covetous dependant Preacher, is angry at him
that converts his Flock into another Fold, and he has verily a great capacity
to decry or recommend, as the Share of the Fleece engages him; but tho he of
all Men may best know the Honesty and Capacity of a Physician, yet I readily
believe he is not always infallible, but may mistake the Marks (being but
small) of honest Physicians, and may readily take some of any Confederacy for
Villains: but if there have not been more than five Villains raised by the
Apothecaries, they are not so bad as I could have believed them, yet they are
much to be blamed for putting any villains o top on the People, or representing
little fellows for great Men, but especially for recommending the care of the
Lives of the sober People to Poets, whose bombast fictions will never cure any
considerable Diseases, whether Arthurs, the Dispensaries, or John Junior's, who
tho the Qualifications may recommend them all to the filly People (who love
Conceits) for ingenious Men, yet Critics will let neither go without Censure,
but soon discover where the Muse was up too soon, and fell into some Supine Nod
or other: or when his Spirits stagnate like a Flood; or when he blazons in
dread smiles his hideous Form, etc.

But the College are sure a wretched sort of Men, that some betray the rest,
and the rest dare not be honest and just; and the Apothecaries are very
unmerciful, that they will not pardon him that cures a Fever at 1 or 2 Pounds,
they might have said Guineas, when I know the most Fevers may be cured at half
the Rate, and the Doctor be a Gainer: and I believe were there nothing but the
Music it self to recommend these Artists, there would but sew dance even to
the Dispensary Clyster-Pipe, who I don't question have their useful Men in
their concern, not only to give Clysters, dress Blister, and bleed when it is
easy, but also to accommodate even the one Sex when they have a mind to a Jigg.
I am glad to hear the Merchant speaks honorably of the Surgeons, and with some
concern for their interest; and grant that they may mind business abroad
without impediment to business at home: It is certainly as much the Surgeons
concern to take care of the Pharmaceutick part as it is the Dispensaries, since
they cannot trust the Apothecaries. I am pleased that they are sensible the
Surgeons are invaded by the Apothecaries as well as themselves, it shows they
are grown better natured since they themselves persecuted that Party for
interloping: but the huge Russian Army of the Apothecarys makes them willing to
speak the Poles fair, and not pretend to turn Dr. Surgeons too, as well as Dr.
Apothecaries; If they had, I should have blamed them for supposing the Nerves
and Arteries lie between the Veins and the Skin, or that there is any need of
cutting through both sides of the Vein, or that Tumors are fistulous before
they are open, or that rotten Bones, or purulent Tumors are most painful.

'But after various fortune abroad (says he) I was to meet a select Company of
Merchants and other eminent Citizens. I determined to ask their Assistance and
Counsel: I showed them your Papers, and laid before them the Informations
relating to the College, and our own Interest: some were discoursing of
Treaties abroad, etc. but at mine and our Friend's request we came to debate of
our own immediate concern. I was desired to give you a further trouble, to
remove the common Opprobrium on the Profession, that it wants Certainty, and
acts often by conjecture* and that more scandalous, that the Apothecarys seeing
the Patient and you at the bed side, is able to give Physic himself. And
(after our assertion or the Cheapness of the best Medicines, and some contests
about it) that you would, as in our Papers for sale by the Candle, give a
pretty near estimate of the Value of every Preparation, and Composition or
Simple now used in Physic. We must wait for this Account, on which the whole
Controversy depends; but the Company would not doubt of the easy prices of the
most effectual Remedies (as are fit for the Use of the Prince, now the regard
of all Europe) many of us having used of several Kinds, of which the Dose was
of no great Value.'

Remark. These were all select Merchants of this new Company (we must suppose)
because their Counsel and Assistance was so necessary, and Interest the same.

But this Gentleman and his Friends were most diligent, they were for home
Treaties, de laribus and focis; but that trouble the Gentleman gave 'em, I
believe will indeed be found one, 'ere the Opprobria of the Profession are
removed. That it is uncertain and conjectural in great part, is most certain,
and granted by all knowing and modest Physicians; but it is certainly asserted
by none so much as the Ignorant, and those that are willing to deceive the
People. I don't see how it should be thought the greater Scandal, that the
Apothecaries by seeing the Patient and Docto^s at the bedside can become able
to give Physic; for were it so, it would argue the Artist certain, and the Art
easy: and that all that have to do with the Sick should be able to give
Physic, would certainly not only be a credit to the Profession, but safe to
the Patient; for one may rectify another mistakes. But I believe here lies the
scandal, that the Apothecary being skilful sometimes is forced to discover the
Doctor's defects in Care, in Prognostics, or in Pharmacy, etc. In which last I
think they have discovered ignorance enough, and that they have not the best
Medicines, their Pharmacopeia being their standard, which is one of the worst
Collections in the World. But it is pleasant that they talk of selling their
Medicines by inch of Candle. And I believe we may wait a great while, 'ere
these Merchants will give us an estimate of the value of every Preparation,
Composition and Simple used in Physic; it will be so laborious and difficult a
work, they will not have time to prescribe. If the whole Controversy depends
upon this, it will never be at an end: but the Company have been used so kindly
in many things, they don't doubt of easy prices.

If they are not kind to those that are to carry on the Trade, it would be
strange. But that nothing but such cheap Physic should be fit for his Majesty,
looks as if they thought him poor, or not to deserve the more precious
Remedies, or at least would have him furnished out of their stock. But he goes
on,

'After their lamenting the Poor, and the vile treatments of others, they
resolved they would make their Acquaintance sensible of the generous Design of
the College, and engage them to the most industrious publication of its Use,
the only Panacea to the Sick; they would not doubt to convince the most
obstinate and heedless Opposers.'

Remark. If these Gentlemen had not made so great a noise about the Poor, and
shown such great industry in inviting to buy their Panaceas, one might have
believed something of their Generosity. But Mankind now adays are not so
immoderately desirous to serve one another, much less those that have most
need; we cannot but in charity think these Merchants are most willing to
relieve their own Poor, who are not so hard to be convinced of any thing that
may tend to their benefit. But,

'He goes on to tell us what the Apothecary must do, he must be obliged to keep
his Shop, that all his Medicines may be made at home, and dispensed with his
own hand, or under his careful inspection, that his Apprentice may be employed
to learn his Trade, and be taken from the giddy ambition of aping a Profession
a little too far removed from his. That our Servants shall be sent for the
Physic, and Directions shall be left at our Houses by the proper Hands; each
of us sending our Porters, the hurry and confusion may be taken off the
Apothecaries and then Servants, by which many Patients Physic being conveyed
at one time, the deadly accidents that often happen may be avoided. Our
Messenger will find the Shop sedately forwarding their Affair, every one will
wait the Mixture for his Master, by which the Possibility of a Mistake will be
prevented.'

Remark. It is very hard that the Apothecary should be obliged to keep his
Shop, since the Doctor is resolvd to send all his Bills to the Dispensary, and
to undersell him in Medicines. I know no way the Apothecary can take, but to
undersell the Doctor in Advice, and he may trust his Man to make up his
Recipe's as well as the Doctor can his at the Dispensary, the Case being the
same. The Profession of Physic, which the Apothecarys Boy is so ambitious t^o
ape, I agree has been too far removed from Pharmacy; and the Doctors do well in
aping the Boy that would bring them together, which ought not to be separate.
But Porters, tho they may carry greater burdens of Physic at once, are not the
fittest Messengers to convey the remedies to the Sick; he that makes up a Bill,
may sometimes save a Lise by seeing the Patient. I have known one lost 'ere
now, which had the Apothecary's Boy seen, the Patient would have been saved.

But if these things were done, he further adds: The College will be safe from
the temptations they now lie under, and from being in so large Numbers debaucht
from their Virtue and indispensible Duty to their Patients; and as the present
1000 ( viz. Apothecaries) have two or three Apprentices each, which multiplying
in proportion must raise the Prices of Physic, and the Quantity, and Industry
of giving more, to the Ruin of their Credit with the People, there is no other
method to preserve themselves. The Families will then make choice of a
Physician from the visible Success of his Art; and not with the greatest
stupidness ask the Apothecary to bring one, since from your Members you are
forced to make the greatest profit of every Patient, which inclines him to a
Physician most useful in that Case. 'Twas resolved after your answer of the
Prices, to oblige the Physician to rate the Prescript sent to the Apothecary at
the fairest Profit, to be paid at furthest after the recovery; and to prevent
the sipping of Cordials, and Pearl Juleps, as Usquebaugh at the Coffeehouses,
upon every little humor of taking, encouraged by the mean and vile customs of
going upon tick till Christmas.

A Modest Gentleman gave his assent with some doubt of success, but he would
propose these things to the best Advantage.



Remark. It Is a thousand pities the College have so many temptations to debauch
them from their duty to their Patients. But it seems the Apothecaries, as bad
as they are, have been the happy occasion of reforming the honest part, by
setting them an example of prescribing their own Remedies; and it is but just
the Doctors should have a little Concern lest their increase in Numbers should
ruin them. But yet the Doctors are so sensible of the Debauchery of the
Apothecaries as well as of their own, that they dare not trust them with the
recommendation of a Physician, lest they should not recommend one of the honest
part who would send the Bills to the College. The visible Success of his Art is
certainly the best Character whereby one may choose a Physician; but if this
were the only rule, none would have ever been chose, for no Man has success
either in Curing or Killing till he has had some experience, which all our
Doctors at first cannot but want. Nor can the Apothecary be sure who he shall
have the best success with till he has tried him, unless he had preingag'd the
young Doctor to prescribe largely, on condition he will cry him up, which is a
Practice I must confess I have heard of. But how the new Company will enable or
oblige the Old, and all Interlopers, to rate the Prescripts, I cannot see, or
how they can pretend to it, with better reason than the Apothecary might rate
the Doctors Fees. But if they could oblige the Patients to pay ready money, and
leave the vile Custom of going upon tick, not only the Apothecary but honest
part of the Doctors would be obliged; yet if it were to be only at the
recovery, none of the Merchants I believe would keep open shop long. How they
will be able to prevent the People from sipping other Cordials or Usquebaugh
when they have a mind to it, or the Apothecary from selling of it, a modest
Gentleman may well doubt. But he gives us something considerable as sollows.

'Another who sees through the Town, demanded what hope there may be of repelling
the Confidence of the Men of the Bottle, Wit and Banter, which admire only the
childish wantonness of Thought, and pretty deviations from good Sense, and
therefore character the Men of their parts and dress into the public Esteem.
They were left to their fortune, and experience of others more discerning: the
Signature ought to be taken from other Affairs of equal concern and importance.'

'The ablest Pilot is put into the Ship; the Gravity, Learning and Application
of a Judge is observed in a Cause of Life and Estate: we shall then raise our
hopes of Recovery from the manner our Cases shall be weighed before the
Judgment be given; when you shall not be brought in durante beneplacito of the
Apothecaries, Assistants, or Physick-Brokers abroad. We shall know who shall
merit our Gratitude and Applause, and put down the infamous Custom of accusing
the Physician; a Practice too vile to be exposed, to impute the Misfortune to
the honest Industry of the Physician, not consulted till the Extremity, after
many days dosing by our selves and Visitants; the Apothecaries not allowing a
fair inquest of Dissection, which would discover the Passages of the Heart
stopped, the Ulcers and Gangrenes of the Viscera. We are agreed to control our
Families, and persuade our Friends to the same Resolutions.'

Remark. Now starts up at last a Lyncean Merchant, that can see the Men at
their Bottle between two Stone Walls, and he doubts how the Wit and Banter of
these Bacchanalian Phanaticks will be repelled: But I think this Gentleman's
Optics not so admirable; tho he could see so far, he cannot see very near; for
childish wantonness of Thought, and Deviations from good Sense are very uncouth
Characters of Wit and Learning, and very unlikely means to bring Men into
esteem; and the Signature ought to be taken not from such Qualifications, or
any of equal Importance, but something above want of Sense. The skilfullest
Pilot, and most grave and learned Judge is certainly to be trusted with the Ship
and Cause: And the manner of the Doctor's weighing the Case, whether with Wit
or none, is to be considered by those that have Wit enough to do it, and how
induced by Apothecaries, Visitants, or whether by the Brokers to the old or new
Company; which done, it will be better guessed, who is likely to merit
applause; and he that does indeed do so, will most put down the Infamy
Physicians have so often merited. But,

How to keep People from dosing themselves, and so making work for the Doctors,
I do not know, as long as there are so many Medicines exposed to sale. That the
Apothecaries should hinder Dissections, to me is a Mystery, if the Friends are
willing: or how the Doctors are so sure to find the Bolusses sticking in the
Passages of the Heart, or the Viscera corrupted, I don't know: such things I
have known as positively asserted by them, as if they had been Oracles, or had
the famed Eyes of the Lynx, but Dissection has discovered their Vanity. If all
Merchants will control their Families by the Direction of the Dispensary, and
persuade their Friends to their Resolutions, the Apothecaries will soon be
outed. Well but he goes on. 'When we were about to part, one of the Society,
that had been silent some time, expressed himself with some heat from the
relation he had to some of the Faculty; Let us not lose this only Opportunity
of raising the Reputation of one of the most useful, and learned Professions,
when our Interest is inseparable from theirs. Shall we look on unconcerned,
when the Faculty and our selves are enslaved, and oppressed by the Number of the
Apothecaries, originally their Servants? What is the Mystery, but a Mechanic
and handicraft Trade? They act nothing but by the Ordinance and Direction of
the Physician; the Medicines are all from their Appointment, the Drugs
poudered, boiled, distilled, and mixed by their Order; What Books or Languages
are understood by them, but the Dispensatory, or Receipt Book? The Cook,
Confectioner, and Perfumer have as much pretense to Learning, or the Knowledge
of the Uses of what they prepare. Have not our Servants the Skill to make up
our Domestic Receipts, many of them the same as theirs? The Under-Servant to
the Chymist's Laboratory, while he cleanses the Glasses, attends the Fires,
speedily discerns the Mechanic Part; tho the Design and Process were given by
the incomparable Mr. Boil, or the Faculty, and the Uses only known to the
sagacious Physician. We pleased our selves at parting, with the great
Reputation, that worthy Gentlemen had given to our Country, with the learned of
all Nations, which will last with the late Discovery of the Circulation.'

Remark. The whole Company of these Merchants without doubt were related to the
Faculty, or they had not been so warm in the Concern: But this Gentleman had
been long musing, and he thought it necessary to add a little heat at last, it
being the only Opportunity to raise the sinking Reputation of those, who have
so long professed themselves one of the most useful, as well as learned
Professions; but I find the chief Cause of his heat was, the inseparableness of
their common Interest, which I the rather believe, because he agrees with the
rest, that it is the number of the Apothecaries that is most dangerous, and not
the Honesty of those rascally Mechanics formerly their Servants; Davus
perturbat omnia. But I must beg the Doctor's Pardon a little: the present
Venders of Medicines were not Doctors Servants, tho that was the Original of
the Trade; but those Doctors, whose Servants turned Apothecaries, were a sort
of Men who very well understood Pharmacy, which the present Dispensers did not
till a few broken Apothecaries came to be Doctors among them. But the old
Blades thought handy works no Disgrace: Paracelsus the proudest of them thought
the highest Title he could bear, was that of Monarch of Mechanical Arcanas. If
the present Apothecaries do nothing but by the Ordinance and direction of the
Physician, why do they complain? but perhaps it is not the honest Physician's
Orders they act by: I am sure it is not the Orders of the skilful they obey in
their Receipt Book; if they had, there would not have been so many insignificant
and foolish Medicines there, and so few good ones, nor the secundum Artem
wholly left to those ignorant Mechanics, in which there often lies more than
in the Receipt it self. But as to Language, I will engage to bring Apothecaries
that understand more, even English, than some of the Learned Doctors of the
Dispensary, besides other liberal Sciences. Many of them, it must be confessed,
are ignorant enough both in Language, and Cookery; but what shall be said of
the Cook, Confectioner, or Perfumer, that knows not the uses of what he
prepares, or of the Wit that can suppose them such ignorant Artists? Nor I
believe would the Gentleman esteem the Mechanic Part of Chemistry so very
easy, if he understood it: for I must tell him there is more Art even in making
a Fire than he seems to imagine; and the incomparable Mr. Boil, had not he and
his Operators too understood the Mechanic Part of some Processes better than
the Faculty, he would never have hid his Design in them, whatever the Faculty
might by chance have stumbled upon. But the Doctor proudly assuming to the
Faculty the sole Knowledge of the uses of Medicines, thereby ungratefully denies
it that excellent Person, for the pleasure he created them in the Reputation be
singly had given the Nation, by making it not wholly ignorant in experimental
Philosophy, the chief Basis of Medicine.

CHAP. III.
SO much for the Merchant's Letter, or the Doctor in disguise. We come now to
the unmasked Physician's Answer. Let us see if we can find any thing more like
the Product of a Pen used to prescribe the best Medicines; and he answers the
Drugster as follows.

'Sir, I perceive you lay the greatest stress on the last enquiry of the low
Prices of Medicines, because you observe that the large Bills of the Apothecary
are the best Argument with the People of his Ability to advise; and while they
believe the Disease is treated very much by guess, they are not very solicitous
who throws the Dice for their Lives: but you rather make choice of one, who has
made it his only Business, has studied, and practiced all the Artifices of
making them run to his purpose, than any common Hand.'

Remark. If the large Bills of the Apothecaries are the best Argument with the
People of the Apothecaries Ability to advise, I do not see how so much stress
can be laid on the Doctors selling a few Medicines at low Prices; that which
argues the Ability of the Apothecary, should methinks also argue the Skill of
the Doctor: but the Doctor here talks too much like an Apothecary, or something
else. It cannot be denied that both Doctors and Apothecaries use their
Medicines very much like Dice; but whether the Doctor or Apothecary has got
more Artifices to make 'em run to his purpose, is not easy to say: I believe
both have more than are good, he that pretends to sell cheap does it to get
more Customers; he that sells dear, does it to get the more Money, and both
have the same Design. But it is very true, there are some uncommon Gamesters.

'Further (says he) you will not deny that every Art has the means to attain
its End. This is obvious in Manufactures, which are made better or worse,
according to the Skill of the Artificer. There are other Arts, whose Subject is
perishable from Causes above the Power and Control of the Art, which Events
are not imputable to the Artist. Navigation will conduct a Ship to the Port,
but Storms, Rocks, etc. may lose the Ship. The Husbandman and Gardener act with
prospect of Success, but extreme Rains, Drought and Blasts destroy their hopes.
The Physician pretends to know with as much certainty how animal Life may be
preserved, and by what means endangered, as they the Health and Growth of
Vegetables. You may make an estimat to what Proportion animal Life may be
prolonged, by observing that the Periods of the Lives of many Quadrupeds and
Birds are supposed to be distinctly known.'

Remark. The Physician could have been contented to have his Art thought as
certain as others, and he might have persuaded the Merchants that so it is, if
he had not unluckily dropped that modest Word pretends, which makes some think,
it is indeed but a Pretense. But I hope he would not cunningly insinuate, that
the bare Supposition of the Knowledge of the Periods of the Lives of Beasts and
Birds, is the way to estimate what Doctors can do. Let us hear what has been
supposed in this matter.

Ter binos deciesque novem superexit in Annos,
Justa senescentumquos implet Vita Virorum,
Hos novies superat vivend^ Garrula Cornix.
Et quater egreditur Cornicis secula Cervus;
Alipedem Cervum ter vincit Corvus: at illum
Multiplicat novies Phoenix reparabilis Ales,
Quem vos perpetuo decies praevertitis aevo
Nymphae Hamadryades.
But I hope he would not have the Merchants think, the new Dispensary-Doctors
can make Men's Lives as long as these supposed Periods. If they could so do,
they would be rare Fellows, but bitterly pestered with Practice. 'But yet Man's
(he says) is the longest Period, and from Galen's Observation that of the
Britains. If in Navigation, the Vessel must be moved by the Tide and Winds, and
turned by the Rudder to a certain course: The Powers of the Body act as
mechanically by the natural Necessity in Health; so in the Appearances of
Diseases, the Humors are by a natural tendency moved to be altered, or
separated. These different Methods of Nature constitute so many Species of
Distempers, which are truly defined, and described from the known Alterations,
and Symptoms in all the Stages of their course.'

'We have the most certain Experiences of their Cures from the Observations of
all Ages, even these which are the most latent; sudden Pestilences, and
malignant Fevers discover the ways by which Nature expels the Malignity, etc.'



Remark. Either the Doctor is mistaken, or Virgil, a better Poet than any of
them, whatever Galen is: but under all, the Doctor's Intent is to persuade us,
that Dispensary Physicians can prolong Life. That Physicians do so truly define
and describe Diseases, or have such certain Experiences of their Cures, I must
deny: Authors differ; if they did not, yet Men of great Business read but
little, and remember less, and he is a very rare Fellow indeed, that has a
Promptuary in his Noddle to serve him on all Occasions; but whatever may have
been done by former Physicians, ours are quot Homines tot Sententiae (except in
some very common Cases) both in their Definitions, and Prescriptions for
Diseases, as any one will find that shall consult diverse Physicians separately,
and compare their Accounts of a Disease and Prescriptions for it; one will say
it is this, another that; one will prescribe one thing, another another. But he
says farther,

'You cannot doubt the efficacy of the Instruments in Physic, when in many
Cases the rich Cordials given improperly, or in large Quantities, act as
Poisons, and then in a little longer time as visibly destroy; when the over
dosing Vinous, or other Spirits, fire and inflame the Blood and Spirits:
Opiates stop the Motions, the Bark checks the ferment of a Fever, which cannot
be cured but by Expulsion of the Venom: the effects of Vomits, Purges,
Diaphoreticks, are owned by the vulgar Experience. The late but surer force of
Labor, Temperance, Rest, have been formerly owned in the most obstinate
Diseases. They are now rejected as the most nauseous Physic, and the most
difficult to be complied with: I need not acquaint you with the Mineral Waters,
which are able to cool, and dilute, and purify the Blood, after it has been
heated and corrupted by modish Living. Nature discovers to the Physician its
surest Methods of dismissing the most common Fevers, by Bleeding, Sweats, etc.
In the more difficult, it gives Indications how it would be assisted or
directed; at least our Magazines of Observations cannot sail to furnish in all
Cases parallel to them.'

Remark. That even Cordials may so easily act as Poisons, and destroy, methinks
is no inviting Argument of the efficacy of Medicines; nor can this appear but
from the Errors of Physicians, who have found it so, which is no great Credit.
Tho the effects of vulgar Medicines are known, the Time and Case where such
effects should be produced; is not so well perceived. Labor, Temperance, and
Rest are certainly excellent Preservatives, but in many Diseases cannot be
used: When a Man cannot so much as sit up, to prescribe him Labor; when he is
delirious, to order him to go to Rest, would be very good Physic, if he could
take it; but it is indeed difficult to be complied with, barely by the Doctor's
Order. It is not so certain to the Merchants, whether, and when the Mineral
Waters do good or hurt: It was the Judgment of Mr. Boil, that they do more
hurt than good, taking one time with another; and it seems to be the Opinion of
one of his Scholars, that all the real Benefit got by drinking the Waters,
comes merely from the large Quantities of Water taken, and not by the Minerals
wherewith they are impregnated and defiled; and he advises Persons rather to
drink at some pure Spring. Letter to a Gentleman, of Alkaly and Acids, p. ult.
But the Air, Company, Diversion of those Places, may add very much to the
Health of the Persons, which is used to be attributed solely to the Waters; tho
all this would not cure a Man, whose Blood is corrupted. Nature's Indications
are not always observed or understood by Physicians, or always followed; but
the Mode Practice prevails above them all: And the Magazines of Observations
are not always open, or resorted to by Physicians; but while a Man is looking
for a parallel Case, the Patient is often dead. A Physician ought to have a
better Rule, than the running to his Study to know what to do, where he is not
sure to find a true Parallel; the Author might be mistaken, and not give a true
or faithful account: Authors are apt to be somewhat guilty of the Crime of the
petty Sorcerers, who make their virulent Medicines all Panaceas, if you will
believe the Catalogues of Cures confidently affirmed in the Bills; when very
likely the Disease never was worse, or so bad as they make it, if the matter of
Fact related had any Truth in it at all. He goes on:

'But if the Patient is overheated, and surfeited by too many Medicines; if the
salutary Looseness be stopped too soon, the Humors fix by Opiates, or the
Bark, it is imputable to the Adviser, not to the Art, which has given the
strictest cautions on the like Conjunctures. It is not a reproach to the Art,
if there are wanting Remedies equal to the Rage or Violence of some Diseases,
which will not wait the effect, or are above the Force of any known Drug that
can be brought to oppose them, any more than to the Statesman, General, or
Counselor, when he cannot always warrant Success. When after the steady use of
Liquors which give a briskness to, but inflame the Spirits, spend the Strength
of the Blood by heating it, give Life a pleasant but quicker Motion, the Liver
and other Parts shall be made scirrous and abcessed, the Omentum rotten, the
Fibers flaccid, shall the Art be accused, that cannot keep the Machin a going
where every Wheel is broken?'

Remark. If the Art of Medicine were so certain as the Doctor would persuade
his hoped-for Patients, the Artist would not so often overheat, yea or
over-cool, or surfeit his Patients by so many Medicines: It will certainly be
the Advantage of every Artist to do his work with the fewest Tools, all the
Cautions that they give one another are hardly sufficient, fixing of Humors is
what a Chemist would be glad to see the Doctor perform. To suppose there are
Remedies wanting to equal the Force of any Disease, is to reproach the Author
of Nature as if he had not goodness enough to provide a Remedy for every evil,
or as if his Goodness were not greater than all Evi^, and to excuse the Artist
who ought to be blamed that he has not found out sufficient Remedies, but
lazily leaves them unknown.

Some of the Doctors themselves are steady Drinkers, but I believe never any of
them were found with scirrous Livers, rotten Omentums, or flaccid Fibers caused
by the briskness of the Blood. But if all Artists may be accused of defects, it
signifies not much what the Art is supposed; it is the Artist, the Patient must
stand or fall by. He farther says,

'That the tendences and events of the Symptoms, and the Issue of the Disease
may be known, and a probable Prognostic given, is owned by the forwardness of
the common People to give their Opinions. How often have you believed the
presumptuous Valuer of himself, who doubts every ones knowledge but his own;
when he has assured you, had he come sooner the Patient had not died; that
another would have expired the next Day, if his advice had been wanting? The
Writers of Government prove the Maxims of State from the Axioms of Physic,
that one Part overnourisht, starves and enervates the others: That when every
Part disregards the Interest of the Whole, its Dissolution is as certain, as
when every Part is vitiated in a shattered Constitution.'

Remark. The Doctor would fain raise the Reputation of Physicians with the
People, particularly the credit of the new Shopkeepers, but he does it by
unlucky Arguments; the forwardness of the common People to prognosticate, or
run to the Fortuneteller to know the Success of their Amors, Lawsuits, etc.
is no very convincing Argument that their Oracle is not a Cheat: nor is their
Faith in the presumptuous Valuer of himself, who so positively decrees what
would have, or not have been, if this, or that; any assurance that he is, or
can be what he pretends. But I believe the Doctors may be certain enough in
their Prognostics of the Body Politic; that if the Apothecarys be over
nourisht, they will starve the Doctors; or if the Dispensary be over fed (a^
they would willingly be) they will starve the Apothecaries and other Doctors:
and if every Part disregard the Interest of the Whole, the College will soon be
dissolved, which God grant, unless they will effectually reform. Amen. But the
Doctor adds,

'If therefore a Physician is supposed to have learnt whatever has been
observed of the different Affections and Disorders from Childhood to Old Age,
of the Sexes in all the Circumstances, how Seasons and Climates alter us, what
changes are made by all sorts of Diet, to have noted the Use and Site of all
Parts by Anatomy, the Virtue of Medicines by the trial Chemistry affords, but
especially the Histories of the almost innumerable Diseases given by Authors,
their Causes, Access, Progress, Events and Consequents of all Methods, and all
Medicines, when he reflects on them, and compares them nicely with the Case
under his care, you will not oppose him to a Rival who has not had
Philosophical Education, or the knowledge of any Language in which Physic is
treated. When you have determined what time is required to collect from many
Writers whatever is useful to the safe and successful Practice of Physic, I
would desire you to state the Years wherein any thing certain can be acquired
from the Prescripts of the Art, without the Reasons given, or any register of
the Success. When Nature throws off the Common Disorders of it self, and is
able to bear any sort of Physic, the Apothecary plies the Sick with Medicines
he does not want, to pay for attending, magnifies the Disease, and his Skill,
etc. In these the most usual Ilnesses, the Physician shows his Art by
prognosticating with integrity the assured success, which is a richer Cordial
than the Shops afford, and merits his Reward. But when there shall be nodus
vindice d gnus, when dubiis trepidat victoria pennis; when the Experienced
Physician will doubt whether Nature acts to its own Preservation, or wants the
Assistance of Art, he will examine the Effects of one Medicine before he
risques the Use of others; the ignorant and less searful Adviser will not lose
the Opportunity of filling the Patient, and the Chamber to his own advantage.
These are the Cases in which all the severest, and most just Observations of
the present and former Ages must be consulted: the least Errors make the Fever
deadly, tho not to be discovered but by the most consummate Artist. They only
can discern when Nature, attackt in all Parts, the Spirits wasted, and Blood
exhausted, is easily overborn by an active Cordial, etc. The People indeed are
satisfied with the Apothecarys skill, who hears the Physicians disourse upon
the Disease. Will you imagine he designs the surest Instruction to his Scholar,
who will set up for a Master next hour? But he makes up the Note, and sees the
Operation. The Instrument-maker, tho he make the Knife and Forceps, will not
pretend to use them as the Surgeon. I will, after you have considered it,
desire your Opinion whether you would communicate a Specific efficacious
Medicine to the Apothecary, which he would instantly make up for every Customer
in the same, or as he thinks not much differing Cases: Will any Merchant or
Artificer expose the secret of his Business? But we cannot discover our Secrets
to any but our own Profession, which is the manner of applying the Medicine to
the latent exigence of the Disease. Some Fevers go off, being only undisturbed,
Water is the richest Cordial in others, and the rich Composition procures to
others a certain Malignity. Will you value the Surgeon from the tipping of his
Instruments, or from his Judgment and Steadiness of Hand in using them? The
most common and simple may have a better effect than the most pompous
Apparatus. The few of our costly Ingredients have been kept in use to cover the
Fraud of Exaction, but specially because we please our selves, that they are
designed for the use of the Grand Monde, while we pity the little People, who
we imagine cannot live without them. But Providence has otherwise provided in
its grand Hospital, we are upon the Level there. The Poor do not want so much
as the Rich, but may have the most valued simple Remedies, and the best
Chemical or Galenical Preparations at an expense they, or their Patrons with an
easy Charity may bear.'

Remark. A Physician that is not supposed, but has indeed learned all that has
been observed of the Affections, and Disorders of the Sexes in all Ages, etc.
that knows the Site and Use of all Parts by Dissections, the Virtues of
Medicines by what Chemistry can do, that has at his Fingers ends the Histories
of Diseases given by Authors, etc. the Consequences of all Methods and
Medidicines, and can compare them nicely on every occasion, is rara Avis in
Terra Medicorum, I dare say not ever seen in Warwick Lane, any more than among
the Glister-pipers: The Gentlemen have not many of them so much as looked into
some of these things; particularly Chymea, that coy colley-handed Gentlewoman,
has not been courted much by them for her Gifts: and he that should insinuate
himself to be one of her Followers, would not be thought likely to have had
Philosophical, or Academical Education, which the Doctor is so willing to boast
of against the Apothecaries. But I must needs say, neither of the Adversaries
have been grounded as they ought in Philosophy, especially the Experimental;
but as being an Apothecary does not make a Man incapable of it, so being of the
College, yea of the Dispensary, does not necessarily include it. Many
Apothecaries have attained the Latin Tongue, and something of Greek, before put
Apprentice, and may improve in Language, and read the Secrets which the Doctors
did; but if none of them had so done, there are English Books enough written by
some of the Faculty, that could write in no other Language. Besides, if one of
the D^spensary says true (and they are the honest Part) nothing has been
written of any certain Truth,

Till be arose, and with reviving Light
Dispel'd the Clouds, and chased away the Night.
See the Dialogue with Alkaly; and he himself writes in a ^ort of English. The
time to collect whatever is useful to the successful Practice of Physic,
wherein any thing certain can be acquired, would be too long for one Man to see
the end of the Process. As the Apothecary plies the Sick with Medicines he does
not want, so the Doctor will not be wanting to write, where there is no need
but of a Fee; or to visit, and advise some little thing or other, that the
Patient may not think he sees him for nothing: he will alike magnify his Art,
and the Disease, tho both be little, and will give that most rich Cordial of
assured Success, which is very commonly indeed the best Medicine he gives, and
gets the willingest Fee by; which he knows better than to refund, when time has
discovered his Assurance not well grounded. But there are knotty and doubtful
Diseases he confesses, even to the experienced Physician, when in fear he knows
not whether he had best prescribe or no; he wisely thinks he does best that
tampers least, and would have the Patients think such a one deserves his Fee
best that has troubled them least. But (...). says Hippocrates. Imperitia vero
malus Thesaurus, and malus agger Timiditatis, and Audaciae nutrix. Timidit as
quidem Impotentiam, Audacia vero Ignorantiam Artis significat. The less fearful
Adviser no doubt will physic them more briskly, that he may have the more
pretense to merit, and Opportunity to get, especially if he may not take a Fee.
But I believe if either the fearful Dr. or confident Apothecary, vel Vice
versa, should consult all the severe and just Observations of the present and
former Ages, they would have neither time to prescribe, or make up Medicines in
any acute Disease: and should the least Errors make the Fever deadly, it would
be an incurable Distemper, nor would one Patient in 10000 be ever the better
for a consummate Artist, when our Age has not produced him, unless the
Dispensary Dr. who says,

To him alone Mankind's indebted more
Than t'all the Doctors that have gone before,
be the Man; such a one perhaps may discern when he has exhausted the Blood,
and wasted the Spirits, and Nature will be overborn by an active Cordial. But
the Doctor is afraid the People will think the Apothecaries skilful (that
Gentleman has assured us, his Master was not) by hearing the Doctor talk, and
by making up his Medicines, and seeing their Operations; tho he assures us he
has been careful lest he should give him any sure Instructions: but if his
Instructions by his Practice be so fallacious, he that designs to be skilled
will take a better Method to learn than the Sight of the fearful or confident
Doctor's Practice can be, whose Instruments could he but know their use, as
well as the Surgeon does his, there were more occasion of Caution who looks on.
There has been no great danger of Apothecaries learning Efficacious Specificks
of the Doctors, since they practice by the Dispensatory; or the Sick finding
the Benefit, since it is dishonorable to give a private Medicine without
Writing. But the manner of applying the Medicine to the latent Exigence of the
Disease, he tells us, is the Doctors Secret; so not the Medicine it self, or
its artful Preparation: yet it is to be applied to something latent, must we
think it so to the Doctor, or is it that which is adapted to escape only the
Eyes of the Apothecary? May not he possibly learn what Fevers will go off of
themselves, or to give them a Specific that will only do no hurt? Cannot he
disguise a sufficient quantity of Aqua simplex, or Dr. Bates's Hydropeg. to
reckon the value of two or three Guineas for; and so save the charge of a
Dispensatory costly malignant Composition? The Judgment of the Physician will
never make either a bad Medicine valuable, or him so who has no good ones, any
more than the tipping of the Instruments will render a Surgeon skilful, or the
sweetness of the Syrups and Conserves recommend either the Dr. that prescribes
them, or the Apothecary that prepares them. But a Surgeon that knows not
whether his Instruments be good, cannot be thought very expert, any more than a
Doctor that knows not the Medicines he prescribes. The Doctors having but newly
set up, and not made any great returns, would have us suppose common and cheap
Medicines the best, that the less Stock may serve; rich active Medicines we
cannot expect there, they so complain against them, they are but to cover the
Fraud of the exacting Apothecaries. But that they may not lose the small Fish,
the Poor are promised the most valued Simples, and the best Chemical and
Galenical Preparations at a small expense; which if they cannot pay, they must
endeavor to get their Patrons to do for them: but whatever of the most valued
Simples may be found in the Repository, I will promise neither Poor nor Rich
shall be able to purchase the best Chemical Preparations thence. He says
further,

'To demonstrate this, I will remove the Rubbish, and lay before you the
Simples of the greatest Virtue, and best Preparations, supported by the best
Trials of Chemistry, and constant Experience. Gold, the great Idol of Mankind,
must be rejected as useless, while it makes the World restless, and anxious to
obtain it; it has in it self no active Parts or energy to procure any Effect,
it is not dissolvable by any Humor in the Body; nothing there can alter it, or
be altered by it: The compact heavy sluggish Parts resist the Impression of
every Animal Agent, which on the other side are secure from any Power it has.
The golden Pill in the twisting of the Bowels by its weight only, may open the
passage, but it costs you only for the Use of it. The leas Gold on Boles, etc.
divert the Mind from the Taste, only by the Pleasure of seeing it; adds nothing
to the Virtue, and only a trifle to the Expense: the Leaf may lie on the Mouths
of the Vessels undissolved, and it prevents the dissolving of purging and
alterative Pills if well gilded, unless to your good Fortune the Cover happens
to be broken.'

Remark. If the Doctor would be plain, I suppose Gold is none of the Rubbish he
would have removed from the Dispensary; tho he would not have it come too much
into the Apothecaries Shop. But for the Credit of Chemistry, and its greatest
Masters, I must tell him he is not supported by its best Trials: the greatest
Physicians and Chemists the World has had, affirm it capable of Preparation
into very great Medicines; and even in Substance it has been supposed by no
small Men, to be of considerable Efficacy; witness the famed Cure of the King's
Evil, where Gold must not be omitted or laid aside, but the Disease returns.
Doctors themselves are very anxious to obtain this Rubbish, or they would never
quarrel with the Apothecaries for getting it from them; and if it makes them so
restless, it must needs have active Parts: quod agit agit is undoubtedly true.
But methinks any Man that experiences the getting of Gold, may be sensible how
refreshing it is, and how it sets all Wheels agoing. But to come a little
nearer, if Gold were not dissolvable in any of our Humors, it does not follow
that it may not be a Medicine; What Humor will dissolve burnt Hartshorn in the
Decoct. album, Sulphur, some Gums, Woods, Stones, and other things commonly
used by Doctors? But that Gold does not resist the Impression of every Animal
Agent, the Doctor might have known if he had been something of a Chemist. That
Body that the strongest Aqua Fortis will not work upon, it easily tore to
pieces by the addition of a little Sal-armoniack, and then by the addition of a
little Spirit of Urine precipitated into a Powder, perhaps the most active Body
in Nature, viz. Aurum fulminans, which in some Cases is not a contemptible
Medicine; but when it shall be opened and volatilized, it will do what the
Doctor never saw performed. Whether crude Gold does either good or hurt taken
inwardly, is not very apparent; I believe the Doctor never saw the Guts twisted
(an Anatomist would hardly think it possible) or was sure they were untwisted
by the Golden Pill. If the Leaf may stop the Mouths of the Vessels, which the
Doctor is not certain of, the Animal would not be secure from its Power to
obstruct, which is sometimes profitable, but the Doctor be sure to contradict
himself. If it would prevent the Dissolution of the Pills, it might sometimes
be to the Patients good Fortune.

'But Bezoar (says he) is rejected by most Physicians, who think on what they
advise. It has the use of the Philosophers Stone, procures Gold, or much Silver
to every thing where it is a part: it adds to the Dose only two Pence; but the
very Name Bezoardick makes the cheapest Boles and Juleps pass off at any Price.
Large Pearls look well on a healthy Skin; but History does not tell us, that
which Cleopatra drank improved her Health. The Pearl Juleps have their value
from the Cordial Water, and white Sugar; they may take it for the suture 3 or 4
Pence the Dose.'

Remark. The Virtues of Bezoar have not been found so great as the Value, the
Doctor is right here; it may serve as an Absorbent, but other things easier to
be purchased by young Shopkeepers will do. The same must be said of Pearls,
unless radically dissolved: greater effects have not been found by them given
in Substance, than may be procured by Oyster Shells, or the like. But I am not
of the Doctor's Opinion, that the Pearl Juleps take any of their Virtue from
the Sugar, unless to please the Taste, to which tho it be so grateful, it is not
so to a Sick Stomach, and a Feverish Blood, being apt to ferment and trun sour:
Yet if any Gentleman or Lady is pleased to make use of either of these, it is
to be had at the Shop at the College in Warwick Lane, over against Frost's
Coffee-House, and at the two gilded Spires in St. Martins Lane; the Doctor
assures you cheap and good. He goes on,

'Ambergrease and Musk are offensive to many, from the Name as well as Scent,
corrupt the Blood, and Spirits, and by altering the Breath make the use in
Perfumes more necessary; the Confections and Waters are more wholesome without
them, etc.'

Remark. That Ambergrease and Musk corrupt the Blood and Spirits, the Doctor
has never found by any certain Experiment, I believe; but that they refresh the
Spirits, most Authors agree with Doctor Experience. Some Persons have a
peculiar disgust at the most innocent thing; but otherwise grateful Scents are
very welcome to Nature, and the small Quantity that is given, they acting only
by their Flavor or Odor, makes the use of them cheap enough. The Doctors need
not fear the charge of keeping a little of them.

'Our precious Stones cost little (continues he) and are worth nothing. The
Hyacinth, Smaragd. etc. finely poudred, are as useful as Glass well prepared:
the famous Confect of Hyacinth sells two Pence the Dose; Oil of Cinnamon, or
other Chemical Oils given but to few Drops, are to be esteemed at the most
inconsiderable Price in so small a Quantity. Balm of Gilead to be taken in
Drops, or mixed up in Pills, these Drops will rise to about a Farthing each.
Cochineal promises to impart its Color to the Blood, and dismiss the Paleness
of the Checks; but we borrow it from the Dyers, at much less cost than the
former.'

Remark. It is true, the precious Stones the Doctors have ordered the
Apothecaries to keep, and abused in Physic, are of very little worth, unless
they are large; they show the Igonrance of those that have prescribed them in
their Receipts, but some are to be commended for beginning to be wiser. Chemical
Oils are of a great Value as to use, being the Essences of those Herbs that
yield them, but are commonly given in too small a Quantity, or not used as they
ought to produce the Effects they otherwise might. That Cochineal promises its
color to the Blood, I never heard till now, or that any suppose it will tinge
the Cheeks unless outwardly used: This notable Body is also given in too small
a Quantity to discover its Effects, tho the Price of it need not hinder its
use. But the Doctor had rather be in the Fields.

'I divert you (says he) from the more pleasant prospect of the Gardens,
Fields, Woods, Rivers, which plentifully afford us the most effectual and
certain Relief: their value in the Quantities used at one time are below any
Coin, and the Cooking in small proportions will not amount to much more.'

'The Flowers, Fruits and Seeds, the Leaf, Root, Wood, and Bark are distilled
simply, or with Water, or Spirit of Wine; beaten with Sugar into Conserves,
boiled into Syrups; compound the Pounders, Troches, and Pills; with Water or
Wine, make the Decoctions, and Apozems. The Conserves in the Dose are a
Farthing or two, the Syrups not much more; Pouders a Penny the Scruple, or half
a Dram. The famous Gascoin Powder without Bezoar; or 4 Pence the Dose: Waters
distilled from Spirit of Wine therefore used in small quantities, not dearer
than a Glass of Wine. But the Ingredients better chosen, or singly infused in a
proper simple distilled Water, would prove more Alexiterial, and deserve the
title of High Rich Cordial at a less Expense. When you have tasted the former
Cordials in your Friends Chamber, have you not felt the Tumult in your Stomach
of such a Rabble of the Spices, which broiled by the Fire disturb you an your
aster, and make you pity his Condition under the often repeated Doses? The
Apozems Hepatick, Splenetick, Diuretic, or Sudorifick, are made at 2 d. 4 d.
or 6 d. the Quart in Spring Water, which divided and sent in little Glasses
rise beyond the Price of Burgundy. You may hence judge of our Oils, Ointments,
and Plasters; that the Surgeon rewarded for his Skill and Care, does not put
you in mind of the Cost he has been put to through the whole Cure. You are well
acquainted with the Prices of Drugs imported; as they are most of a hot Spicy
Nature, their Dose can be but small, the Price proportionable. If many are
absurdly joined together, the Quantity of each is so much the less. The Treacle
of 60 Drugs does not claim a Penny the Dose.'

Remark. Vegetables distilled simply are for the most part Simple, or no
Medicines; can serve only for Vehicles, but when kept a little are commonly
corrupted, and some way ill tasted; some fair times of the Year is more
wholesome than most of their Preparations commonly in Use, if the sick could but
walk out and take it. The Distilling some of them with simple distilled Water
yields nothing but simple distilled Water, and Spirit of Wine raises nothing
from others. A good Pharmaceutick must know the Nature of the thing, and adapt
his Menstrums, which the Learned have not well done in the London Dispensatory
in many Receipts: The huddling up a Farrago of different things with Honey, or
Sugar, has not shown much of their skill, or the Reason of the Composition of
their Pouders much appeared. But our reformed Doctor is of Opinion that the
Ingredients insus'd in a simple distilled Water would be more Alexiterial, and
be richer Cordials than distilled from Spirit of Wine: but I think the Doctor
cannot be excused of Ignorance here, for Spirit of Wine is certainly a better
Cordial than simple Water; every Porter knows the Differcence between the Cock
and the Brandy-bottle. But those things which are ordered to be distilled with
Spirit of Wine by those that know what they do, are full of oily Parts which
will not be extracted, and mixed with simple Water; and to give all things in
substance would so clog the Stomach with the Quantities of the Husks that hold
the small Proportion of Medicinal Juices, that no other Effect would be
produced but the Oppression of Nature. A rabble of Spices cannot be conjoined
by any that would have their single Virtues to be seen; nor will they be
broiled in Spirit of Wine by one that knows how to work; and a small Glass of a
pure Cordial Spirit I Will engage shall remain more grateful to the Stomach of
sick or well, than half a Pint or a Pint of a muddy loathsome Infusion or
Decoction that will corrupt in a few days time. But I hope the Doctors of the
Dispensary will not pretend to keep Oils, Ointments and Plasters, these belong
to the Surgeon, unless they will be so kind also as to let him have them at the
intrinsic Value, that he may no more be cheated by the Apotheracy. The Surgeon
is now become the honestest fellow of all, (whatever he may be for healing
those Sores that wont't be well without internal Remedies) he outdoes the
Di^pensary Men by their own confession; he demands not so much as the cost he
has been at, but is contended to be sufficiently paid for his skill, care and
pains. The Dispensary will reckon 3 s. a day for Medicines; but why may not the
Apothecary be as honest as either, and keep a few ordinary Herbs, and cheap
Drugs, and cook them in his pipkin, and reckon nothing but for his Skill and
Visits? I should think what is sauce for a Goose might be sauce for a Gander
also. But says the Doctor further,

'You may judge of the easy expense of what we advise by another view, the
various Operations. The famous Vomitive is a Penny, Tartar Emetick not a
Farthing, that of the Salt no more, Oximel the Value of the first; Pills for
the Head, Stomach, Bowels, of different force, the price of a Penny; the
alterative Nephritick Antihysterical Pills made of cheap Pouders, are valuable
only for the Success. I need not inform you how easily the fillings of Steel
are procured. If you infuse them with bitter Plants, or boil to a Syrup, you
will readily estimate a Quart. All the Ecphractisk, or Deobstruents, and
Aperitives, Incrassating, or Astringents, agree in their great use, and almost
inexpressible cheapness. It must be owned the Purges of Rhubard, etc. are
otherwise to be prized, but it is used but once a day, and not hastily
repeated, etc.'

Remark. The Doctor sets up another inch of Candle, that you may have another
view of the cheap pennyworths he has at his Shop: This famous Vomit is a Penny
per Dose, his head-Pills, stomach-Pills, bowel-Pills no more; cheaper than Tom
Saffold's 18 for 18 pence, although too cheap in any Man's own sense: But the
other that are valuable only for their success (the true rule of valuing all
Remedies) will often have no value at all. A few Doses of Iron in a Quart of
Water, you may have very cheap. Aperitives, and Astringents, the Keys of our
Bodies, of such great use, can hardly have any price. Rubard indeed, that so
finely opens the Backdore, and shuts it after it, you must pay a little dearer
for now and then; and if you meet with one of Doctor Harvey's Medici
stercorarii, he perhaps will prescribe you nothing else. But he tells us
farther,

'That out of these Drugs many kinds of Chemical Medicines are prepared at the
Expense of only Fire, and the Use of the Glasses, in great quantities. If you
pay for Spirit of Hartshorn, Sal-armon, etc. Tinct. of Castor, Amber-Saffron,
the compound Elixirs, the Acid Spirits, or their Antagonists, the fixed Salts,
the Vitriolate Tartar, or other digestives, one Shilling or two the ounce, you
will with the Vehicle, after many days use, compute your daily expense of
Physic. The Porter that drinks a cup of stronger Ale instead of many of the
smaller, saves his time and his pocket, and is at a greater charge than the
Patient.'

Remark. If the Doctor had been used to Chemistry, he would have known that its
preparations are not made at the mere expense of Fire, and use of Glasses,
which were it so would not be a small Expense; in many Preparations great Fires
are used; and Glasses serve but once, sometimes not once, but break, and lose a
thing of great value: besides, there is sometimes a large expense of time the
most precious thing of all, and a great deal of labor. The very Cheapness of
the Chemical Spirits, Tinctures, fixed Salts, etc. has arose much from the
Sophistication. And tho the Doctor before disliked spirituous and active
Medicines, he now commends them by the Example of the prudent Porter who saves
Time and Pocket, he might have said Heart and Belly too, by drinking a little
of the stronger Ale. Medicines of active parts are really the most convenient,
like keen Instruments, unless they happen in the hands of Fools or Madmen, that
cut and slash they known not why. But says he,

'If in a Fever, the Smallpox, etc. the Physician cools the Blood, and tempers
the heat, shall the Apozem of almost the Saller Herbs, with cheap sweetning
Pouders, and cheaper Sal prunella, etc. and Julep of simple Waters made to taste
a little of a Cordial water, raise the cost higher than common Sapports in
Health? If the Blood and Spirits are oppressed in the Malignant, shall the
Treacle, Mithridate, etc. the Aromaticks and Alexiterials, etc. be esteemed but
from their effects of sweating, and heating the Blood? If the Patient be not
incessantly plied, and the Physician will have care when he has done enough for
one day, and will give the Patient a little rest, before he sets him another
Task: If the Fever truly intermits, has no Malignity, etc. you may use the Bark
only prepared by poudering, which costs no more than the Wine you drink it
with. I have heard you extol the wonderful Force of Opiates, from your
Experience, in Cholick and Nephritick Pains. It Is true, that Plant has no equal
among the Vegetables, nor does any Metal or Mineral pretend to rival it; but
the richest Preparation of this great Anodyne raises no in quietude upon any
other Circumstance: The poor may have it as well as the richest, from a small
Charity, which will give the Donor the ease it procures to the Patients pain.
It is not therefore demonstrated, that in Sickness no Constitution can bear the
use of more than two or three Shillings value in a Day? The dearest Cordial
Waters, and Alexiterial Pouders cannot in the time be used above that Price,
without inflaming the Blood and Spirits into a Delirium, and forcing our common
putrid Fevers into malignant. The milder Diaphoreticks, Diuretics and
Alteratives don't pretend to be rated with the other; but in our common Fevers
these assist Nature, the others destroy it.'

Remark. In Fevers, and Smallpox, tho the Doctor seels his Sallets and other
Coolers, or his sweetning Pouders with his simple Juleps, very cheap; yet his
cooling, and exhausting the Blood, and thereby checking the Motion of Nature,
in casting off the Morbifick matter, often costs the Patient dear, even his
Life. If in Fevers more malignant, Treacle, Mithridate, and Aromaticks, etc.
are to be esteemed for their Virtues of sweating, and heating the Blood; how
can they be condemned so in milder Fevers? And why may not the cooling Apozems
be used here, where there is more heat? But why may not Doctor err in cooling,
and fixing too much, as soon as in heating and dissolving too much? I should
think either Method may tire the Patient, or Nature it self; but if those
things are given which ought to be given, viz. proper Medicines, it is natural
to suppose they ought not to be any Gravamen, but a Levamen to Nature. The Bark
is most of it faise, and every Doctor does not know the true, or best way to
give it; and the false will cost a Man dear sometimes. Opium is a thing of
great Force, but it has a Malignity in it, which none of our common Artists
know how to separate without spoiling it; if that were done, a Dose might
deserve a Doctor's Fee: but I cannot yield to the Doctor, that it has not its
equal among the Vegetables; there are many other Poisons as effectual, and if
skilfully prepared, of good use, tho none so much used; nor can I be persuaded
but that there are many Plants that have as eminent Virtues for their proper
Ends, without so much Malignity, as Opium: Metals and Minerals, I must tell
him, pretend to exceed it; the anodyne Sulphur of Venus has its Virtue without
its Poison, but the Doctor will laughed at that as a Chymera. The ignorant will
deny the being of that which is beyond their Skill. But I must tell him, we
Chemists have known Rest procured by a Preparation of Copper, when Opinium
would not do it. The Doctor thinks he has demonstrated, that no Patient can
well take more than 2 or 3 Shillings a day in Physic; but if he had well
demonstrated, what they ought to expend in Fees for the intrinsic value of
Advice, we might have had more Encouragement to come to their Shop: I wish he
has shown how Cordial Alexiterial Medicines cure in malignant Fevers, and
destroy in the commons and that the Mild assist Nature only in these, but not
in the other. But to go on, says the Doctor,

'Where's then the Mystery of raising the Bill to 1, 2, 3 or 4 Pounds each Day,
by the Artifice of raising the Part equal to the whole, and sending the Apozem,
or Julep in little Parcels? The Electuary is sold well at 2 s. 6 d. but the
Boles come to each as much, tho it afford to Children 20 Boles. The contrivance
of giving in a parcht Mouth, fur'd Throat, and nauseating Stomach, an ill
tasted Bole, when the languishing Patient can swallow nothing but Liquids, has
been reserved for this Age. The Bole of fulsom Conserve, or Treacle, is to be
taken every 3d, 4th or 5th Hour, which dispels all Rest, etc. There Is a little
Julep ready to wash it down: and this is of the greatest Consequence to the
Apothecary; because the Town has been used to pay 2 s. 6 d. for each Bole, and
not much less for the Draught to cleanse the Mouth after it. This Advice was
given to a Physician at his first entrance on the Stage, to order a Bole with a
Draught every fourth Hour; which however it fare with the Patient, would
recommend him to the Apothecaries.'

'The honest Physician mixes the Bole and Julep together, that the feeble
Patient may drink his Cordial, to revive and compose him, without the
Disturbance of taking it at twice, and with Difficulty the other way.'

Remark. There Is now no Mystery of raising the Bill to so many Pounds, since
the Doctor has discovered it; it is well when Men begin to have some Conscience,
and discover one another unlawful Gains. The contrivance of giving ill-tasted
and fulsom, either Boles or any thing else, muddly horrid Decoctions and
Infusions at any time, is not proper for a nauseating or well Stomach, a fur'd
Throat, or parcht Mouth, and whatever they are mixed with, to delude the Stomach
to admit them, it commonly suffers for it afterward. I do not wonder at the
Advice given to the Doctor, at his first entrance on the Stage; nor do I think
the Mountebank, if he knew his Interest, did reject it. But it is a strange
Character of an honest Physician, or Dispensary-Doctor, that he is one that
mixes his Bole and Julep together, and will not let his Patient have the pleasant
relish of the Liq^or at last, without the horrid Taste of the Bole: I hope he
will order hi^ some fine simple thing or other, seeing he can afford things so
cheap to wash both away. In my Opinion it would be the part of a more honest,
or at least wiser Physician, never to give any thing that will disturb his
Patient. But says the Doctor,

'I presume you will allow the Corollary, that by much Physic divided into
little Parcels, and rated high, the Apothecary has in the Reward of his
Attendance (which by the Physician is often excused) much greater Fees, often
trebly or quadruply more than the Faculty. You will not be surprised, if it be
asserted, that in a Bill of 10 l. nine are the Rewards of his Advice, and
Attendance. The People must accuse their own Conduct, who never gratifying the
Apothecary's Visits, oblige him to bring in for every 3 or 4 Hours and several
Days, as much as will answer one of the ends he proposes to himself. Can he
thus neglected by his Customers, with Safety to himself advise the Waters,
Milk, Temperance, Repose, Exercise, a peculiar Diet, or the Country Air, by
which obstinate Diseases are cured, to the reproach of the Compositions of the
Shop? But what redress can be expected to these Grievances? There must be
certain Rates set to all the Medicines, with the greatest Encouragements to the
Apothecaries to prepare them faithfully. They must bring their Number by the
most proper Methods to be equal to the Occasion the City has for using their
Preparations. The former antiquated Methods must be revived, by which the
People were east without the present either Suspicions, or Complaints. The
Physicians lay under no Temptation to impose on the Public, they advised at
their own Houses in the Chronical, or less dangerous Disorders, and
distinguished in their Visits the Differences of the Condition of the Persons,
and Diseases; and arrived to a Reputation, not by the basest Arts, but their
Care, and the Merit of the Success.'

Remark. The Burden of this long Song against the Apothecaries is still, that
they are too numerous for the Doctors, and get as much or more Money for their
Medicines, than the Doctors can for Advice. But after all this outcry against
them for multiplying the Numbers of themselves and Medicines, he confesses the
Peoples Conduct is to be accused as the Cause as these Evils, by not gratifying
the Apothecary with Fees for his Visits; and so obliging him to bring in so
many Medicines as will answer one End he proposes, viz. a Li^elyhood: If the
People would be but so wise, as to give the Apothecary his Fee for Advice or
Attendance, and the College would be so good as not to persecute him for taking
it, he might afford his Wares as cheap as the Shopkeepers in Warwick and St.
Martins-Lanes, and might advise his Patients the most compendious and easy
Method, and do for them as he would for himself, or own Family; he might keep a
smaller and more select Number of Remedies, and advise the Waters, Milk,
Temperance, Repose, etc. and live as well as the other Tradesmen, and do the
People more good, and less harm at less charge, than he does by every 3 or 4
Hours Repetaturs; and cure stubborn Diseases, by hindering the Sick from taking
the reproachful Physic either of the new or old Shops. But the Redress the
Doctor proposes of these Grievances, I think is ridiculous, viz. the
Apothecaries to encourage them to prepare their Remedits faithfully, and give
but few of them, must have their Medicines rates at a small Price by the
Doctors; which were it reasonable, could not easily be done by those Gentlemen,
not yet well skilled in Drugs and Preparations. Yet this will not do alone, their
Numbers must be reduced to equal the Occasion the City has for their
Preparations: How shall we know what Numbers will serve, or what Occasions the
City may have for their Preparations? some affected Chemist would say, the City
has no occasion for any Galenical Stuff; and I to be free must say, for most of
it. But what are the proper Methods to reduce them, or which ought to be
discarded, that the Remnant may live, by selling a few Medicines of small
Value? shall they be condemned to be hanged, and cast Lots to save one in ten?
Shall the greatest Part be pressed to fight the French, put in the Front and be
slain by the Sword, or the Enemy, for being so unfortunate as to possess the
fair Lady Pecunia, which the ruling Doctors are so passionately in love with?
But after all I must tell him, I hate this wicked monopolizing Policy of men,
that would get a good Trade into few Hands: This is not the way to have the
People served honestly, when they cannot go to him that will use them best; but
the Commodities are engrossed, and sold by a Combination. If the Apothecaries
do increase more in Proportion than other People, their own Increase will
destroy them, the Trade will be good for nothing, and none will put their Sons
to it; but their Apprentices serving 8, when other Trades do but 7 Years, would
persuade one they cannot outgrow their Trade.

What the antiquated Methods are the Doctor talks of, as desirous to have
revived, I don't know. But such they must be, that the People will not easily
suspect or complain of the cheat, but be easy under it, while the Doctors
easily get their Money. But if such a Method were ever in use, or may be
contrived, where the Physicians lie under no Temptation to impose on the
Public, that I should be for; and such wherein they might arrive to
Reputation, not by base Arts, but by their Care, and the Merit of their
Success, that I should extremely like: But I think our honest Doctors and
Merchants have not yet proposed any such Method, neither shall I now attempt
it, but rather expect it in the honest Country-Physician's Answer to this long
and tedious Epistle.

CHAP. IV. The Country-Physician's Answer.
SIR, that I may not wholly balk your Expectation, or neglect any thing wherein
I may possibly do my Country any Service, I shall in as few Words as I can give
you my Opinion of the Medicinal War you sent me an account of, and the best
Methods I can think of to bring it to an end; so that the Country which is the
Seat of the War, may now and hereafter feel the least of its ill effects. You
know no one, that can be a capable Judge of these Matters, to be less interested
than I; who have not practiced these many Years with Apothecaries, or in any
Confederacies; who have done nothing to oblige them, or disoblige them, or had
any Dependence upon them, or any others belonging to the Faculty, for Business,
or Medicines to use in it, being by Profession a clean Independent in Medicine,
and so resolve to stand on my own Legs, or fall.

And I must tell you in the first Place, that I perceive the ground of the
Quarrel here, is the very same as of that between the French and the Emperor,
Self-interest, and the strongest Party I believe will never yield to any thing,
but for their own Advantage; and were I Plenipotentiary in the Affair, no
Articles of Reconciliation should ever be concluded between them, so as to
unite them into a new Confederacy. There are too many of them combined still,
and the single Parties at difference are either of them potent enough to be
often too hard for the People. What the Doctor owns in his Conclusion would be
very good, could it but be effected, viz. that the Physician lie under no
Temptation to impose upon the People, and have no way to arrive to Reputation,
but by his Care, and the Merit of his Success. It would be a happy World, if
Physicians, some of the most obnoxious Men in it to Temptations, were liable to
none; the rest of Men would doubtless be free. If they could not be tempted to
impose on the Public, and had no way to raise a Reputation, but by their Care
and Success; very few I think would be of any great repute. But the
strengthening of Parties and Confederacies, to oppress others, or create
Dependencies, is not the way to do this happy thing for their Souls, and the
Peoples Bodies. But I will tell you in few Words, the best Policy to make them
honest, and secure the People, is to break both the Armiss, that not a Man of
them may act but in his single Capacity; let there be none to command, none to
obey, none accessory; but whosoever is capable of the Business of a Physician,
let him be Principal, and act in his concern independent upon any. But to leave
allegorizing, and to represent the matter to you plainly; the true Method to
raise the Reputation of Physicians, and to secure the People as much as may be
from any damage they might sustain by them, is this.

That every Man that undertakes to act as a Physician, be skilled in all things
pertaining to the Art, and that he himself perform, or at least actually see
performed, whatever belongs to the cure of Human Bodies; That there be no such
thing as Doctor, Surgeon, and Apothecary, as distinct and dependent Faculties;
but that the one Thing, the Physician, be all of them, advising, preparing,
dispensing his own Remedies, and doing whatever belongs to a Surgeon for his
Patient, with his own Hands. Here every Man will stand and fall to himself,
having no dependency on others, and himself reap the Fruit of his own doings
whether good or evil.

The one Grand Design of Physic is, the Recovery of the Patients; but there is
a second thing, which a Physician may honestly intend, his own advantageous
Reputation, or if you will, honorable Advantage.

To the attaining of these two Ends, as well as may be, it is most necessary
that the Practitioner himself be so well accomplished, that he might act of
himself independently, and so perform whatever belongs to his Profession. That
this is the only true Method of Physic, wherein its Ends may be best attained,
may soon evidently appear, if we consider a little. Whosoever would deserve the
Name of a Physician, ought not only to be very well read in Physiology and
Pathology, but to be versed in Experimental Philosophy, the ground of all
Physical Science: To have well studied Nature in its entire and sound State,
and then to proceed to the Knowledge of its defects in order to remove them. But
if a Man may be supposed to be never so well acquainted with the Phenomena and
Nature of Diseases; yet if he be ignorant of Medicine, the means to remove
them, his other Knowledge is to little purpose: but he will be ignorant of the
means to remove Diseases, if he is not skilled in Pharmacy. If he does not
understand the Materia Medica, the Natures and Properties of those Bodies that
are to be used in healing, and the proper Methods and reasons of adapting them
to the use of the Sick, whatever he has of liberal Learning, is to little
purpose: he must be a good Apothecary, and especially Chemist, or he can never
bring those Bodies he would use, effectually to perform their Ends in Nature.
But if he could be supposd to understand these things in any tolerable Degree,
without practicing them, he may still be at a loss, the Remedies he may
prescribe may not be to be had, may be only pretended, or not duly prepared,
whereby he may lose the desired Effect to his own discredit, and the Damage of
his Patients. What Authors say of Remedies is not always true, and their
goodness often depends on a Nicety of Preparation, which by mischance,
carelessness, or unskilfulness in Operation, often become good for nothing, and
sometimes not only so, but virulent and hurtful. To trust to an Author for the
Virtue of a Remedy we have never made, and don't understand the Nature of; to
rely on an Apothecary or Chemist who has no other Design or Skill but to make,
and sell to the best Advantage, is not at all safe, and will not be done by a
Man that duly values his Patients welfare, and his own reputation. The
Preparing of Remedies with ones own hand is necessary, not only in order to
their exact and faithful Preparation; but in the very Operation there is often
more seen of the Reason and Nature of the thing, than can be found from all
Authors put together; and a great Part of Natural Philosophy is manifest, and
practically illustrated by the Analysis, and Synthesis of Bodies. In short, a
Physician ought to be so well versed in his business, that if there were no
Books, nor no venders of Medicines, he would know which way to go to work to
provide himself a sufficient Apparatus for the curing of all Diseases he
designs to meddle with. Again, as External and Internal Diseases are often
complicated, and dependent one upon another; Fevers and other Distempers break
out into Abcesses, etc. Wounds, Bruises, etc. produce Fevers, Deliria, and the
like: it is as necessary that the Surgeons Hand should grow upon the
Physicians Arm, as that the Physicians Brain should move and direct it. Will it
not be a Disgrace to a Physician, as well as a Damage to the Patient, that he
must sit staring upon the distressed Object, while a Surgeon who is not always
to be found, is sent for in a Case where Phlebotomy is instantaneously
required? Is it not indeed dishonorable, as well as disadvantageous to him and
his Patient, that he is but one Limb of a Healer, and must be beholden to
another (perhaps wooden) Leg, called in distinction a Surgeon, to perfect the
Cure of a Bubo, Carbunkle, etc. one who is supposed (if not wished) to be
ignorant of the Internal Causes, Springs, and Effluxes of those putrid
Fountains? Or shall a Surgeon not blush to be so little a Physician, as that
his Head cannot work as well as his Hand? must he needs call for one who
perhaps has not studied the Internal fomes of an Ulcer, to prescribe him an
internal Medicine, without which it cannot be healed? must he never let blood
in the most needful Case, without the advice of one that cannot do it? or must
the Patient be at the Charge of 3 distinct Operators, when one may, and ought
to do all better, at the Charge of one of them? Besides, this three legged
Stool has often one Leg defective or shorter than another, by which defect the
weak Patient often falls to the ground, when he might have been upheld held by
one solid Basis till he was able to rise and walk. The Doctor, a Surgeon, if
ignorant of one another business, will be very liable to counterwork one
another; or if ever so well skilled, they will divide the Care. The Surgeon
will not so much value the Success of what he does merely by the Doctors order,
and the Doctor will not reckon himself to blame if the Surgeon does not perform
his part well. So the Apothecary, to come again to the 3d Noun Adjective; which
with the other 2 are now adays thought convenient and able to be equivalent to
a Substantive the Healer, he will be satisfied either with Health, or Death, or
long Sickness of the Patient, if he has but supplied him with things according
to the order of the Doctor: and he who is supposed to sit at the helm of Life
and Death, if the Vessel miscarry, will be apt to lay the blame upon the
Errors, or Disobedience of some one or other of the Mariners. But the little
Ship of Man's Body being within the reach and guidance of one only Artist, he
will have more care to perform what is requisite to its safety, because he only
will have the Honor, the Reward, or the Blame of his good or ill Success. I
cannot forbear taking notice of another mistake, somewhat akin to what we have
been discoursing, and that is this: it is supposed that in the Multitude of
Counselors there is safety, when applied to Physicians. As for Apothecaries,
and Surgeons, tho they be never so well skilled, or chance to see farther into
the case than the Doctor, or have a better Remedy than he knows, if they offer
any thing, he will take it in disdain, and no way admit what they shall
insinuate, of which I could give instances. But even in a Consult of Doctors,
there is indeed less safety: The disgrace, or the credit will be divided
amongst them, whence the Care of the Sick will be the less. They will put the
most Celebrated to write, tho the greatest Blockhead; none will much disagree
with the rest: and if any one has a private Remedy more effectual, he will not
advise that, or the rest admit it without discovering what it is; they will
easily agree not to disgrace the Faculty by contradicting one another, who if
they were separate, they would be quot homines tot sententiae; but one of the
Doctors being more skilful than the rest, if he were to act alone, would act
freely, whenas she most knowing being commonly the most modest, will be shy to
be most forward, or to differ from the rest, but will leave the prescribing to
the most Proud, and Confident, whom he will easily suffer to run away with the
Credit or Blame of the success, and content himself with his Fee. But if any
one, with a more than ordinary Concern for the Patient dislikes what the others
advise, and offers a Nostrum, or particular Method, they will be much
disgusted, and perhaps say, as in a Case I might name, it is a College-case, it
must not be.

But it would go better with the Sick, if instead of a Consult of Doctors at
the Patient's house, the one Physician he thinks fit to employ would consult in
his own behalf diverse of his honest Brotherhood, and consider their Opinions,
and so act according as he shall then judge. But there are diverse Objections I
foresee may be made against this Method of single and independent Practice,
which must be answered before I can well conclude the Subject; and they are of
two sorts, either such as relate to the Method it self, or to the Method in
relation to, and under the present Circumstances of Doctors, Surgeons, and
Apothecaries.

As to the first, it may be said it is indecorous for a Physician to be
concerned with Manuals, dishonorable for him, who must converse with the
greatest Personages: it is enough to make a Lady that is well, fall sick, to
have her Pulse felt by a rough brown Hand. But I say, whatever may be the
Niceness of a Beauish Doctor, or however a Lady that is wantonly sick may like
a finical Fellow, that is the most honorable and decorous Hand, that can bring
the Sick most help.

Optima si profert Medicus Medicamina Morbis,
Non pigeat prunis applicuisse Manus.
A squeamish Doctor cannot more nauseate any thing conducing to the Health of
Men, than the handling some Chirurgical Cases incident to all sorts of People;
but being the Members of his Fellow Creatures, his helpful Hand cannot abhor,
with Honor or Honesty, to do that for another, he would need, and think
reasonable in the like case to be done for himself; nor is it more honorable
to shake the Urinal, vel Stercus Bacculo agitare; yea, or to turn over the
Leaves of moldy worm-eaten Authors, to inspect the Relicts of Antiquity, than
to open the Book of Nature it self with ones own Hands, in Dissections of
Animals, and the Materia medica, tho there be something both like Butchers and
Colliers work, belonging to it. The Greatest Men have done it; those whom we
are not ashamed to follow as Masters, but might with like Industry outgo, as
far as they did those that went before them. Nothing but the basest Pride can
disdain to use those Hands God has given us to the best Purposes, or think
Mechanics dishonorable, which the greatest Persons (I may say Person) that
ever appeared on the Stage of the World, disdained not to practice. But

A more material Objection, and indeed seeming Difficulty, is this, That it is
a thing too great, a Task too heavy for one man to be well skilled in, and to
perform all things belonging to the Art of Healing. To which I reply, That as
it is no way dishonorable, but very much to a Man's Credit, to have both a
Head and a Hand capable of doing whatever belongs to his Art; so it is
possible, and with diligence attainable. Any Boy of a Genius capable of doing
any thing praiseworthy in Physic, if he be not abused, may by 16 have
Language enough to read any Latin Authors, and also have made a considerable
Progress in the Greek, which by use, and the help of Translations which are
annexed to most Greek Authors, he may in time complete. As for other Languages,
they are not so necessary, there being enough in these. And in learning of
these Tongues, he may have read some Books of Physiology, or natural
Philosophy. In 8 or 9 years more spent in diligent Reading, and the Practice of
experimental Philosophy and Pharmacy, with the sight of Cases managed by his
Teachers, he may arrive to a capacity of doing creditably something of what he
has seen others do in all the parts of Healing, if he will but have the Modesty
and Honesty not to undertake all Cases rare and difficult, which many times
puzzle Men of 50 years Practice. He may in that time be so far expert in all
that belongs to the Cure of diverse Diseases, as that he may honestly and
courageously undertake to cure 'em. But it will still be objected by those that
would be thought worthy of a large Practice, That the Pharmaceutick and
Chirurgick parts of Healing cannot be attended, by reason of the many Visits
the Importunity of the Sick obliges 'em to. But it may be answered, in many
cases Visits are not necessary, the Patients may come home to the Doctors, and
take the Medicines home with them; in some they need not be seen so often: And
besides, an ingenious Servant, a Pupil, will quickly come to take off a great
deal of the Labor and Care in Preparation and Dispensation, and Conveyance of
Medicines. There are some Preparations made by those that have nothing to do in
Medicine, as common Spirit of Wine, and diverse others, in which there can be no
considerable Deceit, which the Physician need not trouble himself to make. But
above all, if Physicians would apply themselves particularly to the Cure of
some few Diseases, some to these, some to others, they might be therein more
expert, and easily provided with all things necessary for their particular
Practice, without those Defects and Damages to the Sick which arise from the
common Division of the Physicians work in every Disease, between two or three
Persons, each of whom is usually unskilled in some part of that which belongs
to the Cure of any one Distemper. As if some would apply themselves to the Cure
of all sorts of Fevers, others the Gout and Scorbute, others the Pox, etc. and
would undertake nothing but what they are well provided for, they might have
more business perhaps, or at least enough, and more Credit, and the Patients
much more Comfort. But perhaps there may be some large Souls, that can neither
be contented to subserve a Clyster, to spill the Balsam of Life by command, nor
yet to be skilled in the cure of but some particular Diseases; that think it
little in a Physician, if he is not omnibus numeris completus, and cannot
undertake all Diseases. I say to these brave Souls, if they will but scorn to
pretend, they may by Industry arrive to a capacity of honestly professing
themselves Catholic Physicians, provided they will not covet, nor undertake
more Patients than they can well provide for, and by their Industry can be so
happy as to acquire a few effectual and Catholic Remedies: And I think they
may get Money enough, tho they have no Under-workmen, and being greater Credit
to their Profession, and be a greater Blessing to the Age and Places they live
in. I will profess, as to my self, tho I refuse no Cases, except Lithotomy, and
some few that require Accommodations in a Physician's House, I desire no more
Patients than I can sufficiently provide for with my own Hand and Eye, in
whatsoever belongs to inward and outward Operations: And if any singular Case
happens that I do not well see into, I can be content to consult my Friends of
the Faculty for my information, not to the Patient's Charge; or refer him to
any of them that he or I, or any Friend can judge more expert in the Case: and
what Money cannot be honestly and ingenuously got, I think is too much, and a
Burden that will but help to sink a Man into Misery. And a mighty Practice, tho
tolerably well performed for the real good of Mankind, is but a Life of mighty
Care and Perplexity, not to be desired by a wise man for his own sake; but
rather to be prevented by teaching the Rules of Health, communicating to other
Physicians his Skill, and a modest refusal of Cases he does not yet thoroughly
understand.

But as to those Objections that may arise against this Method of Practice, as
relating to the present State of Physicians, Surgeons and Apothecaries in the
City, and herewith to consider more directly the state of the Controversy
between the Doctors and Apothecaries; it will be said the Apothecaries are not
so well skilled in Physiology, Pathology, and the use of Medicines as they
should be, and so are incapable of single Practice. I answer, It is granted of
a great part of them, and it is true of many of those that call themselves
Doctors; but they of both sorts might be capable of Practice, if they would
desire Skill as much as Money. It will be likewise said, the Doctors are not
skilled in Pharmacy, Chemistry or Surgery. But it is to be answered, They may
be, if Pride, Covetousness and Laziness do not hinder 'em from doing their
Duty. But it cannot be denied that some of the Apothecaries are as well skilled
in all these things, and so as fit to practice as some of the Doctors their
Antagonists, yea even of the Dispensary-men who swell so magisterially. Had not
some of them as mean Education as any? Were not some of them bred Apothecaries,
or less to the purpose? Was not the very Acetabulum of the College bred to very
little Language, hardly a clean Englishman, under a Country Apothecary, who,
he himself says, was very little skilled even in his own Profession? Can a
License be supposed to inspire with Sufficiency in an instant? Or can another,
bred a mere Scholar, incapable of Divine Preferment by Jacobitism, undetermined
to Physic, of a sudden become a Doctor by a University Patent, and a complete
Artist in the Medicinal Faculty, with whom a Man of 1000 l. a year may trust
his Life and precious Enjoyments? I must confess I never got any Skill on a
sudden by such Inspirations. I remember what Persius says as to Poetry;

Nec font labra prolui Caballino,
Nec in bicipiti somniasse Parnasso
Memini ut repent, sic Poeta prodirem.
So say I as to Physic,

I know not when, sleeping in Phoebus Beams,
My heated Pate was filled with Physic Dreams;
So that I waking found my self a Man,
Inspired with Skill, a good Physician.
But the honest Part of the College, as they call themselves, have set up
Shops, where Medicines shall be well and honestly prepared, and those Mischiefs
that have arose from trusting Apothecaries avoided; and so the Method proposed,
is to them needless. I answer, it must here be confessed, that they are so far
commendable, as that they owning some of the Faults they have been guilty of,
profess to do something better. But what they do will not be enough; they are
not yet well skilled in Pharmacy, especially the chief Part of it, Pyrotechny;
their Servants are not better skilled than the Apothecaries, nor can they have
that Care of the Success of their Masters Practice, as a Man would of his own:
the Blame will not lie upon them, the Masters don't always see what they do,
nor can they always teach them what they should do. Neither Masters nor
Servants have affur'd the People of more Skill or Honesty than in the old way.
But if any of them were real Artists, and had any great things, they would not
communicate them; but if they used them, must so far act singly according to
our Method. But the Force of the Objection against the Method I propose, lies
in this; That considering the Doctors and Apothecaries are singly defective in
not understanding the whole that belongs to the Art of Healing, they must
practice some way or other dependently, or not at all; and if the greatest Part
should leave off Practice, 1. How should they live? 2. How shall the People be
supplied in their Necessities? I answer, many of them have got enough already,
and may very well leave off, and take Care of securing their own Health in
another Life by Repentance, or refuse to undertake what they cannot do as they
should, till they can do their Duty. But those that have not already laid up of
the Mammon of Unrighteousness, had better leave off quite, and take to
something they can more honestly perform, than abuse their Neighbors, and ruin
their own Souls. They can have no better Plea to continue in an evil Practice,
than Bauds and Whores, who have not been bred to any other Employment. But as
to the other Plea, how the People shall be served; I answer, it is a question,
whether the present dependent Practice of Physic, taking one time with
another, does more hurt or good; and to try the Experiment by leaving off
Physic for 4 or 5 Years, till some ingenious Men were better accomplished,
perhaps might be worth the People's while. But there are some that follow our
Method, and have always done so, who might be more useful than some of them
are, were the magisterial and haughty way of Practice by Prescribing out of
request, and were the Practitioners by Patent no way able to persecute or
molest those that are most capable of doing the Physician's Duty. But it will
still be replied, it will signify but little to persuade Men against their
Interest, the thing which all Men so vigorously prosecute. I answer, if what I
have said be not sufficient to persuade Physicians, that it is their Interest
to be honest, and well accomplished in their Profession, I would leave them,
and address my self to the suffering People, especially those that govern, and
propose to them two ways whereby Physicians might be excellently accomplished
for their Business, and so more profitable to the People: for presupposing the
Persons be sufficiently accomplished in Languages, and to have a Genius to
Philosophical and Medicinal Studies, or not to be admitted, they should either
serve, not ignorant Apothecaries or Doctors, but able independent Physicians as
their Pupils, faithfully to be instructed a sufficient Number of Years, on
proper Conditions; as Medicine was taught of old. Or 2ly. That there shall be
erected at London a School of Medicine, wherein shall always be a sufficient
Number of skilful Practitioners of all Parts of Medicine, who should not only
theoretically, but practically teach the Pupils all things that belong to the
Profession: and none should be suffered to practice in England, but such as
being fit for Admission had gone through all things belonging to the Art, by
continuance in this School so many Years, as should be thought, or rather found
sufficient to qualify them. Which of these two Methods would be the best, I
shall not now determine: either might be preferred in different respects. The
last perhaps would be most liked, as seeming most honorable; the former might
by an able Master be more easily accomplished, and both very well agree with
what Hippocrates proposes in Lege. (...), etc. Quisquis enim Medicinae
Scientiam sibi vere comparare volet, eum hisce ^iti oportet, Natura, Doctrina,
Loco Studiis apto, Institutione a Puero, Studio, and Industria atque Tempore.
Prim^m quidem igitur omnium Natura opus est. Natura enim ^epognante, irrita
sunt omnia. Eadem ve^^ viam ad ^ptima commonstrante, Artis Doctrina contin, it.
Quam ipsam cum Prudentia sibi compa^a^e oportet, ita ut a Puero Institutio
accedat, idque in L^c^ a Nat^ra ad Disciplinam accommodato. Amplius autem and
Industriam adhibere oportet; eam^, ad multum temporis, ut scilicet Di^ciplina
in Naturam versa, ac veluti ingenerata, feliciter and capiose Fr^ctus proferat.
Qualis enim eorum quae Terra producit Consideratio est, talis etiam Medicina
cognitio. Natura enim nostra velut Ager est: Dogmata Praeceptorum veluti semina
sunt. Instit^tioni a Peuro cum eo convenit, quod opportuno tempore semina
Terrae committere oportet. Locus autem in quo Disciplina contingit, est velut
ambiens aer e terra nascentibus nutrimentum praebers. Studium autem Cultura
est. Tempus p^stremo haec omnia corroborat, ut perfect en^triantur.

But where shall we find one among a thousand, who from an early Inclination or
natural Genius to the Art, has been instructed from his Youth, in a Place
accommodated with all things necessary to perfect his Skill, who has hereto
added the Industry of a long time, and ripened his Studies to the bringing
forth of plenteous Fruit? Not every, Apothecary in his eight years
Apprenticeship has been thus completed; nor have many Doctors, tho they have
supposed themselves to come full blown out of the Universities, been much
better accomplished, Nay I will affirm that there is no public Method now in
use in England, whereby men are sufficiently instructed in all that belongs to
the Art of Medicine. But were the Nation as willing to spare some thousands to
promote the Art of preserving men from Diseases, as they have been to part with
Millions to defend them from the French (who have perhaps slain more by their
Pox than Sword) there should be a Method proposed for a School of Medicine,
every way so adapted to promote the Art, and perfect the Artist, that no
reasonable Man should be able to find fault with it.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Doctor complains much of the largeness of the Apothecaries Bills; but I
believe he cannot give us a Specimen of any larger than what have been extended
only by the Prescriptions of some that would be thought of the honest Part of
the College, or of any Bills so large as their Fees, as appears in an account I
lately had, from an honest and worthy City-Physician, that honest Dr. T. and
honest Dr. P. while he was better Friends with the Apothecaries, lengthened out
their obsequious Porter's Bill in a Year and 3 quarters to 370 l. (a Sum enough
to tempt the Doctors to set up Shops, and become ambodexters, to receive Fees
in one Hand and Bills in the other) but had in the time extracted 900 Guineas
for themselves, as Fees for advising the Patient to purchase the large Cargo of
Drugs, which yet was not enough to cure him of his supposed Disease of
nocturnal Pollutions he had sometimes, which they frighted him with as some
terrible thing, when he was in perfect Health, abating the Purgatory of
Physic, and wanted no Remedy but an honest she Companion to take off the
Superfluity of a laudable Constitution. And yet the Doctor complains as if the
Physicians had not their due proportion and share with the Apothecaties.

Sic Clodius accusat Maechos, Catilina Cethegum.

FINIS.
Remarks upon Dr. P's late Bill, and his Postscript.
DR. P. the Scribe to the Company of Traders, that call themselves the
Dispensary, or Dr. Apothecaries, in his late Bill of Sale, has these few
things remarkable.

First, That he dedicates it, and addresses himself to the Pagan God Terminus.
Whom whether he has chosen his peculiar Deity, as most likely to terminate the
Money of the Sick at the Dispensary, I shall not determine, or whether his
Religion is Pagan, Christian, Medical, or Composita.

2. He says nothing in it more to his purpose, than what he said in his other
Bills.

3. His design (apparent in them all) is to get Patients, Customers, and
thereby Money. It cannot be supposed that 46 Leeches in our corrupt Times
should combine to carry on the Trade, merely for the Public Good.

4. The Means he still uses is no more than all Quacks use, viz. to cry up
themselves, their Skill, and Honesty, and the goodness and cheapness of their
Remedies, their Nostrums and Arcanas, and to tell of their great Practice, and
at the same time to decry others.

5. That to catch much Fish it is necessary to continue casting the Net, one
impression of Bills will never bring in a Trade.

6. That he sells his Bills (contrary to the charitable Custom of other Quacks
who give them gratis) the shortest of which at a penny a piece, may rob the
People of above 4 l. more than the intrinsic Value.

7. That if the College be the standard of what is creditable in Physicians,
it is now no shame to put out Bills to get Patients.

8. That he has spent seven lines of his half Sheet in a Postscript in answer
to the Author of Bellum Medicinale; in which he accuses him,

First, of prosing an odd Method of bringing Physic and Surgery together. To
which he replys;

That the odness of the Method is no Argument against the goodness and
necessity thereof: but his Method was not only to bring Physic and Surgery
together, but to add Pharmacy also to them as a third thing, without which the
Healer cannot be his Crafts-master.

2. He accuses him, That he has exposed all the Doctors and Apothecaries. To
which he replys;

That his Accuser hereby owns that they are capable of being exposed, but he
never designed to expose, or thinks he has exposed any of either Party but
those that deserve it; and if any particular Person thinks himself touched,
it is the Application makes the Ass.

3. For using Chemical Medicines only. But he replys;

That he never professed to do so in his Book, or otherwise, but thinks him no
very wise Man that shall spend Time, Labor, and Money on any Chemical
Preparation, where a more easily preparable Medicine will do as well, whether
Specific, or other: But yet thinks it very well worth his while to work some
even tedious, Chemical Preparations, knowing that there are Effects in healing
to be wrought by Chemical Medicines, which no crude Simples, or Compounds have
ever been found sufficient for. But,

4. He says he is no Chemist, not knowing that Aqua Regis dissolves Gold only
from the Spirit of Salt in the Sal Armoniack. But he excuses him, That the
Experiment may be too costly for him. To which he answers, If he that does not
know that Aqua Regis dissolves Gold only from the Spirit of Salt in the Sal
Armon. is no Chemist, then Dr. P. is the Man by his own Argument will be proved
to be no Chemist; for that which is not true, is not known to be so: but it is
not true that Aqua Regis dissolves Gold only from the Spirit of Salt in the Sal
Ammoniac; for all that know the Nature and Uses of Spirit of Salt, know it is
no apt Menstrum to dissolve Gold, without the association of Spirit of Niter,
which of it self will not do it, but by both in conjunction it is readily done;
but the Spirit of Niter being the greatest part of the Dissolvent, has
undoubtedly the greatest share in the action; so it cannot be only from that
Part which of it self, or only is not sufficient. Whatever will not do alone,
can never be the only thing that does. But suppose Dr. P. should be told that
tho there is materially, yet there is formally no Spirit of Salt in Sal
Ammoniac; that Salt is not Spirit of Salt; and that he never saw a true Spirit
of Salt in his Life: I don't know how he would be able to make out the
contrary. But the Author of Bellum Medicinale, to prove against the Doctor the
Action or Passion of an animal Substance with Gold, did not say, That common
Salt is properly an Animal Substance (tho it is hardly ever wanting in Man's
Body) or that the Volatile Salt in the Sal Ammoniac was the efficient of the
Solution of Gold in Aqua Regis (whatever it may confer toward the effect) but
added what the Doctor did not care to take notice of in his Postcript, viz.
That Spirit of Urin (which certainly is an Animal Substance) precipitates the
dissolved Gold into Aurum F^lminans; in which Operation the Spirit of Urin has
without all doubt some Action or Passion with Gold, the Calx of Gold made only
with Aqua Regis having no fulminating Property.

As for the costliness of the Experiment, Whether the Spirit of Salt only
dissolves Gold in Aqua Regis: If the Doctor supposes 8 or 900 Guineas must be
spent, or that the Gold must be dissolved by Pounds, it is confessed the
Experiment might be so costly; 'twere better being ignorant in the Matter, and
skilled only in some slight, whereby one might finger so much of the Metal. But
the Doctor I must needs say talks here as if he were no Chemist, and could
never spare his Gold to make the Trial, for Chemists know how to reduce their
Gold again with very little loss. But farther, I will engage to teach any Man
how he may make ten Experiments of this Matter for five Pence charge, tho he
should not recover the Gold used in the trial. But the

Fifth and last thing laid to the Charge of the Author of Bellum Medicinale, is,

That in his Postscript he makes the Dotor's Sum 870 l. too much, and probably
40 or 50 l. concluded the Apothecary's Bill. To which he answers; He will tell
the Doctor a Story, and so leave him.

There was a Gentleman on a time traveling on the Rode, and he fell among
Thieves who robbed him, as he testified before a Justice, of 1317 l. 10 s. But
whereas he was foolishly decoyed into their hands, and very cowardly suffered
himself to be robbed by Persons not so well armed as himself, he was ashamed
(like a Man cheated by an Alchymist, or a Whore) to prosecute the Felons; and
so never stirred in the matter, or sought to apprehend them. But after some time
it happened that they were discovered by another Person (hating Villainy) and
accused of the Theft; but when they came to answer for themselves, they pleaded
that they were very Honest Men, and were abused by their Accuser, for they took
but 147 l. from the Gentleman. You silly Rogues, says the Judge, you have
condemned your selves by acknowledging the Fact, and a Robbery great enough,
there is now no need of farther Evidence, or of the Gentleman's Testimony for
the larger Sum: Yet if he can be prevailed with to appear against you, the Fact
shall be made out in all its Circumstances to your greater shame. But what you
own you took is enough to make you Rogues that deserve to be hanged with other
Villains; God give you Repentance, and so Lord have Mercy upon you. But,

The Cheater under Friendship's Guise is worse
Than he that bids me stand, and give my Purse.
This Hero plainly tells me what he would have,
And gives me leave to fight, my Coin to save:
Against the other I have no defense,
The sneaking Rogue hides under feigned Pretense.
Perhaps he frights me with supposed Disease
In Embryo, swears he seeks my Health and Ease
Pretends to purge the latent Matter forth,
While he imbezles Strength and Money both;
And brings me down unto a tabid State,
Then Asses Milk prescribes to make me fat:
When raised again, the Humors reabound,
Then I Am advised to take another round.
This is my Doctor's friendly Discipline,
I lose my Strength and Health, he gets my Coin.
FINIS.

