ESSAYS, MORAL AND POLITICAL.

Tros Rutulusve fuat, nullo discrimine habebo.
VIRG. EDINBURGH, Printed by R. FLEMING and A. ALISON, for A. KINCAID
Bookseller, and Sold at his Shop above the Cross. MDCCXLI.

Advertisement.
MOST of these ESSAYS were wrote with a View of being published as
WEEKLY-PAPERS, and were intended to comprehend the Designs both of the
SPECTATORS and CRAFTSMEN. But having dropped that Undertaking, partly from
LAZINESS, partly from WANT of LEISURE, and being willing to make Trial of my
Talents for Writing, before I ventured upon any more serious Compositions, I
was induced to commit these Trifles to the Judgment of the Public. Like most
new Authors, I must confess, I feel some Anxiety concerning the Success of my
Work: But one Thing makes me more secure; That the READER may condemn my
Abilities, but must approve of my Moderation and Impartiality in my Method of
handling POLITICAL SUBJECTS: And as long as my Moral Character is in Safety, I
can, with less Anxiety, abandon my Learning and Capacity to the most severe
Censure and Examination. Public Spirit, methinks, should engage us to love the
Public, and to bear an equal Affection to all our Countrymen; not to hate one
Half of them, under Pretext of loving the Whole. This PARTY-RAGE I have
endeavored to repress, as far as possible; and I hope this Design will be
acceptable to the moderate of both Parties; at the same Time, that, perhaps, it
may displease the Bigots of both.

THE READER must not look for any Connection among these ESSAYS, but must
consider each of them as a Work apart. This is an Indulgence that is given to
all ESSAY-WRITERS, and is an equal Ease both to WRITER and READER, by freeing
them from any tiresome Stretch of Attention or Application.

CONTENTS.
Essay, I. Of the Delicacy of Taste and Passion, Page, 1 II. Of the Liberty of
the Press, 9 III. Of Impudence and Modesty, 19 IV. That Politics may be
reduced to a Science, 27 V. Of the first Principles of Government, 49 VI. Of
Love and Marriage, 59 VII. Of the Study of History, 69 VIII. Of the
Independency of Parliament, 79 IX. Whether the British Government inclines more
to absolute Monarchy, or to a Republic, 93 X. Of Parties in general, 105 XI.
Of the Parties of Great Britain, 119 XII. Of Superstition and Enthusiasm, 141
XIII. Of Avarice, 153 XIV. Of the Dignity of Human Nature, 161 XV. Of Liberty
and Despotism, 173
ESSAY I. Of the DELICACY of TASTE and PASSION.
THERE is a certain Delicacy of Passion, to which some People are subject, that
makes them extremely sensible to all the Accidents of Life, and gives them a
lively Joy upon every prosperous Event, as well as a piercing Grief, when they
meet with Crosses and Adversity. Favors and Good-offices easily engage their
Friendship; while the smallest Injury provokes their Resentment. Any Honor or
Mark of Distinction elevates them above Measure; but they are as sensibly
touched with Contempt. People of this Character have, no doubt, much more
lively Enjoyments, as well as more pungent Sorrows, than Men of more cool and
sedate Tempers: But, I believe, when every Thing is balanced, there is no one,
that would not rather choose to be of the latter Character, were he entirely
Master of his own Disposition. Good or ill Fortune is very little at our own
Disposal: And when a Person, that has this Sensibility of Temper, meets with
any Misfortune, his Sorrow or Resentment takes entire Possession of him, and
deprives him of all Relish in the common Occurrences of Life, the right
Enjoyment of which forms the greatest Part of our Happiness. Great Pleasures
are much less frequent than great Pains; so that a sensible Temper must meet
with fewer Trials in the former Way than in the latter. Not to mention, that
Men of such lively passions are apt to be transported beyond all Bounds of
Prudence and Discretion, and take false Steps in the Conduct of Life, which are
often irretrievable.

THERE is a Delicacy of Taste observable in some Men, which very much resembles
this Delicacy of Passion, and produces the same Sensibility to Beauty and
Deformity of every Kind, as that does to Prosperity and Adversity, Obligations
and Injuries. When you present a Poem or a Picture to a Man possessed of this
Talent, the Delicacy of his Feeling or Sentiments makes him be touched very
sensibly by every Part of it; nor are the masterly Strokes perceived with a
more exquisite Relish and Satisfaction, than the Negligences or Absurdities
with Disgust and Uneasiness. A polite and judicious Conversation affords him
the highest Entertainment. Rudeness or Impertinence is as great a Punishment to
him. In short, Delicacy of Taste has the same Effect as Delicacy of Passion: It
enlarges the Sphere both of our Happiness and Misery, and makes us sensible of
Pains, as well as Pleasures, that escape the rest of Mankind.

I BELIEVE, however, there is no one, who will not agree with me, that
notwithstanding this Resemblance, a Delicacy of Taste is as much to be desired
and cultivated as a Delicacy of Passion is to be lamented, and to be remedied,
if possible. The good or ill Accidents of Life are very little at our Disposal:
But we are pretty much Masters what Books we shall read, what Diversions we
shall partake of, and what Company we shall keep. The ancient Philosophers
endeavored to render Happiness entirely independent of every Thing external.
That is impossible to be attained: But every wise Man will endeavor to place
his Happiness on such Objects as depend most upon himself: And that is not to
be attained so much by any other Means as by this Delicacy of Sentiment. When a
Man is possessed of that Talent, he is more happy by what pleases his Taste than
by what gratifies his Appetites, and receives more Enjoyment from a Poem or a
Piece of Reasoning than the most expensive Luxury can afford.

HOW far the Delicacy of Taste and that of Passion are connected together in
the original Frame of the Mind, it is hard to determine. To me there appears to
be a very considerable Connection betwixt them. For we may observe, that Women,
who have more delicate Passions than Men, have also a more delicate Taste of
the Ornaments of Life, of Dress, Equipage, and the ordinary Decencies of
Behavior. Any Excellency in these hits their Taste much sooner than Ours; and
when you please their Taste, you soon engage their Affections.

BUT whatever Connection there may be originally betwixt these Dispositions, I
am persuaded, that nothing is so proper to cure us of this Delicacy of Passion
as the cultivating of that higher and more refined Taste, which enables us to
judge of the Characters of Men, of Compositions of Genius, and of the
Productions of the nobler Arts. A greater or less Relish of those obvious
Beauties, that strike the Senses, depends entirely upon the greater or less
Sensibility of the Temper: But with regard to the Liberal Arts, a fine Taste is
really nothing but strong Sense, or at least depends so much upon it, that they
are inseparable. To judge aright of a Composition of Genius, there are so many
Views to be taken in, so many Circumstances to be compared, and such a
Knowledge of human Nature requisite, that no Man, who is not possessed of the
soundest Judgment, will ever make a tolerable Critic in such Performances. And
this is a new Reason for cultivating a Relish in the Liberal Arts. Our Judgment
will strengthen by this Exercise: We shall form truer Notions of Life: Many
Things, which rejoice or afflict others, will appear to us too frivolous to
engage our Attention: And we shall lose by Degrees that Sensibility and
Delicacy of Passion, which is so incommodious.

BUT perhaps I have gone too far in saying, that a cultivated Taste for the
Liberal Arts extinguishes the Passions, and renders us indifferent to those
Objects, which are so fondly pursued by the rest of Mankind. When I reflect a
little more, I find, that it rather improves our Sensibility for all the tender
and agreeable Passions; at the same Time, that it renders the Mind incapable of
the rougher and more boisterous Emotions. Ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts,
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.


FOR this, I think there may be assigned two very natural Reasons. In the first
Place, nothing is so improving to the Temper as the Study of the Beauties,
either of Poetry, Eloquence, Music, or Painting. They give a certain Elegance
of Sentiment, which the rest of Mankind are entire Strangers to. The Emotions
they excite are soft and tender. They draw the Mind off from the Hurry of
Business and Interest; cherish Reflection; dispose to Tranquillity; and produce
an agreeable Melancholy, which, of all Dispositions of the Mind, is the best
suited to Love and Friendship.

IN the second Place, a Delicacy of Taste is favorable to Love and Friendship,
by consining our Choice to few People, and making us indifferent to the Company
and Conversation of the greatest Part of Men. You will very seldom find, that
mere Men of the World, whatever strong Sense they may be endowed with, are very
nice in distinguishing of Characters, or in marking those insensible
Differences and Gradations, which make one Man preferable to another. Any one,
that has competent Sense, is sufficient for their Entertainment. They talk to
him of their Pleasures and Affairs, with the same Frankness as they would to
any other: And finding many, that are fit to supply his Place, they never feel
any Vacancy or Want in his Absence. But to make use of the Allusion of a famous
Mons. Fontenelle, Pluralite des Mondes, Soir 6.
French Author: The Judgment may be compared to a Clock or Watch, where the
most ordinary Machine is sufficient to tell the Hours; but the most elaborate
and artificial only can point out the Minutes and Seconds, and distinguish the
smallest Differences of Time. One that has well digested his Knowledge both of
Books and Men, has little Enjoyment but in the Company of a few select
Companions. He feels too sensibly, how much all the rest of Mankind falls short
of the Notions he has entertained. And his Affections being thus confined in a
narrow Circle, no Wonder he carries them further, than if they were more
general and undistinguished. The Gaiety and Frolic of a Bottle-Companion
improves with him into a solid Friendship: And the Ardours of a youthful
Appetite become an elegant Passion.

ESSAY II. Of the LIBERTY of the PRESS.
THERE is nothing more apt to surprise a Foreigner, than the extreme Liberty we
enjoy in this Country, of communicating whatever we please to the Public, and
of openly censuring every Measure which is entered into by the King or his
Ministers. If the Administration resolve upon War, it is affirmed, that either
wilfully or ignorantly they mistake the Interest of the Nation, and that Peace,
in the present Situation of Affairs, is infinitely preferable. If the Passion
of the Ministers be for Peace, our Political Writers breathe nothing but War
and Devastation, and represent the pacifick Conduct of the Government as mean
and pusillanimous. As this Liberty is not indulged in any other Government,
either Republican or Monarchical; in Holland and Venice, no more than in France
or Spain; it may very naturally give Occasion to these two Questions, How it
happens that Great Britain enjoys such a peculiar Privilege? and, Whether the
unlimited Exercise of this Liberty be advantageous or prejudicial to the
Public?

AS to the first Question, Why the Laws indulge us in such an extraordinary
Liberty? I believe the Reason may be derived from our mixed Form of Government,
which is neither wholly Monarchical, nor wholly Republican. 'Twill be found, if
I mistake not, to be a true Observation in Politics, That the two Extremes in
Government, of Liberty and Slavery, approach nearest to each other; and, that
as you depart from the Extremes, and mix a little of Monarchy with Liberty, the
Government becomes always the more free; and, on the other Hand, when you mix a
little of Liberty with Monarchy, the Yoke becomes always the more grievous and
intolerable. In a Government, such as that of France, which is entirely
absolute, and where Laws, Custom, and Religion, all concur to make the People
fully satisfied with their Condition, the Monarch cannot entertain the least
Jealousy against his Subjects, and therefore is apt to indulge them in great
Liberties both of Speech and Action. In a Government altogether Republican,
such as Holland, where there is no Magistrate so eminent as to give Jealousy to
the State, there is also no Danger in intrusting the Magistrates with very
large discretionary Powers; and though many Advantages result from such Powers,
in the Preservation of Peace and Order; yet they lay a considerable Restraint
on Men's Actions, and make every private Subject pay a great Respect to the
Government. Thus it is evident, that the two Extremes, of absolute Monarchy and
of a Republic, approach very near to each other in the most material
Circumstances. In the first, the Magistrate has no Jealousy of the People: In
the second, the People have no Jealousy of the Magistrate: Which want of
Jealousy begets a mutual Confidence and Trust in both Cases, and produces a
Species of Liberty in Monarchies, and of arbitrary Power in Republics.

To justify the other Part of the foregoing Proposition, that in every
Government the Means are most wide of each other, and that the Mixtures of
Monarchy and Liberty render the Yoke either more easy or more grievous. I must
take Notice of a Remark of Tacitus with regard to the Romans under their
Emperors, that they neither could bear total Slavery nor total Liberty, Nec
totam servitutem nec totam libertatem pati possunt. This Remark a famous Poet
has translated and applied to the English in his admirable Description of Queen
Elizabeth's Policy and happy Government. Et fit aimer son joug a l'Anglois
indompte,
Qui ne peut ni servir, ni vivre en liberte
HENRIADE, Live. 1.

ACCORDING to these Remarks, therefore, we are to consider the Roman Government
as a Mixture of Despotism and Liberty, where the Despotism prevailed; and the
English Government as a Mixture of the same Kind, but where the Liberty
predominates. The Consequences are exactly conformable to the foregoing
Observation; and such as may be expected from those mixed Forms of Government,
which beget a mutual Watchfulness and Jealousy. The Roman Emperors were, many
of them, the most frightful Tyrants that ever disgraced Humanity; and it is
evident their Cruelty was chiefly excited by their Jealousy, and by their
observing, that all the great Men of Rome bore with Impatience the Dominion of
a Family, which, but a little before, was nowise superior to their own. On the
other Hand, as the Republican Part of the Government prevails in England, though
with a great Mixture of Monarchy, it is obliged, for its own Preservation, to
maintain a watchful Jealousy over the Magistrates, to remove all discretionary
Powers, and to secure every one's Life and Fortune by general and inflexible
Laws. No Action must be deemed a Crime but what the Law has plainly determined
to be such: No Crime must be imputed to a Man but from a legal Proof before his
Judges: And even these Judges must be his Fellowsubjects, who are obliged by
their own Interest to have a watchful Eye over the Encroachments and Violence
of the Ministers. From these Causes it proceeds, that there is as much Liberty,
and even, perhaps, License in Britain, as there was formerly Slavery and
Tyranny in Rome.

THESE Principles account for the great Liberty of the Press in these Kingdoms,
beyond what is indulged in any other Government. It Is sufficiently known, that
despotic Power would soon steal in upon us, were we not extreme watchful to
prevent its Progress, and were there not an easy Method of conveying the Alarm
from one End of the Kingdom to the other. The Spirit of the People must
frequently be roused to curb the Ambition of the Court; and the Dread of
rouzing this Spirit must be employed to prevent that Ambition. Nothing is so
effectual to this Purpose as the Liberty of the Press, by which all the
Learning, Wit, and Genius of the Nation may be employed on the Side of Liberty,
and every one be animated to its Defense. As long, therefore, as the Republican
Part of our Government can maintain itself against the Monarchical, it must be
extreme jealous of the Liberty of the Press, as of the utmost Importance to its
Preservation.

SINCE therefore the Liberty of the Press is so essential to the Support of our
mixed Government; this sufficiently decides the second Question, Whether this
Liberty be advantageous or prejudicial; there being nothing of greater
Importance in every State than the Preservation of the ancient Government,
especially if it be a free one. But I would fain go a Step farther, and assert,
that such a Liberty is attended with so few Inconveniences, that it may be
claimed as the common Right of Mankind, and ought to be indulged them almost in
every Government; except the Ecclesiastical, to which indeed it would be fatal.
We need not dread from this Liberty any such ill Consequences as followed from
the Harangues of the popular Demagogues of Athens and Tribunes of Rome. A Man
reads a Book or Pamphlet alone and coolly. There is none prefent from whom he
can catch the Passion by Contagion. He is not hurried away by the Force and
Energy of Action. And should he be wrought up to never so seditious a Humor,
there is no violent Resolution presented to him, by which he can immediately
vent his Passion. The Liberty of the Press, therefore, however abused, can
scarce ever excite popular Tumults or Rebellion. And as to those Murmurs or
secret Discontents it may occasion, it is better they should get Vent in Words,
that they may come to the Knowledge of the Magistrate before it be too late, in
order to his providing a Remedy against them. Mankind, it is true, have always a
greater Propension to believe what is said to the Disadvantage of their
Governors than the contrary; but this Inclination is inseparable from them,
whether they have Liberty or not. A Whisper may fly as quick, and be as
pernicious as a Pamphlet. Nay it will be more pernicious, where Men are not
accustomed to think freely, or distinguish betwixt Truth and Falsehood.

IT has also been found, as the Experience of Mankind increases, that the
People are no such dangerous Monster as they have been represented, and that
it is in every Respect better to guide them, like rational Creatures, than to
lead or drive them, like brute Beasts. Before the united Provinces set the
Example, Toleration was deemed incompatible with good Government, and 'twas
thought impossible, that a Number of religious Sects could live together in
Harmony and Peace, and have all of them an equal Affection to their common
Country, and to each other. England has set a like Example of civil Liberty;
and though this Liberty seems to occasion some mall Ferment at present, it has
not as yet produced any pernicious Effects, and it is to be hoped, that Men,
being every Day more accustomed to the free Discussion of public Affairs, will
improve in their Judgment of them, and be with greater Difficulty seduced by
every idle Rumor and popular Clamor

IT IS a very comfortable Reflection to the Lovers of Liberty, that this
peculiar Privilege of Britain is of a Kind that cannot easily be wrested from
us, and must last as long as our Government remains, in any Degree, free and
independent. It Is seldom, that Liberty of any Kind is lost all at once. Slavery
has so frightful an Aspect to Men accustomed to Freedom, that it must steal in
upon them by Degrees, and must disguise itself in a thousand Shapes, in ordet
to be received. But if the Liberty of the Press ever be lost, it must be lost
at once. The general Laws against Sedition and Libelling are at present as
strong as they possibly can be made. Nothing can impose a farther Restraint,
but either the clapping an IMPRIMATUR upon the Press, or the giving very large
discretionary Powers to the Court to punish whatever displeases them. But these
Concessions would be such a barefaced Violation of Liberty, that they will
probably be the last Efforts of a despotic Government. We may conclude, that
the Liberty of Britain is gone for ever, when these Attempts shall succeed.

ESSAY III. Of IMPUDENCE and MODESTY.
I HAVE always been of Opinion, that the Complaints against Providence have
been ill-grounded, and that the good or bad Qualities of Men are the Causes of
their good or bad Fortune, more than what is generally imagined. There are, no
doubt, Instances to the contrary, and pretty numerous ones too; but few, in
Comparison of the Instances we have of a right Distribution of Prosperity and
Adversity: Nor indeed could it be otherwise from the common Course of human
Affairs. To be endowed with a benevolent Disposition, and to love others will
almost infallibly procure Love and Esteem; which is the chief Circumstance in
Life, and facilitates every Enterprise and Undertaking; besides the
Satisfaction, which immediately results from it. The Case is much the same with
the other Virtues. Prosperity is naturally, though not necessarily attached to
Virtue and Merit; as Adversity is to Vice and Folly.

I MUST, however, confess, that this Rule admits of an Exception with regard to
one moral Quality; and that Modesty has a natural Tendency to conceal a Man's
Talents, as Impudence displays them to the utmost, and has been the only Cause
why many have risen in the World, under all the Disadvantages of low Birth and
little Merit. Such Indolence and Incapacity is there in the Generality of
Mankind, that they are apt to receive a Man for whatever he has a Mind to put
himself off for; and admits his over-bearing Airs as Proofs of that Merit,
which he assumes to himself. A decent Assurance seems to be the natural
Attendant of Virtue; and few Men can distinguish Impudence from it: As, on the
other Hand, Diffidence, being the natural Result of Vice and Folly, has drawn
Disgrace upon Modesty, which in outward Appearance so nearly resembles it.

I WAS lately lamenting to a Friend of mine, who loves a Conceit, that popular
Applause should be bestowed with so little Judgment, and that so many empty
forward Coxcombs should rise up to a Figure in the World: Upon which he said
there was nothing surprising in the Case. Popular Fame, says he, is nothing but
Breath or Air; and Air very naturally presses into a Vacuum.

As Impudence, though really a Vice, has the same Effects upon a Man's Fortune,
as if it were a Virtue; so it is remarkable that it is almost as difficult to
be attained, and is, in that respect, distinguished from all the other Vices,
which are acquired with little Pains, and continually increase upon Indulgence:
Many a Man, being sensible that Modesty is extremely prejudicial to him in the
making his Fortune, has resolved to be impudent and to put a bold Face upon the
Matter: But it is observable, that such People have seldom succeeded in the
Attempt, but have been obliged to relapse into their primitive Modesty. Nothing
carries a Man through the World like a true genuine natural Impudence. Its
Counterfeit is good for nothing, nor can ever support itself. In any other
Attempt, whatever Faults a Man commits and is sensible of, he is so much the
nearer his End. But when he endeavors at Impudence, if he ever failed in the
Attempt, the Remembrance of it will make him blush, and will infallibly
disconcert him: After which every Blush is a Cause for new Blushes, 'till he be
found out to be an arrant Cheat, and a vain Pretender to Impudence.

IF any thing can give a modest Man more Assurance, it must be some Advantages
of Fortune, which Chance procures to him. Riches naturally gain a Man a
favorable Reception in the World, and give Merit a double Luster, when a
Person is endowed with it; and supply its Place, in a great Measure, when it is
absent. It Is wonderful to observe what Airs of Superiority Fools and Knaves,
with large Possessions, give themselves above Men of the greatest Merit in
Poverty. Nor do the Men of Merit make any strong Opposition to these
Usurpations; or rather seem to favor them by the Modesty of their Behavior.
Their Good Sense and Experience make them diffident of their Judgment, and
cause them to examine every thing with the greatest Accuracy: As on the other
Hand, the Delicacy of their Sentiments makes them timorous lest they commit
Faults, and lose in the Practice of the World that Integrity of Virtue, of
which they are so jealous. To make Wisdom agree with Confidence is as difficult
as to reconcile Vice to Modesty.

THESE are the Reflections that have occurred to me upon this Subject of
Impudence and Modesty; and I hope the Reader will not be displeased to see them
wrought into the following Allegory.

JUPITER, in the Beginning, joined VIRTUE, WISDOM and CONFIDENCE together; and
VICE, FOLLY, and DIFFIDENCE: And in that Society set them upon the Earth. But
though he thought he had matched them with great judgment, and said that
Confidence was the natural Companion of Virtue, and that Vice deserved to be
attended with Diffidence, they had not gone far before Dissension arose among
them. Wisdom, who was the Guide of the one Company, was always accustomed,
before she ventured upon any Road, however beaten, to examine it carefully; to
enquire whither it led; what Dangers, Difficulties and Hindrances might
possibly or probably occur in it. In these Deliberations she usually consumed
some Time; which Delay was very displeasing to Confidence, who was always
inclined to hurry on, without much Forethought or Deliberation, in the first
Road he met. Wisdom and Virtue were inseparable: But Confidence one Day,
following his impetuous Nature, advanced a considerable Way before his Guides
and Companions; and not feeling any Want of their Company, he never inquired
after them, nor ever met with them more. In like Manner, the other Society,
though joined by Jupiter, disagreed and separated. As Folly saw very little Way
before her, she had nothing to determine concerning the Goodness of Roads, nor
could give the Preference to one above another; and this Want of Resolution was
increased by Diffidence, who with her Doubts and Scruples always retarded the
Journey. This was a great Annoyance to Vice, who loved not to hear of
Difficulties and Delays, and was never satisfied without his full Career, in
whatever his Inclinations led him to. Folly, he knew, though she hearkened to
Diffidence, would be easily managed when alone; and therefore, as a vicious
Horse throws his Rider, he openly beat away this Controller of all his
Pleasures, and proceeded in his Journey with Folly, from whom he is
inseparable. Confidence and Diffidence being, after this Manner, both thrown
loose from their respective Companies, wandered for some Time; till at last
Chance led them at the same Time to one Village. Confidence went directly up to
the great House, which belonged to WEALTH, the Lord of the Village; and without
staying for a Porter, intruded himself immediately into the innermost
Apartments, where he found Vice and Folly well received before him. He joined
the Train; recommended himself very quickly to his Landlord; and entered into
such Familiarity with Vice, that he was enlisted in the same Company along with
Folly. They were frequent Guests of Wealth, and from that Moment inseparable.
Diffidence, in the mean Time, not daring to approach the Great House, accepted
of an Invitation from POVERTY, one of the Tenants; and entering the Cottage,
found Wisdom and Virtue, who being repulsed by the Landlord had retired
thither. Virtue took Compassion of her, and Wisdom found, from her Temper, that
she would easily improve: So they admitted her into their Society. Accordingly,
by their Means, she altered in a little Time somewhat of her Manner, and
becoming much more amiable and engaging, was now called by the Name of MODESTY.
As ill Company has a greater Effect than good, Confidence, though more refractory
to Counsel and Example, degenerated so far by the Society of Vice and Folly, as
to pass by the Name of IMPUDENCE. Mankind, who saw these Societies as Jupiter
first joined them, and knew nothing of these mutual Desertions, are led into
strange Mistakes by those Means; and wherever they see Impudence, make account
of Virtue and Wisdom, and wherever they observe Modesty call her Attendants
Vice and Folly.

ESSAY IV. That POLITICS may be reduced to a SCIENCE.
IT is a great Question with several, Whether there be any essential Difference
betwixt one Form of Government and another? and, Whether every Form may not
become good or bad, according as it is well or ill administered For Forms of
Government let Fools contest:
Whatever is best administered is best.
Essay on Man, Book 3.
? Were it once admitted, that all Governments are alike, and that the only
Difference consists in the Character and Conduct of the Governors, most
political Disputes would be at an End, and all Zeal for one Constitution above
another must be esteemed mere Bigotry and Folly. But though I be a professed
Friend to Moderation, I cannot forbear condemning this Sentiment, and should be
sorry to think, that human Affairs admit of no greater Stability, than what
they receive from the casual Humors and Characters of particular Men.

IT IS true, those who maintain, that the Goodness of all Government consists in
the Goodness of the Administration, may cite many particular Instances in
History where the very same Government, in different Hands, varies suddenly
into the two opposite Extremes of good and bad. Compare the French Government
under Henry III. and under Henry IV. Cruelty, Oppression, Levity, Artifice on
the Part of the Rulers; Faction, Sedition, Treachery, Rebellion, Disloyalty on
the Part of the Subjects: These compose the Character of the former miserable
Era. But when the Patriot and heroic Prince, who succeeded, was once firmly
seated on the Throne, the Government, the People, every Thing seemed to be
totally changed, and all from the Change of the Temper and Sentiments of one
single Man. An equal Difference of a contrary Kind, may be found in comparing
the Reigns of Elisabeth and James, at least with Regard to foreign Affairs; and
Instances of this Kind may be multiplied, almost without Number, from ancient
as well as modern History.

BUT here I would beg Leave to make a Distinction. All absolute Governments
(and such the English Government was, in a great Measure, till the Middle of
the last Century) must very much depend on the Administration; and this is one
of the great Inconveniences of that Form of Government. But a Republican and
free Government would be a most glaring Absurdity, if the particular Checks and
Controuls, provided by the Constitution, had really no Influence, and made it
not the Interest, even of bad Men, to operate for the public Good. Such is the
Intention of these Forms of Government; and such is the real Effect, where they
are wisely constituted: As on the other Hand, they are the Sources of all
Disorder, and of the blackest Crimes, where either Skill or Honesty has been
wanting in their original Frame and Institution. So great is the Force of Laws,
and of particular Forms of Government, and so little Dependence have they on
the Humors and Temper of Men, that Consequences as general and as certain may
be deduced from them, on most Occasions, as any which the Mathematical Sciences
can afford us.

THE Roman Government gave the whole Legislative Power to the Commons, without
allowing a Negative, either to the Nobility, or Consuls. This unbounded Power
the Commons possessed in a collective Body, not in a Representative. The
Consequences were, When the People, by Success and Conquest had become very
numerous, and had spread themselves to a great Distance from the Capital, the
City-Tribes, though the most contemptible, carried almost every Vote: They were,
therefore, most cajoled by every one who affected Popularity: They were
supported in Idleness by the general Distribution of Corn, and by particular
Bribes, which they received from almost every Candidate: By this Means they
became every Day more licentious, and the Campus Martius was a perpetual Scene
of Tumult and Sedition: Armed Slaves were introduced among these rascally
Citizens; so that the whole Government fell into Anarchy, and the greatest
Happiness the Romans could look for, was the despotic Power of the Caesar's.
Such are the Effects of Democracy without a Representative.

A NOBILITY may possess the whole or any Part of the legislative Power of a
State after two different Ways. Either every Nobleman shares the Power as part
of the whole Body, or the whole Body enjoys the Power as composed of Parts;
which have each a distinct Power and Authority. The Venetian Nobility are an
Instance of the first kind of Government: The Polish of the second. In the
Venetian Government the whole Body of Nobility possesses the whole Power, and
no Nobleman has any Authority, which he receives not from the Whole. In the
Polish Government every Nobleman, by Means of his Fiefs, has a peculiar
hereditary Authority over his Vassals, and the whole Body has no Authority but
what it receives from the Concurrence of its Parts. The distinct Operations and
Tendencies of these two Species of Government might be made most apparent even
a priori. A Venetian Nobility is infinitely preferable to a Polish, let the
Humors and Education of Men be ever so much varied. A Nobility, who possess
their Power in common, will preserve Peace and Order, both among themselves,
and their Subjects; and no Member can have Authority enough to control the
Laws for a Moment. They will preserve their Authority over the People, but
without any grievous Tyranny, or any Breach of private Property; because such a
tyranninical Government is not the Interest of the whole Body, however it may
be the Interest of some Individuals. There will be a Distinction of Rank
betwixt the Nobility and People, but this will be the only Distinction in the
State. The whole Nobility will form one Body, and the whole People another,
without any of those private Feuds and Animosities, which spread Ruin and
Desolation everywhere. It Is easy to see the Disadvantages of a Polish Nobility
in every one of these Particulars.

IT IS possible so to constitute a free Government, as that a single Person,
call him Duke, Prince or King, shall possess a very large Share of the Power,
and shall form a proper Balance or Counterpoise to the other Parts of the
Legislature. This chief Magistrate may be either elective or hereditary; and
though the former Institution may, to a superficial View, appear most
advantageous; yet a more accurate Inspection will discover in it greater
Inconveniences than in the latter, and such as are founded on Causes and
Principles eternal and immutable. The filling of the Throne, in such a
Government, is a Point of too great and too general Interest not to divide the
whole People into Factions: From whence a Civil War, the greatest of Ills, may
be apprehended, almost with Certainty, upon every Vacancy. The Prince elected
must be either a Foreigner or a Native: The former will be ignorant of the
People whom he is to govern; suspicious of his new Subjects, and suspected by
them; giving his Confidence entirely to Strangers, who will have no other
Thoughts but of enriching themselves in the quickest Manner, while their
Master's Favor and Authority is able to support them. A Native will carry into
the Throne all his private Animosities and Friendships, and will never be
regarded, in his Elevation, without exciting the Sentiments of Envy in those
who formerly considered him as their Equal. Not to mention, that a Crown is too
high a Reward ever to be given to Merit alone, and will always induce the
Candidates to employ Force, or Money, or Intrigue, to procure the Votes of the
Electors: So that such a Choice will give no better Chance for a superior Merit
in the Prince, than if the State had trusted to Birth alone to determine their
Sovereign.

IT may therefore be pronounced as an universal Axiom in Politics, That an
hereditary Prince, a Nobility without Vassals, and a People voting by their
Representatives, form the best MONARCHY, ARISTOCRACY and DEMOCRACY. But in
order to prove more fully, that Politics admit of general Truths, which are
invariable by the Humor or Education either of Subject or Sovereign, it may
not be amiss to observe some other Principles of this Science, which may seem
to deserve that Character.

IT may easily be observed, that though free Governments have been commonly the
most happy for those who partake of their Freedom; yet are they the most
ruinous and oppressive for their Provinces: And this Observation may, I
believe, be fixed as a Maxim of the kind we are here speaking of. When a
Monarch extends his Dominions by Conquest, he soon learns to consider his old
and his new Subjects as on the same Footing; because in reality all his
Subjects are to him the same, except the few Friends and Favorites, with whom
he is personally acquainted. He does not, therefore, make any Distinction
betwixt them in his general Laws; and at the same Time is no less careful to
prevent all particular Acts of Oppression in the one as in the other. But a
free State necessarily makes a great Distinction, and must always do so, 'till
Men learn to love their Neighbors as well as themselves. The Conquerors, in
such a Government, are all Legislators, and will be sure so to contrive
Matters, by Restrictions of Trade and by Taxes, as to draw some private, as
well as public, Advantage from their Conquests. Provincial Governors have also
a better Chance in a Republic, to escape with their Plunder, by means of
Bribery or Interest; and their Fellow-Citizens, who find their own State to be
enriched by the Spoils of their Subject-Provinces, will be the more inclined to
tolerate such Abuses. Not to mention, that it is a necessary Precaution in a
free State to change the Governors frequently; which obliges these temporary
Tyrants to be more expeditious and rapacious, that they may accumulate
sufficient Wealth before they give place to their Successors. What cruel
Tyrants were the Romans over the World during the Time of their Commonwealth!
It Is true, they had Laws to prevent Oppression in their Provincial Magistrates;
but Cicero informs us, that the Romans could not better consult the Interest of
the Provinces than by repealing these very Laws. For, says he, in that Case our
Magistrates, having entire Impunity, would plunder no more than would satisfy
their own Rapaciousness: Whereas, at present, they must also satisfy that of
their Judges, and of all the great Men of Rome, whose Protection they stand in
need of. Who can read of the Cruelties and Oppressions of Verres without Horror
and Astonishment? And, who is not touched with Indignation to hear, that after
Cicero had exhausted on that abandoned Criminal all the Thunders of the most
divine Eloquence, and had prevailed so far as to get him condemned to the
utmost Extent of the Laws; yet that cruel Tyrant lived peaceably to old Age, in
Opulence and Ease, and, thirty Years afterward, was put into the Proscription
by Mark Anthony, upon account of his exorbitant Wealth, where he fell, along
with Cicero himself, and all the most virtuous Men of Rome? After the
Dissolution of the Commonwealth, the Roman Yoke became easier upon the
Provinces, as Tacitus informs us; and it may be observed, that many of the
worst Emperors, Domitian, for instance, were very careful to prevent all
Oppression of the Provinces. In Vespasian's Time, Gaul was esteemed richer than
Italy itself: Nor do I find, during the whole Time of the Roman Monarchy, that
the Empire became less rich or populous in any of its Provinces; though indeed
its Valor and military Discipline were always upon the Decline. If we pass
from ancient to modern Times, we shall find the same Observation to hold true.
The Provinces of obsolute Monarchies are always better treated than those of
free States. Compare the Pais conquis of France with Ireland, and you will be
convinced of this Truth; though this latter Kingdom, being almost entirely
peopled from England, possesses so many Rights and Privileges as should
naturally make it challenge better Treatment than that of a conquered Province.
Corsica is also an obvious Instance to the same Purpose.

THERE is an Observation of Machiavel, with regard to the Conquests of
Alexander the Great, which, I think, may be regarded as one of those eternal
political Truths, which no Time or Accidents can vary. It may seem strange,
says that Politician, that such sudden Conquests as those of Alexander, should
be possessed so peaceably by his Successors, and that the Persians, during all
the Confusions and civil Wars of the Greeks, never made the smallest Effort
toward the Recovery of their former independent Government. To satisfy us
concerning the Cause of this remarkable Event, we may consider, that a Monarch
may govern his Subjects after two different Ways. He may either follow the
Maxims of the Eastern Princes, and stretch his Power so far as to leave no
Distinction of Ranks among his Subjects, but what proceeds immediately from
himself; no Advantages of Birth; no hereditary Honors and Possessions: And, in
a Word, no Credit among the People, except from his Commission alone. Or a
Monarch may exert his Power in a milder Manner, like our European Princes; and
leave other Sources of Honor, beside his Smile and Favor: Birth, Titles,
Possessions, Valor, Integrity, Knowledge, or brave and fortunate
Achievements. In the former Species of Government, after a Conquest, it is
impossible ever to shake off the Yoke; since no one possesses among the People
so much personal Credit and Authority as to begin such an Enterprise: Whereas
in the latter Species of Government, the least Misfortune or Discord of the
Victors, will encourage the Vanquished to take Arms, who have Leaders ready to
prompt and conduct them in every Undertaking.

SUCH is the Reasoning of Machiavel, which seems to me very solid and
conclusive; though I wish he had not mixed Falsehood with Truth, in asserting that
Monarchies governed according to the Eastern Policy, though more easily kept when
once they are subdued, yet are the most difficult to be subdued; since they
cannot contain any powerful Subject, whose Discontent and Faction may
facilitate the Enterprises of an Enemy. For besides, that such a tyrannical
Government enervates the Courage of Men, and renders them indifferent
concerning the Fortunes of their Sovereign; besides this, I say, we find by
Experience, that even the temporary and delegated Authority of the Generals and
Magistrates, being always, in such Governments, as absolute within its Sphere
as that of the Prince himself, is able, with Barbarians, accustomed to a blind
Submission, to produce the most dangerous and fatal Revolutions. So that, in
every Respect, a gentle Government is preferable, and gives the greatest
Security to the Sovereign as well as to the Subject.

LEGISLATORS, therefore, should not trust the future Government of a State
entirely to Chance, but ought to provide a System of Laws to regulate the
Administration of public Affairs to the latest Posterity. Effects will always
correspond to Causes; and wise Regulations in any Commonwealth are the most
valuable Legacy, which can be left to future Ages. In the smallest Court or
Office, the stated Forms and Methods, by which Business must be conducted, are
found to be a considerable Check on the natural Depravity of Mankind. Why
should not the Case be the same in public Affairs? Can we ascribe the Stability
and Wisdom of the Venetian Government, through so many Ages, to any Thing but
their Form of Government? And is it not easy to point out those Defects in the
original Constitution, which produced the tumultuous Governments of Athens and
Rome, and ended at last in the Ruin of these two famous Republics? And so
little Dependence has this Affair on the Humors and Education of particular
Men, that one Part of the same Republic may be wisely conducted, and another
weakly, by the very same Men, merely by Reason of the Difference of the Forms
and Institutions, by which these Parts are regulated. Historians inform us,
that this was actually the Case with Genoa. For while the State was always full
of Sedition, and Tumult, and Disorder, the Bank of St. George, which had become
a considerable Part of the People, was conducted for several Ages with the
utmost Integrity and Wisdom Essempio veramenti raro, and da Filosofi intante
loro imaginate and vedute Republiche may non trovato, vedere dentro ad un
medesimo cerchio, fra medesimi cittadini, la liberta, and la tirannide, la vita
civil and la corrotta, la giustitia and la licenza; perch quella ordine and
solo manti^ne quella citta piena di costumi antichi and venerabili. E s'egli
auvenisse (che col tempo in ogni modo auverra) que San Giorgio tutta quella
citta occupasse, sarrebbe quella una Republica pin que la Venetiana memorabile.
Della Hist. Fiorentine, Lib. 8.
.

HERE then is a sufficient Inducement to maintain, with the utmost ZEAL, in
every free State, those Forms and Institutions, by which Liberty is secured,
the Public Good consulted, and the Avarice or Ambition of private Men
restrained and punished. Nothing does more Honor to human Nature, than to see
it susceptible of so noble a Passion; as nothing can be a greater Indication of
Meanness of Heart in any Man, than to see him devoid of it. A Man who loves
only himself, without Regard to Friendship or Merit, is a detestable Monster;
and a Man, who is only susceptible of Friendship, without public Spirit, or a
Regard to the Community, is deficient in the most material Part of Virtue.

BUT this is a Subject that need not be longer insisted on at present. There
are enough of Zealots on both Sides to kindle up the Passions of their
Partisans, and under the Pretense of public Good, pursue the Interests and
Ends of their particular Faction. For my Part, I shall always be more fond of
promoting Moderation than Zeal; though perhaps the surest Way of producing
Moderation in every Party is to increase our Zeal for the Public. Let us,
therefore, try, if it be possible, from the foregoing Doctrine, to draw a
Lesson of Moderation, with regard to the Parties, in which our Country is at
present divided; at the same Time that we allow not this Moderation to abate
the Industry and Passion with which every Individual is bound to pursue the
Good of his Country.

THOSE who either attack or defend a Minister in such a Government as ours,
where the utmost Liberty is allowed, always carry Matters to Extremes, and
exaggerate his Merit or Demerit with regard to the Public. His Enemies are
sure to charge him with the greatest Enormities, both in domestic and foreign
Management; and there is no Meanness or Crime, of which, in their Account, he
is not capable. Unnecessary Wars, scandalous Treaties, Profusion of public
Treasure, oppressive Taxes, every kind of Maladministration is ascribed to
him. To aggravate the Charge, his pernicious Conduct, it is said, will extend
its baneful Influence even to Posterity, by undermining the best Constitution
in the World, and disordering that wise System of Laws, Institutions and
Customs, by which our Ancestors, for so many Centuries, have been so happily
governed. He is not only a wicked Minister in himself, but has removed every
Security provided against wicked Ministers for the future.

ON the other Hand, the Partisans of the Minister make his Panegyric run as
high as the Accusation against him, and celebrate his wise, steady, and
moderate Conduct in every Part of his Administration. The Honor and Interest
of the Nation supported abroad, public Credit maintained at home, Persecution
restrained, Faction subdued; the Merit of all these Blessings is ascribed
solely to the Minister. At the same Time, he crowns all his other Merits, by a
religious Care of the best Constitution in the World, which he has preserved
inviolate in all its Parts, and has transmitted entire, to be the Happiness and
Security of the latest Posterity.

WHEN this Accusation and Panegyric are received by the Partisans of each
Party, no Wonder they engender a most extraordinary Ferment on both Sides, and
fill the whole Nation with the most violent Animosities. But I would fain
persuade these Party-Zealots, that there is a flat Contradiction both in the
Accusation and Panegyric, and that it were impossible for either of them to run
so high, were it not for this Contradiction; if our Constitution be really
Dissertation on Parties, Letter 10.
that noble Fabric, the pride of Britain, the Envy of our Neighbors, raised by
the Labor of so many Centuries, repaired at the Expense of so many Millions,
and cemented by such a Profusion of Blood; I say, if our Constitution does in
any Degree deserve these Elogiums, it would never have endured a wicked and a
weak Minister to govern triumphantly for a Course of Twenty Years, when opposed
by the greatest Geniuses of the Nation, who exercised the utmost Liberty of
Tongue and Pen, in Parliament, and in their frequent Appeals to the People. But
if the Minister be wicked and weak, to the Degree so strenuously insisted on,
the Constitution must be faulty in its original Principles, and the Minister
cannot consistently be charged with undermining the best Constitution of the
World. A Constitution is only so far good, as it provides a Remedy against
Maladministration; and if the British Constitution, when in its greatest
Vigor, and repaired by two such remarkable Events, as the Revolution and
Accession, by which our ancient Royal Family was sacrificed to it; if our
Constitution, I say, with so great Advantages, does not, in Fact, provide any
such Remedy against Maladministration, we are rather beholden to any
Minister, that undermines it, and affords us an Opportunity of erecting a
better Constitution in its Place.

I WOULD make Use of the same Topics to moderate the Zeal of those who defend
the Minister. If our Constitution be so excellent, a Change of Ministry can be
no such dreadful Event; since it is essential to such a Constitution, in every
Ministry, both to preserve itself from Violation, and to prevent all Enormities
in the Administration. If our Constitution be bad, so extraordinary a Jealousy
and Apprehension, on Account of Changes, is illplac'd; and a Man should no more
be anxious in this Case, than a Husband, who had married a Woman from the
Stews, should be watchful to prevent her Infidelity. Public Affairs, in such a
Constitution, must necessarily go to Confusion by whatever Hands they are
conducted; and the Zeal of Patriots is much less requisite in that Case than
the Patience and Submission of Philosophers. The Virtue and good Intentions of
Cato and Brutus are highly laudable; But to what Purpose did their Zeal serve?
To nothing, but to hasten the fatal Period of the Roman Government, and render
its Convulsions and dying Agonies more violent and painful.

I WOULD not be understood to mean, that public Affairs deserve no Care and
Attention at all. Would Men be moderate and consistent, their Claims might be
admitted; at least, might be examined. The Country Party might still assert,
that our Constitution, though excellent, will admit of Maladministration to a
certain Degree; and therefore, if the Minister be bad, it is proper to oppose
him with a suitable Degree of Zeal. And on the other Side, the Court-Party may
be allowed, upon the Supposition, that the Minister were good, to defend, and
with some Zeal too, his Administration. I would only persuade Men not to
contend, as if they were fighting pro aris and focis, and change a good
Constitution into a bad one, by the Violence of their Factions.

I HAVE not here considered any Thing that is personal in the present
Controversy. In the best Constitution of the World, where every Man is
restrained by the most rigid Laws; it is easy to discover either the good or bad
Intentions of a Minister, and to judge, whether his personal Character deserves
Love or Hatred. But such Questions are of little Importance to the Public, and
ly under a just Suspicion either of Malevolence or Flattery in those who employ
their Pens upon them.

ESSAY V. Of the first PRINCIPLES of GOVERNMENT.
NOTHING is more surprising to those, who consider human Affairs with a
Philosophical Eye; than to see the Easiness with which the many are governed by
the few, and to observe the implicit Submission with which Men resign their
own Sentiments and Passions to those of their Rulers. When we enquire by what
Means this Wonder is brought about, we shall find, that as FORCE is always on
the Side of the Governed, the Governors have nothing to support them but
OPINION. It Is therefore, on Opinion only that Government is founded; and this
Maxim extends to the most despotick and most military Governments, as well as
to the most free and most popular. The Sultan of Egypt, or the Emperor of
Rome, might drive his harmless Subjects, like brute Beasts, against their
Sentiments and Inclination: But he must, at least, have led his Mamalukes, or
Praetorian Bands, like Men, by their Opinion.

OPINION is of two Kinds, viz. Opinion of INTEREST, and Opinion of RIGHT. By
Opinion of Interest, I chiefly understand the Sense of the public Advantage
which is reapt from Government; along with the Persuasion, that the particular
Government, which is established, is equally advantageous with any other that
could easily be settled. When this Opinion prevails among the Generality of a
State, or among those who have the Force in their Hands, it gives great
Security to any Government.

RIGHT is of two Kinds, Right to POWER, and Right to PROPERTY. What Prevalence
Opinion of the first Kind has over Mankind, may easily be understood by
observing the Attachment, which all Nations have to their ancient Government,
and even to those Names, which have had the Sanction of Antiquity. Antiquity
always begets the Opinion of Right; and whatever disadvantageous Sentiment we
may entertain of Mankind, they are always found to be prodigal both of Blood
and Treasure, in the Maintenance of public Right. This Passion we may
denominate Enthusiasm, or may give it what Appellation we please; but a
Politician, who would overlook its Influence on human Affairs, would prove
himself to have but a very limited Understanding.

IT IS sufficiently understood, that the Opinion of Right to Property is of the
greatest Moment in all Matters of Government. A noted Author has made Property
the Foundation of all Government; and most of our political Writers seem
inclined to follow him in that Particular. This is carrying the Matter too far;
but still it must be owned, that the Opinion of Right to Property has a great
Influence in this Subject.

UPON these three Opinions, therefore, of Interest, of Right to Power, and of
Right to Property, are all Governments founded, and all Authority of the few
over the many. There are indeed other Principles, which add Force to these, and
determine, limit, or alter their Operation; such as Self-Interest, Fear, and
Affection: But still I assert, that these other Principles can have no
Influence alone, but suppose the antecedent Influence of those Opinions
abovementioned. They are, therefore, to be esteemed the secondary, not the
original Principles of Government.

FOR first, as to Self-Interest, by which I mean the Expectation of particular
Rewards, distinct from the general Protection which we receive from Government;
it is evident, that the Magistrate's Authority must be antecedently established,
or at least be hoped for, in order to produce this Expectation. The Expectation
of Reward may augment the Authority with regard to some particular Persons; but
can never give Birth to it with regard to the Public. Men naturally look for
the greatest Favors from their Friends and Acquaintance; and therefore, the
Hopes of any considerable Number of the State, would never center in any
particular Set of Men, if these Men had no other Title to Magistracy, and had
no Influence over the Opinions of Mankind. The same Observation may be extended
to the other two Principles of Fear and Affection. No Man would have any Reason
to fear the Fury of a Tyrant, if he had no Authority over any but from Fear;
since, as a single Man, his bodily Force can reach but a small Way, and
whatever Power he has beyond, must be founded either on our own Opinion, or on
the presumed Opinion of others. And though Affection to Wisdom and Virtue in a
Sovereign extends very far, and has great Influence; yet he must be
antecedently supposed to be invested with a public Character, otherwise the
public Esteem will serve him in no Stead, nor will his Virtue have any
Influence beyond his private Sphere.

A GOVERNMENT may endure for several Ages, though the Balance of Power, and
the Balance of Property do not agree. This chiefly happens, where any Member
of the State has acquired a large Share of the Property; but from the original
Constitution of the Government has no Share of the Power. Under what Pretext
would any Individual of that Order pretend to intermeddle in public Affairs? As
Men are commonly much attacht to their ancient Government, it is not to be
expected, that the Public would ever favor such Usurpations. But where the
original Constitution allows any Share of the Power, though small, to an Order
of Men, that possesses a large Share of Property, it is easy for them gradually
to stretch their Authority, and bring the Balance of Power to coincide with
that of Property. This has been the Case with the House of Commons in England.

MOST Writers, that have treated of the British Government, have supposed, that
as the House of Commons represents all the Commons of Great Britain; so its
Weight in the Scale is proportioned to the Property and Power of all whom they
represent. But this Principle must not be received as absolutely true. For
though the People are apt to attach themselves more to the House of Commons
than to any other Member of the Constitution, that House being chosen by them
as their Representatives, and as the public Guardians of their Liberty; yet are
there Instances where the House, even when in Opposition to the Crown, has not
been followed by the People; as we may particularly observe in the Tory House
of Commons in the Reign of King William. Were the Members of the House obliged
to receive Instructions from their Constituents, like the Dutch Deputies, this
would entirely alter the Case; and if such immense Power and Riches, as those
of the whole Commons of Britain, were brought into the Scale, it is not easy to
conceive, that the Crown could either influence that Multitude of People, or
withstand that Overbalance of Property. It Is true, the Crown has great
Influence over the collective Body of Britain in the Elections of Members; but
were this Influence, which at present is only exerted once in seven Years, to
be employed in bringing over the People to every Vote, it would soon be wasted;
and no Skill, Popularity or Revenue could support it. I must, therefore, be of
Opinion, that an Alteration in this particular would introduce a total
Alteration in our Government, and would soon reduce it to a pure Republic; and
perhaps, to a Republic of no inconvenient Form. For though the People collected
in a Body, like the Roman Tribes, be quite unfit for Government, yet when
dispersed in small Bodies, they are more susceptible both of Reason and Order;
the Force of popular Currents and Tides is, in some Measure, broke; and the
public Interest may be pursued with Method and Constancy. But it is needless to
reason any farther concerning a Form of Government, which is never likely to
have place in Britain, and which seems not to be the Aim of any Party amongst
us. Let us cherish and improve our ancient Government as much as possible,
without encouraging a Passion for such dangerous Novelties.

I SHALL conclude this Subject with observing, that the present political
Controversy, with regard to Instructions, is a very frivolous one, and can
never be brought to any Decision, as it is managed by both Parties. The
Country-Party do not pretend, that a Member is absolutely bound to follow such
Instructions, as an Ambassador or General is confined by his Orders, and that
his Vote is not to be received in the House but so far as it is conformable to
them. The Court-Party, again, do not pretend, that the Sentiments of the People
ought to have no Weight with every Member; much less that he ought to despise
the Sentiments of those whom he represents, and with whom he is more
particularly connected. And if their Sentiments be of Weight, why ought they
not to express these Sentiments? The Question, then, is only concerning the
Degrees of Weight, which ought to be placed on Instructions. But such is the
Nature of Language, that it is impossible for it to express distinctly these
different Degrees; and if Men will carry on a Controversy on this Head, it may
well happen, that they may differ in their Language, and yet agree in their
Sentiments; and differ in their Sentiments, and yet agree in their Language.
Besides, how is it possible to fix these Degrees, considering the Variety of
Affairs that come before the House, and the Variety of Places, which Members
represent? Ought the Instructions of Totness to have the same Weight as those
of London? Or Instructions, with regard to the Convention, which respected
foreign Politics, to have the same Weight as those with regard to the Excise,
which respected only our domestic Affairs?

ESSAY VI. Of LOVE and MARRIAGE.
I Know not whence it proceeds, that Women are so apt to take amiss every Thing
that is said in Disparagement of the married State; and always consider a Satyr
upon Matrimony as a Satyr upon themselves. Do they mean by this, that they are
the Parties principally concerned, and that if a Backwardness to enter into
that State should prevail in the World, they would be the greatest Sufferers?
Or, are they sensible, that the Misfortunes and Miscarriages of the married
State are owing more to their Sex than to ours? I hope they do not intend to
confess either of these two Particulars, or to give such an Advantage to their
Adversaries, the Men, as even to allow them to suspect it.

I HAVE often had Thoughts of complying with this Humor of the Fair Sex, and
of writing a Panegyric upon Marriage: But, in looking around for Materials,
they seemed to be of so mixed a Nature, that at the Conclusion of my
Reflections, I found I was as much disposed to write a Satyr, which might be
placed on the opposite Pages of my Panegyric: And I am afraid, that as Satyr
is, on most Occasions, thought to have more Truth in it than Panegyric, I
should have done their Cause more Harm than Good by this Expedient. To
misrepresent Facts is what, I know, they will not require of me. I must be more
a Friend to Truth, than even to them, where their Interests are opposite.

I SHALL tell the Women what it is our Sex complains of most in the married
State; and if they be disposed to satisfy us in this Particular, all the other
Differences will be easily accomodated. If I be not mistaken, it is their Love
of Dominion which is the Ground of the Quarrel; though it is very likely, that
they will think it an unreasonable Love of it in us, which makes us insist so
much upon that Point. However this may be, no Passion seems to have more
Influence on female Minds than this for Power; and there is a remarkable
Instance in History of its prevailing above another Passion, which is the only
one that can be supposed a proper Counter-poise for it. We are told, that all
the Women in Scythia once conspired against the Men, and kept the Secret so
well, that they executed their Design before they were suspected. They
surprised the Men in Drink, or asleep, bound them all fast in Chains, and
having called a solemn Council of the whole Sex, it was debated what Expedient
should be used to improve the present Advantage, and prevent their falling
again into Slavery. To kill all the Men did not seem to the Relish of any Part
of the Assembly, notwithstanding the Injuries formerly received; and they were
afterward pleased to make a great Merit of this Lenity of theirs. It was,
therefore, agreed to put out the Eyes of the whole male Sex, and thereby resign
for ever after all the Vanity they could draw from their Beauty, in order to
secure their Authority. We must no longer pretend to dress and Show, say they;
but then we shall be free from Slavery. We shall hear no more tender Sighs; but
in return we shall hear no more imperious Commands. Love must for ever leave
us; but he will carry Subjection along with him.

IT IS regarded by some as an unlucky Circumstance, since the Women were
resolved to main the Men, and deprive them of some of their Senses, in order to
render them humble and dependent, that the Sense of hearing could not serve
their Purpose, since it is probable the Females would rather have attacked that
than the Sight: And I think it is agreed among the Learned, that, in a married
State, it is not near so great an Inconvenience to lose the former Sense as the
latter. However this may be, we are told by modern Anecdotes, that some of the
Scythian Women did secretly spare their Husbands Eyes; presuming, I suppose,
that they could govern them as well by means of that Sense as without it. But
so incorrigible and intractable were these Men, that their Wives were all
obliged in a few Years, as their Youth and Beauty decayed, to imitate the
Example of their Sisters; which it was no difficult Matter to do in a State
where the female Sex had once got the Superiority.

I KNOW not if our Scottish Ladies derive any Thing of this Humor from their
Scythian Ancestors; but I must confess, that I have often been surpised to see
a Woman very well pleased to take a Fool for her Mate, that she might govern
with the less Control; and could not but think her Sentiments, in this
Respect, still more barbarous than those of the Scythian Women abovementioned,
as much, as the Eyes of the Understanding are more valuable than those of the
Body.

BUT to be just, and to lay the Blame more equally, I am afraid it is the Fault
of our Sex, if the Women be so fond of Rule, and that if we did not abuse our
Authority, they would never think it worth while to dispute it. Tyrants, we
know, produce Rebels; and all History informs us, that Rebels, when they
prevail, are apt to become Tyrants in their Turn. For this Reason, I could wish
there were no Pretensions to Authority on either Side; but that every Thing was
carried on with perfect Equality, as betwixt two equal Members of the same
Body. And to induce both Parties to embrace those amicable Sentiments, I shall
deliver to them Plato's Account of the Origin of Love and Marriage.

MANKIND, according to that fanciful Philosopher, were not, in their Original,
divided into Male and Female, as at present; but each individual Person was a
Compound of both Sexes, and was in himself both Husband and Wife, melted down
into one living Creature. This Union, no Doubt, was very entire, and the Parts
very well adjusted together, since there resulted a perfect Harmony betwixt the
Male and Female, although they were obliged to be inseparable Companions. And so
great was the Harmony and Happiness flowing from it, that the ANDROGYNES (for
so Plato calls them) or MEN-WOMEN, became insolent upon their Prosperity, and
rebelled against the Gods. To punish them for this Temerity, Jupiter could
contrive no better Expedient, than to divorce the Male-Part from the Female,
and make two imperfect Beings of the Compound, which was before so perfect.
Hence the Origin of Men and Women, as distinct Creatures. But notwithstanding
this Division, so lively is our Remembrance of the Happiness we enjoyed in our
primaeval State, that we are never at Rest in this Situation; but each of these
Halves is continually searching through the whole Species to find the other Half,
which was broken from it: And when they meet, they join again with the greatest
Fondness and Sympathy. But it often happens, that they are mistaken in this
Particular; that they take for their Half what no Way corresponds to them; and
that the Parts do not meet nor join in with each other, as is usual in
Fractures. In this Case the Union is soon dissolved, and each Part is set loose
again to hunt for its lost Half, joining itself to every one it meets by Way of
Trial, and enjoying no Rest, till its perfect Sympathy with its Partner shows
that it has at last been successful in its Endeavors.

WERE I disposed to carry on this Fiction of Plato, which accounts for the
mutual Love betwixt the Sexes in so agreeable a Manner, I would do it by the
following Allegory.

WHEN Jupiter had separated the Male from the Female, and had quelled their
Pride and Ambition by so severe an Operation, he could not but repent him of
the Cruelty of his Vengeance, and take Compassion on poor Mortals, who were now
become incapable of any Repose or Tranquillity. Such Cravings, such Anxieties,
such Necessities arose, as made them curse their Creation, and think Existence
itself a Punishment. In vain had they Recourse to every other Occupation and
Amusement. In vain did they seek after every Pleasure of Sense, and every
Refinement of Reason. Nothing could fill that Void, which they felt in their
Hearts, or supply the Loss of their Partner, who was so fatally separated from
them. To remedy this Disorder, and to bestow some Comfort, at least, on human
Race in their forelorn Situation, Jupiter sent down LOVE and HYMEN to collect
the broken Halves of human Kind, and piece them together, in the best Manner
possible. These two Deities found such a prompt Disposition in Mankind to unite
again in their primitive State, that they proceeded on their Work with
wonderful Success for some Time; till at last, from many unlucky Accidents,
Dissension arose betwixt them. The chief Counselor and Favorite of Hymen was
CARE, who was continually filling his Patron's Head with Prospects of Futurity;
a Settlement, Family, Children, Servants; so that little else was regarded in
all the Matches they made. On the other Hand, Love had chosen PLEASURE for his
Favorite, who was as pernicious a Counselor as the other, and would never
allow Love to look beyond the present momentary Gratification, or the
satisfying of the prevailing Inclination. These two Favorites became, in a
little Time, irreconcilable Enemies, and made it their chief Business to
undermine each other in all their Undertakings. No sooner had Love fixed upon
two Halves, which he was cementing together, and forming to a close Union, but
Care insinuates himself, and bringing Hymen along with him, dissolves the Union
produced by Love, and joins each Half to some other Half, which he had provided
for it. To be revenged of this, Pleasure creeps in upon a Pair already joined
by Hymen; and calling Love to his Assistance, they Underhand contrive to join
each Half, by secret Links, to Halves, which Hymen was wholly unacquainted
with. It was not long before this Quarrel was felt in its pernicious
Consequences; and such Complaints arose before the Throne of Jupiter, that he
was obliged to summon the offending Parties to appear before him, in order to
give an Account of their Proceedings. After hearing the Pleadings on both
Sides, he ordered an immediate Reconcilement betwixt Love and Hymen, as the
only Expedient for giving Happiness to Mankind: And that he might be sure this
Reconcilement should be durable, he laid his strict Injunctions on them never
to join any Halves without consulting their Favorites, Care and Pleasure, and
obtaining the Consent of both to the Conjunction. Where this Order is strictly
observed, the Androgyne is perfectly restored, and human Race enjoy the same
Happiness as in their primaeval State. The Seam is scarce perceived, that joins
the two Beings together; but both of them combine to form one perfect and happy
Creature.

ESSAY VII. Of the STUDY of HISTORY.
THERE is nothing I would recommend more earnestly to my female Readers than
the Study of History, as an Occupation, of all others, the best suited both to
their Sex and Education; much more instructive than their ordinary Books of
Amusement, and more entertaining than those serious Compositions, which are
usually to be found in their Closets. Among other important Truths, which they
may learn from History, they may be informed of two Particulars, the Knowledge
of which may contribute very much to their Quiet and Repose; That our Sex, as
well as theirs, are far from being such perfect Creatures as they are apt to
imagine, and, That Love is not the only Passion, that governs the Male-World,
but is often overcome by Avarice, Ambition, Vanity, and a thousand other
Passions. Whether they be the false Representations of Mankind in those two
Particulars, that endear Romances and Novels so much to the fair Sex, I know
not; but must confess I am sorry to see them have such an Aversion to Matter of
Fact, and such an Appetite for Falsehood. I remember I was once desired by a
young Beauty, for whom I had some Passion, to send her some Novels and Romances
for her Amusement in the Country; but was not so ungenerous as to take the
Advantage, which such a Course of Reading might have given me, being resolved
not to make Use of poisoned Arms against her. I therefore sent her Plutarch's
Lives, assuring her at the same Time, that there was not a Word of Truth in
them from Beginning to End. She perused them very attentively, 'till she came
to the Lives of Alexander and Caesar, whose Names she had heard of by Accident:
and then returned me the Book, with many Reproaches for deceiving her.

I MAY indeed be told, that the fair Sex have no such Aversion to History, as I
have represented, provided it be secret History, and contain some memorable
Transaction proper to excite their Curiosity. But as I do not find that Truth,
which is the Basis of History, is at all regarded in those Anecdotes, I cannot
admit of this as a Proof of their Passion for that Study. However this may be,
I see not why the same Curiosity might not receive a more proper Direction, and
lead them to desire Accounts of those who lived in past Ages as well as of
their Contemporaries. What is it to Cleora, whether Fulvia entertains a secret
Commerce of Love with Philander or not? Has she not equal Reason to be pleased,
when she is informed, (what is whispered about among Historians) that Cato's
Sister had an Intrigue with Caesar, and palmed her Son, Marcus Brutus, upon her
Husband for his own, though in Reality he was her Gallant's? And are not the
Loves of Messalina or Julia as proper Subjects of Discourse as any Intrigue,
that this City has produced of late Years.

BUT I know not whence it comes, that I have been thus seduced into a kind of
Raillery against the Ladies: Unless, perhaps, it proceed from the same Cause,
that makes the Person, who is the Favorite of the Company, be often the Object
of their good-natured Jests and Pleasantries. We are pleased to address our
selves after any manner to a Person that is agreeable to us; and at the same
Time presume, that nothing will be taken amiss by one who is secure of the good
Opinion and Affections of every one present. I shall now proceed to handle my
Subject more seriously, and shall point out the many Advantages, that flow from
the Study of History, and show how well suited it is to every one, but
particularly to those who are debarred the severer Studies by the Tenderness of
their Complexion and the Weakness of their Education. The Advantages found in
History seem to be of three kinds, as it amuses the Fancy, as it improves the
Understanding, and as it strengthens Virtue.

IN reality, what more agreeable Entertainment to the Mind, than to be
transported into the remotest Ages of the World, and to observe human Society
in its Infancy, making the first faint Essays toward the Arts and Sciences: To
see the Policy of Government, and the Civility of Conversation refining by
Degrees, and every thing that is ornamental to human Life advancing toward its
Perfection. To remark the Rise, Progress, Declension and final Extinction of
the most flourishing Empires: The Virtues, which contributed to their
Greatness; and the Vices, which drew on their Ruin. In short, to see all human
Race, from the Beginning of Time, pass, as it were, in Review before us,
appearing in their true Colors, without any of those Disguises, which, during
their Lifetime, so much perplexed the Judgments of the Beholders. What
Spectacle can be imagined so magnificent, so various, so interesting? What
Amusement, either of the Senses or Imagination, can be compared with it? Shall
those trifling Pastimes, which engross so much of our Time, be preferred as
more satisfactory, and more fit to engage our Attention? How perverse must that
Taste be, which is capable of so wrong a Choice of Pleasures?

BUT History is a most improving Part of Knowledge, as well as an agreeable
Amusement; and indeed, a great Part of what we commonly call Erudition, and
value so highly, is nothing but an Acquaintance with historical Facts. An
extensive Knowledge of this kind belongs to Men of Letters; but I must think it
an unpardonable Ignorance in Persons of whatever Sex or Condition, not to be
acquainted with the History of their own Country, along with the Histories of
ancient Greece and Rome. A Woman may behave herself with good Manners, and have
even some Vivacity in her Turn of Wit; but where her Mind is so unfurnished,
it is impossible her Conversation can afford any Entertainment to Men of Sense
and Reflection.

I MUST add, that History is not only a valuable Part of Knowledge, but opens
the Door to many other Parts of Knowledge, and affords Materials to most of the
Sciences. And indeed, if we consider the Shortness of human Life, and our
limited Knowledge even of what passes in our own Time, we must be sensible,
that we should be for ever Children in Understanding, were it not for this
Invention, which extends our Experience to all past Ages, and to the most
distant Nations; making them contribute as much to our Improvement in Wisdom,
as if they had actually lain under our Observation. A Man acquainted with
History may, in some respect, be said to have lived from the Beginning of the
World, and to have been making continual Additions to his Stock of Knowledge in
every Century.

THERE is also an Advantage in that Knowledge, which is acquired by History,
above what is learned by the Practice of the World, that it brings us
acquainted with human Affairs, without diminishing in the least from the most
delicate Sentiments of Virtue. And to tell the Truth, I know not any Study or
Occupation so unexceptionable as History in this particular. Poets can paint
Virtue in the most charming Colors; but as they address themselves entirely to
the Passions, they often become Advocates for Vice. Even Philosophers are apt
to bewilder themselves in the Subtilty of their Speculations; and we have seen
some go so far as to deny the Reality of all moral Distinctions. But I think it
a Remark worthy the Attention of the speculative Reader, that the Historians
have been, almost without Exception, the true Friends of Virtue, and have
always represented it in its proper Colors, however they may have erred in
their Judgments of particular Persons. Machiavel himself discovers a true
Sentiment of Virtue in his History of Florence. When he talks as a Politician,
he considers Poisoning, Assassination and Perjury as lawful Arts of Power; but
when he speaks as an Historian, he shows so keen an indignation against Vice,
and so warm an Approbation of Virtue in many Passages, that I could not forbear
applying to him that Remark of Horace, That if you chase away Nature, though
with never so great Indignity, she will always return upon you. Nor is this
Combination of Historians in favor of Virtue at all difficult to be accounted
for. When a Man of Business enters into Life and Action, he is more apt to
consider the Characters of Men, as they have Relation to his Interest, than as
they stand in themselves; and has his Judgment warped on every Occasion by the
Violence of his Passion. When a Philosopher contemplates Characters and Manners
in his Closet, the general abstract View of the Objects leaves the Mind so cold
and unmoved, that the Sentiments of Nature have no Room to play, and he scarce
feels the Difference betwixt Vice and Virtue. History keeps in a just Medium
betwixt these Extremes, and places the Objects in their true Point of View. The
Writers of History, as well as the Readers, are sufficiently interested in the
Characters and Events, to have a lively Sentiment of Blame or Praise; and at
the same Time have no particular Interest or Concern to pervert their Judgment.

Verae voces tum demum pectore ab imo Eliciuntur.

ESSAY VIII. Of the INDEPENDENCY of PARLIAMENT.
I HAVE frequently observed, in comparing the Conduct of the Court and Country
Party, that the former are commonly less assuming and dogmatical in
Conversation, more apt to make Concessions, and though not, perhaps, more
susceptible of Conviction; yet more able to bear Contradiction than the latter;
who are apt to fly out upon any Opposition, and to regard one as a mercenary
designing Fellow, if he argues with any Coolness and Impartiality, or makes any
Concessions to their Adversaries. This is a Fact, which, I believe, every one
may have observed, who has been much in Companies, where political Questions
have been discussed; though, were one to ask the Reason of this Difference, every
Party would be apt to assign a different Reason. Gentlemen in the Opposition
will ascribe it to the very Nature of their Party, which, being founded on
public Spirit, and a Zeal for the Constitution, cannot easily endure such
Doctrines, as are of pernicious Consequence to Liberty. The Courtiers, on the
other Hand, will be apt to put us in Mind of the Clown mentioned by Lord
Shaftsbury. "A Clown, says that Miscellaneous Reflections, Page 107.
excellent Author, once took a Fancy to hear the Latin Disputes of Doctors at an
University. He was asked what Pleasure he could take in viewing such Combatants,
when he could never know so much, as which of the Parties had the better." For
that Matter, replied the Clown, " I a'n't such a Fool neither, but I can see
who is the first that puts to'other into a passion. Nature herself dictated this
Lesson to the Clown, that he who had the better of the Argument would be easy
and well-humour'd: But he who was unable to support his Cause by Reason, would
naturally lose his Temper, and grow violent."

To which of these Reasons shall we adhere? To neither of them, in my Opinion:
Unless we have a-mind to inlist ourselves, and become Zealots in either Party.
I believe I can assign the Reason of this different Conduct of the two Parties,
without offending either. The Country-Party are plainly most popular at
present, and perhaps have been so in most Administrations: So that, being
accustomed to prevail in Company, they cannot endure to hear their Opinions
controverted, but are as confident on the public Favor, as if they were
supported in all their Sentiments by the most infallible Demonstration. The
Courtiers, on the other Hand, are commonly so run down by your popular Talkers,
that if you speak to them with any Moderation, or make them the smallest
Concessions, they think themselves extremely obliged to you, and are apt to
return the Favor by a like Moderation and Facility on their Part. To be
furious and passionate, they know, would only gain them the Character of
shameless Mercenaries; not that of zealous Patriots, which is the Character
that such a warm Behavior is apt to acquire to the other Party.

IN all Controversies, we find, without regarding the Truth or Falsehood on
either Side, that those who defend the established and popular Opinions are
always most dogmatical and imperious in their Style: While their Adversaries
affect a most extraordinary Gentleness and Moderation, in order to soften, as
much as possible, any Prejudices, that may ly against them. Consider the
Behavior of our Free-thinkers of all Denominations, whether they be such as
decry all Revelation, or only oppose the exorbitant Power of the Clergy;
Collins, Tindal, Foster, Hoadley. Compare their Moderation and Good-manners
with the furious Zeal and Scurrility of their Adversaries, and you will be
convinced of the Truth of my Observation. A like Difference may be observed in
the Conduct of those French Writers, who maintained the Controversy with regard
to ancient and modern Learning. Boileau, Monsieur and Madame Dacier, l'Abbe de
Bos, who defended the Party of the Ancients, mixed their Reasonings with Satyr
and Invective: While Fontenelle, la Motte, Charpentier, and even Perrault never
transgressed the Bounds of Moderation and Good-breeding; though provoked by the
most injurious Treatment of their Adversaries.

I MUST, however, observe, that this Remark, with regard to the seeming
Moderation of the Court Party, is entirely confined to Conversation, and to
Gentlemen, who have been engaged by Interest or Inclination in that Party. For
as to the Court-Writers, being commonly hired Scriblers, they are altogether as
scurrilous as the Mercenaries of the other Party, nor has the Gazeteer any
Advantage, in this Respect, above Common Sense. A Man of Education will, in any
Party, discover himself to be such, by his Good-breeding and Decency; as a
Scoundrel will always betray the opposite Qualities. The false Accusers
accused, etc. is very scurrillous; though that Side of the Question, being least
popular, should be defended with most Moderation. When L -- d B -- e, L -- d M
-- t, Mr. L -- n take the Pen in Hand, though they write with Warmth, they
presume not upon their Popularity so far as to transgress the Bounds of Decency.

I AM led into this Train of Reflection, by considering some Papers wrote upon
that grand Topic of Court-Influence, and Parliamentary Dependence, where, in my
humble Opinion, the Country-Party show too rigid an Inflexibility, and too
great a Jealousy of making Concessions to their Adversaries. Their Reasonings
lose their Force, by being carried too far; and the Popularity of their
Opinions has seduced them to neglect, in some Measure, their Justness and
Solidity. The following Reasoning will, I hope, serve to justify me in this
Opinion.

POLITICAL Writers have established it as a Maxim, That in contriving any
System of Government, and fixing the several Checks and Controuls of the
Constitution, every Man ought to be supposed a Knave, and to have no other End,
in all his Actions, but private Interest. By this Interest we must govern him,
and by Means of it, make him cooperate to public Good, notwithstanding his
insatiable Avarice and Ambition. Without this, say they, we shall in vain boast
of the Advantages of any Constitution, and shall find, in the End, that we have
no Security for our Liberties or Possessions, except the Good Will of our
Rulers; that is, we shall have no Security at all.

IT IS therefore a just political Maxim, That every Man must be supposed a
Knave: Though at the same Time, I must own it appears somewhat strange, that a
Maxim should be true in Politics, which is false in Fact. But to satisfy us on
this Head, we may consider, that Men are generally more honest in their private
than in their public Character, and will go greater Lengths to serve a Party
than where their own private Interest is alone concerned. Honor is a great
Check upon Mankind: But where a considerable Body of Men act together, this
Check is, in a great measure, removed; since a Man is sure to be approved of by
his own Party for what promotes the common Interest, and soon learns to despise
the Clamours of his Adversaries. To which we may add, that every Court or
Senate is determined by the Majority; so that if Self-Interest influences only
the Majority (as it will always do in the present depraved State of Mankind)
the whole Senate follows the Allurements of this separate Interest, and acts as
if it contained not one Member, who had any Regard to public Interest and
Liberty.

WHEN, therefore, there offers to my Censure and Examination any Plan of
Government, real or imaginary, where the Power is distributed among several
Courts, and several Orders of Men, I always consider the private Interest of
each Court, and each Order; and if I find, that, by the artful Division of the
Power, the private Interest must necessarily, in its Operation, concur with the
public, I pronounce that Government to be wise and happy. If, on the contrary,
the private Interest of each Order be not checked, and be not directed to
public Interest, I shall look for nothing but Faction, Disorder, and Tyranny
from such a Government. In this Opinion I am justified by Experience, as well
as by the Authority of all Philosophers and Politicians, both ancient and
modern.

HOW much, therefore, would it have surprised such a Genius, as Cicero, or
Tacitus, to have been told, that in a future Age there should arise a very
regular System of mixed Government, where the Power was so distributed, that one
Rank, whenever it pleased, might swallow up all the rest, and engross the whole
Power of the Constitution. Such a Government, they would have been apt to say,
will not be a mixed Government. For so great is the natural Ambition of Men,
that they are never satisfied with Power; and if one Order of Men, by pursuing
the Interest of their Order, can usurp upon every other Order, it will
certainly do so, and render itself, as far as possible, absolute and
uncontrollable.

BUT in this Opinion, Experience shows they would have been mistaken. For this
is actually the Case with the British Constitution. The Share of Power allotted
by our Constitution to the House of Commons is so great, that it absolutely
commands all the other Parts of our Government. The King's legislative Power is
plainly no proper Check to it. For though the King has a Negative in the
passing of all Laws; yet this, in Fact, is esteemed of so little Moment, that
whatever passes the two Houses is always sure to be passed into a Law, and the
Royal Assent is little beter than a mere Form. The principal Weight of the
Crown lies in the executive Power: But besides that the executive Power, in
every Government, is altogether subordinate to the legislative; besides this, I
say, the Exercise of this Power requires an immense Expense, and the Commons
have assumed to themselves the sole Power of disposing of public Money: How
easy, therefore, would it be for that House to wrest from the Crown all these
Powers, one after another, by making every Grant of Money conditional, and
choosing their Time so well, that their Refusal of Subsidies should only
distress the Government, without giving foreign Powers any Advantage over us?
Did the House of Commons depend in the same manner on the King, and had none of
the Members any Property but from his Gift, would not he command all their
Resolutions, and be from that Moment absolute? As to the House of Lords, they
are a very powerful Support to the Crown as long as they are, in their Turn,
supported by it; but both Experience and Reason show us, that they have no
Force nor Authority sufficient to maintain themselves alone, without any such
Support.

How, therefore, shall we solve this Paradox? And by what Means is this Member
of our Constitution confined within its proper Limits; since, from our very
Constitution, it must necessarily have as much Power as it demands, and can
only be confined by itself? How is this consistent with our constant Experience
of human Nature? I answer, that the Interest of the Body is here restrained by
the Interest of the Individuals, and that the House of Commons stretches not
its Power, because such an Usurpation would be contrary to the Interest of the
Majority of its Members. The Crown has so many Offices at its Disposal, that
when assisted by the honest and disinterested Part of the House, it will always
command the Resolutions of the whole; so far at least, as to preserve the
ancient Constitution from Danger. We may, therefore, give to this Influence
what Name we please; we may call it by the invidious Appellations of Corruption
and Dependence; but some Degree and some Kind of it are inseparable from the
very Nature of the Constitution, and necessary to the Preservation of our mixed
Government.

INSTEAD then of asserting See Dissertation on Parties, throughout.
absolutely, that the Dependence of Parliament, in every Degree, is an
Infringement of British Liberty, the Country-Party would have done better to
have made some Concessions to their Adversaries, and have only examined what
was the proper Degree of this Dependence, beyond which it became dangerous to
Liberty. But such a Moderation is not to be expected of Partymen of any kind.
After a Concession of this Nature, all Declamation must be abandoned; and a
serious calm Enquiry into the proper Degrees of Court-Influence, and
Parliamentary Dependence would have been expected by the Readers. And though the
Advantage, in such a Controversy, might possibly remain to the Country-Party;
yet the Victory would not have been so complete as they wish for, nor would a
true Patriot have given an entire Loose to his Zeal, for fear of running
Matters into a contrary Extreme, by diminishing too By that Influence of the
Crown, which I would justify, I mean only, that arising from the Offices and
Honors, that are at the Disposal of the Crown. As to private Bribery, it may
be considered in the same Light as the Practice of employing Spies, which is
scarce justifiable in a good Minister, and is infamous in a bad one: But to be
a Spy, or to be corrupted, is always infamous in all Ministers, and is to be
regarded as a shameless Prostitution.
far the Influence of the Crown. 'Twas, therefore, thought best to deny, that
this Extreme could ever be dangerous to the Constitution, or that the Crown
could ever have too little Influence over Members of Parliament.

ALL Questions concerning the proper Medium betwixt any two Extremes are very
difficult to be decided; both because it is difficult to find Words proper to
fix this Medium, and because the Good and Ill, in such Cases, run so gradually
into each other, as even to render our Sentiments doubtful and uncertain. But
there is a peculiar Difficulty in the present Case, which would embarrass the
most knowing and most impartial Examiner. The Power of the Crown is always
lodged in a single Person, either King or Minister; and as this Person may have
either a greater or less Degree of Ambition, Capacity, Courage, Popularity or
Fortune, the Power, which is too great in one Hand, may become too little in
another. In pure Republics, where the Power is distributed among several
Assemblies or Senates, the Checks and Controuls are more regular in their
Operation; because the Members of such numerous Assemblies may be presumed to
be always nearly equal in Capacity and Virtue; and it is only their Number,
Riches, or Authority, that enter into Consideration. But a limited Monarchy
admits not of any such Stability; nor is it possible to assign to the Crown
such a determinate Degree of Power, as will, in every Hand, form a proper
Counter-ballance to the other Parts of the Constitution. This is an unavoidable
Disadvantage, among the many Advantages attending that Species of Government.

ESSAY IX. Whether the BRITISH GOVERNMENT inclines more to ABSOLUTE MONARCHY,
or to a REPUBLIC.
IT affords a violent Prejudice against almost every Art and Science, that no
prudent Man, however sure of his Principles, dare prophesy concerning any
Event, or foretell the remote Consequences of Things. No Physician will venture
to pronounce concerning the Condition of his Patient a Fortnight or Month
after: And still less dare a Politician foretell the Situation of public
Affairs a few Years hence. Harrington thought himself so sure of his general
Principle, That the Balance of Power depends on that of Property, that he
ventured to pronounce it impossible ever to re-establish Monarchy in England.
But his Book was scarce published when the King was restored; and we see that
Monarchy has ever since subsisted upon the same Footing as before.
Notwithstanding of this unlucky Example, I will venture to examine a very
important Question, viz. Whether the British Government inclines more to
Absolute Monarchy, or to a Republic? and in which of these two Species of
Government it will most probably terminate? As there seems not to be any great
Danger of a sudden Revolution either Way, I shall at least escape the Shame
attending my Temerity, if I should be found to have been mistaken.

THOSE who assert, that the Balance of our Government inclines toward
Absolute Monarchy may support their Opinion by the following Reasons. That
Property has a great Influence on Power cannot possibly be denied; but yet the
general Maxim, That the Balance of the one depends upon the Balance of the
other, must be received with several Limitations. It Is evident, that much less
Property in a single Hand will be able to counter-ballance a greater Property
in several Hands; not only because it is difficult to make many Persons combine
in the same Views and Measures; but also because Property, when united, causes
much greater Dependence, than the same Property, when dispersed. An hundred
Persons of 1000 a Year apiece, can consume all their Income, and no Body shall
ever be the better for them, except their Servants and Tradesmen, who justly
regard their Profits as the Product of their own Labor. But a Man possessed of
100,000 a Year, if he has either any Generosity, or any Cunning, may create a
great Dependence by Obligations, and still a greater by Expectations. Hence we
find, that in all free Governments any Subject exorbitantly rich has always
created Jealousy, even though his Riches bore no manner of Proportion to the
Riches of the State. Crassus's Fortune, if I remember well, amounted only to
About 400,000 l. Sterling.
Three Thousand Talents a Year; and yet we find, that though his Genius was
nothing extraordinary, he was able, by Means of his Riches alone, to
counter-ballance, during his Lifetime, the Power of Caesar, who afterward
became Master of the World. The Wealth of the Medicis made them Masters of
Florence; though, it is probable, it was very inconsiderable, compared to the
united Property of that opulent Republic.

THESE Considerations are apt to make one entertain a very magnificent Idea of
the British Spirit and Love of Liberty; since we could maintain our free
Government, during so many Centuries, against our Sovereigns, who, besides the
Power and Dignity and Majesty of the Crown, have always been possessed of much
more Property, than any Subject has ever enjoyed in any Commonwealth. But it
may be said, that this Spirit, however great, will never be able to support
itself against that immense Property, which is now lodged in the King, and
which is still increasing. Upon a moderate Computation, there are near three
Millions at the Disposal of the Crown. The civil List amounts to near a
Million. The Collection of all Taxes to another Million. And the Employments in
the Army and Navy, along with Ecclesiastical Preferments above a third Million;
a monstrous Sum, and what may fairly be computed to be more than a thirtieth
Part of the whole Income and Labor of the Kingdom. When we add to this immense
Property, the increasing Luxury of the Nation, our Proneness to Corruption,
along with the great Power and Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Command of
such numerous military Forces, there is no one but must despair, without
extraordinary Efforts, of being able to support our free Government much longer
under all these Disadvantages.

ON the other Hand, those who maintain, that the Bias of the British
Government leans toward a Republic, may support their Opinion by very specious
Arguments. It may be said, that though this immense Property in the Crown, be
joined to the Dignity of first Magistrate, and to many other legal Powers and
Prerogatives, which should naturally give it a greater Influence; yet it really
becomes less dangerous to Liberty upon that very Account. Were Britain a
Republic, and were any private Man possessed of a Revenue, a third, or even a
tenth Part as large as that of the Crown, he would very justly excite Jealousy;
because he would infallibly have great Authority in the Government: And such an
irregular Authority, not avowed by the Laws, is always more dangerous than a
much greater Authority, which is derived from them. A On ne monte jamais si
haut que quand on ne sqait pas ou on va, said Cromwell to the President de
Bellievre.
Man possessed of usurped Authority can set no Bounds to his Pretensions: His
Partisans have Liberty to hope for every thing in his Favors: His Enemies
provoke his Ambition, along with his Fears, by the Violence of their
Opposition: And the Government being thrown into a Ferment, every corrupted
Humor in the State naturally gathers to him. On the contrary, a legal
Authority, though very great, has always some Bounds, which terminate both the
Hopes and Pretensions of the Persons possessed of it: The Laws must have
provided a Remedy against its Excesses: Such an eminent Magistrate has much to
fear, and little to hope from his Usurpations: And as his legal Authority is
quietly submitted to, he has little Temptation and little Opportunity of
extending it farther. Besides, it happens, with regard to ambitious Aims and
Projects, what may be observed with regard to Sects of Philosophy and Religion.
A new Sect excites such a Ferment, and is both opposed and defended with such
Vehemence, that it spreads always faster, and multiplies its Partisans with
greater Rapidity, than any old established Opinion, recommended by the Sanction
of the Laws and of Antiquity. Such is the Nature of Novelty, that where any
thing pleases, it becomes doubly agreeable, if new, but, if it displeases, it
is doubly displeasing, upon that very Account. And, in most Cases, the Violence
of Enemies is favorable to ambitious Projects, as well as the Zeal of
Partisans.

IT may farther be said, That though Men be very much governed by Interest; yet
even Interest itself, and all human Affairs are merely governed by Opinion.
Now, there has been a very sudden and a very sensible Change in the Opinions of
Men within these last Fifty Years, by the Progress of Learning and of Liberty.
Most People, in this Island, have divested themselves of all superstitious
Reverence to Names and Authority: The Clergy have entirely lost their Credit:
Their Pretensions and Doctrines have been ridiculed; and even Religion can
scarce support itself in the World. The mere Name of King commands little
Respect; and to talk of him as GOD's Vicegerent upon Earth, or to give him any
of those magnificent Titles, which formerly dazzled Mankind, would but excite
Laughter in every one. Though the Crown, by Means of its large Revenue, may
maintain its Authority in Times of Tranquillity, upon private Interest and
Influence; yet, as the least Shock or Convulsion must break all these Interests
to Pieces, the kingly Power, being no longer supported by the settled
Principles and Opinions of Men, will immediately dissolve. Had Men been in the
same Disposition at the Revolution, as they are at present, Monarchy would have
run a great Risque of being entirely lost in this Island.

DURST I venture to deliver my own Sentiments amidst these opposite Arguments,
I would assert, that unless there happen some extraordinary Convulsion, the
Power of the Crown, by Means of its large Revenue, is rather upon the Increase;
though, at the same Time, I own, that its Progress seems to me very slow and
almost insensible. The Tide has run long, and with some Rapidity, to the Side
of popular Government, and is just beginning to turn toward Monarchy.

IT IS well known, that every Government must come to a Period, and that Death
is unavoidable to the political as well as to the animal Body. But, as one Kind
of Death may be preferable to another, it may be inquired, Whether it be more
disirable for the British Constitution to terminate in a popular Government, or
in absolute Monarchy? Here I would declare frankly, that though Liberty be
infinitely preferable to Slavery, in almost every Case; yet I would much rather
wish to see an absolute Monarch than a Republic in this Island: For, let us
consider, what Kind of Republic we have Reason to expect. The Question is not
concerning any fine imaginary Republic, which a Man may form a Plan of in his
Closet. There is no Doubt, but a popular Government may be imagined more
perfect than absolute Monarchy, or even than our present Constitution: But what
Reason have we to expect that any such Government will ever be established in
Britain, upon the Dissolution of our Monarchy? If any single Person acquire
Power enough to take our Constitution to Pieces, and put it up anew, he is
really an absolute Monarch; and we have had already an Instance of this Kind,
sufficient to convince us, that such a Person will never resign his Power, or
establish any free Government. Matters, therefore, must be trusted to their
natural Progress and Operation; and the House of Commons, according to its
present Constitution, must-be the only Legislature in such a popular
Government. The Inconveniences, attending such a Situation of Affairs, present
themselves by Thousands. If the House of Commons, in such a Case, ever
dissolves itself, which is not to be expected, we may look for a Civil War
every Election. If it continues itself, we shall suffer all the Tyranny of a
Faction, sub-divided into new Factions: And as such a violent Government cannot
long subsist, we shall, at last, after infinite Convulsions and Civil Wars,
find Repose in absolute Monarchy, which it would have been happier for us to
have established peaceably from the Beginning. Absolute Monarchy, therefore, is
the easiest Death, the true Euthanasia of the British Constitution.

THUS, if we have Reason to be more jealous of Monarchy, because the Danger is
more imminent from that Quarter; we have also Reason to be more jealous of
popular Government, because that Danger is more terrible. This may teach us a
Lesson of Moderation in all our political Controversies.

ESSAY X. Of PARTIES in general.
OF all Men, that distinguish themselves by memorable Achievements, the first
Place of Honor, in my Opinion, is due to LEGISLATORS, and Founders of States,
who transmit a System of Laws and Institutions to secure the Peace, Happiness
and Liberty of future Generations. The Influence of useful Inventions in the
Arts and Sciences may, perhaps, extend farther than those of wise Laws, whose
Effects are limited both in Time and Place; but the Benefit arising from the
former is not so sensible as that which proceeds from the latter. Speculative
Sciences, do, indeed, improve the Mind; but this Advantage reaches only to a
few Persons, who have Leisure to apply themselves to them. And as to practical
Arts, which increase the Commodities and Enjoyments of Life; it is well known,
that Men's Happiness consists not so much in an Abundance of these, as in the
Peace and Security with which they possess them: And these Blessings can only
be derived from good Government. Not to mention, that general Virtue and good
Morals in a State, which are so requisite to Happiness, can never arise from
the most refined Precepts of Philosophy, or even the severest Injunctions of
Religion; but must proceed entirely from a virtuous Education, the Effect of
wise Laws and Institutions. I must, therefore, be of a different Opinion from
my Lord BACON in this Particular, and must regard Antiquity as somewhat unjust
in in its Distribution of Honor, when it made Gods of all the Inventors of
useful Arts, such as Ceres, Bacchus, Aesculapius; and dignified Legislators,
such as Romulus and Theseus, only with the Appellation of Demigods and Heroes.

As much as Legislators and Founders of States ought to be honored and
respected among Men, as much ought the Founders of Sects and Factions to be
detested and hated; because the Influence of Factions is directly contrary to
that of Laws. Factions subvert Government; render Laws impotent, and beget the
fiercest Animosities among Men of the same Nation, who ought to give mutual
Assistance and Protection to each other. And what should render the Founders of
Factions more odious is the Difficulty of extirpating Factions, when once they
have taken rise in any State. They naturally propagate themselves for many
Centuries, and seldom end but by the total Dissolution of that Government, in
which they are planted. They are, besides, Seeds, which grow most plentifully
in the richest Soils; and though despotic Governments be not entirely free from
them, it must be confessed, that they rise more easily, and propagate
themselves faster in free Governments, where they always infect the Legislature
itself, which alone could be able, by the steady Application of Rewards and
Punishments, to eradicate them.

FACTIONS or Parties may be divided into PERSONAL and REAL; that is, into
Factions founded on personal Friendship or Animosity among those who compose
the Factions, and into those founded on some real Difference of Sentiment or
Interest. The Reason of this Distinction is obvious; though I must acknowledge,
that Parties are seldom found pure and unmixt, either of the one kind or the
other. It Is not often seen, that a Government divides into Factions, where
there is no Difference in the Views of these Factions, either real or apparent,
trivial or material: And in those Factions, which are founded on the most real
and most material Difference, there is always found to be a great deal of
personal Animosity or Affection. But notwithstanding of this Mixture, a Party
may be denominated either personal or real, according to that Principle which
is predominant, and is observed to have the greatest Influence.

PERSONAL Factions arise most easily in small Republics. Every domestic Quarrel
becomes an Affair of State. Love, Vanity, Emulation, any Passion begets public
Division, as well as Ambition and Resentment. The Neri and Bianchi of Florence,
the Fregosi and Adorni of Genoa, the Colonnesi and Orsini of modern Rome, were
Parties of this kind.

MEN have such a Propensity to divide into personal Factions, that the smallest
Appearance of real Difference will beget them. What can be imagined more
trivial than the Difference betwixt one Color of Livery and another in
Horse-Races? And yet this Difference begot two most inveterate Factions in the
Greek Empire, the Prasini and Veneti, who never suspended their Animosities,
'till they ruined that unhappy Government.

NOTHING is more usual than to see Parties, which have begun upon a real
Difference, continue even after that Difference is lost. When Men are once
inlisted on different Sides, they contract an Affection to the Persons with
whom they are united, and an Animosity against their Antagonists: And these
Passions they often transmit to their Posterity. The real Difference betwixt
Guelf and Ghibbelline was long lost in Italy, before these Factions were
extinguished. The Guelfs adhered to the Pope, the Ghibbellines to the Emperor;
and yet the Family of Sforsa, who were in Alliance with the Emperor, though
they were Guelfs, being expelled Milan by the King Lewis XIIth.
of France, assisted by Jacomo Trivulzio and the Ghibbellines, the Pope
concurred with them, and they formed Leagues with the Pope against the Emperor.

THE Civil Wars lately arisen in Morocco betwixt the Blacks and Whites, merely
on account of their Complexion, are founded on a very pleasant Difference. We
laugh at them; but I believe, were Things rightly examined, we afford much more
Occasion of Ridicule to the Moors. For pray, what are all the Wars of Religion,
which have prevailed in this polite and knowing Part of the World? They are, in
my Opinion, more absurd than the Moorish Civil Wars. The Difference of
Complexion is a sensible and a real Difference: But the Difference about an
Article of Faith, which is utterly absurd and unintelligible, is not a real
Difference of Sentiments, but only a Difference of a few Phrases and
Expressions, which one Party accepts of, without understanding them; and the
other refuses, in the same Manner. Besides, I do not find, that the Whites in
Morocco ever imposed on the Blacks any Necessity of altering their Complexion,
or threatened them with Inquisitions and penal Laws in case of Obstinacy: Nor
have the Blacks been more unreasonable in this Particular. But is a Man's
Opinion, where he is able to form a real Opinion, more at his Disposal than his
Complexion? And can one be induced by Force or Fear to do more than paint and
Disguise in the one Case as well as in the other?

REAL Factions may be divided into Factions from Interest, from Principle, and
from Affection. Of all Factions, those from Interest are the most reasonable
and the most excusable. Where two Orders of Men, such as the Nobles and People,
have a distinct Authority in a Government, which is not very accurately
balanced and modeled, they naturally follow a distinct Interest; nor can we
reasonably expect a different Conduct from that Degree of Selfishness, which is
implanted in human Nature. It requires very great Skill in a Legislator to
prevent such Factions; and many Philosophers are of Opinion, that this Secret,
like the Grand Elixir, or Perpetual Motion, may amuse Men in Theory, but can
never possibly be reduced to Practice. In despotick Governments, indeed,
Factions often do not appear; but they are never the less real; or rather, they
are more real and more pernicious, upon that very Account. The distinct Orders
of Men, Nobles and People, Soldiers and Merchants, have all a distinct
Interest; but the more Powerful oppresses the Weaker with Impunity, and without
Resistance; which begets a seeming Tranquillity in such Governments.

THERE has been an Attempt to divide the landed and trading Interest in
England; but without Success. The Interest of these two Bodies is not really
distinct, and never will be so, till our public Debts increase to such a
Degree, as to become altogether oppressive and intolerable.

PARTIES from Principles, especially abstract speculative Principles, are known
only to modern Times, and are, perhaps, the most extraordinary and
unaccountable Phenomenon, that have ever yet appeared in human Affairs. Where
different Principles beget a Contrariety of Conduct, as all different political
Principles do, the Matter may be more easily explained. A Man, who esteems the
true Right of Government to ly in one Man, or one Family, cannot easily agree
with his Fellow-Citizen, who thinks, that another Man or Family is possessed of
this Right. Each naturally wishes that Right may take Place, according to his
own Notions of it. But where the Difference of Principles begets no Contrariety
of Action, but each may follow his own Way, without interfering with his
Neighbor, as happens in all religious Controversies; what Madness, what Fury
can beget such unhappy and such fatal Divisions?

TWO Men, traveling on the Highway, of whom one goes East, the other West,
can easily pass each other, if the Way be broad enough: But two Men, reasoning
upon opposite Principles of Religion, cannot so easily pass, without shocking;
though one should think, that the Way were also, in that Case, sufficiently
broad, and that each might proceed, without Interruption, in his own Way. But
such is the Nature of the human Mind, that it always takes hold of every Mind
that approaches it; and as it is wonderfully strengthened and corroborated by
an Unanimity of Sentiments, so it is shocked and disturbed by any Contrariety.
Hence the Eagerness, which most People discover in a Dispute; hence their
Impatience of Opposition, even in the most speculative and indifferent Opinions.

THIS Principle, however frivolous it may appear, seems to have been the Origin
of all religious Wars and Divisions. But, as this Principle is universal in
human Nature, its Effects would not have been confined to one Age, and to one
Sect of Religion, did it not there concur with other more accidental Causes,
which raise it to such a Height, as to cause the highest Misery and
Devastation. Most Religions of the ancient World arose in the unknown Ages of
Government, when Men were as yet barbarous and uninstructed, and the Prince, as
well as Peasant, were disposed to receive, with implicit Faith, every pious
Tale or Fiction that was offered them. The Magistrate embraced the Religion of
the People, and entering cordially into the Care of sacred Matters, naturally
acquired an Authority in them, and united the Ecclesiastical with the Civil
Power. But the Christian Religion arising, while Principles directly opposite
to it were firmly established in the polite Part of the World, who despised the
Nation that first broached this Novelty; no Wonder, that Christianity, in such
Circumstances, was but little countenanced by the Civil Magistrate, and that
the Christian Priesthood were allowed to engross all the Authority in the new
Sect. So bad a Use did they make of this Power, even in those early Times, that
the Perfecutions of Christianity may, perhaps, in Part, be ascribed to the
Violence instilled by them into their Followers. And the same Principles of
Priestly Government continuing, after Christianity became the established
Religion, they have engendered a Spirit of Persecution, which has ever since
been the Poison of human Society, and the Source of the most inveterate
Factions in every Government. Such Factions, therefore, on the Part of the poor
People, may justly be esteemed Factions of Principle; but on the Part of the
Priests, who are the prime Movers, they are really Factions of Interest.

THERE is another Cause (beside the Authority of the Priests, and the
Separation of the Ecclesiastical and Civil Powers) that has contributed to
render Christendom the Scene of religious Wars and Divisions. Religions, that
arise in Ages totally ignorant and barbarous, consist mostly of traditional
Tales and Fictions, which may be very different in every Sect, without being
contrary to each other; and even when they are contrary, every one adheres to
the Tradition of his own Sect, without much Reasoning or Disputation. But as
Philosophy was widely spread over the World, at the Time that Christianity
arose, the Teachers of the new Sect were obliged to form a System of
speculative Opinions; to divide, with some Accuracy, their Articles of Faith;
and to explain, comment, confute, and confirm with all the Subtility of
Argument and Science. From hence naturally arose Keenness in Dispute, when
Christianity came to be split into new Divisions and Heresies: And this
Keenness assisted the Priests in their pernicious Policy, of begetting a mutual
Hatred and Antipathy among their deluded Followers. Sects of Philosophy, in the
ancient World, were more zealous than Parties of Religion; but, in modern
Times, Parties of Religion are more furious and enraged than the most cruel
Factions, that ever arose from Interest and Ambition.

I HAVE mentioned Parties from Affection as a kind of real Parties, beside
those from Interest and Principle. By Parties from Affection, I understand
those which are founded on the different Affections of Men toward particular
Families and Persons, whom they desire to rule over them. These Parties are
often very violent, though I must own it is somewhat unaccountable, that Men
should attach themselves so strongly to Persons, whom they are no way
acquainted with, whom perhaps they never saw, and from whom they never received
nor can ever hope for any Favor. Yet this we find often to be the Case, and
even with Men, who, on other Occasions, discover no great Generosity of Spirit,
nor are found to be easily transported by Friendship beyond their own Interest.
We are apt, I know not how, to think the Relation betwixt us and our Sovereign
very close and intimate. The Splendour of Majesty and Power bestows an
Importance on the Fortunes even of a single Person. And when a Man's
Goodnature does not give him this imaginary Interest, his Ill Nature will do
it, from Spite and Opposition to Persons, whose Sentiments are different from
his own.

ESSAY XI. Of the PARTIES of GREAT BRITAIN.
WERE the British Government proposed as a Subject of Speculation to a studious
Man, he would immediately perceive in it a Source of Division and Party, which
it would be almost impossible for it, in any Administration, to avoid. The just
Balance betwixt the Republican and Monarchical Part of our Constitution is
really, in itself, so extreme delicate and uncertain, that when joined to Men's
Passions and Prejudices, it is impossible but different Opinions must arise
concerning it, even among Persons of the best Understanding. Those of mild
Tempers, who love Peace and Order, and detest Sedition and Civil Wars, will
always entertain more favorable Sentiments of Monarchy, than Men of bold
Spirits, who are passionate Lovers of Liberty, and think no Evil comparable to
Subjection and Slavery. And though all reasonable Men agree in general to
preserve our mixed Government; yet when they come to Particulars, some will
incline to trust larger Powers to the Crown, to bestow on it more Influence,
and to guard against its Encroachments with less Caution, than others who are
terrified at the most distant Approaches of Tyranny and despotic Power. Thus
there are Parties of PRINCIPLE involved in the very Nature of our Constitution,
which may properly enough be denominated These Words have become of general
Use, and therefore I shall employ them, without intending to express by them an
universal Blame of the one Party, or Approbation of the other. The Court-Party
may, no doubt, on some Occasions, consult best the Interest of the Country, and
the Country-Party oppose it. In like Manner, the Roman Parties were denominated
Optimates and Populares; and Cicero, like a true Partyman, defines the
Optimates to be such as, in all their public Conduct, regulated themselves by
the Sentiments of the best and worthiest of the Romans: Pro Sextio. The Term of
Country-Party may afford a favorable Definition or Etymology of the same kind:
But it would be Folly to draw any Argument from that Head, and I have no Regard
to it in employing these Terms.
COURT and COUNTRY Parties. The Strength and Violence of each of these Parties
will much depend upon the particular Administration. An Administration may be
so bad as to throw a great Majority into the Country Party; as a good
Administration will reconcile to the Court many of the most passionate Lovers
of Liberty. But, however the Nation may fluctuate betwixt these two Parties,
the Parties will always subsist, as long as we are governed by a limited
Monarchy.

BUT, besides this Difference of Principle, those Parties are very much
fomented by a Difference of INTEREST, without which they could scarce ever be
dangerous or violent. The Crown will naturally bestow all its Trust and Power
upon those, whose Principles, real or pretended, are most favorable to
Monarchical Government; and this Temptation will naturally engage them to go
greater Lengths than their Principles would otherwise carry them. Their
Antagonists, who are disappointed in their ambitious Aims, throw themselves
into the Party, whose Principles incline them to be most jealous of Royal
Power, and naturally carry those Principles to a greater Length than sound
Politics will justify. Thus, the Court and Country Parties, which are the
genuine Factions of the British Government, are a kind of mixed Parties, and are
influenced partly by Principle, partly by Interest. The Heads of the Parties
are commonly most governed by the latter Motive; the inferior Members of them,
by the former. I must be understood to mean this of Persons who have any Motive
for taking Party on any Side. For, to tell the Truth, the greatest Part are
commonly Men who associate themselves they know not why; from Example, from
Passion, from Idleness. But still it is requisite there be some Source of
Division, either in Principle or Interest; otherwise such Persons would not
find Parties, to which they could associate themselves.

AS to Ecclesiastical Parties; we may observe, that, in all Ages of the World,
Priests have been Enemies to Liberty; and it is certain, that this steady
Conduct of theirs must have been founded on fixed Reasons of Interest and
Ambition. Liberty of thinking, and of expressing our Thoughts, is always fatal
to Priestly Power, and to those pious Frauds, on which it is commonly founded;
and by an infallible Connection, which is found among every Species of Liberty,
this Privilege can never be enjoyed, at least, has never yet been enjoyed, but
in a free Government. Hence it must happen, in such a Government as Britain,
that the established Clergy will always be of the Court-Party; as, on the
contrary, Dissenters of all kinds will be of the Country-Party; since they can
never hope for that Toleration they stand in need of, but by Means of our free
Government. All Princes, that have aimed at despotic Power, have known this
important Interest of gaining the established Clergy: As the Clergy, on their
Side, have shown a great Facility of entering into the Views of such Princes.
Gustavus Vaza was, perhaps, the only ambitious Monarch, that ever depressed the
Church, at the same Time, that he discouraged Liberty. But the exorbitant Power
of the Bishops in Sweden, who at that Time overtop'd the Crown, along with
their Attachment to a foreign Family, was the Reason of his embracing such an
unusual Piece of Politics.

THIS Observation concerning the Propensity of Clergymen to despotic Power, and
to the Government of a single Person, is not true with regard to one Sect only:
The Presbyterian and Calvinistic Clergy in Holland were always professed
Friends to the Power of the Family of Orange; as the Arminians, who were
esteemed Heretics, were always of the Lovestein Faction, and zealous for
Liberty. But if a Prince has the Choice of both, it is easy to see, that he will
prefer the Episcopal to the Presbyterian Form of Government; both because of
the greater Affinity betwixt Monarchy and Episcopacy, and because of the
Facility which a Prince finds in such a Government, of ruling the Clergy, by
Means of their Ecclesiastical Superiors.

IF we consider the first Rise of Parties in England, during the Civil Wars, we
shall find, that they were exactly conformable to this general Theory, and that
the Species of the Government gave Birth to them, by a regular and infallible
Operation. The English Constitution, before that Time, had lain in a Kind of
Confusion; yet so, as that the Subjects possessed many noble Privileges, which,
though not, perhaps, exactly bounded and secured by Law, were universally
deemed, from long Possession, to belong to them as their Birthright. An
ambitious, or rather an ignorant, Prince arose, who esteemed all these
Privileges to be Concessions of his Predecessors, revocable at Pleasure; and in
Prosecution of this Principle, he openly acted in Violation of Liberty, during
the Course of several Years. Necessity, at last, constrained him to call a
Parliament: The Spirit of Liberty arose: The Prince, being without any Support,
was obliged to grant every Thing required of him: And his Enemies, jealous and
implacable, set no Bounds to their Pretensions. Here then begun those Contests,
in which it was no Wonder, that Men of that Age were divided into different
Parties; since, even at this Day, the Impartial are at a Loss to decide
concerning the Justice of the Quarrel. The Pretensions of the Parliament, if
yielded to, broke the Balance of our Constitution, by rendering the Government
almost entirely Republican. If not yielded to, we were, perhaps, still in
Danger of despotic Power, from the settled Principles and inveterate Habits of
the King, which had plainly appeared in every Concession, that he had been
constrained to make to his People. In this Question, so delicate and uncertain,
Men naturally fell to the Side, which was most conformable to their usual
Principles; and those, who were the most passionate Favorers of Monarchy,
declared for the King; as the zealous Friends of Liberty sided with the
Parliament. The Hopes of Success being nearly equal on both Sides, Interest had
little Influence in this Contest: So that ROUNDHEAD and CAVALIER were merely
Parties of Principle; neither of which disowned either Monarchy or Liberty; but
the former Party inclined most to the Republican Part of our Government, and
the latter to the Monarchial. In which respect they may be considered as Court
and Country-Party enflamed into a Civil War, by an unhappy Concurrence of
Circumstances, and by the turbulent Spirit of the Age. The Commonwealth's-Men,
and the Partisans of despotic Power, lay concealed in both Parties, and formed
but an inconsiderable Part of them.

THE Clergy had concurred, in a shameless Manner, with the King's arbitrary
Designs, according to their usual Maxims in such Cases: And, in Return, were
allowed to persecute their Adversaries, whom they called Heretics and
Schismatics. The established Clergy was Episcopal; the Non-conformists
Presbyterians: So that all Things concurred to throw the former, without
Reserve, into the King's Party; and the latter into that of the Parliament. The
Cavaliers being the Court-Party, and the Roundheads the Country-Party, the
Union was infallible betwixt the former and the established Prelacy, and
betwixt the latter and Presbyterian Non-conformists. This Union is so natural,
according to the general Principles of Politics, that it requires some very
extraordinary Concurrence of Circumstances to break it.

EVERY one knows the Event of this Quarrel; fatal to the King first, and to the
Parliament afterward. After many Confusions and Revolutions, the Royal Family
was at last restored, and the Government established on the same Footing as
before. Charles II. was not made wiser by the dreadful Example of his Father;
but prosecuted the same Measures, though with more Secrecy and Caution. New
Parties arose, under the Appellations^ WHIG and TORY, which have continued ever
since to confound and distract our Government. What the Nature is of these
Parties, is, perhaps, one of the most difficult Questions that can be met with,
and is a Proof, that History may contain Problems, as uncertain as any that are
to be found in the most abstract Sciences. We have seen the Conduct of these
two Parties, during the Course of Seventy Years, in a vast Variety of
Circumstances, possessed of Power, and deprived of it, during Peace and during
War: We meet with Persons, who profess themselves of one Side or the other, every
Hour, in Company, in our Pleasures, in our serious Occupations: We ourselves
are constrained, in a Manner, to take Party; and living in a Country of the
highest Liberty, every one may openly declare all his Sentiments and Opinions:
And yet we are at a Loss to tell the Nature, Pretensions, and Principles of the
two Parties. The Question is, perhaps, in itself, somewhat difficult; but has
been rendered more so, by the Prejudices and Violence of Party.

WHEN we compare the Parties of Whig and Tory, to those of Roundhead and
Cavalier, the most obvious Difference, that appears betwixt them, consists in
the Doctrines of passive Obedience and indefeasible Right, which were but
little heard of among the Cavaliers, but became the universal Doctrine, and was
the true Characteristic, of a Tory. Were these Principles pushed into their
most obvious Consequences, they imply a formal Renunciation of all our
Liberties, and an Avowal of absolute Monarchy; since nothing can be a greater
Absurdity than a limited Power, which must not be resisted, even when it
exceeds its Limitations. But as the most rational Principles are often but a
weak Counterpoise to Passion; it is no Wonder, that these absurd Principles,
sufficient, according to a justly celebrated Dissertation on Parties, Letter 2d.
Author, to shock the common Sense of a HOTTENTOT or SAMOIEDE, were found too
weak for that Effect. The Tories, as Men, were Enemies to Oppression; and also,
as Englishmen, they were Enemies to despotick Power. Their Zeal for Liberty,
was, perhaps, less fervent than that of their Antagonists; but was sufficient
to make them forget all their general Principles, when they saw themselves
openly threatened with a Subversion of the ancient Government. From these
Sentiments arose the Revolution; an Event of mighty Consequence, and the
firmest Foundation of British Liberty. The Conduct of the Tories, during that
Event, and after it, will afford us a true Insight into the Nature of that
Party.

IN the first Place, They appear to have had the Sentiments of true Britons in
their Affection to Liberty, and their determined Resolution not to sacrifice it
to any abstract Principles whatsoever, or to any imaginary Rights of Princes.
This Part of their Character might justly have been doubted of before the
Revolution, from the obvious Tendency of their avowed Principles, and from
their almost unbounded Compliances with a Court, that made little Secret of its
arbitrary Designs. The Revolution showed them to have been, in this Respect,
nothing but a genuine Court-Party, such as might be expected in a British
Government: That is, Lovers of Liberty, but greater Lovers of Monarchy. It
must, however, be confessed, that they carried their monarchical Principles
further, even in Practice, but more so in Theory, than was, in any Degree,
consistent with a limited Government.

Secondly. NEITHER their Principles nor Affections concurred with the
Settlement made at the Revolution, or with that which has since taken Place.
This Part of their Character may seem contradictory to the former; since any
other Settlement, in those Circumstances of the Nation, must have been
dangerous, if not fatal to Liberty. But the Heart of Man is made to reconcile
the most glaring Contradictions; and this Contradiction abovementioned is not
greater than that betwixt Passive Obedience, and the Resistance employed at the
Revolution. A Tory, therefore, since the Revolution, may be defined in a few
Words to be a Lover of Monarchy, though without abandoning Liberty; and a
Partizan of the Family of STUART. As a Whig may be defined to be a Lover of
Liberty, though without renouncing Monarchy; and a Friend to the Settlement in
the Protestant Line.

THE celebrated Writer above cited, has asserted, that the REAL Distinction
betwixt Whig and Tory was lost at the Revolution, and that ever since they have
continued to be mere personal Parties, like the Guelfs and Ghibbellines, after
the Emperors had lost all Authority in Italy. Such an Opinion, were it
received, would turn our whole History into an Aenigma; and is, indeed, so
contrary to the strongest Evidence, that a Man must have a great Opinion of his
own Eloquence to attempt the proving of it.

I SHALL first mention, as an irresistible Proof of a real Distinction betwixt
these Parties, what every one may have observed or heard concerning the Conduct
and Conversation of all his Friends and Acquaintance on both Sides. Have not
the Tories always bore an avowed Affection to the Family of Stuart, and have
not their Adversaries always opposed with Vigor the Succession of that Family?

THE Tory Principles are confessedly the most favorable to Monarchy. Yet the
Tories have almost always opposed the Court these fifty Years; nor were they
cordial Friends to King William, even when employed by him. Their Quarrel,
therefore, cannot be supposed to have lain with the Throne, but with the
Person, who sat on it.

THEY concurred heartily with the Court during the four last Years of Queen
Anne. But is any one at a loss to find the Reason?

IT IS monstrous to see an established Episcopal Clergy in declared Opposition
to the Court, and a Nonconformist Presbyterian Clergy in Conjunction with it.
What can produce such an unnatural Conduct in both? Nothing but that the former
have espoused Monarchical Principles too high for the present Settlement, which
is founded on Principles of Liberty: And the latter, being afraid of the
Prevalence of those high Principles, adhere to that Party, from whom they have
Reason to expect Liberty and Toleration.

THE different Conduct of the two Parties, with regard to foreign Politics, is
also a Proof to the same Purpose. Holland has always been most favored by one,
and France by the other. In short, the Proofs of this kind are so palpable and
evident, that one is almost ashamed to collect them.

A Tory is a Lover of Monarchy, though without abandoning Liberty; and a
Partizan of the Family of STUART. A Whig is a Lover of Liberty, though without
renouncing Monarchy; and a Friend to the Settlement in the Protestant Line.
These different Views, with regard to the Settlement of the Crown, are
accidental, but natural Additions to the Principles of the Court and Country
Parties, which are the genuine Parties of the British Government. A passionate
Lover of Monarchy is apt to be displeased at any Change of this Succession; as
savouring too much of a Commonwealth: A passionate Lover of Liberty is apt to
think that every Part of the Government ought to be subordinate to the
Interests of Liberty. It Is however remarkable, that though the Principles of
Whig and Tory be both of them of a compound Nature; yet the Ingredients, which
predominated in both, were not correspondent to each other. A Tory loved
Monarchy, and bore an Affection to the Family of Stuart; but the latter
Affection was the predominant Inclination of the Party. A Whig loved Liberty,
and was a Friend to the Settlement in the Potestant Line; but the Love of
Liberty was professedly his predominant Inclination. The Tories have frequently
acted as Republicans, where either Policy or Revenge has engaged them to that
Conduct; and there was none of that Party, who, upon the Supposition, that they
were to be disappointed in their Views with regard to the Succession, would not
have desired to impose the strictest Limitations on the Crown, and to bring our
Form of Government as near Republican as possible, in order to depress the
Family, that, according to their Apprehension, succeeded without any just
Title. The Whigs, it is true, have also taken Steps dangerous to Liberty, under
Pretext of securing the Succession and Settlement of the Crown, according to
their Views: But as the Body of the Party had no Passion for that Succession,
otherwise than as the Means of securing Liberty, they have been betrayed into
these Steps by Ignorance or Frailty, or the Interest of their Leaders. The
Succession of the Crown was, therefore, the chief Point with the Tories: The
Security of our Liberties with the Whigs.

It Is Difficult to penetrate into the Thoughts and Sentiments of any particular
Man; but it is almost impossible to distinguish those of a whole Party, where it
often happens, that no two Persons agree precisely in the same Way of thinking.
Yet I will venture to affirm, that it was not so much PRINCIPLE, or an Opinion
of indefeazible Right, that attached the Tories to the ancient Royal Family, as
AFFECTION, or a certain Love and Esteem for their Persons. The same Cause
divided England formerly betwixt the Houses of York and Lancaster, and
Scotland, betwixt the Families of Bruce and Baliol; in an Age, when political
Disputes were but little in Fashion, and when political Principles must of
Course have had but little Influence on Mankind. The Doctrine of passive
Obedience is so absurd in itself, and so opposite to our Liberties, that it
seems to have been chiefly left to Pulpit Declaimers, and to their deluded
Followers among the Mob. Men of better Sense were guided by Affection; and as
to the Leaders of this Party, it is probable, that Interest was their sole
Motive, and that they acted more contrary to their private Sentiments, than the
Leaders of the opposite Party.

SOME, who will not venture to assert, that the real Difference betwixt Whig
and Tory was lost at the Revolution, seem inclined to think, that the
Difference is now abolished, and that Affairs are so far returned to their
natural State, that there are at present no other Parties amongst us but Court
and Country; that is, Men, who by Interest or Principle are attached either to
Monarchy or to Liberty. It must, indeed, be confessed, that the Tory Party has,
of late, decayed much in their Numbers; still more in their Zeal; and I may
venture to say, still more in their Credit and Authority. There is no Man of
Knowledge or Learning, who would not be ashamed to be thought of that Party;
and in almost all Companies the Name of OLD WHIG is mentioned as an
uncontestable Appellation of Honor and Dignity. Accordingly, the Enemies of
the Ministry, as a Reproach, call the Courtiers, the true Tories; and as an
Honor, denominate the Gentlemen in the Opposition the true Whigs. The Tories
have been so long obliged to talk in the Republican Style, that they seem to
have made Converts of themselves by their Hypocrisy, and to have embraced the
Sentiments, as well as Language of their Adversaries. There are, however, very
considerable Remains of that Party in England, with all their old Prejudices;
and a demonstrative Proof, that Court and Country are not our only Parties, is,
that almost all the Dissenters side with the Court, and the lower Clergy, at
least, of the Church of England, with the Opposition.

ISHALL conclude this Subject with observing, that we never had any Tories in
Scotland, according to the proper Signification of the Word, and that the
Division of Parties in this Country was really into Whigs and Jacobites. A
Jacobite seems to be a Tory, who has no Regard to the Constitution, but is
either a zealous Partizan of absolute Monarchy, or at least willing to
sacrifice our Liberties to the obtaining the Succession in that Family, to
which he is attached. The Reason of the Difference betwixt England and Scotland
I take to be this. Our political and our religious Divisions in this Country,
have been, since the Revolution, regularly correspondent to each other. The
Presbyterians were all Whigs without Exception: The Episcopalians, of the
opposite Party. And as the Clergy of the latter Sect were turned out of their
Churches at the Revolution, they had no Motive to make any Compliances with the
Government in their Oaths or Forms of Prayer, but openly avowed the highest
Principles of their Party; which is the Cause, why their Followers have been
more barefaced and violent than their Brethren of the Tory Party in England.
As violent Things have not commonly so long a Duration as moderate, we actually
find, that the Jacobite Party is almost entirely vanished from among us, and
that the Distinction of Court and Country, which is but creeping in at London,
is the only one that is ever mentioned in this Kingdom. Beside the Violence and
Openness of the Jacobite Party, another Reason has, perhaps, contributed to
produce so sudden and so visible an Alteration in this Part of Britain. There
are only two Ranks of Men among us; Gentlemen, who have some Fortune and
Education, and the meanest slaving Poor; without any considerable Number of
that middling Rank of Men, which abounds more in England, both in Cities and in
the Country, than in any other Part of the World. The slaving Poor are
incapable of any Principles: Gentlemen may be converted to true Principles, by
Time and Experience: The middling Rank of Men have Curiosity and Knowledge
enough to form Principles, but not enough to form true Ones, or correct any
Prejudices that they may have imbibed: And it is among the middling Rank of
People, that Tory Principles do at present prevail most in England.

ESSAY XII. Of SUPERSTITION and ENTHUSIASM.
THAT the Corruption of the best Things produces the worst, is grown into a
Maxim, and is verified, among other Instances, by the pernicious Effects of
Superstition and Enthusiasm, the Corruptions of true Religion.

THESE two Species of false Religion, though both pernicious, yet are of a very
different, and even of a contrary Nature. The Mind of Man is subject to certain
unaccountable Terrors and Apprehensions, proceeding either from the unhappy
Situation of private or public Affairs, from ill Health, from a gloomy and
melancholy Disposition, or from the Concurrence of all these Circumstances. In
such a State of Mind, infinite unknown Evils are dreaded from unknown Agents;
and where real Objects of Terror are wanting, the Soul, active to its own
Prejudice, and fostering its predominant Inclination, finds imaginary Ones, to
whose Power and Malevolence it sets no Limits. As these Enemies are invisible
and unknown, the Methods taken to appease them are as unaccountable, and
consist in Ceremonies, Observances, Mortifications, Sacrifices, Presents, or in
any Practice, however absurd and frivolous, which either Folly or Knavery
recommends to a blind and terrified Credulity. Weakness, Fear, Melancholy,
along with Ignorance, are, therefore, the true Sources of SUPERSTITION.

BUT the Mind of Man is also subject to an unaccountable Elevation and
Presumption, proceeding from prosperous Success, from luxuriant Health, from
strong Spirits, and from a bold and confident Disposition. In such a State of
Mind, the Imagination swells with great, but confused Conceptions, to which no
sublunary Beauties or Enjoyments can correspond. Every Thing mortal and
perishable vanishes as unworthy of Attention. And a full Range is given to the
Fancy in the invisible Regions or World of Spirits, where the Soul is at
Liberty to indulge itself in every Imagination, that may best suit its present
Taste and Disposition. Hence arise Raptures, Transports, and surprising Flights
of Fancy; and Confidence and Presumption still increasing, these Raptures,
being altogether unaccountable, and seeming quite beyond the Reach of our
ordinary Faculties, are attributed to the immediate Inspiration of that Divine
Being, who is the Object of Devotion. In a little Time, the inspired Person
comes to regard himself as the chief Favorite of the Divinity; and when this
Frenzy once takes Place, which is the Summit of Enthusiasm, every Whimsy is
consecrated: Human Reason, and even Morality are rejected as fallacious Guides:
And the fanatic Madman delivers himself over, blindly and without Reserve, to
the supposed Illapses of the Spirit, and to Inspirations from above. Hope,
Pride, Presumption, warm Imagination along with Ignorance, are, therefore, the
true Sources of ENTHUSIASM.

THESE two Species of false Religion might afford Occasion to many
Speculations; but I shall confine my self at present to a few Reflections
concerning their different Influence on Government and Society.

MY first Reflection is, that Religions, which partake of Enthusiasm are, on
their first Rise, much more furious and violent than these which partake of
Superstition; but in a little Time become much more gentle and moderate. The
violence of this Species of Religion, when excited by Novelty, and animated by
Opposition, appears from numberless Instances; of the Anabaptists in Germany,
the Camisars in France, the Levellers and other Fanatics in England, and the
Covenanters in Scotland. As Enthusiasm is founded on strong Spirits, and a
presumptuous Boldness of Character, it naturally begets the most extreme
Resolutions; especially after it rises to that Height as to inspire the deluded
Fanatics with the Opinion of Divine Illuminations, and with a Contempt of the
common Rules of Reason, Morality and Prudence.

IT IS thus Enthusiasm produces the most cruel Desolation in human Society: But
its Fury is like that of Thunder and Tempest, which exhaust themselves in a
little Time, and leave the Air more calm and serene than before. The Reason of
this will appear evidently by comparing Enthusiasm to Superstition, the other
Species of false Religion; and tracing the natural Consequences of each. As
Superstition is founded on Fear, Sorrow, and a Depression of Spirits, it
represents the Person to himself in such despicable Colors, that he appears
unworthy in his own Eyes of approaching the Divine Presence, and naturally has
Recourse to any other Person, whose Sanctity of Life, or, perhaps, Impudence
and Cunning, have made him be supposed to be more favored by the Divinity. To
him they entrust their Devotions: To his Care they recommend their Prayers,
Petitions, and Sacrifices: And by his Means hope to render their Addresses
acceptable to their incensed Deity. Hence the Origin of By Priests, I
understand only the Pretenders to Power and Dominion, and to a superior
Sanctity of Character, distinct from Virtue and good Morals. These are very
different from Clergymen, who are set apart to the Care of sacred Matters, and
the Conducting our public Devotions with greater Decency and Order. There is no
Rank of Men more to be respected than the latter.
PRIESTS, who may justly be regarded as proceeding from one of the grossest
Inventions of a timorous and abject Superstition, which, ever diffident of
itself, dares not offer up its own Devotions, but ignorantly thinks to
recommend itself to the Divinity by the Mediation of his supposed Friends and
Servants. As Superstition is a considerable Ingredient of almost all Religions,
even the most fanatical; there being nothing but Philosophy able to conquer
entirely these unaccountable Terrors; hence it proceeds, that in almost every
Sect of Religion there are Priests to be found: But the stronger Mixture there
is of Superstition, the higher is the Authority of the Priesthood. Modern
Judaism and Popery, especially the latter, being the most barbarous and absurd
Superstitions, that have yet been known in the World, are the most enslaved by
their Priests. As the Church of England has a strong Mixture of Popish
Superstition, it partakes also, in its original Constitution, of a Propensity
to Priestly Power and Dominion; particularly in the Respect it exacts to the
Priest. And though, according to the Sentiments of that Church, the Prayers of
the Priest must be accompanied with those of the Laity; yet is he the Mouth of
the Congregation, his Person is sacred, and without his Presence few would
think their public Devotions, or the Sacraments and other Rites, acceptable to
the Divinity.

ON the other hand, it may be observed, that all Enthusiasts have been free
from the Yoke of Ecclesiastics, and have expressed a great Independence in their
Devotion; with a Contempt of Forms, Traditions and Authorities. The Quakers are
the most egregious, though at the same Time the most innocent, Enthusiasts that
have been yet known; and are, perhaps, the only Sect, that have never admitted
Priests amongst them: The Independents, of all the English Sectaries, approach
nearest to the Quakers in Fanaticism, and in their Freedom from Priestly
Bondage. The Presbyterians follow after, at an equal Distance in both these
Particulars. In short, this Observation is founded on the most certain
Experience; and will also appear to be founded on Reason, if we consider that
as Enthusiasm arises from a presumptuous Pride and Confidence, it thinks itself
sufficiently qualified to approach the Divinity, without any human Mediator.
Its rapturous Devotions are so servent, that it even imagines itself actually
to approach him, by the Way of Contemplation and inward Converse; which makes
it neglect all those outward Ceremonies and Observances, to which the
Assistance of the Priest appears so requisite in the Eyes of their
superstitious Votaries. The Fanatic consecrates himself, and bestows on his own
Person a sacred Character, much superior to what Forms and Ceremonious
Institions can confer on any other.

IT IS therefore an infallible Rule, that Superstition is favorable to Priestly
Power, and Enthusiasm as much, or rather more, contrary to it than sound Reason
and Philosophy. The Consequences are evident. When the first Fire of Enthusiasm
is spent, Men naturally, in such fanatical Sects, sink into the greatest
Remissness and Coolness in Sacred Matters; there being no Body of Men amongst
them, endowed with sufficient Authority, whose Interest is concerned to support
the religious Spirit. Superstition, on the contrary, steals in gradually and
insensibly; renders Men tame and submissive; is acceptable to the Magistrate,
and seems inoffensive to the People: Till at last the Priest, having firmly
established his Authority, becomes the Tyrant and Disturber of human Society,
by his endless Contentions, Persecutions, and religious Wars. How smoothly did
the Romish Church advance in their Acquisition of Power? But into what dismal
Convulsions did they throw all Europe, in order to maintain it? On the other
Hand, our Sectaries, who were formerly such dangerous Bigots, are now become
our greatest Free-thinkers; and the Quakers are, perhaps, the only regular Body
of Deists in the Universe, except the Literati or Disciples of Confucius in
China.

MY second Observation, with regard to these Species of false Religion, is,
That Superstition is an Enemy to Civil Liberty, and Enthusiasm a Friend to it.
As Superstition groans under the Dominion of the Priests, and Enthusiasm is an
Enemy to all Ecclesiastical Power, this sufficiently accounts for the present
Observation. Not to mention, that Enthusiasm, being the Infirmity of bold and
ambitious Tempers, is naturally accompanied with a Spirit of Liberty; as
Superstition, on the contrary, renders Men tame and abject, and fits them for
Slavery. We learn from the English History, that, during the Civil Wars, the
Independents and Deists, though the most opposite in their religious Principles;
yet were united in their political Ones, and were alike passionate for a
Commonwealth. And since the Origin of Whig and Tory, the Leaders of the VVhigs
have either been Deists or professed Latudinarians in their Principles; that is,
Friends to Toleration, and indifferent to any particular Sect of Christians:
While the Sectaries, who have all a strong Tincture of Enthusiasm, have always,
without Exception, concurred with that Party, in the Defense of Civil Liberty.
The Resemblance in their Superstitions long united the High-Church Tories and
the Roman Catholics, in the Support of Prerogative and Kingly Power; though
Experience of the tolerating Spirit of the VVhigs seems of late to have
reconciled the Catholics to that Party.

THE Molinists and Jansenists in France have a Thousand unintelligible
Disputes, which are not worthy the Attention of a Man of Sense: But what
principally distinguishes these two Sects, and alone merits our Attention, is
the different Spirit of their Religion. The Molinists, conducted by the
Jesuits, are great Friends to Superstition, rigid Observers of external Forms
and Ceremonies, and devoted to the Authority of the Priests, and to Tradition.
The Jansenists are Enthusiasts, and zealous Promoters of the passionate
Devotion, and of the inward Life; little influenced by Authority; and in a
Word, but Half Catholics. The Consequences are exactly conformable to the
foregoing Reasoning. The Jesuits are the Tyrants and the Slaves of the Court:
And the Jansenists preserve alive the small Sparks of the Love of Liberty,
which are to be found in the French Nation.

ESSAY XIII. Of AVARICE.
IT IS easy to observe, That Comic Writers exaggerate every Character, and draw
their Fop or Coward, with stronger Features than are any where to be met with
in Nature. This moral kind of Painting for the Stage has been often compared to
the Painting for Cupolas and Ceilings, where the Colors are overcharged, and
every Part is drawn excessively large, and beyond Nature. The Figures seem
monstrous and disproportioned, when seen too nigh; but become natural and
regular, when set at a Distance, and placed in that Point of View, in which
they are intended to be surveyed. After the same manner, when Characters are
exhibited in theatrical Representations, the Want of Reality sets the
Personages at a Distance from us; and rendering them more cold and
unentertaining, makes it necessary to compensate, by the Force of Coloring,
what they want in Substance. Thus, we find in common Life, That when a Man once
allows himself to depart from Truth in his Narrations, he never can keep within
the Bounds of Probability; but adds still some new Circumstance to render his
Stories more mavelous, and satisfy his Imagination. Two Men in Buckram Suits
became eleven to Sir John Falstaff before the End of his Story.

THERE is only one Vice, which may be found in Life with as strong Features,
and as high a Coloring, as need be employed by any Satyrist or Comic Poet; and
that is AVARICE. Every Day we meet with Men of immense Fortunes, without Heirs,
and on the very Brink of the Grave, who refuse themselves the most common
Necessaries of Life, and go on heaping Possessions on Possessions, under all
the real Pressures of the severest Poverty. An old Usurer, says the Story,
lying in his last Agonies, was presented by the Priest with the Crucifix to
worship. He opens his Eyes a Moment before he expires, considers the Crucifix,
and cries, These Jewels are not true; I can only lend ten Pistoles upon such a
Pledge. This was probably the Invention of some Epigrammatist; and yet every
one, from his own Experience, may be able to recollect almost as strong
Instances of Perseverance in Avarice. It Is commonly reported of a famous Miser
in this City, that finding himself near Death, he sent for some of the
Magistrates, and gave them a Bill of an hundred Pounds, payable after his
Decease; which Sum he intended should be disposed of in charitable Uses; but
scarce were they gone, when he orders them to be called back, and offers them
ready Money, if they would abate five Pounds of the Sum. Another noted Miser in
the North, intending to defraud his Heirs, and leave his Fortune to the
Building an Hospital, protracted the drawing of his Will from Day to Day; and
it is thought, that if those interested in it had not paid for the Drawing of
it, he would have died intestate. In short, none of the most furious Excesses
of Love and Ambition are in any respect to be compared to the Extremes of
Avarice.

THE best Excuse that can be made for Avarice is, That it generally prevails in
old Men, or in Men of cold Tempers, where all the other Affections are extinct;
and the Mind being incapable of remaining without some Passion or Pursuit, at
last finds out this monstrous unreasonable one, which suits the Coldness and
Inactivity of its Temper. At the same Time, it seems very extraordinary, that
so frosty spiritless a Passion should be able to carry us farther than all the
Warmth of Youth and Pleasure. But if we look more narrowly into the Matter, we
shall find, that this very Circumstance renders the Explication of the Case
more easy. When the Temper is warm, and full of Vigor, it naturally shoots out
more Ways than one, and produces inferior Passions to counter-balance, in some
Degree, its predominant Inclination. It Is impossible for a Person of that
Temper, however bent on any Pursuit, to be deprived of all Sense of Shame, or
Regard to the Sentiments of Mankind. His Friends must have some Influence over
him: And other Considerations are apt to have their Weight. All this serves to
restrain him within some Bounds. But it is no Wonder the avaritious Man being,
from the Coldness of his Temper, without regard to Reputation, to Friendship,
or to Pleasure, should be carried so far by his prevailing Inclination, and
should display his Passion in such surprising Instances.

ACCORDINGLY we find no Vice so irreclaimable as Avarice: And though there
scarcely has been a Moralist or Philosopher, from the Beginning of the World to
this Day, who has not levelled a Stroke at it, we hardly find a single Instance
of any Person's being cured of it. For this Reason, I am more apt to approve of
those, who attack it with Wit and Humor, than of those who treat it in a
serious Manner. There being so little Hopes of doing Good to the People
infected with this Vice, I would have the rest of Mankind, at least, diverted
by our Manner of exposing it: As indeed there is no Kind of Diversion, of which
they seem so willing to partake.

AMONG the Fables of Monsieur de la Motte, there is one levelled against
Avarice, which seems to me more natural and easy, than most of the Fables of
that ingenious Author. A Miser, says he, being dead, and fairly interred, came
to the Banks of the Styx, desiring to be ferry'd over along with the other
Ghosts. Charon demands his Fare, and is surpised to see the Miser, rather than
pay it, throw himself into the River, and swim over to the other Side,
notwithstanding all the Clamor and Opposition that could be made to him. All
Hell was in an Uproar; and each of the Judges was meditating some Punishment,
suitable to a Crime of such dangerous Consequence to the infernal Revenues.
Shall he be chained to the Rock along with Prometheus? Or tremble below the
Precipice in Company with the Danaides? Orassist Sisyphus in rolling his Stone?
No, says Minos, None of these. We must invent some severer Punishment. Let him
be sent back to the Earth, to see the Use his Heirs are making of his Riches.

I HOPE it will not be interpreted as a Design of setting myself in Opposition
to this famous Author, if I proceed to deliver a Fable of my own, which is
intended to expose the same Vice of Avarice. The Hint of it was taken from
these Lines of Mr. Pope, Damned to the Mines, an equal Fate betides
The Slave that digs it, and the Slave that hides.


OUR old Mother EARTH once laid an Indictment against AVARICE before the Courts
of Heaven, for her wicked and malicious Counsel and Advice, in tempting,
inducing, persuading, and traitorously seducing the Children of the Plaintiff
to commit the detestable Crime of Parricide upon her, and mangling her Body, in
ransacking her very Bowels for hidden Treasure. The Indictment was very long
and verbose; but we must omit a great Part of the Repetitions and Synonimous
Terms. Not to tire our Reader too much with our Tale; Avarice, being called
before Jupiter, to answer to this Charge, had not much to say in her own
Defense. The Injury was clearly proved upon her. The Fact, indeed, was
notorious, and the Injury had been frequently repeated. When therefore the
Plaintiff demanded Justice, Jupiter very readily gave Sentence in her Favor;
and his Decree was to this Purpose, That since Dame Avarice, the Defendant, had
thus grievously injured Dame Earth, the Plaintiff, she was hereby ordered to
take that Treasure, of which she had feloniously robbed the said Plaintiff, by
ransacking her Bosom, and in the same Manner, as before, opening her Bosom,
restore it back to her, without Diminution or Retention. From this Sentence, it
shall follow, says Jupiter to the Bystanders, That in all future Ages, the
Retainers of Avarice shall bury and conceal their Riches, and thereby restore
to the Earth what they took from her.

ESSAY XIV. Of the DIGNITY of HUMAN NATURE.
THERE are certain Sects, which secretly form themselves in the learned World,
as well as in the political; and though sometimes they come not to an open
Rupture, yet they give a different Turn to the Ways of thinking of those who
have taken Party on either Side. The most remarkable of this Kind are the
Sects, that are founded on the different Sentiments, with regard to the Dignity
of human Nature; which is a Point, that seems to have divided Philosophers and
Poets, as well as Divines, from the Beginning of the World to this Day. Some
exalt our Species to the Skies, and represent Man as a Kind of human Demi-God,
that derives his Origin from Heaven, and retains evident Marks of his Lineage
and Descent. Others insist upon the blind Sides of human Nature, and can
discover nothing, except Vanity, in which Man surpasses the other Animals, whom
he affects so much to despise. If an Author possesses the Talent of Rhetoric,
and Declamation, he commonly takes Party with the former: If his Turn lies
toward Irony and Ridicule, he naturally throws himself into the other Extreme.

I AM far from thinking, that all those, who have depreciated Human Nature,
have been Enemies to Virtue, and have exposed the Frailties of their
Fellow Creatures with any bad Intention. On the contrary, I am sensible, that a
very delicate Sense of Virtue, especially when attended with somewhat of the
Misanthrope, is apt to give a Man a Disgust of the World, and to make him
consider the common Course of Human Affairs with too much Spleen and
Indignation. I must, however, be of Opinion, that the Sentiments of those, who
are inclined to think favorably of Mankind, are much more advantageous to
Virtue, than the contrary Principles, which give us a mean Opinion of our
Nature. When a Man is possessed of a high Notion of his Rank and Character in
the Creation, he will naturally endeavor to act up to it, and will scorn to do
a base or vicious Action, which might sink him below that Figure, which he
makes in his own Imagination. Accordingly we find, That all our polite and
fashionable Moralists insist upon this Topic, and endeavor to represent Vice
as unworthy of Man, as well as odious in itself.

WOMEN are generally much more flattered in their Youth than Men; which may
proceed from this Reason, among others, that their chief Point of Honor is
considered as much more difficult than ours, and requires to be supported by
all that decent Pride, which can be instilled into them.

WE find very few Disputes, that are not founded on some Ambiguity in the
Expression; and I am persuaded, that the present Dispute concerning the Dignity
of Human Nature is not more exempt from it than any other. It may, therefore,
be worth while to consider, what is real, and what is only verbal, in this
Controversy.

THAT there is a natural Difference betwixt Merit and Demerit, Virtue and Vice,
Wisdom and Folly, no reasonable Man will deny: But yet it is evident, that in
affirming the Term, which denotes either our Approbation or Blame, we are
commonly more influenced by Comparison than by any fixed unalterable Standard in
the Nature of Things. In like manner, Quantity, and Extension, and Bulk, are by
every one acknowledged to be real Things: But when we call any Animal great or
little, we always form a secret Comparison betwixt that Animal and others of
the same Species; and it is that Comparison which regulates our Judgment
concerning its Greatness. A Dog and a Horse may be of the very same Size, while
the one is admired for the Greatness of its Bulk, and the other for the
Smallness. When I am present, therefore, at any Dispute, I always consider with
myself, whether or not it be a Question merely of Comparison, that is the
Subject of the Dispute; and if it be, whether the Disputants compare the same
Objects together, or talk of Things, that are widely different. As this is
commonly the Case, I have long since learnt to neglect such Disputes as
manifest Abuses of Leisure, the most valuable Present that could be made to
Mortals.

IN forming our Notions of Human Nature, we are very apt to make a Comparison
betwixt Men and Animals, which are the only Creatures endowed with Thought that
fall under our Senses. Certainly this Comparison is very favorable to Mankind.
On the one hand we see a Creature, whose Thoughts are not limited by any narrow
Bounds either of Place or Time; who carries his Researches into the most
distant Regions of this Globe, and beyond this Globe, to the Planets and
Heavenly Bodies; looks backward to consider the first Origin of Human Race;
casts his Eyes forward to see the Influence of his Actions upon Posterity, and
the Judgments, that will be formed of his Character a thousand Years hence. A
Creature, that traces Causes and Effects to a great Length and Intricacy;
extracts general Principles from particular Appearances; improves upon his
Discoveries; corrects his Mistakes; and makes his very Errors profitable. On
the other hand, we are presented with a Creature the very reverse of this;
limited in its Observations and Reasonings to a few sensible Objects that
surround it; without Curiosity, without Foresight; blindly conducted by
Instinct, and arriving in a very short Time at its utmost Perfection, beyond
which it is never able to advance a single Step. What a wide Difference is
there betwixt these Creatures! And how exalted a Notion must we entertain of
the former, in Comparison of the latter!

THERE are two Means commonly employed to destroy this Conclusion: First, By
making an unfair Representation of the Case, and insisting only upon the
Weaknesses of Human Nature. And secondly, By forming a new and secret
Comparison betwixt Man and Beings of the most perfect Wisdom. Among the other
Excellencies of Man, there is this remarkable, that he can form a Notion of
Perfections much beyond what he has Experience of in himself; and is not
limited in his Conception of Wisdom and Virtue. He can easily exalt his
Notions, and conceive a Degree of Wisdom, which, when compared to his own, will
make the latter appear very contemptible, and will cause the Difference betwixt
that and the Sagacity of Animals, in a manner, to disappear and vanish. Now
this being a Point, in which all the World is agreed, that Human Understanding
falls infinitely short of perfect Wisdom, it is proper we should know when this
Comparison takes Place, that we may not dispute where there is no real
Difference in our Sentiments. Man falls much more short of perfect Wisdom, and
even of his own Ideas of perfect Wisdom, than Animals do of Man; but yet the
latter Difference is so considerable, that nothing but a Comparison with the
former, can make it appear of little Moment.

IT IS also very usual to compare one Man with another; and finding very few,
that we can call wise or virtuous, we are apt to entertain a contemptible
Notion of our Species in general. That we may be sensible of the Fallacy of
this Way of Reasoning, we may observe, that the Honorable Appellations of wise
and virtuous, are not annexed to any particular Degree of those Qualities of
Wisdom and Virtue; but arise altogether from the Comparison we make betwixt one
Man and another. When we find a Man, who arrives at such a Pitch of Wisdom as
is very uncommon, we pronounce him a wise Man: So that to say, there are few
wise Men in the World, is really to say nothing; since it is only by their
Scarcity that they merit that Appellation. Were the lowest of our Species as
wise as Tully, or my Lord Bacon, we should still have Reason to say, that there
are few wise Men. For in that Case we should exalt our Notions of Wisdom, and
would not pay a singular Honor to any one, that was not singularly
distinguished by his Talents. In like Manner, I have heard it observed by
thoughtless People, that there are few Women possessed of Beauty, in Comparison
of those who want it; not considering, that we bestow the Epithet of Beautiful
only on such as possess a Degree of Beauty, that is common to them with a few.
The same Degree of Beauty in a Woman is called Deformity, which is treated as
real Beauty in one of our Sex.

AS it is usual, in forming a Notion of our Species, to compare it with the
other Species above or below it, or to compare the Individuals of the Species
among themselves; so we often compare together the different Motives or
actuating Principles of Human Nature, in order to regulate our Judgment
concerning it. And indeed, this is the only Kind of Comparison, that is worth
our Attention, or decides any Thing in the present Question. Were the selfish
and vicious Principles of Human Nature so much predominant above the Social and
Virtuous, as is asserted by some Philosophers, we ought undoubtedly to
entertain a contemptible Notion of Human Nature. I may, perhaps, treat more
fully of this Subject in some future Speculation. In the mean Time, I shall
observe, what has been proved beyond Question by several great Moralists of the
present Age, that the social Passions are by far the most powerful of any, and
that even all the other Passions receive their Force and Influence from them.
Whoever desires to see this Question treated at large, with the greatest Force
of Argument and Eloquence, may consult my Lord Shaftsbury's Enquiry concerning
Virtue.

IN my Opinion, there are two Things, which have led astray those Philosophers,
that have insisted so much on the Selfishness of Man. In the First Place, they
found, that every Act of Virtue or Friendship was attended with a secret
Pleasure: From whence they concluded, that Friendship and Virtue could not be
disinterested. But the Fallacy of this is obvious. The virtuous Sentiment or
Passion produces the Pleasure, and does not arise from it. I feel a Pleasure in
doing good to my Friend, because I love him; but do not love him for the sake
of that Pleasure.

IN the second Place, it has always been found, that virtuous Men are far from
being indifferent to Praise; and therefore they have been represented as a Set
of vainglorious Men, that had nothing in View but the Applauses of others. But
this also is a Fallacy. It Is very unjust in the World, when they find any
Tincture of Vanity in a laudable Action, to depreciate it upon that Account, or
ascribe it entirely to that Motive. The Case is not the same with Vanity, as
with other Passions. Where Avarice or Revenge enters into any seemingly
virtuous Action, it is difficult for us to determine how far it enters, and it is
natural to suppose it the sole actuating Principle. But Vanity is so nearly
allied to Virtue, and to love the Fame of virtuous Actions approaches so near
the Love of virtuous Actions for their own sake, that these Passions are more
capable of Mixture, than any other kinds of Passion; and it is almost impossible
to have the latter without some Degree of the former. Accordingly we find, that
this Passion for Glory is always warped and varied according to the particular
Taste or Sentiment of the Mind on which it falls. Nero had the same Vanity in
driving a Chariot, that Trajan had in governing the Empire with Justice and
Ability. To love the Glory of virtuous Actions is a sure Proof of the Love of
virtuous Actions.

ESSAY XV. Of LIBERTY and DESPOTISM.
THOSE who employ their Pens on political Subjects, free from Party-Rage, and
Party-Prejudices, cultivate a Science, which, of all others, contributes most
both to public Utility, and to the private Satisfaction of those who addict
themselves to the Study of it. I am apt, however, to entertain a Suspicion,
that the World is still too young to fix any general stable Truths in Politics,
which will remain true to the latest Posterity. We have not as yet had
Experience of above three thousand Years; so that not only the Art of Reasoning
is still defective in this Science, as well as in all others, but we even want
sufficient Materials, upon which we can reason. It Is not sufficiently known,
what Degrees of Refinement, either in Virtue or Vice, human Nature is
susceptible of; nor what may be expected of Mankind from any great Revolution
in their Education, Customs, or Principles. Machiavel was certainly a great
Genius; but having confined his Study to the furious Tyranny of ancient
Sovereigns, or the little disorderly Principalities of Italy, his Reasonings,
especially upon Monarchical Government, have been found extremely defective;
and there scarce is any Maxim in his Prince, which subsequent Experience has
not entirely refuted. A weak Sovereign, says he, is incapable of receiving good
Counsel; for if he consult with several, he will not be able to choose among
their different Counsels. If he abandon himself to one, that Minister may,
perhaps, have Capacity; but he will not be long a Minister: He will be sure to
dispossess his Master, and place himself and his own Family upon the Throne. I
mention this, among innumerable Instances, of the Errors of that Politician,
proceeding from his having lived in too early an Age of the World, to be a good
Judge of political Truth. Almost all the Princes of Europe are at present
governed by their Ministers, and have been so for near two Centuries; and yet
no such Event has ever happened, or can possibly happen. Sejanus might project
the dethroning the Caesar's; but Fleury, though ever so vicious, could not,
while in his Senses, entertain the least Hopes of dispossessing the Bourbons.

TRADE was never esteemed an Affair of State, 'till within this last Century;
nor is there any ancient Writer on Politics, who has made mention of it. Even
the Italians have kept a profound Silence with regard to it; though it has now
excited the chief Attention, as well of Ministers of State, as of speculative
Reasoners. The great Opulence, Grandeur, and military Archievements of the two
Maritime Powers, seem first to have instructed Mankind in the vast Importance
of an extensive Commerce.

HAVING, therefore, intended in this Essay to have made a full Comparison of
Liberty and Despotism, and have shown the Advantages and Disadvantages of each,
I began to entertain a Suspicion, that no Man in this Age was sufficiently
qualified for such an Undertaking, and that whatever he should advance on that
Head would, in all Probability, be refuted by further Experience, and be
rejected by Posterity. Such mighty Revolutions have happened in human Affairs,
and so many Events have arisen contrary to the Expectation of the ancients, as
are sufficient to beget the Suspicion of still farther Changes.

IT had been observed by the Ancients, that all the Arts and Sciences arose
among free Nations, and that the Persians and Egyptians, notwithstanding all
their Ease, Opulence and Luxury, made but faint Efforts toward a Relish in
those finer Pleasures, which were carried to such Perfection by the Greeks,
amidst continual Wars, attended with Poverty, and the greatest Simplicity of
Life and Manners. It had also been observed, that as soon as the Greeks lost
their Liberty, though they increased mightily in Riches, by Means of the
Conquests of Alexander; yet the Arts, from that Moment, declined among them,
and have never since been able to raise their Head in that Climate. Learning
was transplanted to Rome, the only free Nation at that Time in the Universe;
and having met with so favorable a Soil, it made prodigious Shoots for above a
Century; till the Decay of Liberty produced also the Decay of Letters, and
spread a total Barbarity over the World. From these two Experiments, of which
each was double in its Kind, and showed the Fall of Learning in Despotic
Governments, as well as its Rise in popular Ones, Longinus thought himself
sufficiently justified, in asserting, That the Arts and Sciences could never
flourish, but in a free Government: And in this Opinion, he has been followed
by several eminent Writers Mr. Addison, and my Lord Shaftsbury.
in our own Country, who either confined their View merely to ancient Facts, or
entertained too great a Partiality in Favor of that Form of Government, which
is established amongst us.

BUT what would these Writers have said, to the Instance of modern Rome and
Florence; of which the former carried to Perfection all the finer Arts of
Sculpture, Painting and Music, as well as Poetry, though they groah'd under
Slavery, and under the Slavery of Priests: While the latter never made any
Efforts toward the Arts and Sciences, till they began to lose their Liberty by
the Usurpations of the Family of the Medicis? Ariosto, Tasso, Galilaeo, no more
than Raphael, or Michael Angelo, were not born in Republics. And though the
Lombard School was famous as well as the Roman, yet the Venetians have had the
smallest Share in its Honors, and seem rather inferior to the other Italians,
in their Genius for the Sciences. Rubens established his School at Antwerp, not
at Amsterdam. Dresden, not Hamburg, is the Center of Politeness in Germany.

BUT the most eminent Instance of the flourishing of Learning in despotic
Governments, is that of FRANCE, which never enjoyed any Shadow of Liberty, and
yet has carried the Arts and Sciences nearer Perfection than any other Nationa
of the Universe. The English are, perhaps, better Philosophers; the Italians
better Painters and Musicians; the Romans were better Orators: But the French
are the only People, except the Greeks, who have been at once Philosophers,
Poets, Orators, Historians, Painters, Architects, Sculptors and Musicians. With
regard to the Stage, they have far excelled the Greeks: And in common Life,
have, in a great Measure, perfected that Art, the most useful and agreeable of
any, l'Art de Vivre, the Art of Society and Conversation.

IF we consider the State of the Sciences and polite Arts in our own Country,
Horace's Observation, with regard to the Romans, may, in a great Measure, be
applied to the British. -- Sed in longum tamen aevum
Manserunt, hodieque manent vestigia ruris.


THE Elegance and Propriety of Style have been very much neglected among us. We
have no Dictionary of our Language, and scarce a tolerable Grammar. The first
polite Prose we have, was wrote by a Man Doctor Swift.
who is still alive. As to Sprat, Temple and Lock, they knew too little of the
Rules of Art to be esteemed elegant Writers. The Prose of Bacon, Harrington and
Milton, is altogether stiff and pedantic; though their Sense be excellent. Men,
in this Country, have been so much occupied in the Grand Disputes of Religion,
Politics and Philosophy, that they had no Relish for the minute Observations of
Grammar and Criticism. And though this Turn of Thinking must have considerably
improved our Sense and Talent of Reasoning beyond that of other Nations; yet it
must be confessed, that even in these Sciences, we have not any Standard-Book,
which we can transmit to Posterity: And the utmost we have to boast of, are a
few faint Efforts toward a more just Philosophy; which, indeed, promise very
much, but have not, as yet, reached any Degree of Perfection.

IT has become an established Opinion, That Commerce can never flourish but in
a free Government; and this Opinion seems to have been founded on a longer and
larger Experience than the foregoing, with Regard to the Arts and Sciences. If
we trace Commerce in its Progress through Tire, Athens, Syracuse, Carthage,
Venice, Florence, Genoa, Antwerp, Holland, England, etc. we shall always find
it to have fixed its Seat in free Governments. The three greatest trading Towns
now in the World, are London, Amsterdam, and Hamburgh; all free Cities, and
Protestant Cities; that is, enjoying a double Liberty. It must, however, be
observed, that the great Jealousy entertained of late, with regard to the
Commerce of France, seems to prove, that this Maxim is no more certain and
infallible, than the foregoing, and that the Subjects of absolute Princes may
become our Rivals in Commerce, as well as in Learning.

DURST I deliver my Opinion in an Affair of so much Uncertainty, I would
assert, That, notwithstanding the Efforts of the French, there is something
pernicious to Commerce inherent in the very Nature of absolute Government, and
inseparable from it: Though the Reason I would assign for this Opinion, is
somewhat different from that which is commonly insisted on. Private Property
seems to me fully as secure in a civilized Europaean Monarchy, as in a
Republic; nor is any Danger ever apprehended, in such a Government, from the
Violence of the Sovereign; no more than we commonly apprehend Danger from
Thunder, or Earthquakes, or any Accident the most unusual and extraordinary.
Avarice, the Spur of Industry, is so obstinate a Passion, and works its Way
through so many real Dangers and Difficulties, that it is not likely it will be
scarr'd by an imaginary Danger, which is so small, that it scarce admits of
Calculation. Commerce, therefore, in my Opinion, is apt to decay in absolute
Governments, not because it is there less secure, but because it is less
honorable. A Subordination of Ranks is absolutely necessary to the Support of
Monarchy. Birth, Titles, and Place, must be honored above Industry and Riches.
And while these Notions prevail, all the considerable Traders will be tempted
to throw up their Commerce, in order to purchase some of these Employments, to
which Privileges and Honors are annexed.

SINCE I am upon this Head of the Alterations that Time has produced, or may
produce in Politics, I must observe, That all Kinds of Government, free and
despotic, seem to have undergone, in modern Times, a great Change to the
better, with regard both to foreign and domestic Management. The Balance of
Power is a Secret in Politics known only to the present Age; and I must add,
That the internal POLICE of the State has also received great Improvements
within this last Century. We are informed by Sallust, That Cataline's Army was
much augmented by the Accession of the Highway-men about Rome; though I believe,
that all of that Profession, who are at present dispersed over Europe, would
not amount to a Regiment. In Cicero's Pleadings for Milo, I find this Argument,
among others, made Use of to prove, that his Client had not assassinated
Clodius. Had Milo, says he, intended to have killed Clodius, he had not
attacked him in the Daytime, and at such a Distance from the City: He had
Waylaid him at Night, near the Suburbs, where it might have been pretended,
that he was killed by Robbers; and the Frequency of the Accident would have
favored the Deceit. This is a surprising Proof of the loose Police of Rome,
and of the Number and Force of these Robbers; since Clodius, as we learn from
the same Oration, was at that Time attended with Sixty Slaves, who were
completely armed, and, by the Roman Laws, answerable, upon their own Lives, for
the Life of their Master.

BUT though all Kinds of Government be much improved in modern Times, yet
Monarchical Government seems to have received the most considerable
Improvements. It may now be affirmed of civilized Monarchies, what was formerly
said in Praise of Republics alone, that they are a Government of Laws, not of
Men. They are found susceptible of Order, Method, and Constancy, to a
surprising Degree. Property is secure; Industry encouraged; the Arts flourish;
and the Prince lives secure among his Subjects, like a Father among his
Children. It must, however, be confessed, that though Monarchical Governments have
approached nearer to popular Ones, in Gentleness and Stability; yet they are
still much inferior. Our modern Education and Customs instill more Humanity and
Moderation than the ancient; but have not as yet been able to overcome entirely
the Disadvantages of that Form of Government.

BUT here I must beg leave to advance a Conjecture, which seems to me very
probable, but which Posterity alone can fully judge of. I am apt to think, that
in Monarchical Governments there is a Source of Improvement, and in Popular
Governments a Source of Degeneracy, which in Time will bring these Species of
Government still nearer an Equality. The greatest Abuses, which arise in
France, the most perfect Model of pure Monarchy, proceed not from the Number or
Weight of the Taxes, beyond what are to be met with in free Countries; but from
the Expensive, unequal, arbitrary, and intricate Method of levying them, by
which the Industry of the Poor, especially of the Peasants and Farmers, is, in
a great Measure, discouraged, and Agriculture rendered a beggarly and a slavish
Employment. But to whose Advantage do these Abuses serve? If to that of the
Nobility, they might be esteemed inherent in that Form of Government; since the
Nobility are the true Supports of Monarchy; and it is natural their Interest
should be more consulted, in such a Constitution, than that of the People. But
the Nobility are, in reality, the principal Losers by this Oppression; since it
ruins their Estates, and beggars their Tenants. The only Gainers by it are the
Financiers, a Race of Men despised and hated by the Nobility and the whole
Kingdom. If a Prince or Minister, therefore, should arise, endowed with
sufficient Discernment to know his own and the public Interest, and of
sufficient Force of Mind to break through ancient Customs, we may expect to see
these Abuses remedied; in which Case, the Difference betwixt their absolute
Government and our free one, would be more nominal than real.

The Source of Degeneracy, that may be remarked in free Governments, consists
in the Practice of contracting Debt, and mortaging the public Revenues, by
which Taxes may, in Time, become altogether intolerable, and all the Property
of the State be brought into the Hands of the Public. This Practice is of
modern Date. The Athenians, though a Republic, paid Twenty per Cent. for Money,
as we learn from Xenophon. Among the Moderns, the Dutch first introduced the
Practice of borrowing great Sums at low Interest, and have well nigh ruined
themselves by it. Absolute Princes have also contracted Debt; but as an
Absolute Prince may play the Bankrupt when he pleases, his People can never be
oppressed by his Debts. In popular Governments, the People, and chiefly those who
have the highest Offices, being always the public Creditors, it is impossible
the State can ever make use of this Remedy, which, however it may be sometimes
necessary, is always cruel and barbarous. This, therefore, seems to be an
Inconvenience, that nearly threatens all free Governments, especially our own,
at the present Juncture of Affairs. And what a strong Motive is this, to
increase our Frugality of the public Money; left, for want of it we be reduced,
by the Multiplicity of Taxes, to curse our free Government, and wish ourselves
in the same State of Servitude with all the Nations that surround us.

FINIS.

