LETTERS OF Mr. Wycherley and Mr. Pope,
From the Year 1704 to 1710.
The Author's Age then Sixteen.
Mr. POPE to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
December. 26, 1704.
IT was certainly a great Satisfaction to me to see and converse with a Man,
whom in his Writings I had so long known with Pleasure: But it was a high
addition to it, to hear you, at our very first meeting, doing justice to your
dead friend Mr. Dryden. I was not so happy as to know him; Virgilium tantum
vidi -- Had I been born early enough, I must have known and loved him: For I
have been assured, not only by your self, but by Mr. Congreve and Sir William
Trumbul, that his personal Qualities were as amiable as his Poetical,
notwithstanding the many libelous Misrepresentations of them (against which the
former of these Gentlemen has told me he will one day vindicate him He since
did so, in his Dedication to the Duke of Newcastle, prefixed to Tonson's
Duodecimo Edition of Dryden's Plays, 1717.
) I suppose those Injuries were begun by the Violence of Party, but it is no
doubt they were continued by Envy at his success and fame: And those Scriblers
who attacked him in his latter times, were only like Gnats in a Summer's
evening, which are never very troublesome but in the finest and most glorious
Season; (for his fire, like the Sun's, shined clearest toward its setting.)

You must not therefore imagine, that when you told me of my own performances
that they were above those Critics, I was so vain as to believe it; and yet I
may not be so humble as to think my self quite below their notice. For Critics,
as they are Birds of Prey, have ever a natural inclination to Carrion: And
though such poor Writers as I, are but Beggars, however no Beggar is so poor
but he can keep a Cur, and no Author is so beggarly but he can keep a Critic.
So I Am far from thinking the Attacks of such people either any honor or
dishonor, even to me, much less to Mr. Dryden. I think with you, that whatever
lesser Wits have risen since his Death, are but like Stars appearing when the
Sun is set, that twinkle only in his absence, and with the Rays they have
borrowed from him. Our Wit (as you call it) is but Reflection or Imitation,
therefore scarce to be called ours. True Wit I believe, may be defined a
Justness of Thought, and a Facility of Expression; or (in the Midwives phrase)
a perfect Conception, with an easy Delivery. However this is far from a
complete definition; pray help me to a better, as I doubt not you can.

I am, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Jan. 25, 1704-5.
I HAVE been so busy of late in correcting and transcribing some of my
Madrigals, for a great Man or two who desired to see them, that I have (with
your Pardon) omitted to return you an Answer to your most ingenious Letter: So
Scriblers to the Public, like Bankers to the Public, are profuse in their
voluntary Loans to it, whilst they forget to pay their more private and
particular, as more just Debts, to their best and nearest Friends. However, I
hope, you who have as much good Nature as good Sense, (since they generally are
Companions) will have Patience with a Debtor, who you think has an Inclination
to pay you his Obligations, if he had wherewithal ready about him; and in the
mean time should consider, when you have obliged me beyond my present Power of
returning the Favor, that a Debtor may be an honest Man, if he but intends to
be just when he is able, though late. But I should be less just to you, the more
I thought I could make a Return to so much Profuseness of Wit and Humanity
together; which though they seldom accompany each other, in other Men, are in you
so equally met, I know not in which you most abound. But so much for my Opinion
of you, which is, that your Wit and Ingenuity is equaled by nothing but your
Judgment, or Modesty; which (though it be to please my self) I must no more
offend, than I can do either right.

Therefore I will say no more now of them, than that your good Wit never
forfeited your good Judgment, but in your Partility to me and mine; so that if
it were possible for a hardened Scribbler to be vainer than he is, what you
write of me would make me more conceited, than what I scribble my self; yet I
must confess I ought to be more humbled by your Praise than exalted; which
commends my little Sense with so much more of yours, that I am disparaged and
disheartened by your commendations; who give me an Example of your Wit in the
first Part of your Letter, and a Definition of it in the last: to make writing
well (that is like you) more difficult to me than ever it was before. Thus the
more great and just your Example and Definition of Wit are, the less I am
capable to follow them. Then the best way of showing my Judgment, after having
seen how you write, is to leave off writing; and the best way to show my
Friendship to you, is to put an end to your Trouble, and to conclude

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
March 25, 1705.
WHEN I write to you, I foresee a long Letter, and ought to beg your Patience
beforehand; for if it proves the longest, it will be of course the worst I have
troubled you with. Yet to express my Gratitude at large for your obliging
Letter, is not more my Duty than my Interest; as some People will abundantly
thank you for one Piece of Kindness, to put you in mind of bestowing another.
The more favorable you are to me, the more distinctly I see my Faults; Spots
and Blemishes you know, are never so plainly discovere'd as in the brightest
Sunshine. Thus I am mortified by those Commendations which were designed to
encourage me: for Praise to a young Wit, is like Rain to a tender Flower; if it
be moderately bestowed, it chears and revives, but if too lavishly, overcharges
and depresses him. Most Men in years, as they are generally discouragers of
Youth, are like old Trees, that being past Bearing themselves, will suffer no
young Plants to flourish beneath them: But as if it were not enough to have
outdone all your Coaevals in Wit, you will excel them in good Nature too. As
for my His Pastorals, written at 16 Years of Age.
green Essays, if you find any pleasure in 'em, it must be such as a Man
naturally takes in observing the first Shoots and Buddings of a Tree which he
has raised himself: and it is impossible they should be esteemed any otherwise,
than as we value Fruits for being early, which nevertheless are the most
insipid, and the worst of the Year. In a word, I must blame you for treating me
with so much Compliment, which is at best but the Smoke of Friendship. I
neither write, nor converse with you, to gain your Praise but your Affection.
Be so much my Friend as to appear my Enemy, and tell me my Faults, if not as a
young Man, at least as an unexperienced Writer.

I am, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
March 29, 1705.
YOUR Letter of the Twenty-fifth of March I have received, which was more
welcome to me than any thing could be out of the Country, though it were one's
Rent due that Day: and I can find no fault with it, but that it charges me with
Want of Sincerity, or Justice, for giving you your Due; who should not let your
Modesty be so unjust to your Merit, as to reject what is due to it, and call
that Compliment which is so short of your desert, that it is rather degrading
than exalting you. But if Compliment be the Smoke only of Friendship (as you
say) however you must allow there is no Smoke but there is some Fire; and as
the Sacrifice of Incense offered to the Gods would not have been half so sweet
to others, if it had not been for its Smoke; so Friendship like Love, cannot be
without some Incense, to perfume the Name it would praise and immortalize. But
since you say you do not write to me to gain my Praise, but my Affection, pray
how is it possible to have the one without the other? We must admire before we
love. You affirm, you would have me so much your Friend as to appear your
Enemy, and find out your Faults rather than your Perfections: But (my Friend)
that would be so hard to do, that I who love no Difficulties, cannot be
persuaded to it. Besides, the Vanity of a Scribbler is such, that he will never
part with his own Judgment to gratify another's; especially when he must take
Pains to do it: And though I am proud to be of your Opinion, when you talk of any
Thing, or Man but your self, I cannot suffer you to murder your fame, with
your own hand, without opposing you; especially when you say your last Letter
is the worst (since the longest) you have favored me with; which I therefore
think the best, as the longest Life (if a good one) is the best, as it yields
the more Variety and is more Exemplary; as a cheerful Summer's Day, though longer
than a dull one in the Winter, is less tedious and more entertaining: Therefore
let but your Friendship be like your Letter, as lasting as it is agreeable, and
it can never be tedious, but more acceptable and obliging to

Your, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
April 7, 1705.
I HAVE received yours of the Fifth, wherein your Modesty refuses the just
Praise I give you, by which you lay claim to more, as a Bishop gains his
Bishopric by saying he will not Episcopate: But I must confess, whilst I
displease you by commending you, I please my self; just as Incense is sweeter
to the Offerer than the Deity to whom it is offered, by his being so much above
it: For indeed, every Man partakes of the Praise he gives, when it is so justly
given.

As to my enquiry after your Intrigues with the Muses, you may allow me to make
it, since no old Man can give so young, so great, and able a Favorite of
theirs, Jealousy. I am, in my Enquiry, like old Sir Bernard Gascoign, who used
to say, That when he was grown too old to have his Visits admitted alone by the
Ladies, he always took along with him a young Man, to ensure his Welcome to
them; who, had he come alone had been rejected, only because his Visits were
not scandalous to them. So I am (like an old Rook, who is ruined by Gaming)
forced to live on the good Fortune of the pushing young Men, whose Fancies are
so vigorous, that they ensure their Success in their Adventures with the Muses,
by their Strength of Imagination.

-- Your Papers are safe in my Custody (you may be sure) from any one's Theft
but my own; for it is as dangerous to trust a Scribbler with your Wit, as a
Gamester with the Custody of your Money. -- If you happen to come to Town, you
will make it more difficult for me to leave it, who am, dear Mr. Pope,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
April 30, 1705.
I Cannot contend with you. You must give me leave at once to wave all your
Compliments, and to collect only this in general from 'em, that your Design is
to encourage me. But I separate from all the rest that Paragraph or two, in
which you make me so warm an Offer of your Friendship. Were I possessed of
That, it would put an End to all those Speeches with which you now make me
blush; and change them to wholesome Advices, and free Sentiments, which might
make me wiser and happier. I know it is the general Opinion, that Friendship is
best contracted betwixt Persons of equal Age: but I have so much Interest to be
of another Mind, that you must pardon me if I cannot forbear telling you a few
Notions of mine, in opposition to that Opinion.

In the first place it is observable, that the Love we bear to our Friends is
generally caused by our finding the same Dispositions in them, which we feel in
our selves. This is but Self-love at the Bottom: Whereas the Affection betwixt
People of different Ages cannot well be such, the Inclinations of such being
commonly various. The Friendship of two young Men is often occasioned by Love
of Pleasure or Voluptuousness, each being desirous, for his own sake, of one to
assist or encourage him in the Courses he pursues; as that of two old Men is
frequently on the score of some Profit, Lucre, or Design upon others: Now, as a
young Man who is less acquainted with the Ways of the World, has in all
probability less of Interest; and an old Man who may be weary of himself, less
of Self-love; so the Friendship between them is the more likely to be true, and
unmixed with too much Self-regard. One may add to this, that such a Friendship
is of greater Use and Advantage to both; for the old Man will grow more gay and
agreeable to please the young one; and the young Man more discreet and prudent
by the help of the old one; so it may prove a Cure of those epidemical Diseases
of Age and Youth, Sourness and Madness. I hope you will not need many Arguments
to convince you of the Possibility of this; One alone abundantly satisfies me,
and convinces to the very Heart; which is, that I am, etc. Mr. Wycherley was at
this time about Seventy Years old, Mr. Pope under Seventeen.


Mr. POPE to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
June 23, 1705.
I Should believe my self happy in your good Opinion, but that you treat me so
much in a Style of Compliment. It has been observed of Women, that they are
more subject in their youth to be touched with Vanity than Men, on account of
their being generally treated this way; but the weakest Women are not more so
than that weak class of Men, who are thought to pique themselves upon their
Wit. The World is never wanting, when a Coxcomb is accomplishing himself, to
help to give him the finishing Stroke.

Every Man is apt to think his Neighbor overstock'd with Vanity, yet I cannot
but fancy, there are certain Times, when most people are in a disposition of
being informed; and it is incredible what a vast Good a little Truth might do,
spoken in such seasons. A very small Alms will do a great kindness, to people
in extreme necessity.

I could name an acquaintance of yours, who would at this time think himself
more obliged to you for the Information of his Faults, than the Confirmation of
his Follies. If you would make those the subject of a Letter, it might be as
long as I could wish your Letters always were.

I do not wonder you have hitherto found some difficulty (as you are pleased to
say) in writing to me, since you have always chosen the Task of commending me:
Take but the other way, and I dare engage you will find none at all.

As for my Verses which you praise so much, I may truly say they had never been
the cause of any Vanity in me, except what they gave me when they first
occasioned my acquaintance with you. But I have several times since been in
danger of this Vice, as often I mean as I received any Letters from you.

It Is certain, the greatest magnifying Glasses in the World are a Man's own
Eyes, when they look upon his own Person; yet even in those, I cannot fancy my
self so extremely like Alexander the Great, as you would persuade me: If I must
be like him, it is you will make me so, by complimenting me into a better
opinion of my self than I deserve: They made him think he was the Son of
Jupiter, and you assure me I am a Man of Parts. But is this all you can say to
my honor? You said ten times as much before, when you called me your Friend.
After having made me believe I possessed a share in your affection, to treat me
with Compliments and sweet Sayings, is like the proceeding with poor Sancho
Panca: They had persuaded him that he enjoyed a great Dominion, and then gave
him nothing to subsist upon but Wafers and Marmalade. In our Days, the greatest
obligation you can lay upon a Wit, is to make a Fool of him. For as when Madmen
are found incurable, wise Men give them their Way, and please them as well as
they can; so when those incorrigible things, Poets, are once irrecoverably
Be-Mus'd, the best way both to quiet them, and secure your selves from the
effects of their Frenzy, is to feed their Vanity; (which indeed for the most
part is all that is fed in a Poet.)

You may believe me, I could be heartily glad that all you say were as true,
applied to me, as it would be to your self, for several weighty Reasons; but
for none so much, as that I might be to you what you deserve; whereas I can now
be no more, than is consistent with the small, though utmost Capacity of,

Dear, Sir, Your ever affectionate Servant.

Mr. POPE to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
Oct. 26, 1705.
I HAVE now changed the Scene from the Town to the Country; from Will's
Coffee-House to Windsor Forest. I find no other difference than this, betwixt
the common Town-Wits, and the downright Country Fools; that the first are
pertly in the Wrong, with a little more Flourish and Gaiety, and the last
neither in the Right nor the Wrong, but confirmed in a stupid, settled Medium
betwixt both. However, methinks these are most in the Right, who quietly and
easily resign themselves over to the gentle Reign of Dullness, which the Wits
must do at last, though after a great deal of Noise, Pother, and Resistance. Ours
are a sort of modest, inoffensive People, who neither have Sense, nor pretend
to any, but enjoy a jovial Sort of Dullness. They are commonly known in the
World by the Name of honest, civil Gentlemen. They live much as they ride, at
random; a kind of hunting Life, pursuing with earnestness and hazard, something
not worth the catching; never in the way, nor out of it. I cannot but prefer
Solitude to the Company of all these; for though a Man's self may possibly be the
worst Fellow to converse with in the World, yet one would think the Company of
a Person whom we have the greatest regard to, and affection for, could not be
very unpleasant: As a Man in love with a Mistress, desires no Conversation but
hers, so a Man in love with himself, (as most Men are) may be best pleased with
his own. Besides, if the truest and most useful Knowledge, be the knowledge of
our selves, Solitude conducing most to make us look into our selves, should be
the most instructive State of Life. We see nothing more commonly, than Men, who
for the sake of the circumstantial Part, and mere outside of Life, have been
half their Days rambling out of their Nature, and ought to be sent into
Solitude to study themselves over again. People are usually spoiled instead of
being taught, at their coming into the World; whereas by being more conversant
with Obscurity, without any Pains, they would naturally follow what they were
meant for. In a word, if a Man be a Coxcomb, Solitude is his best School; and
if he be a Fool, it is his best Sanctuary.

These are good Reasons for my own Stay here, but I wish I could give you any
for your coming hither, except that I earnestly invite you. And yet I cannot
help saying, I have suffered a great deal of discontent that you do not, though I
so little merit that you should.

I must complain of the shortness of your last: Those who have most Wit, like
those who have most Money, are generally most sparing of either.

Mr. WYCHERLEY's Answer.
Nov. 5, 1705.
YOURS of the 26th of October I have received, as I have always done yours,
with no little Satisfaction, and am proud to discover by it, that you find
fault with the shortness of mine, which I think the best Excuse for it: And
though they (as you say) who have most Wit or Money, are most sparing of either;
there are some who appear Poor to be thought Rich, and are Poor, which is my
Case: I cannot but rejoice, that you have undergone so much discontent for want
of my company; but if you have a Mind to punish me for my fault, (which I could
not help) defer your coming to Town, and you will do it effectually. But I know
your Charity always exceeds your Revenge, so that I will not despair of seeing
you, who, in return to your inviting me to your Forest, invite you to my
Forest, the Town; where the Beasts that inhabit, tame or wild, of long Ears or
Horns, pursue one another either out of Love or Hatred. You may have the
Pleasure to see one Pack of Bloodhounds pursue another Herd of Brutes, to bring
each other to their Fall, which is their whole Sport: Or, if you affect a less
bloody Chase, you may see a Pack of Spaniels, called Lovers, in hot pursuit of
a two-legg'd Vixen, who only flies the whole lowed Pack to be singled out by
one Dog, who runs mute to catch her up the sooner from the rest, as they are
making a Noise, to the Loss of their Game. In fine, this is the Time for all
sorts of Sport in the Town, when those of the Country cease; therefore leave
your Forest of Beasts, for ours of Brutes, called Men, who now in full Cry,
(packed by the Court or Country) run down in the House of Commons, a deserted
horned Beast of the Court, to the satisfaction of their Spectators: Besides,
(more for your Diversion) you may see not only the two great Play Houses of the
Nation, those of the Lords and Commons, in Dispute with one another; but the
two other Play Houses in high Contest, because the Members of one House are
removed up to the other, (as it is often done by the Court for Reasons of State.)
Insomuch that the lower Houses, I mean the Play Houses, are going to act
Tragedies on one another without Doors, and the Sovereign is put to it (as it
often happens in the other two Houses) to silence one or both, to keep Peace
between them: Now I have told you all the News of the Town.

I am, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Feb. 5, 1705/6.
I HAVE received your kind Letter, with my Paper The same which was printed in
the Year 1717, in a Miscellany of Bern. Lintot's, and in the present Edition of
the Posthumous Works of Mr. Wycherley.
to Mr. Dryden corrected. I own you have made more of it by making it less, as
the Dutch are said to burn half the Spices they bring home to inhance the Price
of the remainder, so to be greater Gainers by their Loss, (which is indeed my
Case now.) Well; you have pruned my fading Laurels of some superfluous,
sapless, and dead Branches, to make the remainder live the longer; thus like
your Master Apollo, you are at once a Poet and a Physician.

Now, Sir, as to my impudent invitation of you to the Town, your good Nature
was the first Cause of my confident request; but excuse me, I must (I see) say
no more upon this Subject, since I find you a little too nice to be dealt
freely with; though you have given me some Encouragement to hope, our Friendship
(though young) might be without Shyness, or criminal Modesty; for a Friend like a
Mistress, though he is not to be mercenary to be true, yet ought not to refuse a
Friend's kindness because it is small or trivial: I have told you (I think)
that a Spanish Lady said to her poor, poetical Gallant, that a Queen if she lay
with a Groom, would expect a Mark of his kindness from him, though it were but
his Curry-comb. But you and I will dispute this Matter when I am so happy as to
see you here; and perhaps it is the only Dispute in which I might hope to have
the better of you.

Now, Sir, to make you another Excuse for my boldness in inviting you to Town,
I designed to leave with you some more of my Papers, (since these return so
much better out of your Hands than they went from mine) for I intended (as I
told you formerly) to spend a Month, or six Weeks this Summer, near you in the
Country, for you may be assured there is nothing I desire so much, as an
Improvement of your Friendship, --

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
March 22, 1705/6.
I MUST lay a Penance upon you, which is to desire you to look over that damned
Miscellany of Madrigals of mine, to pick out (if possible) some that may be so
altered that they may yet appear in Print again; I hope with better success
than they hitherto have done. I will give you my Reason for this Request of
mine, when I see you; which I am resolved shall be when I have done here, and
at the Bath, where I design to go, and afterward to spend two Months (God
willing) with you, at Binfield, or near it --

Mr. POPE's Answer.
April 10, 1705/6.
BY yours of the last Month, you desire me to select, if possible, some Things
from the Printed in Folio, in the Year 1704.
first Volume of your Miscellanies, which may be altered so as to appear again.
I doubted your meaning in this; whether it was to pick out the best of those
Verses, (as that on the Idleness of Business; on Ignorance; on Laziness, etc.)
to make the Method and Numbers exact, and avoid Repetitions? For though (upon
reading 'em on this occasion) I believe they might receive such an Alteration
with Advantage; yet they would not be changed so much, but any one would know
'em for the same at first sight. Or if you mean to improve the worst Pieces,
which are such as to render them very good, would require a great addition, and
almost the entire new writing of them? Or, lastly, if you mean the middle sort,
as the Songs and Love-Verses? For these will need only to be shortened, to omit
repetition; the Words remaining very little different from what they were
before. Pray let me know your mind in this, for I am utterly at a loss. Yet I
have tried what I could do to some of the Songs, Vid. better of Nov. 20, 1707.
a.
and the Poems on Laziness and Ignorance, but cannot (even in my own partial
Judgment) think my alterations much to the purpose. So that I must needs desire
you would apply your Care wholly at present, to those which are yet
unpublished, of which there are more than enough to make a considerable Volume,
of full as good ones, nay, I verily believe, of better than any in Vol. I.
which I could wish you would defer, at least 'till you have finished these that
are yet unprinted.

I send you a Sample of some few of these; namely, the Verses to Mr. Waller in
his old Age; your new ones on the Duke of Marlborough, and two others. I have
done all that I thought could be of advantage to them: Some I have contracted,
as we do Sunbeams, to improve their Energy and Force; some I have taken quite
away, as we take Branches from a Tree, to add to the Fruit; others I have
entirely new expressed, and turned more into Poetry. Done (like one of his
Successors) had infinitely more Wit than he wanted Versification: for the great
dealers in Wit, like those in Trade, take least Pains to set off their Goods;
while the Haberdashers of small Wit, spare for no Decorations or Ornaments. You
have commissioned me to paint your Shop, and I have done my best to brush you
up like your Neighbors. But I can no more pretend to the Merit of the
Production, than a Midwife to the Virtues and good Qualities of the Child she
helps into the Light.

The few Things I have entirely added, you will excuse; you may take them
lawfully for your own, because they are no more than Sparks lighted up by your
Fire; and you may omit them at last, if you think them but Squibs in your
Triumphs.

I am, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Feb. 19, 1706/7.
I HAVE received yours of the 26th, as kind as it is ingenious, for which
therefore I most heartily thank you: It would have been much more welcome to
me, had it not informed me of your want of Health: But you who have a Mind so
vigorous, may well be contented with its crazy Habitation; since (you know) the
old Similitude says, The Keenness of the Mind soonest wears out the Body; as
the sharpest Sword soonest destroys the Scabbard: So that (as I say) you must
be satisfied with your apprehension of an uneasy Life, (though I hope not a short
one;) notwithstanding that generally you sound Wits (though weak Bodies) are
immortal hereafter, by that Genius which shortens your present Life to prolong
that of the future. But I yet hope, your great, vigorous, and active Mind, will
not be able to destroy your little, tender, and crazy Carcass.

Now to say something to what you write, concerning the present epidemick
Distemper of the Mind and Age, Calumny; I know it is no more to be avoided (at
one time or another of our Lives) than a Fever, or an Ague; and as often those
Distempers attend, or threaten the best Constitutions, from the worst Air; so
does that malignant Air of Calumny, soonest attack the sound and elevated in
Mind, as Storms of Wind the tallest and most fruitful Trees; whilst the low and
weak, for bowing and moving to and fro, are, by their Weakness, secure from the
danger and violence of the Tempest. But so much for stinking Rumor, which
weakest Minds are most afraid of; as Irish Men, though the nastiest of Mankind,
are most offended at a Fart.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Nov. 11, 1707.
I Received yours of the 9th yesterday, which has (like the rest of your
Letters) at once pleased and instructed me; so that I assure you, you can no
more write too much to your absent Friends, than speak too much to the present.
This is a Truth that all Men own who have either seen your Writings, or heard
your Discourse; enough to make others show their Judgment, in ceasing to write
or talk, especially to you, or in your company. However, I speak or write to
you, not to please you, but my self; since I provoke your Answers; which,
whilst they humble me, give me vanity; though I am lessened by you even when you
commend me; since you commend my little Sense with so much more of yours, that
you put me out of Countenance, whilst you would keep me in it. So that you have
found a way (against the Custom of great Wits) to show even a great deal of
good Nature with a great deal of good Sense.

I thank you for the Book you promised me, by which I find you would not only
correct my Lines, but my Life.

As to the damned Verses I entrusted you with, I hope you will let them undergo
your Purgatory, to save them from other People's damning them; since the
Critics, who are generally the first damned in this Life, like the damned
below, never leave to bring those above them under their own Circumstances. I
beg you to peruse my Papers, and select what you think best, or most tolerable,
and look over them again; for I resolve suddenly to print some of them, as a
hardened old Gamester will (in spite of all former ill usage by Fortune) push
on an ill Hand, in expectation of recovering himself; especially, since I have
such a Croupier or Second to stand by me as Mr. Pope.

Mr. POPE to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
Nov. 20, 1707.
MR. Engiefyld being upon his Journey to London, tells me I must write to you
by him, which I do, not more to comply with his desire, than to gratify my own;
though I did it so lately by the Messenger you sent hither: I take it too as an
opportunity of sending you the fair Copy of the Poem The Original of it in
Blots, and with Figures of the References from Copy to Copy, in Mr. Pope's
Hand, is in the Harley-Library, among other such Brouillons of Mr. Wycherley's
Poems, corrected by him. Vid. Let. Ap. 10, 1705/6. Note (a).
on Dullness, which was not then finished, and which I should not care to hazard
by the common Post. Mr. Englefyld is ignorant of the Contents, and I hope your
prudence will let him remain so, for my sake no less than your own: Since if
you should reveal any thing of this nature, it would be no wonder Reports
should be raised, and there are those (I fear) who would be ready to improve
them to my disadvantage. I am sorry you told the great Man, whom you met in the
Court of Requests, that your Papers were in my hands: No Man alive shall ever
know any such thing from me; and I give you this warning besides, that though
your self should say I had any way assisted you, I am notwithstanding resolved
to deny it.

The method of the Copy I send you is very different from what it was, and much
more regular: For the better help of your Memory, I desire you to compare it by
the Figures in the Margin, answering to the same in this Letter. The Poem is
now divided into four Parts, marked with the literal Figures I. II. III. IV.
The first contains the praise of Dullness, and shows how upon several
suppositions, it passes for 1. Religion. 2. Philosophy. 3. Example. 4. Wit. And
5. The cause of Wit, and the end of it. The second Part contains the advantages
of Dullness: 1st, In Business; and 2dly, at Court; where the Similitudes of the
Bias of a Bowl, and the Weights of a Clock, are directly tending to illustrate
those advantages of Dullness, though introduced before in a place where there was
no mention made of them; (which was your only objection to my adding them.) The
third contains the happiness of Dullness in all Stations, and shows in a great
many Particulars, that it is so fortunate, as to be esteemed some good Quality
or other in all sorts of People; that it is thought Quiet, Sense, Caution,
Policy, Prudence, Majesty, Valor, Circumspection, Honesty, etc. The fourth
Part I have wholly added, as a Climax which sums up all the praise, advantage,
and happiness of Dullness in a few words, and strengthens them all by the
opposition of the disgrace, disadvantage, and unhappiness of Wit, with which it
concludes This is totally omitted in the present Edition: Some of the Lines in
the H. M. are these. Thus Dullness, the safe Opiate of the Mind,
The last kind refuge weary Wit can find,
Fit for all stations, and in each content,
Is satisfied, secure, and innocent;
No pains it takes, and no offense it gives,
Un-fear'd, unhated, undisturbed it lives, etc.



Though the whole be as short again as at first, there is not one Thought
omitted, but what is a Repetition of something in your first Volume, or in this
very Paper: Some Thoughts are contracted, where they seemed encompassed with
too many words; and some new expressed, or added, where I thought there wanted
heightning, (as you will see particulary in the Simile of the Clock-Weights; It
was originally thus expressed: As Clocks run fastest when most Lead is on. We
find it so in a Letter of Mr. Pope to Mr. Wycherley, dated April 3, 1705. and
in a paper of Verses of his, To the Author of a Poem called Successio, which
got out in a Miscellany in 1712, three Years before Mr. Wycherley died, and two
after he had laid aside the whole design of publishing any Poems.


and the Versification throughout, is, I believe such, as no Body can be
shocked at. The repeated permissions you give me of dealing freely with you,
will (I hope) excuse what I have done; for if I have not spared you when I
thought Severity would do you a kindness, I have not mangled you where I
thought there was no absolute need of Amputation. As to Particulars, I can
satisfy you better when we meet; in the mean time pray write to me when you
can, you cannot too often.

Mr. WYCHERLEY's Answer.
Nov. 22, 1707.
YOU may see by my Style, I had the happiness and satisfaction to receive
yesterday (by the hands of that Wagg, Mr. Englefyld) your extreme kind and
obliging Letter of the 20th of this Month; which like all the rest of yours,
did at once mortify me, and make me vain; since it tells me with so much more
Wit, Sense and Kindness than mine can express, that my Letters are always
welcome to you. So that even whilst your Kindness invites me to write to you,
your Wit and Judgment forbids me; since I may return you a Letter, but never an
Answer.

Now, as for my owning your assistance to me, in over-looking my unmusical
Numbers, and harsher Sense, and correcting them both, with your Genius, or
Judgment; I must tell you I always own it, (in spite of your unpoetick Modesty)
who would do with your Friendship as your Charity; conceal your Bounty to
magnify the Obligation; and even whilst you lay on your Friend the Favor,
acquit him of the Debt: But that shall not serve your turn; I will always own,
it is my infallible Pope has, or would redeem me from a poetical Damning, the
second time; and save my Rhimes from being condemned to the Critics Flames to
all Eternity: But (by the Faith you profess) you know your works of
Supererrogation, transferred upon an humble, acknowledging Sinner, may save even
Him; having good Works enough of your own besides, to ensure yours, and their
Immortality.

And now for the pains you have taken to recommend my Dullness, by making it
more methodical, I give you a thousand thanks; since true and natural Dullness
is shown more by its pretense to form and method, as the sprightliness of Wit
by its despising both. I thank you a thousand times for your repeated
Invitations to come to Binfield: -- You will find, it will be as hard for you
to get quit of my mercenary kindness to you, as it would for me to deserve, or
return to yours; however, it shall be the Endeavor of my future Life, as it
will be to demonstrate my self,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Reply.
Nov. 29, 1707.
THE Compliments you make me, in regard of any inconsiderable Service I could
do you, are very unkind, and do but tell me in other words, that my Friend has
so mean an opinion of me, as to think I expect acknowledgments for trifles;
which upon my faith I shall equally take amiss, whether made to my self, or to
any others. For God's sake, (my dear Friend Wycherley) think better of me, and
believe I desire no sort of Favor so much, as that of serving you, more
considerably than I have yet been able to do.

I shall proceed in this manner, with some others of your Pieces; but since you
desire I would not deface your Copy for the future, and only mark the
Repetitions; I must, as soon as I Have marked these, transcribe what is left on
another Paper; and in that, blot, alter, and add all I can devise, for their
Improvement. For you are sensible, the Omission of Repetitions is but one, and
the easiest Part, of yours and my Design; there remaining besides to rectify
the Method, to connect the Matter, and to mend the Expression and
Versification. I will go next upon the Some Brouillons of these, transcribed
and very much blotted by Mr. Pope, are extant in the Harley Library.
Poems of Solitude, on the public, and on the mixed Life; the Bill of Fare; the
Praises of Avarice, and some others.

I must take some Notice of what you say, of "My pains to make your Dullness
methodical;" and of your hint, that "The sprightliness of Wit despises method."
This is true enough, if by Wit you mean no more than Fancy or Conceit; but in
the better notion of Wit, considered as propriety, surely Method is not only
necessary for Perspicuity and Harmony of parts, but gives beauty even to the
minute and particular thoughts, which receive an additional advantage from
those which precede or follow in their due place: According to a Simile Mr.
Dryden used in conversation, of Feathers in the Crowns of the wild Indians,
which they not only choose for the beauty of their Colors, but place them in
such a manner as to reflect a Luster on each other. I will not disguise any of
my Sentiments from you: To methodize in your Case, is full as necessary as to
strike out; otherwise you had better destroy the whole Frame, and reduce them
into single Thoughts in Prose, like Rochfoucault, as I have more than once
hinted to you.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Feb. 28, 1707-8.
I HAVE had yours of the 23d of this Instant, for which I give you many thanks,
since I find by it, that even absence (the usual bane of Love, or Friendship)
cannot lessen yours no more than mine. Mr. Pope had this from Mr. Cromwell,
after his Enquiry, in these Words. "I returned to Town last Saturday, and
inquiring (as you desired) about Mr. Wycherley, was told, in two several
Places, that he had been very ill, and that he was even gone off our Stage: But
I could not imagine this report to be true, or that so great a Man could leave
the World without its being instructed to lament so considerable a Loss."
As to your hearing of my being ill; I am glad, and sorry for the report: In
the first place, glad that it was not true; and in the next sorry that it
should give you any disturbance, or concern more than ordinary for me; for
which as well as your concern for my future well-being or life, I think my self
most eternally obliged to you; assuring, your concern for either will make me
more careful of both. Yet for your sake I love this Life so well, that I shall
the less think of the other; but it is in your power to ensure my Happiness in
one and the other, both by your Society and good Example, so not only
contribute to my felicity here, but hereafter.

Now as to your Excuse for the plainness of your Style, or Letter, I must needs
tell you, that Friendship is much more acceptable to a true Friend than Wit,
which is generally false Reasoning; and a Friend's reprimand often shows more
Friendship than his compliment: Nay Love, which is more than Friendship, is
often seen, by our Friend's correction of our Follies or Crimes. Upon this Test
of your Friendship I intend to put you when I return to London, and thence to
you at Binfield, which I hope will be within a Month.

Next to the News of your good Health, I am pleased with the good News of your
going to print some of your Poems, and proud to be known by them to the Public
for your Friend; who intend (perhaps the same way) to be revenged of you for
your kindness; by taking your Name in vain in some of my future Madrigals: yet
so as to let the World know, my love or esteem for you are no more Poetic than
my Talent in scribbling. But of all the Arts of Fiction, I desire you to
believe I want that of feigning Friendship, and that I am sincerely,

Your, etc,

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
May 13, 1708.
I HAVE received yours of the first of May. Your Pastoral Muse outshines, in
her modest and natural dress, all Apollo's Court-Ladies, in their more artful,
labored, and costly Finery; therefore I am glad to find by your Letter, you
design your Country-beauty of a Muse shall appear at Court and in Public; to
outshine all the farded, lewd, confident, affected, Town-dowdies, who aim at
being honored only to their Shame: But her artful Innocence (on the contrary)
will gain more Honor as she becomes more Public; and in spite of Custom will
bring Modesty again into Fashion, or at least make her Sister-rivals of this
Age, blush for Spite, if not for Shame. As for my stale, antiquated, poetical
Puss, whom you would keep in countenance, by saying she has once been
tolerable, and would yet pass Muster by a little licking over; it is true that
(like most vain antiquated Jades which have once been passable) she yet affects
Youthfulness, in her Age, and would still gain a few Admirers, (who the more
she seeks, or labors for their liking, are but more her contemners.)
Nevertheless, she is resolved henceforth to be so cautious as to appear very
little more in the World, except it be as an attendant on your Muse, or as a
Foil, not a Rival to her Wit, or Fame: So that let your Countrygentlewoman
appear when she will in the World This, and the following Extract, are a full
Confutation of the Lying Spirit of John Dennis and others, who impudently
asserted that Mr. Pope wrote these Verses on himself, (though published by Mr.
Wycherley six Years before his Death.) We find here it was a voluntary Act of
his, promised beforehand, and written while Mr. Pope was absent. The first
Brouillon of those Verses, and the second Copy with Corrections, are both yet
extant in Mr. Wycherley's own hand; from which will appear, that if they
received any alteration from Mr. Pope, it was in the Omission of some of his
own Praises.
, my old worn-out Jade of a lost Reputation, shall be her attendant into it, to
procure her Admirers; as an old Whore who can get no more Friends of her own,
bawds for others, to make Sport or Pleasure yet, one way or other, for Mankind.
I approve of your making Tonson your Muse's Introductor into the World, or
Master of the Ceremonies, who has been so long a Pimp, or Gentleman Usher to
the Muses.

I wish you good Fortune; since a Man with store of Wit, as store of Money,
without the help of good Fortune, will never be Popular; but I wish you a great
many Admirers, which will be some Credit to my Judgment as well as your Wit,
who always thought you had a great deal, and am

Your, etc.

Extract from two Letters of Mr. WYCHERLEY of May 18, and of July 28, 1708.
I HAVE made a damned Compliment in Verse, upon the printing your Pastorals,
which you shall see when you see me. -- If you suffer my old Dowdy of a Muse to
wait upon your sprightly Lass of the Plains, into the Company of the Town,
'twill be but like an old City-bawd's attending a young Country-beauty to Town,
to gain her Admirers, when past the Hopes of pleasing the World herself.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
May 17, 1709.
I MUST thank you for a Book of your Miscellanies, which Tonson sent me, I
suppose by your Order; and all I can tell you of it is, that nothing has lately
been better received by the Public, than your part of it; you have only
displeased the Critics by pleasing them too well; having not left them a Word
to say for themselves, against you and your performances; so that now your hand
is in you must persevere, 'till my Prophecy's of you be fulfilled. In earnest,
all the best Judges of good Sense, or Poetry, are Admirers of yours; and like
your Part of the Book so well, that the rest is liked the worse. This is true
upon my word, without Compliment; so that your first Success will make you for
all your Life a Poet, in spite of your Wit; for a Poet's Success at first, like
a Gamester's Fortune at first, is like to make him a loser at last, and to be
undone by his good fortune and merit.

But hitherto your Miscellanies have safely run the Gantlet, through all the
Coffeehouses; which are now entertained with a whimsical new News-Paper,
called, The Tatler, which I suppose you have seen. This is the newest thing I
can tell you of, except it be of the Peace, which now (most People say) is
drawing to such a Conclusion, as all Europe is, or must be satisfied with; so
Poverty you see, which makes Peace in Westminster Hall, makes it likewise in
the Camp or Field, throughout the World: Peace then be to you, and to me; who
am now grown peaceful, and will have no Contest with any Man, but him who says
he is more your Friend, or humble Servant, than

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
May 20, 1709.
I AM glad you received the Jacob Tonson 's sixth Vol. of Miscellany Poems.
Miscellany, if it were only to show you that there are as bad Poets in this
Nation as your Servant. This modern Custom of appearing in Miscellanies, is
very useful to the Poets, who, like other Thieves, escape by getting into a
Crowd, and herd together like Banditti, safe only in their Multitude. Methinks
Strada has given a good Description of these kind of Collections; Nullus hodie
mortalium aut nascitur, aut moritur, aut proeliatur, aut rusticatur, aut abit
peregre; aut redit, aut nubit; aut est, aut non est, (nam etiam mortuis isti
canunt) cui non illi ea templo cudant Epicoedia, Genethaliaca, Protreptica,
Panegyrica, Epithalamia, Vaticinia, Propemptica, Saterica, Paroenctica,
Noenias, Nugas. As to the success which you say my part has met with, it is to
be attributed to what you were pleased to say of me to the World; which you do
well to call your Prophecy, since whatever is said in my favor, must be a
Prediction of things that are not yet; you, like a true Godfather, engage on my
part for much more than ever I can perform. My Pastoral Muse, like other
Country Girls, is but put out of Countenance, by what you Courtiers say to her;
yet I hope you would not deceive me too far, as knowing that a young Scribler's
vanity needs no Recruits from abroad: for Nature like an indulgent Mother,
kindly takes care to supply her sons with as much of their own, as is necessary
for their Satisfaction. If my Verses should meet with a few flying
Commendations, Virgil has taught me that a young Author has not too much reason
to be pleased with them, when he considers, that the natural consequence of
Praise, is Envy and Calumny. -- Si ulna placitum laudarit, Baccare frontem
Cingite, ne Vati noceat mala lingua futuro:
When once a Man has appeared as a Poet, he may give up his Pretensions to all
the rich and thriving Arts: Those who have once made their court to those
Mistresses without Portions, the Muses, are never like to set up for Fortunes.
But for my part, I shall be satisfied if I can lose my Time agreeably this way,
without losing my reputation: As for gaining any, I am as indifferent in the
Matter as Falstaff was, and may say of Fame as he did of Honor, If it comes,
it comes unlooked for; and there is an End on it. I can be content with a bare
saving game, without being thought an Eminent hand, (with which Title Jacob has
graciously dignified his adventurers and volunteers in Poetry.) Jacob creates
Poets, as Kings sometimes do Knights, not for their honor, but for money.
Certainly he ought to be esteemed a worker of Miracles, who is grown rich by
Poetry.

What Authors lose, their Booksellers have won,
So Pimps grow rich, while Gallants are undone.
I am, your, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
May 26, 1709.
THE last I received from you, was dated the 22d of May. I take your charitable
hint to me very kindly, wherein you do like a true Friend, and a true
Christian, and I shall endeavor to follow your Advice, as well as your
Example, -- As for your wishing to see your Friend an Hermit with you, I cannot
be said to leave the world, since I shall enjoy in your conversation, all that
I can desire of it; nay, can learn more from you alone, than from my long
experience of the great, or little vulgar in it.

As to the success of your Poems in the late Miscellany, I told you of in my
last; (upon my word) I made you no Compliment, for you may be assured, that all
sorts of Readers like them, except they are Writers too; but for them, (I must
needs say) the more they like them, they ought to be the less pleased with 'em:
So that you do not come off with a bare Saving Game (as you call it) but have
gained so much Credit at first, that you must needs support it to the last:
Since you set up with so great a Stock of good Sense, Judgment and Wit, that
your Judgment ensures all that your Wit ventures at. The Salt of your Wit has
been enough to give a relish to the whole insipid Hotch-Potch it is mingled The
sixth Volume of Tonson's Miscellanies
with; and you will make Jacob's Ladder raise you to Immortality, by which
others are turned off shamefully, to their Damnation (for Poetic Thieves as
they are) who think to be saved by others good works, how faulty soever their
own are: But the Coffee-house Wits, or rather Anti-wits, the Critics, prove
their Judgments by approving your Wit; and even the News-Mongers and Poets will
own, you have more Invention than they; nay, the Detracters or the Envious, who
never speak well of any Body, (not even of those they think well of in their
absence) yet will give you (even in your absence) their good Word; and the
Critics only hate you, for being forced to speak well of you whether they will
or no; and all this is true, upon the word of,

Your, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Aug. 11, 1709.
MY Letters, so much inferior to yours, can only make up their scarcity of
Sense by their number of Lines; which is like the Spaniards paying a debt of
Gold with a load of brass Money. But to be a Plain-dealer, I must tell you, I
will revenge the raillery of your Letters upon mine, by printing them, (as
Dennis did mine) without your knowledge too, which would be a revenge upon your
Judgment, for the raillery of your Wit: For some dull Rogues (that is the most
in the World) might be such Fools as to think what you said of me, was in
earnest: It is not the first time, you great Wits have gained Reputation by
their paradoxical or ironical Praises; your Forefathers have done it, Erasmus
and others. -- For all Mankind who know me must confess, he must be no ordinary
Genius, or little Friend, who can find out any thing to commend in me
seriously; who have given no sign of my Judgment, but my Opinion of yours, nor
mark of my Wit, but my leaving off Writing, to the public, now you are
beginning, to show the World, what you can do by yours: whose Wit is as
spiritual as your Judgment infallible; in whose Judgment I have an implicit
Faith, and shall always subscribe to it to save my Works in this World, from
the Flames and Damnation. -- Pray present my most humble Service to Sir W.
Trumbull; for whom and whose Judgment I have so profound a respect, that his
Example had almost made me marry, more than my Nephew's ill Carriage to me;
having once resolved to have revenged my self upon him by my Marriage, but now
am resolved to make my revenge greater upon him by his Marriage.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
April 1, 1710.
I HAVE had yours of the 30th of the last Month, which is kinder than I desire
it should be, since it tells me you could be better pleased to be sick again in
Town in my company, than to be well in the Country without it; and that you are
more impatient to be deprived of Happiness than of Health: yet, my dear Friend,
set raillery or compliment aside, I can bear your absence (which procures your
Health and Ease) better than I can your company when you are in Pain: for I
cannot see you so without being so too. Your love to the Country I do not
doubt, nor do you (I hope) my love to it or you, since there I can enjoy your
company without seeing you in Pain to give me Satisfaction and Pleasure; there
I can have you without Rivals or Disturbers; without the C^s too civil, or the
T^s too rude; without the Noise of the Loud, and the Censure of the Silent; and
would rather have you abuse me there with the Truth, than at this distance with
your Compliment: Since now, your business of a Friend and kindness to a Friend,
is by finding fault with his Faults, and mending them by your obliging
Severity. I hope (in point of your good nature) you will have no cruel Charity
for those Papers of mine, you were so willing to be troubled with; which I take
most infinitely kind of you, and shall acknowledge with gratitude, as long as I
live. No Friend can do more for his Friend than preserving his Reputation (nay
not by preserving his Life) since by preserving his Life he can only make him
live about threescore or fourscore Years; but by preserving his Reputation, he
can make him live as long as the World lasts; so save him from damning, when he
is gone to the Devil: Therefore I pray condemn me in private, as the Thieves do
their Accomplices in Newgate, to save them from condemnation by the Public. Be
most kindly unmerciful to my poetical Faults, and do with my Papers, as you
Country-gentlemen do with your Trees, slash, cut, and lop-off the Excrescencies
and dead Parts of my withered Bays, that the little remainder may live the
longer, and increase the value of them, by diminishing the number. I have
troubled you with my Papers rather to give you Pain than Pleasure,
notwithstanding your compliment, which says, you take the trouble kindly: Such
is the generosity to your Friends, that you take it kindly to be desired by
them to do them a kindness; and you think it done to you, when they give you an
opportunity to do it to them. Wherefore you may be sure to be troubled with my
Letters out of Interest, if not Kindness; since mine to you will procure yours
to me, so that I write to you more for my own sake than yours; less to make you
think I write well, than to learn from you to write better. Thus you see
Interest in my Kindness, which is like the Friendship of the World, rather to
make a Friend than be a Friend; but I am yours, as a true Plain-dealer.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
April 11, 1710.
IF I can but do part of my Business at Shrewsbury in a Fortnights time (which
I propose to do) I will be soon after with you, and trouble you with my
Company, for the remainder of the Summer: In the mean time I beg you to give
your self the pains of altering, or leaving out what you think superfluous in
my Papers, that I may endeavor to print such a Number of them as you and I
shall think fit, about Michaelmas next; in order to which (my dear Friend) I
beg you to be so kind to me, as to be severe to them; that the Critics may be
less so; for I had rather be condemned by my Friend in private, than exposed to
my Foes in public, the Critics, or common Judges, who are made such by having
been old Offenders themselves. Pray believe I have as much Faith in your
Friendship and Sincerity, as I have Deference to your Judgment; and as the best
Mark of a Friend, is telling his Friend his Faults in private, so the next is
concealing them from the public, 'till they are fit to appear; in the mean
time I am not a little sensible of the great kindness you do me, in the trouble
you take for me, in putting my Rhimes in Tune, since good Sounds set off often
ill Sense, as the Italian Songs, whose good Airs, with the worst Words, or
Meaning, make the best Music; so by your tuning my Welsh Harp, my rough Sense
may be the less offensive to the nicer Ears of those Critics, who deal more in
Sound than Sense. Pray then take Pity at once both of my Readers and me, in
shortning my barren Abundance, and increasing their Patience by it, as well as
the Obligations I have to you; and since no Madrigaller can entertain the Head,
unless he pleases the Ear; and since the crowded Opera's have left the best
Comedies with the least Audiences, it is a sign Sound can prevail over Sense;
therefore soften my Words, and strengthen my Sense, and Eris mihi magnus Apollo.

Mr. WYCHERLEY

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
April 27, 1718.
YOU give me an account in your Letter, of the trouble you have undergone for
me, in comparing my Papers you took down with you, with the old printed Volume,
and with one another of that Bundle you have in your hands; amongst which (you
say) you find numerous The Truth of this may be seen in the whole printed
Volume of his Miscellanies in Folio, in 1704, in almost every Page.
repetitions, of the same Thoughts and Subjects; all which I must confess my
want of Memory has prevented me from imagining; as well as made me capable of
committing them; since, of all Figures, that of Tautology, is the last I would
use, or least forgive my self for; but seeing is believing; wherefore I will
take some pains to examine and compare those Papers in your hands, with one
another, as well as with the former printed Copies or Books, of my damned
Miscellanies; all which (as bad a Memory as I have) with a little more pains
and care, I think I can remedy; therefore I would not have you give your self
more trouble about them, which may prevent the pleasure you have, and may give
the World, in writing upon new Subjects of your own, whereby you will much
better entertain your self and others. Now as to your Remarks upon the whole
Volume of my Papers; all that I desire of you, is to mark in the Margin
(without defacing the Copy at all) either any Repetition of Words, Matter, or
Sense, or any Thoughts, or Words too much repeated; which if you will be so
kind as to do for me, you will supply my want of Memory, with your good One,
and my Deficiences of Sense, with the Infallibility of yours; which if you do,
you will most infinitely oblige me, who almost repent the trouble I have given
you, since so much. Now as to what you call Freedom with me, (which you desire
me to forgive) you may be assured I would not forgive you unless you did use
it; for I am so far from thinking your Plainness a Fault, or an Offense to me,
that I think it a Charity and an Obligation; which I shall always acknowledge,
with all sort of Gratitude to you for it, who am therefore

(Dear Mr. Pope) Your most obliged humble Servant W. WYCHERLEY.
All the News I have to send you, is, that poor Mr. Betterton is going to make
his Exit from the Stage of this World, the Gout being gotten up into his Head,
and (as the Physicians say) will certainly carry him off suddenly.



Mr. POPE's Answer.
May 2, 1710.
I AM sorry you persist to take ill my not accepting your Invitation, and to
find (if I mistake not) your Exception not unmixt with some Suspicion. Be
certain I shall most carefully observe your Request, not to cross over, or
deface the Copy of your Papers for the future, and only to mark in the Margin
the Repetitions: But as this can serve no further than to get rid of those
Repetitions, and no way rectify the Method, nor connect the Matter, nor improve
the Poetry in Expression or Numbers, without further blotting, adding, and
altering; so it really is my opinion, and desire, that you should take your
Papers out of my hands into your own; and that no Alterations may be made but
when both of us are present; when you may be satisfied with every Blot, as well
as every Addition, and nothing be put upon the Papers but what you shall give
your own sanction and assent to, at the same time.

Do not be so unjust, as to imagine from hence that I would decline any part of
this Task: On the contrary you know, I have been at the pains of transcribing
some Pieces, at once to comply with your desire of not defacing the Copy, and
yet to lose no Time in proceeding upon the Correction. I will go on the same
way if you please; though truly it is (as I have often told you) my sincere
opinion, that the greater part would make a much better Figure as Single Maxims
and Reflections in Prose, after the manner of your Favorite Rochefoucaut, than
in Verse: Mr. Wycherley lived five Years after, to December 1715, but little
progress was made in this Design, through his Old age, and the increase of his
Infirmities. However some of the Verses which had been touched by Mr. P. with
308 of these Maxims in Prose were found among his Papers, which having the
misfortune to fall into the Hands of a Mercenary, were published in 1728, in
Octavo, under the Title of The Posthumous Works of William Wycherley, Esquire
And this, when nothing more is done but marking the Repetitions in the Margin,
will be an easy Task for your self to proceed upon, notwithstanding the bad
Memory you complain of.

I am unfeignedly, dear Sir, Your, etc.

LETTERS OF William Walsh, Esquire AND Mr. POPE.

From 1705 to 1707.

LETTERS OF Of Abberley in Worcestershire, Gentleman of the Horse in Queen
Anne's reign, Author of several beautiful pieces in Prose and Verse, and in the
Opinion of Mr. Dryden, (in his Postscript to Virgil,) the Best Critic of our
Nation in his time.
Mr. Walsh and Mr. Pope.
From 1705, to 1707.
Mr. WALSH to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
Apr. 20. 1705.
I Return you the Mr. Pope's Pastorals.
Papers you favored me with, and had sent them to you yesterday morning, but
that I thought to have brought them to you last night my self. I have read them
over several times with great satisfaction. The Preface is very judicious and
very learned; and the Verses very tender and easy. The Author seems to have a
particular Genius for that kind of Poetry, and a Judgment that much exceeds the
years you told me he was of. He has taken very freely from the Ancients, but
what he has mixed of his own with theirs, is no way inferior to what he has
taken from them. It Is no flattery at all to say, that Virgil had written
nothing so good at his Age Sixteen.
. I shall take it as a favor if you will bring me acquainted with him; and if
he will give himself the trouble any morning to call at my House, I shall be
very glad to read the Verses over with him, and give him my opinion of the
particulars more largely than I can well do in this Letter. I am, Sir,

Your most faithful and most humble Servant, W. WALSH.

Mr. WALSH to Mr. POPE.
June 24, 1706.
I Received the favor of your Letter, and shall be very glad of the
continuance of a correspondence by which I am like to be so great a gainer. I
hope when I have the happiness of seeing you again in London, not only to read
over the Verses I have now of yours, but more that you have written since; for
I make no doubt but any one who writes so well, must write more. Not that I
think the most voluminous Poets always the best, I believe the contrary is
rather true. I mentioned somewhat to you in London of a Pastoral Comedy, which
I should be glad to hear you had thought upon since. I find Menage in his
observations upon Tasso's Aminta, reckons up fourscore Pastoral Plays in
Italian: And in looking over my old Italian Books, I find a great many
Pastorals and Piscatory Plays, which I suppose Menage reckons together. I find
also by Menage, that Tasso is not the first that writ in that kind, he
mentioning another before him, which he himself had never seen, nor indeed have
I. But as the Aminta, Pastor Fido, and Filli di Sciro of Bonarelli are the
three best, so I think there is no dispute but Aminta is the best of the three:
Not but that the Discourses in Pastor Fido are more entertaining and copious in
several peoples opinion, though not so proper for Pastoral; and the Fable of
Bonarelli more surprising. I do not remember many in other Languages, that have
written in this kind with success. Racan's Bergeries are much inferior to his
Lyrick Poems; and the Spaniards are all too full of Conceits. Rapin will have
the design of Pastoral Plays to be taken from the Cyclops of Euripides. I am
sure there is nothing of this kind in English worth mentioning, and therefore
you have that Field open to your self. You see I write to you without any sort
of constraint or method, as things come into my head, and therefore pray use
the same freedom with me, who am, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. WALSH.
July 2, 1706.
I Cannot omit the first opportunity of making you my acknowledgments for
reviewing those Papers of mine. You have no less right to correct me, than the
same hand that raised a Tree has to prune it. I am convinced as well as you,
that one may correct too much; for in Poetry as in Painting, a Man may lay
Colors one upon another, till they stiffen and deaden the Piece. Besides to
bestow heightning on every part is monstrous: Some parts ought to be lower than
the rest; and nothing looks more ridiculous, than a Work, where the Thoughts,
however different in their own nature, seem all on a level: It Is like a Meadow
newly mown, where Weeds, Grass, and Flowers are all laid even, and appear
undistinguished. I believe too that sometimes our first Thoughts are the best,
as the first squeezing of the Grapes makes the finest and richest Wine.

I have not attempted any thing of Pastoral Comedy, because I think the Taste
of our Age will not relish a Poem of that sort. People seek for what they call
Wit, on all subjects, and in all places; not considering that Nature loves
Truth so well, that it hardly ever admits of flourishing: Conceit is to Nature
what Paint is to Beauty; it is not only needless, but impairs what it would
improve. There is a certain Majesty in Simplicity which is far above all the
Quaintness of Wit: insomuch that the Critics have excluded it from the loftiest
Poetry, as well as the lowest, and forbid it to the Epic no less than the
Pastoral. I should certainly displease all those who are charmed with Guarini
and Bonarelli, and imitate Tasso not only in the Simplicity of his Thoughts,
but in that of the Fable too. If surprising discoveries should have place in
the story of a Pastoral Comedy, I believe it would be more agreeable to
Probability to make them the effects of Chance than of Design; Intrigue not
being very consistent with that Innocence, which ought to constitute a
Shepherd's Character. There is nothing in all the Aminta (as I remember) but
happens by mere accident; unless it be the meeting of Aminta with Sylvia at the
Fountain, which is the contrivance of Daphne, and even that is the most simple
in the world: The contrary is observable in Pastor Fido, where Corisca is so
perfect a Mistress of Intrigue, that the Plot could not have been brought to
pass without her. I am inclined to think the Pastoral Comedy has another
disadvantage, as to the Manners: Its general design is to make us in love with
the Innocence of a rural Life, so that to introduce Shepherds of a vicious
Character must in some measure debase it; and hence it may come to pass, that
even the virtuous Characters will not shine so much, for want of being opposed
to their contraries. -- These Thoughts are purely my own, and therefore I have
reason to doubt them: but I hope your Judgment will set me right.

I would beg your opinion too as to another point: It is how far the liberty of
Borrowing may extend? I have defended it sometimes by saying, that it seems not
so much the Perfection of Sense, to say things that have never been said
before, as to express those best that have been said oftenest; and that Writers
in the case of borrowing from others, are like Trees which of themselves would
produce only one sort of Fruit, but by being grafted upon others, may yield
variety. A mutual commerce makes Poetry flourish; but then Poets like
Merchants, should repay with something of their own what they take from others;
not like Pirates, make prize of all they meet. I desire you to tell me
sincerely, if I have not stretched this License too far in these Pastorals? I
hope to become a Critic by your Precepts, and a Poet by your Example. Since I
have seen your Eclogues, I cannot be much pleased with my own; however you have
not taken away all my Vanity, so long as you give me leave to profess my self

Your, etc.

Mr. WALSH to Mr. POPE.
July 20, 1706.
I Had sooner returned you thanks for the favor of your Letter, but that I was
in hopes of giving you an account at the same time of my Journey to Windsor;
but I am now forced to put that quite off, being engaged to go to my
Corporation of Richmond in Yorkshire. I think you are perfectly in the right in
your Notions of Pastoral, but I am of opinion, that the redundancy of Wit you
mention, though it is what pleases the common people, is not what ever pleases the
best judges. Pastor Fido indeed has had more admirers than Aminta; but I will
venture to say, there is a great deal of difference between the admirers of one
and the other. Corisca, which is a Character generally admired by the ordinary
judges, is intolerable in a Pastoral; and Bonarelli's fancy of making his
Shepherdess in love with two men equally, is not to be defended, whatever pains
he has taken to do it. As for what you ask of the Liberty of Borrowing; it is
very evident the best Latin Poets have extended this very far; and none so far
as Virgil, who is the best of them. As for the Greek Poets, if we cannot trace
them so plainly, it is perhaps because we have none before them; it is evident
that most of them borrowed from Homer, and Homer has been accused of burning
those that wrote before him, that his Thefts might not be discovered. The best
of the modern Poets in all Languages, are those that have the nearest copied
the Ancients. Indeed in all the common Subjects of Poetry, the Thoughts are so
obvious (at least if they are natural) that whoever writes last, must write
things like what have been said before: But they may as well applaud the
Ancients for the Arts of eating and drinking, and accuse the Moderns of having
stolen those Inventions from them; it being evident in all such cases, that
whoever live first, must first find them out. It Is true, indeed, when -- unus
and alter Assuitur pannus,
when there is one or two bright Thoughts stolen, and all the rest is quite
different from it, a Poem makes a very foolish figure: But when it is all melted
down together, and the Gold of the Ancients so mixed with that of the Moderns,
that none can distinguish the one from the other, I can never find fault with
it. I cannot however but own to you, that there are others of a different
opinion, and that I have shown your Verses to some who have made that objection
to them. I have so much Company round me while I write this, and such a noise
in my ears, that it is impossible I should write any thing but Nonsense, so must
break off abruptly.

I am, Sir, Your most afsectionate and most humble Servant.

Mr. WALSH to Mr. POPE.
Sept. 9. 1706.
AT my return from the North I received the favor of your Letter, which had
lain there till then. Having been absent about six weeks, I read over your
Pastorals again, with a great deal of pleasure, and to judge the better read
Virgil's Eclogues, and Spenser's Calendar, at the same time; and I assure you I
continue the same opinion I had always of them. By the little hints you take
upon all occasions to improve them, it is probable you will make them yet better
against Winter; though there is a mean to be kept even in that too, and a Man may
correct his Verses till he takes away the true Spirit of them; especially if he
submits to the correction of some who pass for great Critics, by mechanical
Rules, and never enter into the true Design and Genius of an Author. I have
seen some of these that would hardly allow any one good Ode in Horace, who cry
Virgil wants fancy, and that Homer is very incorrect. While they talk at this
rate, one would think them above the common rate of mortals: but generally they
are great admirers of Ovid and Lucan; and when they write themselves, we find
out all the Mystery. They scan their Verses upon their Fingers; run after
Conceits and glaring Thoughts; their Poems are all made up of Couplets, of
which the first may be last, or the last first, without any sort of prejudice
to their Works; in which there is no Design, or Method, or any thing Natural or
Just. For you are certainly in the right, that in all Writings whatsoever (not
Poetry only) Nature is to be followed; and we should be jealous of our selves
for being fond of Similies, Conceits, and what they call saying Fine Things.
When we were in the North, my Lord Wharton showed me a Letter he had received
from a certain great The Earl of P.
General in Spain; I told him I would by all means have that General recalled,
and set to writing here at home, for it was impossible that a Man with so much
Wit as he showed, could be fit to command an Army, or do any other Business. As
for what you say of Expression: it is indeed the same thing to Wit, as Dress is
to Beauty; I have seen many Women over-drest, and several look better in a
careless Nightgown, with their hair about their ears, than Mademoiselle
Spanheim dressed for a Ball. I do not design to be in London till toward the
Parliament: then I shall certainly be there; and hope by that time you will
have finished your Pastorals as you would have them appear in the world, and
particularly the third of Autumn which I have not yet seen. Your last Eclogue
being upon the same Subject as that of mine on Mrs. Tempest's Death, I should
take it very kindly in you to give it a little turn, as if it were to the
Memory of the same Lady, if they were not written for some particular Woman
whom you would make immortal. You may take occasion to show the difference
between Poets Mistresses, and other Men's. I only hint this, which you may
either do, or let alone just as you think fit. I shall be very much pleased to
see you again in Town, and to hear from you in the mean time. I am with very
much esteem,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. WALSH.
Oct. 22, 1706.
AFter the Thoughts I have already sent you on the subject of English
Versification, you desire my opinion as to some farther particulars. There are
indeed certain Niceties, which though not much observed even by correct
Versifiers, I cannot but think deserve to be better regarded.

1. It is not enough that nothing offends the Ear, but a good Poet will adapt
the very Sounds, as well as Words, to the things he treats of. So that there is
(if one may express it so) a Style of Sound. As in describing a gliding Stream,
the Numbers should run easy and flowing; in describing a rough Torrent or
Deluge, sonorous and swelling, and so of the rest. This is evident every where
in Homer and Virgil, and no where else that I know of to any observable degree.
The following Examples will make this plain, which I have taken from Vida.

Molle viam tacito lapsu per levia radit.
Incedit tardo molimine subsidendo.
Luctantes ventos, tempestatesque sonoras.
Immenso cum praecipitans ruit Oceano Nox.
Telum imbelle sine ictu, Conjecit.
Toll moras, cape saxa manu, cape robora Pastor,
Ferte citi flammas data tela, repellite pestem.
This, I think, is what very few observe in practice, and is undoubtedly of
wonderful force in imprinting the Image on the reader: We have one excellent
Example of it in our Language, Mr. Dryden's Ode on St. Caecilia's Day,
entitled, Alexander's Feast.

2. Every nice Ear, must (I believe) have observed, that in any smooth English
Verse of ten syllables, there is naturally a Pause at the fourth, fifth, or
sixth syllable. It is upon these the Ear rests, and upon the judicious Change
and Management of which depends the Variety of Versification. For example,

At the fifth. Wherever thy Navy spreads her canvass Wings,
At the fourth. Homage to thee and Peace to all she brings.
At the sixth. Like Tracts of Leverets in Morning Snow.
Now I fancy, that to preserve an exact Harmony and Variety, the Pauses of the
4th or 6th should not be continued above three lines together, without the
Interposition of another; else it will be apt to weary the Ear with one
continued Tone, at least it does mine: That at the 5th runs quicker, and
carries not quite so dead a weight, so tires not so much though it be continued
longer.

3. Another nicety is in relation to Expletives, whether Words or Syllables,
which are made use of purely to supply a vacancy: Do before Verbs plural is
absolutely such; and it is not improbable but future Refiners may explode did
and does in the same manner, which are almost always used for the sake of
Rhyme. The same Cause has occasioned the promiscuous use of You and Thou to the
same Person, which can never sound so graceful as either one or the other.

4. I would also object to the Irruption of Alexandrine Verses of twelve
syllables, which I think should never be allowed but when some remarkable
Beauty or Propriety in them attones for the Liberty: Mr. Dryden has been too
free of these, especially in his latter Works. I am of the same opinion as to
Triple Rhimes.

5. I could equally object to the Repetition of the same Rhimes within four or
six lines of each other, as tiresome to the Ear through their Monotony.

6. Monosyllable-Lines, unless very artfully managed, are stiff, or
languishing: but may be beautiful to express Melancholy, Slowness, or Labor.

7. To come to the Hiatus, or Gap between two words which is caused by two
Vowels opening on each other (upon which you desire me to be particular) I
think the rule in this case is either to use the Caesura, or admit the Hiatus,
just as the Ear is least shocked by either: For the Caesura sometimes offends
the Ear more than the Hiatus itself, and our language is naturally overcharged
with Consonants: As for example; If in this Verse, The Old have Interest ever
in their Eye,
we should say, to avoid the Hiatus, But the Old have Interest --


The Hiatus which has the worst effect, is when one word ends with the same
Vowel that begins the following; and next to this, those Vowels whose sounds
come nearest to each other are most to be avoided. O, A, or U, will bear a more
full and graceful Sound than E, I, or Y. I know some people will think these
Observations trivial, and therefore I am glad to corroborate them by some great
Authorities, which I have met with in Tully and Quintilian. In the fourth Book
of Rhetoric to Herennius, are these words: Fugiemus crebras Vocalium
concursiones, quae vastam atque hiantem reddunt orationem; ut hoc est, Baccae
aeneae amaenissimae impendebant. And Quintilian l. 9. cap. 4. Vocalium
concursus cum accidit, hiat and intersistit, at quasi laborat oration. Pessimi
long quae easdem inter se literas committunt, sonabunt: Praecipuus tamen erit
hiatus earum quae cavo aut patulo ore efferuntur. E plenior litera est, I
angustior. But he goes on to reprove the excess on the other hand of being too
sollicitous in this matter, and says admirably, Nescio an negligentia in hoc,
aut solicitudo sit pejor. So likewise Tully (Orator ad Brut.) Theopompum
reprehendunt, quod eas literas tanto opere fugerit, etsi idem magister ejus
Isocrates: which last Author, as Turnebus on Quintilian observe, has hardly one
Hiatus in all his Works. Quintilian tells us that Tully and Demosthenes did not
much observe this Nicety, though Tully himself says in his Orator, Crebra ista
Vocum concursio, quam magna ex part vitiosam, fugit Demosthenes. If I am not
mistaken, Malherbe of all the Moderns has been the most scrupulous in this
point; and I think Menage in his Observations upon him says, he has not one in
his Poems. To conclude, I believe the Hitus should be avoided with more care in
Poetry than in Oratory; and I would constantly try to prevent it, unless where
the cutting it off is more prejudicial to the Sound than the Hiatus itself. I
am, etc. Mr. Walsh died at 49 Years old, in the Year 1708. The Year after, Mr.
Pope writ the Essay on Criticism, in which he gives him this Elogy, Such late
was Walsh, the Muses Judge and Friend,
Who justly knew to blame or to commend;
To failings mild, but zealous for desert,
The clearest Head, and the sincerest Heart.





LETTERS OF Mr. POPE to H. C. Esquire

From 1708 to 1711.

LETTERS OF Mr. POPE to H. C. Esquire
From 1708, to 1711.
March 18, 1708.
I Believe it was with me when I left the Town, as it is with a great many Men
when they leave the World, whose loss it self they do not so much regret, as
that of their Friends whom they leave behind in it. For I do not know one thing
for which I can envy London, but for your continuing there. Yet I guess you
will expect I should recant this Expression, when I tell you, that Sapho (by
which heathenish Name you have christened a very orthodox Lady) did not
accompany me into the Country. However, I will confess my self the less
concerned on that account, because I have no very violent Inclination to lose
my Heart, especially in so wild and savage a place as this Forest is: In the
Town, it is ten to one but a young Fellow may find his strayed Heart again, with
some Wildstreet or Drury Lane Damsel; but here, where I could have met with no
redress from an unmerciful, virtuous Dame, I must for ever have lost my little
Traveller in a Hole, where I could never rummage to find him again. -- Well,
Sir, you have your Lady in the Town still, and I have my Heart in the Country
still, which being wholly unemploy'd as yet, has the more room in it for my
Friends, and does not want a Corner at your Service. -- To be serious, you have
extremely obliged me by your. Frankness and Kindness to me: And if I have
abused it by too much Freedom on my part, I hope you will attribute it to the
natural Openness of my Temper, which hardly knows how to show Respect, where I
feel Affection. I would love my Friend, as my Mistress, without Ceremony; and
hope a little rough Usage sometimes may not be more displeasing to the one,
than it is to the other.

If you have any Curiosity to know in what manner I live, or rather lose a
Life, Martial will inform you in one Line: (the Translation of which cost a
Friend of ours three in English,

One short, one long,
One soft, one strong,
One right, one wrong.).
Prandeo, poto, cano, ludo, lego, caeno, quiesco.
Every Day with me is literally another yesterday; for it is exactly the same:
It has the same Business, which is Poetry; and the same Pleasure, which is
Idleness. A man might indeed pass his Time much better, but I question if any
Man could pass it much easier. If you will visit our Shades this Spring, which
I very much desire, you may perhaps instruct me to manage my Game more wisely;
but at present I am satisfied to trifle away my Time any Way, rather than let
it stick by me; as Shopkeepers are glad to be rid of those Goods at any rate,
which would otherwise always be lying upon their hands.

Sir, if you will favor me sometimes with your Letters, it will be a great
Satisfaction to me on several accounts; and on this in particular, That it will
show me (to my Comfort) that even a wise Man is sometimes very idle; for so you
must needs be when you can find leisure to write to

Your, etc.

April 27, 1708.
I Have nothing to say to you in this Letter; but I was resolved to write to
tell you so. Why should not I content my self with so many great Examples, of
deep Divines, profound Casuists, grave Philosophers; who have written, not
Letters only, but whole Tomes and voluminous Treatises about Nothing? Why
should a Fellow like me, who all his life does nothing, be ashamed to write
nothing? and that to one who has nothing to do but to read it? But perhaps
you will say, the whole World has something to do, something to talk of,
something to wish for, something to be employed about: But pray, Sir, cast up
the Account, put all these Somethings together, and what is the Sum Total but
just Nothing? I have no more to say, but to desire to give you my Service (that
is nothing) to your Friends, and to believe that I am nothing more than

Your, etc.

Ex nihilo nil fit. LUCR.
May 10, 1708.
YOU talk of Fame and Glory, and of the great Men of Antiquity: Pray tell me,
what are all your great dead Men, but so many little living Letters? What a
vast Reward is here for all the Ink wasted by Writers, and all the Blood spilt
by Princes? There was in old time one Severus a Roman Emperor. I dare say you
never called him by any other Name in your Life: and yet in his days he was
styled Lucius, Septimius, Severus, Pius, Pertinax, Augustus, Parthicus,
Adiabenicus, Arabicus, Maximus, -- and what not? What a prodigious waste of
Letters has Time made! what a Number have here dropped off, and left the poor
surviving Seven unattended! For my own part, Four are all I have to take care
for; and I Will be judged by you if any man could live in less compass? except it
were one Monsieur D. and one Romulus * But these, contrary to the common
Calamity, came in process of time, to be called Monsieur Boileau Despreaux, and
Romulus Threepoints. -- Well, Sir, for the future I Will drown all high Thoughts
in the Lethe of Cowslip-Wine; as for Fame, Renown, Reputation, take 'em
Critics! Tradam protervis in Mare Criticum
Ventis --


If ever I seek for Immortality here, may I be d^d! for there is not so much
danger in a Poet's being damned: Damnation follows Death in other Men,
But your damned Poet lives and writes again.


November 1, 1708.
I Have been so well satisfied with the Country ever since I saw you, that I
have not so much as once thought of the Town, or inquired of any one in it
besides Mr. Wycherley and your self. And from him I understand of your Journey
this Summer into Leicestershire; from whence I guess you are returned by this
time, to your old Apartment in the Widow's Corner, to your old Business of
comparing Critics, and reconciling commentators; and to the old diversions of a
losing game at picquet with the ladies, and half a play, or a quarter of a
play, at the theater; where you are none of the malicious Audience, but the
chief of amorous Spectators; and for the infirmity of one His Hearing.
Sense which there for the most part could only serve to disgust you, enjoy the
vigor of another which ravishes you. You know, when one Sense is suppressed,
It but retires into the rest.


(According to the poetical, not the learned, Dodwell; who has done one thing
worthy of eternal memory; wrote two lines in his life that are not nonsense!)
So you have the advantage of being entertained with all the beauty of the
boxes, without being troubled with any of the dullness of the stage. You are so
good a critic, that it is the greatest happiness of the modern Poets that you do
not hear their works; and next, that you are not so arrant a critic, as to damn
them (like the rest) without hearing. But now I talk of those critics, I have
good news to tell you concerning my self, for which I expect you should
congratulate with me: It is that beyond all my expectations, and far above my
demerits, I have been most mercifully reprieved by the fovereign power of Jacob
Tonson, from being brought forth to public punishment; and respited from time
to time from the hands of those barbarous executioners of the Muses, whom I was
just now speaking of. It often happens, that guilty Poets, like other guilty
criminals, when once they are known and proclaimed, deliver themselves into the
hands of Justice, only to prevent others from doing it more to their
disadvantage; and not out of any Ambition to spread their fame, by being
executed in the face of the world, which is a same but of short continuance.
That Poet were a happy man who could but obtain a grant to preserve his for
ninety-nine years; for those names very rarely last so many days, which are
planted either in Jacob Tonson's, or the Ordinary of Newgate's Miscellanies.

I have an hundred things to say to you, which shall be deferred till I have
the happiness of seeing you in town, for the season now draws on, that invites
every body thither. Some of them I had communicated to you by Letters before
this, if I had not been uncertain where you passed your time the last season:
So much fine weather, I doubt not, has given you all the pleasure you could
desire from the country, and your own thoughts the best company in it. But
nothing could allure Mr. Wycherley to our Forest, he continued (as you told me
long since he would) an obstinate lover of the town, in spite of friendship and
fair weather. Therefore henceforward, to all those considerable qualities I
know you possessed of, I shall add that of Prophecy. But I still believe Mr.
Wycherley's intentions were good, and am satisfied that he promises nothing but
with a real design to perform it: how much soever his other excellent qualities
are above my imitation, his sincerity, I hope, is not; and it is with the
utmost that I am,

Sir, etc.
Jan. 22, 1708-9.
I Had sent you the enclosed This was a Translation of the first Book of
Statius, done when the Author was but 14 Years old, as appears by an
Advertisement before the first Edition of it in a Miscellany published by B.
Lintot, 80 1711.
Papers before this time, but that I intended to have brought them my self, and
afterward could find no opportunity of sending them without suspicion of their
miscarrying; not, that they are of the least value, but for fear some body
might be foolish enough to imagine them so, and inquisitive enough to discover
those faults which I (by your help) would correct. I therefore beg the favor
of you to let them go no farther than your chamber, and to be very free of your
remarks in the margins, not only in regard to the accuracy, but to the fidelity
of the translation; which I have not had time of late to compare with its
original. And I desire you to be the more severe, as it is much more criminal
for me to make another speak nonsense, than to do it in my own proper, person.
For your better help in comparing, it may be fit to tell you, that this is not
an entire version of the first book. There is an omission from the 168th line
-- Jam murmura serpunt plebis agenoreae -- to the 312th -- Interea patriis olim
vagus exul ab oris -- (between these These he since translated, and they are
extant in the printed Version.
two Statius has a description of the council of the Gods, and a speech of
Jupiter; which contain a peculiar beauty and majesty, and were left out for no
other reason, but because the consequence of this machine appears not till the
second book) The translation goes on from thence to the words Hic vero ambobus
rabiem fortuna cruentam where there is an odd account of a battle at
fifty-cuffs between the two Princes on a very slight occasion, and at a time
when one would think the fatigue of their journey in so tempestuous a night,
might have rendered them very unfit for such a scuffle. This I had actually
translated, but was very ill satisfied with it, even in my own words, to which
an author cannot but be partial enough of conscience; it was therefore omitted
in this copy, which goes on above eighty lines farther, at the words -- Hic
primum lustrare oculis, etc. -- to the end of the book.

You will find, I doubt not, that Statius was none of the discreetest Poets,
though he was the best versifier next Virgil: In the very beginning he unluckily
betrays his ignorance in the rules of Poetry, (which Horace had already taught
the Romans) when he asks his Muse where to begin his Thebaid, and seems to
doubt whether it should not be ab ovo Ledaeo? when he comes to the scene of his
Poem, and the prize in dispute between the Brothers, he gives us a very mean
opinion of it -- Pugna est de paupere regno. -- Very different from the conduct
of his master Virgil, who at the entrance of his Poem informs his reader of the
greatness of its subject, -- Tantoe molis erat Romanam condere Gentem. [Bossu
on Epic Poetry.] There are innumerable little faults in him, among which I
cannot but take notice of one in this book, where speaking of the implacable
hatred of the brothers, he says, The whole world would be too small a prize to
repay so much impiety. Quid si peteretur crimine tanto
Limes uterque Poli, quem Sol emissus Eoo
Cardine, aut portu vergens prospectat Ibero?


This was pretty well, one would think already, but he goes on

Quasque procul terras oblique sydere tangit
Avius, aut Boreoe gelidas, madidive tepentes
Igne Noti?
After all this, what could a Poet think of but Heaven itself for the Prize?
but what follows is astonishing. -- Quid si Tyrioe Phrygioeve sub unum
Convectentur Opes?


I do not remember to have met with so great a fall in any ancient author
whatsoever. I should not have insisted so much on the faults of this Poet, if I
did not hope you would take the same freedom with, and revenge it upon, his
Translator. I shall be extremely glad if the reading this can be any amusement
to you, the rather because I had the dissatisfaction to hear you have been
confined to your chamber by an illness, which I fear was as troublesome a
companion as I have sometimes been to you in the same place; where if ever you
found any pleasure in my company, it must surely have been that which most men
take in observing the faults and follies of another; a pleasure which you see I
take care to give you even in my absence.

If you will oblige me at your leisure with the confirmation of your recovery,
under your own hand, it will be extreme grateful to me, for next to the
pleasure of seeing my friends, is that I take in hearing from them; and in this
particular, I am beyond all acknowledgments obliged to our friend Mr.
Wycherley, who, as if it were not enough to have excelled all men in wit, is
resolved to excel them in goodnature too. I know I need no apology to you for
speaking of Mr. Wycherley, whose example as I am proud of following in all
things, so in nothing more than in professing my self like him,

Your, etc.

May 7, 1709.
YOU had long before this time been troubled with a Letter from me, but that I
deferred it till I could send you either the Jacob Tonson's sixth Volume of
Poetical Miscellanies, in which Mr. Pope's Pastorals and some Versions of Homer
and Chaucer were first printed.
Miscellany, or my continuation of the Version of Statius. The first I imagined
you might have had before now, but since the contrary has happened, you may
draw this Moral from it, That Authors in general are more ready to write
nonsense, than Booksellers are to publish it. I had I know not what
extraordinary flux of rhyme upon me for three days together, in which time all
the verses you see added, have been written; which I tell you that you may more
freely be severe upon them. It Is a mercy I do not assault you with a number of
original Sonnets and Epigrams, which our modern Bards put forth in the
springtime, in as great abundance, as Trees do Blossoms, a very few whereof
ever come to be Fruit, and please no longer than just in their birth. So that
they make no less haste to bring their flowers of wit to the press, than
gardiners to bring their other flowers to the market, which if they cannot get
off their hands in the morning, are sure to die before night. Thus the same
reason that furnishes Covent Garden with those nosegays you so delight in,
supplies the Muses Mercury, and British Apollo (not to say Jacob's
Miscellanies) with Verses. And it is the happiness of this age, that the modern
invention of printing Poems for pence a-piece, has brought the Nosegays of
Parnassus to bear the same price; whereby the publickspirited Mr. Henry Hills
of Black-fryars has been the cause of great ease and singular comfort to all
the Learned, who never overabounding in transitory coin, should not be
discontented (methinks) even though Poems were distributed gratis about the
streets, like Bunyan's Sermons and other pious treatises, usually published in
a like Volume and Character.

The time now drawing nigh, when you use with Sapho to cross the Water in an
Evening to Spring-Garden, I hope you will have a fair opportunity of ravishing
her: -- I mean only (as Oldfox in the Plain-dealer says) through the ear, with
your well-penn'd Verses. I have been told of a very lucky Compliment of an
Officer to his Mistress in the very same place, which I cannot but set down
(and desire you at present to take it in good part instead of a Latin
Quotation) that it may some time or other be improved by your pronunciation,
while you walk Solus cum Sola in those amorous shades. When at Spring-garden
Sapho deigns t'appear
The flowers march in her van, musk in her rear.


I wish you all the pleasures which the Season and the Nymph can afford; the
best Company, the best Coffee, and the best News you can desire. And what more
to wish you than this, I do not know; unless it be a great deal of patience to
read and examine the Verses I send you; and I promise you in return a great
deal of deference to your judgment, and an extraordinary obedience to your
sentiments for the future, (to which you know I have been sometimes a little
refractory.) If you will please to begin where you left off last, and mark the
margins, as you have done in the pages immediately before, (which you will find
corrected to your sense since your last perusal) you will extremely oblige me,
and improve my Translation. Besides those places which may deviate from the
sense of the Author, it would be very kind in you to observe any deficiencies
in the Diction or Numbers. The Hiatus in particular I would avoid as much as
possible, to which you are certainly in the right to be a professed enemy; though
I confess I could not think it possible at all times to be avoided by any
writer, till I found by reading Malherbe lately, that there is scarce any
throughout his poems. I thought your observation true enough to be passed into
a Rule, but not a rule without exceptions, nor that ever it had been reduced to
practice: But this example of one of the most correct and best of their Poets
has undeceived me, and confirms your opinion very strongly, and much more than
Mr. Dryden's Authority who though he made it a rule, seldom observed it.

Your, etc.

June 10, 1709.
I Have received part of the Version of Statius, and return you my thanks for
your remarks which I think to be just, except where you cry out (like one in
Horace's Art of Poetry) Pulchre, been, recte! There I have some fears, you are
often, if not always, in the wrong.

One of your objections, namely on that passage, The rest, revolving years
shall ripen into Fate,
may be well grounded, in relation to its not being the exact sense of the
words -- See the first book of Statius, Verse 302.
Caetera reliquo ordine ducam. But the duration of the Action of Statius's poem
may as well be excepted against, as many things besides in him: (which I wonder
Bossu has not observed) For instead of confining his narration to one year, it
is manifestly exceeded in the very first two books: The Narration begins with
Oedipus's prayer to the Fury to promote discord betwixt his Sons; afterward the
Poet expressly describes their entering into the agreement of reigning a year by
turns; and Polynices takes his flight for Thebes on his brother's refusal to
resign the throne. All this is in the first book; in next, Tydeus is sent
Ambassador to Etheocles, and demands his resignation in these terms, --
Astriferum velox jam circulus orbem
Torsit, and amissae redierunt montibus umbrae,
Ex quo srater inops, ignota per oppida tristes
Exul agit casus --


But Bossu himself is mistaken in one particular, relating to the commencement
of the Action; saying in Book 2. Cap. 8. that Statius opens it with Europa's
Rape, whereas the Poet at most only deliberates whether he should or not? --
Unde jubetis
Ire, Deae? Gentisne canam primor dia, dirae,
Sidonios raptus? etc.
but then expressly passes all this with a Longa retro series -- and says --
Limes mihi carminis esto
Oedipodae confusa domus --
Indeed there are numberless particulars blameworthy in our Author, which I
have tried to soften in the version: -- Dubiamque jugo fragor impulit Oeten
In latus, and geminis vix fluctibus obstitit Isthmus
is most extravagantly hyperbolical: Nor did I ever read a greater piece of
Tautology than -- Vacua cum solus in Aula
Respiceres jus omne tuum, cunctosque Minores,
Et nusquam par stare caput.


In the Journey of Polynices is some geographical error, -- In mediis audit duo
litora campis
could hardly be; for the Isthmus of Corinth is full five miles over: And
Caligantes abrupto sole Mycaenas, is not consistent with what he tells us, in
Lib. 4. lin. 305: "that those of Mycaenae came not to the war at this time,
because they were then in confusion by the divisions of the Brothers, Atreus
and Thyestes:" Now from the raising the Greek army against Thebes, back to the
time of this journey of Polynices, is (according to Statius's own account)
three years.

Yours, etc.

July 17, 1709.
THE Morning after I parted from you, I found my felf (as I had prophesied) all
alone, in an uneasy Stage-Coach; a doleful change from that agreeable company I
enjoyed the night before! without the least hope of entertainment but from my
last recourse in such cases, a Book. I then began to enter into acquaintance
with the Moralists, and had just received from them some cold consolation for
the inconveniences of this life, and the incertainty of human affairs; when I
perceived my Vehicle to stop, and heard from the side of it the dreadful news
of a sick Woman preparing to enter it. It Is not easy to guess at my
mortification, but being so well fortified with Philosophy I stood resigned
with a Stoical constancy to endure the worst of evils, a sick Woman. I was
indeed a little comforted to find, by her voice and dress, that she was Young
and a Gentlewoman; but no sooner was her hood removed, but I saw one of the
finest faces I ever beheld, and to increase my surprise, heard her salure me by
my name. I never had more reason to accuse Nature for making me short-sighted
than now, when I could not recollect I had ever seen those fair eyes which knew
me so well, and was utterly at a loss how to address my self; till with a great
deal of simplicity and innocence she let me know (even before I discovered my
ignorance) that she was the daughter of one in our Neighborhood, lately
married, who having been consulting her Physicians in Town, was returning into
the Country, to try what good Air and a new Husband could do to recover her. My
Father, you must know, has sometimes recommended the Study of Physic to me,
but I never had any ambition to be a Doctor till this instant. I ventured to
prescribe some Fruit (which I happened to have in the Coach) which being
forbidden her by her Doctors, she had the more inclination to. In short, I
tempted, and she eat; nor was I more like the Devil than she like Eve. Having
the good success of the 'foresaid Gentleman before my eyes, I put on the
Gallantry of the old Serpent, and in spite of my evil Form accosted her with
all the Gaiety I was master of; which had so good effect, that in less than an
hour she grew pleasant, her color returned, and she was pleased to say my
prescription had wrought an immediate cure: In a word, I had the pleasantest
journey imaginable.

Thus far (methinks) my Letter has something of the air of a Romance, though it
be true. But I hope you will look on what follows as the greatest of truths,
That I think my self extremely obliged by you in all points, especially for
your kind and honorable Information and Advice in a matter of the utmost
concern to me, which I shall ever acknowledge as the highest proof at once of
your friendship, justice, and sincerity. At the same time be assured, that
Gentleman we spoke of, shall never by any alteration in me discover my
knowledge of his Mistake; the hearty forgiving of which is the only kind of
Return I can possibly make him for so many favors. And I may derive this
pleasure at least from it, that whereas I must otherwise have been a little
uneasy to know my incapacity of returning to his Obligations; I may now, by
bearing his Frailty, exercise my Gratitude and Friendship more than Himself
either is, or perhaps ever will be sensible of. Ille meos, primus qui me sibi
junxit, Amores
Abstulit; ille habeat secum, servetque Sepulchro!


But in one thing, I must confess you have your self obliged me more than any
man, which is, that you have showed me many of my Faults, to which as you are
the more an implacable Enemy, by so much the more you are a kind Friend to me.
I could be proud, in revenge, to find a few slips in your Verses, which I read
in London, and since in the Country with more application and pleasure: the
thoughts are very just, and you are sure not to let them suffer by the
Versification. If you would oblige me with the trust of any thing of yours, I
should be glad to execute any commissions you would give me concerning them. I
am here so perfectly at leisure, that nothing would be so agreeable an
entertainment to me; but if you will not afford me that, do not deny me at
least the satisfaction of your Letters as long as we are absent, if you would
not have him very unhappy who is very sincerely

Your, etc.

Having a vacant space here, I will fill it with a short Ode on Solitude, which
I found yesterday by great accident, and which I find by the date was written
when I was not twelve years old; that you may perceive how long I have
continued in my passion for a rural life, and in the same employments of it.

Happy the man, whose wish and care,
A few paternal Acres bound,
Content to breathe his native air,
In his own ground.
Whose herds with milk, whose fields with bread,
Whose flocks supply him with attire,
Whose trees in summer yield him shade,
In winter, fire.
Blessed, who can unconcern'dly find
Hours, days, and years slide soft away,
In Health of body, Peace of mind,
Quiet by day,
Sound sleep by night; Study and Ease,
Together mixed; sweet Recreation,
And Innocence which most does please,
With Meditation.
Thus, let me live unseen, unknown,
Thus, unlamented let me die,
Steal from the world, and not a stone
Tell where I lie.
August 19, 1709.
IF I were to write to you as often as I think of you, my Letters would be as
bad as a Rentcharge; but though the one be but too little for your Goodnature,
the other would be too much for your Quiet, which is one blessing Goodnature
should indispensably receive from mankind, in return for those many it gives. I
have been informed of late, how much I am indebted to that quality of yours, in
speaking well of me in my absence; the only thing by which you prove your self
no Wit or Critic: Though indeed I have often thought, that a friend will show
just as much indulgence (and no more) to my faults when I am absent, as he does
severity to 'em when I am present. To be very frank with you, Sir, I must own,
that where I received so much Civility at first, I could hardly have expected
so much Sincerity afterward. But now I have only to wish, that the last were
but equal to the first, and that as you have omitted nothing to oblige me, so
you would omit nothing to improve me.

I caused an acquaintance of mine to enquire twice of your welfare, by whom I
have been informed, that you have left your speculative Angle in the Widow's
Coffee-house, and bidding adieu for some time to all the Rehearsals, Reviews,
Gazettes, etc. have marched off into Lincolnshire. Thus I find you vary your
life in the scene at least, though not in the Action; for though Life for the most
part, like an old Play, be still the same, yet now and then a new Scene may
make it more entertaining. As for my self, I would not have my life a very
regular Play, let it be a good merry Farce, a G-d's name, and a fig for the
critical Unities! Yet (on the other side) I would as soon write like Durfey, as
live like The; whose beastly, yet merry life, is (if you will excuse such a
similitude) not unlike a F^t, at once nasty and laughable. For the generality
of men, a true modern life is like a true modern play, neither Tragedy, Comedy,
nor Farce, nor one, nor all of these: every Actor is much better known by his
having the same Face, than by keeping the same Character: for we change our
minds as often as they can their parts, and he who was yesterday Caesar, is to
day Sir John Daw. So that one might ask the same question of a modern life,
that Rich did of a modern play; "Pray do me the favor, Sir, to inform me; Is
this your Tragedy or your Comedy?"

I have dwelt the longer upon this, because I persuade my self it might be
useful, at a time when we have no other Theater, to divert our selves at this
great one. Here is a glorious standing Comedy of Fools, at which every man is
heartily merry, and thinks himself an unconcerned Spectator. This (to our
singular comfort) neither my Lord Chamberlain, nor the Queen her self can ever
shut up, or silence. While that of Drury (alas!) lies desolate, in the
profoundest peace: and the melancholy prospect of the Nymphs yet lingering about
its beloved avenues, appears no less moving than that of the Trojan Dames
lamenting over their ruined Ilium! What now can they hope, dispossessed of
their ancient seats, but to serve as Captives to the insulting Victors of the
Hay-Market? The afflicted subjects of France do not, in our Post-man, so
grievously deplore the obstinacy of their arbitrary Monarch, as these perishing
people of Drury the obdurate heart of that Pharaoh, Rich, who like him,
disdains all Proposals of peace and accommodation. Several Libels have been
secretly affixed to the great gates of his imperial palace in Bridges-street;
and a Memorial representing the distresses of these persons, has been
accidentally dropped (as we are credibly informed by a person of quality) out of
his first Minister the chief Box-keeper's pocket, at a late Conference of the
said Person of quality and others, on the part of the Confederates, and his
Theatrical Majesty on his own part. Of this you may expect a copy as soon as it
shall be transmitted to us from a good hand. As for the late Congress, it is
here reported, that it has not been wholly ineffectual; but this wants
confirmation; yet we cannot but hope the concurring prayers and tears of so
many wretched Ladies may induce this haughty Prince to reason.

I am, etc.

October 19, 1709.
I MAY truly say I am more obliged to you this summer than to any of my
Acquaintance, for had it not been for the two kind letters you sent me, I had
been perfectly, oblitusque meorum, obliviscendus and illis. The only companions
I had were those Muses of whom Tully says, Adolescentiam alunt, Senectutem
oblectant, secundas res ornant, adversis perfugium ac solatium praebent,
delectant domi, non impediunt foris, pernoctant nobiscum, peregrinantur,
rusticantur. Which indeed is as much as ever I expected from them; for the
Muses, if you take them as Companions, are very pleasant and agreeable; but
whoever should be forced to live or depend upon 'em, would find himself in a
very bad condition. That Quiet, which Cowley calls the Companion of Obscurity,
was not wanting to me, unless it was interrupted by those fears you so justly
guess I had for our Friend's welfare. It Is extremely kind in you to tell me the
news you heard of him, and you have delivered me from more anxiety than he
imagines me capable of on his account, as I am convinced by his long silence.
However the love of some things rewards itself, as of Virtue, and of Mr.
Wycherley. I am surpised at the danger you tell me he has been in, and must
agree with you, that our nation would have lost in him alone, more wit, and
probity, than would have remained (for ought I know) in all the rest of it. My
concern for his friendship will excuse me, (since I know you honor him so
much, and since you know I love him above all men) if I vent a part of my
uneasiness to you, and tell you, that there has not been wanting one to
insinuate malicious untruths of me to Mr. Wycherley, which I fear may have had
some effect upon him. If so, he will have a greater punishment for his
credulity than I could wish him, in that fellow's acquaintance. The loss of a
faithful creature is something, though of ever so contemptible an one; and if I
were to change my Dog for such a Man as the aforesaid, I should think my Dog
undervalu'd: (who follows me about as constantly here in the country, as I was
used to do Mr. Wycherley in the Town.)

Now I talk of my Dog, that I may not treat of a worse subject which my spleen
tempts me to, I will give you some account of him; a thing not wholly
unprecedented, since Montaigne (to whom I am but a Dog in comparison) has done
the very same thing of his Cat. Dic mihi quid melius desidiosus agam? You are
to know then, that as it is Likeness begets affection, so my favorite dog is a
little one, a lean one, and none of the finest shaped. He is not much a Spaniel
in his fawning, but has (what might be worth any man's while to imitate from
him) a dumb surly sort of kindness, that rather shows itself when he thinks me
illus'd by others, than when we walk quietly and peaceably by our selves. If it
be the chief point of Friendship to comply with a friend's Motions and
Inclinations, he possesses this in an eminent degree; he lies down when I sit,
and walks when I walk, which is more than many good friends can pretend to,
witness our Walk a year ago in St. James's Park. -- Histories are more full of
examples of the Fidelity of Dogs than of Friends, but I will not insist upon
many of 'em, because it is possible some may be almost as fabulous as those of
Pylades and Orestes, etc. I will only say for the honor of Dogs, that the two
most ancient and esteemable books sacred and profane extant, ( viz. the
Scripture and Homer) have shown a particular regard to these animals. That of
Toby is the more remarkable, because there was no manner of reason to take
notice of the Dog, besides the great humanity of the Author. Homer's account of
Ulysses's Dog Argus is the most pathetick imaginable, all the Circumstances
considered, and an excellent proof of the old Bard's Goodnature. Ulysses had
left him at Ithaca when he embarked for Troy, and found him at his return after
twenty years, (which by the way is not unnatural as some Critics have said,
since I remember the dam of my dog was twenty-two years old when she died: May
the omen of longaevity prove fortunate to her successor!) You shall have it in
verse.

ARGUS.
When wise Ulysses from his native coast
Long kept by wars, and long by tempests tossed,
Arrived at lost, poor, old, disguised, alone,
To all his friends, and even his Queen, unknown,
Changed as he was, with age, and toils, and cares,
Furrowed his reverend face, and white his hairs,
In his own Palace forced to ask his bread,
Scorned by those slaves his former bounty fed,
Forgot of all his own domestic crew;
The faithful Dog alone his rightful Master knew!
Unfed, unhous'd, neglected, on the clay,
Like an old servant now cashiered, he lay;
Touched with resentment of ungrateful man,
And longing to behold his ancient Lord again.
Him when he saw -- he rose, and crawled to meet,
('It Was all he could) and fawned, and kissed his feet,
Seized with dumb joy -- then falling by his side,
Owned his returning Lord, looked up, and died!
Plutarch relating how the Athenians were obliged to abandon Athens in the time
of Themistocles, steps back again out of the way of his History, purely to
describe the lamentable cries and howlings of the poor Dogs they left behind.
He makes mention of one, that followed his Master across the Sea to Salamis,
where he died and was honored with a Tomb by the Athenians, who gave the name
of the Dog's Grave to that part of the Island where he was buried: this respect
to a dog in the most polite people of the world, is very observable. A modern
instance of gratitude to a Dog (though we have but few such) is, that the chief
Order of Denmark (now injuriously called the Order of the Elephant) was
instituted in memory of the fidelity of a dog named Wild-brat, to one of their
Kings who had been deserted by his subjects: He gave his Order this motto, or
to this effect, (which still remains) Wild-Brat was faithful. Sir William
Trumbull has told me a story which he heard from one that was present: King
Charles I. being with some of his Court during his troubles, a discourse arose
what sort of dogs deserved pre-eminence, and it being on all hands agreed to
belong either to the Spaniel or Greyhound, the King gave his opinion on the
part of the Greyhound, because (said he) it has all the Goodnature of the
other, without the Fawning. A good piece of satire upon his Courtiers, with
which I will conclude my Discourse of Dogs. Call me a Cynick, or what you
please, in revenge for all this impertinence, I will be contented; provided you
will but believe me when I say a bold word for a christian, that, of all dogs,
you will find none more faithful than

Your, etc.

April 10, 1710.
I Had written to you sooner, but that I made some scruple of sending profane
things to you in Holy week. Besides our Family would have been scandalized to
see me write, who take it for granted I write nothing but ungodly Verses. I
assure you I am looked upon in the Neighborhood for a very well-dispos'd
person, no great Hunter indeed, but a great Admirer of the noble sport, and
only unhappy in my want of constitution for that, and Drinking. They all say
it is pity I am so sickly, and I think it is pity they are so healthy. But I say
nothing that may destroy their good opinion of me: I have not quoted one Latin
Author since I came down, but have learned without book a Song of Mr. Thomas
Durfey's, who is your only Poet of tolerable reputation in this country. He
makes all the merriment in our Entertainments, and but for him, there would be
so miserable a dearth of Catches, that I fear they would put either the Parson
or me upon making some for 'em. Any man, of any quality, is heartily welcome to
the best Topeing-Table of our Gentry, who can roar out some Rhapsodies of his
works: so that in the same manner as it was said of Homer to his Detractors,
What? dares any man speak against Him who has given so many men to Eat?
(meaning the Rhapsodists who lived by repeating his verses) thus may it be said
of Mr. Durfey to his Detractors; Dares any one despise Him, who has made so
many men Drink? Alas, Sir! this is a glory which neither you nor I must ever
pretend to. Neither you with your Ovid, nor I with my Statius, can amuse a
whole board of Justices and extraordinary 'Squires, or gain one hum of
approbation, or laugh of admiration! These things (they would say) are too
studious, they may do well enough with such as love Reading, but give us your
ancient Poet Mr. Durfey! It Is mortifying enough, it must be confessed; but
however, let us proceed in the way that nature has directed us -- Multi multa
sciunt, sed nemo omnia, as it is said in the Almanac. Let us communicate our
works for our mutual comfort; send me Elegies, and you shall not want Heroicks.
At present, I have only these Arguments in Prose to the Thebaid, which you
claim by promise, as I do your Translation of Pars me Sulmo tenet -- and the
Ring: the rest I hope for as soon as you can conveniently transcribe 'em, and
whatsoever orders you are pleased to give me shall be punctually obeyed by

Your, etc.

May 10, 1710.
I Had not so long omitted to express my acknowledgments to you for so much
goodnature and friendship as you lately showed me; but that I am but just
returned to my own Hermitage, from Mr. Caryl's, who has done me so many
favors, that I am almost inclined to think my Friends infect one another, and
that your conversation with him has made him as obliging to me as your self. I
can assure you he has a sincere respect for you, and this I believe he has
partly contracted from me, who am too full of you not to overflow upon those I
converse with. But I must now be contented to converse only with the Dead of
this world, that is to say, the dull and obscure, every way obscure, in their
intellects as well as their persons: Or else have recourse to the living Dead,
the old Authors with whom you are so well acquainted, even from Virgil down to
Aulus Gellius, whom I do not think a Critic by any means to be compared to Mr.
Dennis: And I must declare positively to you, that I will persist in this
opinion, till you become a little more civil to Atticus. Who could have
imagined, that he who had escaped all the misfortunes of his Time, unhurt even
by the Proscriptions of Antony and Augustus, should in these days find an Enemy
more severe and barbarous than those Tyrants? and that Enemy the gentlest too,
the best-natur'd of mortals, Mr. C^? Whom I must in this compare once more to
Augustus; who seemed not more unlike himself, in the Severity of one part of
his life and the Clemency of the other, than you. I leave you to reflect on
this, and hope that Time (which mollifies rocks, and of stiff things makes
limber) will turn a resolute critic to a gentle reader; and instead of this
positive, tremendous, new-fashion'd Mr. C^, restore unto us our old
acquaintance, the soft, beneficent, and courteous Mr. C^.

I expect much, toward the civilizing of you in your critical capacity, from
the innocent Air and Tranquillity of our Forest, when you do me the favor to
visit it. In the mean time, it would do well by way of Preparative, if you
would duly and constantly every morning read over a Pastoral of Theocritus or
Virgil; and let the Lady Isabella put your Macrobius and Aulus Gellius
somewhere out of your way, for a month or so. Who knows, but Traveling and
long Airing in an open field, may contribute more successfully to the cooling a
Critic's severity, than it did to the asswaging of Mr. Cheek's Anger, of old?
In these fields you will be secure of finding no enemy, but the most faithful
and affectionate of your friends, etc.

May 17, 1710.
AFTER I had recovered from a dangerous Illness which was first contracted in
Town, about a fortnight after my coming hither I troubled you with a letter,
and a paper enclosed, which you had been so obliging as to desire a sight of
when last I saw you, promising me in return some translations of yours from
Ovid. Since when, I have not had a syllable from your hands, so that it is to be
feared that though I have escaped Death, I have not Oblivion. I should at least
have expected you to have finished that Elegy upon me, which you told me you
was upon the point of beginning when I was sick in London; if you will but do
so much for me first, I will give you leave to forget me afterward; and for my
own part will die at discretion, and at my leisure. But I fear I must be forced
like many learned Authors, to write my own Epitaph, if I would be remembered at
all. Monsieur de la Fontaine's would fit me to a hair, but it is a kind of
Sacrilege, (do you think it is not?) to steal Epitaphs. In my present, living
dead condition, nothing would be properer than Oblitusque meorum, obliviscendus
and illis, but that unluckily I cannot forget my friends, and the civilities I
received from your self, and some others. They say indeed it is one quality of
generous minds to forget the obligations they have conferred, and perhaps too
it may be so to forget those on whom they conferred 'em? Then indeed I must be
forgotten to all intents and purposes! I am, it must be owned, dead in a
natural capacity, according to Mr. Bicker staff; dead in a poetical capacity,
as a damned author; and dead in a civil capacity, as a useless member of the
Commonwealth. But reflect, drar Sir, what melancholy effects may ensue, if
Dead men are not civil to one another? If he who has nothing to do himself,
will not comfort and support another in his idleness? If those who are to die
themselves, will not now and then pay the charity of visiting a Tomb and a dead
friend, and strowing a few flowers over him? In the shades where I am, the
inhabitants have a mutual compassion for each other: Being all alike Inanes,
and Umbratiles, we saunter to one another's habitations, and daily assist each
other in doing nothing at all; this I mention for your edification and example,
that Tout plein du vie as you are, yet you may not sometimes disdain --
desipere in loco. Though you are no Papist, and have not so much regard to the
dead as to address your self to them, (which I plainly perceive by your
silence) yet I hope you are not one of those Heterodox, who hold them to be
totally insensible of the good offices and kind wishes of their living friends,
and to be in a dull State of Sleep, without one dream of those they left behind
them? If you are, let this Letter convince you to the contrary, which assures
you, I am still, though in a State of Separation,

Your, etc.
P. S. This letter of Deaths, puts me in mind of poor Mr. Betterton's; over
whom I would have this Sentence of Tully for an Epitaph. Vitae been actae
jucundissima est Recordatio.



(...) so much, as to cause a total subversion of my countenance: Some days
after, to be revenged on her, I presented her among other company the following
Rondeau on that occasion, which I desire you to show Sapho.

You know where you did despise
(The Other day) my little Eyes,
Little Legs, and little Thighs,
And some Things of little Size,
You know where.
You, it is true, have fine black Eyes,
Taper Legs, and tempting Thighs,
Yet what more than all we prize
Is a Thing of little Size,
You know where.
This sort of writing called the Rondeau is what I never knew practiced in our
Nation, and I verily believe it was not in use with the Greeks or Romans,
neither Macrobius nor Hyginus taking the least notice of it. It Is to be
observed, that the vulgar spelling and pronouncing it Round O, is a manifest
Corruption, and by no means to be allowed of by Critics. Some may mistakenly
imagine that it was a sort of Rondeau which the Gallick Soldiers sung in
Caesar's Triumph over Gaul -- Gallias Caesar subegit, etc. as it is recorded by
Suetonius in Julio, and so derive its original from the ancient Gauls to the
modern French: but this is erroneous; the words there not being ranged
according to the Laws of the Rondeau, as laid down by Clement Marot. If you
will say, that the Song of the Soldiers might be only the rude beginning of
this kind of Poem, and so consequently imperfect, neither Heinsius nor I can be
of that opinion; and so I conclude, that we know nothing of the matter.

But, Sir, I ask your pardon for all this Buffoonry, which I could not address
to any one so well as to you, since I have found by experience, you most easily
forgive my impertinencies. It Is only to show you that I am mindful of you at
all times, that I write at all times; and as nothing I can say can be worth
your reading, so I may as well throw out what comes uppermost, as study to be
dull.

I am, etc.

Mr. C...... to Mr. POPE.
July 15, 1710.
AT last I have prevailed over a lazy humor to transcribe this Elegy: I have
changed the situation of some of the Latin Verses, and made some
Interpolations, but I hope they are not absurd, and foreign to my Author's
sense and manner; but they are referred to your censure, as a debt; whom I
esteem no less a Critic than a Poet: I expect to be treated with the same
rigor as I have practiced to Mr. Dryden and you, -- Hanc veniam petimusque
damusque vicessim.


I desire the favor of your opinion, why Priam, in his speech to Pyrrhus in
the second Aeneid, says this to him, At non ille satum quo te mentiris,
Achilles.


He would intimate (I fancy by Pyrrbus's answer) only his degeneracy: but then
these following lines of the Version (I suppose from Homer's History) seem
absurd in the mouth of Priam, viz. He cheered my sorrows, and for sums of gold,
The bloodless carcass of my Hector sold.


I am, Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
July 20, 1710.
I Give you thanks for the Version you sent me of Ovid's Elegy. It is very much
an image of that author's writing, who has an agreeableness that charms us
without correctness, like a mistress whose faults we see, but love her with
them all. You have very judiciously altered his method in some places, and I
can find nothing which I dare insist upon as an error: What I have written in
the margins being merely Guesses at a little improvement, rather than
Criticisms. I assure you I do not expect you should subscribe to my private
notions but when you shall judge 'em agreeable to reason and good sense. What I
have done is not as a Critic, but as a Friend; I know too well how many
qualities are requisite to make up the one, and that I want almost all I can
reckon up; but I am sure I do not want inclination, nor I hope capacity, to be
the other. Nor shall I take it at all amiss, that another dissents from my
opinion: It Is no more than I have often done from my own; and indeed, the more
a man advances in understanding, he becomes the more every day a critic upon
himself, and finds something or other still to blame in his former notions and
opinions. I could be glad to know if you have translated the 11th Elegy of Lib.
2. Ad amicam navigantem. the 8th of Book 3, or the 11th of Book 3, which are
above all others my particular favorites, especially the last of these.

As to the passage of which you ask my opinion in the second Aeneid, it is
either so plain as to require no solution; or else (which is very probable) you
see farther into it than I can. Priam would say, that " Achilles (whom surely
you only feign to be your Father, since your actions are so different from his)
did not use me thus inhumanly. He blushed at his murder of Hector when he saw
my sorrows for him; and restored his dead body to me to be buried." To this the
answer of Pyrrhus seems to be agreeable enough. "Go then to the shades, and
tell Achilles how I degenerate from him:" granting the truth of what Priam had
said of the difference between them. Indeed Mr. Dryden's mentioning here what
Virgil more judiciously passes in silence, the circumstance of Achilles's
selling for money the body of Hector, seems not so proper; it in some measure
lessening the character of Achilles's generosity and piety, which is the very
point of which Priam endeavors in this place to convince his Son, and to
reproach him with the want of. But the truth of this circumstance is no way to
be questioned, being expressly taken from Homer, who represents Achilles weeping
for Priam, yet receiving the gold, Iliad 24: For when he gives the body, he
uses these words, "O my friend Patroclus! forgive me that I quit the corpse of
him who killed thee; I have great gifts in ransom for it, which I will bestow
upon thy funeral."

I am, etc.

Mr. C...... to Mr. POPE.
Aag. 3, 1710.
LOoking among some French Rhymes, I was agreeably surpised to find in the
Rondeau of In Voiture's Poems.
Pour le moins -- your Apoticaire and Lavement, which I took for your own; so
much is your Muse of Intelligence with the Wits of all languages. You have
refined upon Voiture, whose Ou Vous Scavez is much inferior to your You know
where -- You do not only pay your club with your author (as our friend says)
but the whole reckoning; who can form such pretty lines from so trivial a hint.

For my Ovid 's Amorum, l. 2. El. 16. Pars me Sulmo, etc.
Elegy; it is confessed, that the Topography of Sulmo in the Latin makes but an
awkward figure in the Version. Your couplet of the Dog Star is very fine, but
may be too sublime in this place. I laughed heartily at your note upon
Paradise; for to make Ovid talk of the Garden of Eden, is certainly most
absurd: But Xenophon in his Oeconomicks, speaking of a garden finely planted
and watered (as is here described) calls it Paradisos: It Is an interpolation
indeed, and serves for a gradation to the Caelestial Orb; which expresses in
some sort the Sidus Castoris in part Coeli -- How Trees can enjoy, let the
naturalists determine; but the Poets make 'em sensitive, lovers, bachelors, and
married. Virgil in his Georgicks Lib. 2. Horace Ode 15. Lib. 2. Pla^tanus
coelebs evincet ulmos. Epod. 2. Ergo aut adulta vitium propagine Altas maritat
populos. Your Critique is a very Dolce-piccante; for after the many faults you
justly find, you smooth your rigor: but an obliging thing is owing (you think)
to one who so much esteems and admires you, and who shall ever be

Your, etc.

August 21, 1710.
YOUR Letters are a perfect charity to a man in retirement, utterly forgotten
of all his Friends but you; for since Mr. Wycherley left London, I have not
heard a word from him; though just before, and once since, I writ to him, and
though I know my self guilty of no offense but of doing sincerely just what he
Correcting his Verses. See the Letters in 1706, and the following Years, of Mr.
Wycherley and Mr. Pope.
bid me. -- Hoc mihi libertas, hoc pia lingua dedit! But the greatest injury he
does me is the keeping me in ignorance of his welfare, which I am always very
sollicitous for, and very uneasy in the fear of any Indisposition that may
befall him. In what I sent you some time ago, you have not verse enough to be
severe upon, in revenge for my last criticism: In one point I must persist,
that is to say, my dislike of your Paradise, in which I take no pleasure; I
know very well that in Greek it is not only used by Xenophon, but is a common
word for any Garden; but in English it bears the signification and conveys the
idea of Eden, which alone is (I think) a reason against making Ovid use it; who
will be thought to talk too like a Christian in your version at least, whatever
it might have been in Latin or Greek. As for all the rest of my Remarks, since
you do not laugh at them as at this, I can be so civil as not to lay any stress
upon 'em (as I think I told you before) and in particular in the point of Trees
enjoying, you have, I must own, fully satisfied me that the Expression is not
only defensible, but beautiful. I shall be very glad to see your Translation of
the Elegy, Ad Amicam navigantem, as soon as you can; for (without a complement
to you) every thing you write either in verse or prose, is welcome to me; and
you may be confident, (if my opinion can be of any sort of consequence in any
thing) that I will never be unsincere, though I may be often mistaken. To use
Sincerity with you is but paying you in your own coin, from whom I have
experienced so much of it; and I need not tell you how much I really esteem
you, when I esteem nothing in the world so much as that Quality. I know you
sometimes say civil things to me in your Epistolary Style, but those I am to
make allowance for, as particularly when you talk of Admiring; it is a word you
are so used to in conversation of Ladies, that it will creep into your
discourse in spite of you, even to your Friends. But as Women when they think
themselves secure of admiration, commit a thousand Negligences, which show them
so much at disadvantage and off their guard, as to lose the little real Love
they had before: so when men imagine others entertain some esteem for their
abilities, they often expose all their Imperfections and foolish works, to the
disparagement of the little Wit they were thought masters of. I am going to
exemplify this to you, in putting into your hands (being encouraged by so much
indulgence) some verses of my Youth, or rather Childhood; which (as I was a
great admirer of Waller) were intended in imitation of his manner; and are
perhaps, such imitations, as those you see in awkward country Dames of the fine
and well-bred Ladies of the Court. If you will take 'em with you into
Lincolnshire, they may save you one hour from the conversation of the country
Gentlemen and their Tenants, (who differ but in Dress and Name) which if it be
there as bad as here, is even worse than my Poetry. I hope your stay there will
be no longer than (as Mr. Wycherley calls it) to rob the Country, and run away
to London with your money. In the mean time I beg the favor of a line from
you, and am (as I will never cease to be)

Your, etc.

October 12, 1710.
I Deferred answering your last, upon the advice I received that you were
leaving the town for some time, and expected your return with impatience,
having then a design of seeing my Friends there, among the first of which I
have reason to account your self. But my almost continual Illnesses prevent
that, as well as most other satisfactions of my life: However I may say one
good thing of sickness, that it is the best Cure in nature for Ambition, and
designs upon the World or Fortune: It makes a man pretty indifferent for the
future, provided he can but be easy, by intervals, for the present. He will be
content to compound for his Quiet only, and leave all the circumstantial part
and pomp of life to those, who have a health vigorous enough to enjoy all the
Mistresses of their desires. I thank God, there is nothing out of my self which
I would be at the trouble of seeking, except a Friend; a happiness I once hoped
to have possessed in Mr. Wycherley; but -- Quantum mutatus ab illo! -- I have
for some years been employed much like Children that build houses with Cards,
endeavoring very busily and eagerly to raise a Friendship, which the first
breath of any ill-natured By-stander could puff away. -- But I will trouble you
no farther with writing, nor my self with thinking, of this subject.

I was mightily pleased to perceive by your quotation from Voiture, that you
had track'd me so far as France. You see it is with weak heads as with weak
stomachs, they immediately throw out what they received last: and what they
read, floats upon the surface of their mind, like Oil upon water, without
incorporating. This, I think however, cannot be said of the Loveverses I last
troubled you with, where all (I am afraid) is so puerile and so like the
Author, that no body will suspect any thing to be borrowed. Yet you, (as a
friend, entertaining a better opinion of 'em) it seems searched in Waller, but
searched in vain. Your judgment of 'em is (I think) very right, -- for it was
my own opinion before. If you think 'em not worth the trouble of correcting,
pray tell me so freely, and it will save me a labor; if you think the
contrary, you would particularly oblige me by your remarks on the several
thoughts as they occur. I long to be nibling at your verses, and have not
forgot who promised me Ovid's Elegy ad Amicam Navigantem? Had Ovid been as long
composing it, as you in sending it, the Lady might have sailed to Gades, and
received it at her return. I have really a great Itch of Criticism upon me, but
want matter here in the Country; which I desire you to furnish me with, as I do
you in the Town, Sic servat Studii Faedera quisque sui.


I am obliged to Mr. Caryl (whom you tell me you met at Epsom) for telling you
Truth, as a man is in these days to any one that will tell Truth to his
advantage, and I think none is more to mine, than what he told you and I should
be glad to tell all the world, that I have an extreme Affection and Esteem for
you. Tecum etenim longos memini consumere soles,
Et tecum primas epulis decerpere noctes,
Unum Opus and Requiem pariter disponimus ambo,
Atque verecunda laxamus seria mensa.


By these Epulae, as I take it, Persius meant the Portugal Snuff and burned
Claret, which he took with his Master Cornutus; and the Verecunda Mensa was,
without dispute, some Coffee-house table of the ancients. -- I will only
observe, that these four lines are as elegant and musical as any in Persius,
not excepting those six or seven which Mr. Dryden quotes as the only such in
all that Author. -- I could be heartily glad to repeat the satisfaction
described in them, being truly

Your, etc.

October 28, 1710.
I Am glad to find by your last letter that you write to me with the freedom of
a friend, setting down your thoughts as they occur, and dealing plainly with me
in the matter of my own Trifles, which I assure you I never valued half so much
as I do that Sincerity in you which they were the occasion of discovering to
me; and which while I am happy in, I may be trusted with that dangerous weapon,
Poetry; since I shall do nothing with it but after asking and following your
advice. I value Sincerity the more, as I find by sad experience, the practice
of it is more dangerous; Writers rarely pardoning the executioners of their
verses, even though themselves pronounce sentence upon them. -- As to Mr.
Philips's Pastorals, I take the first to be infinitely the best, and the second
the worst; the third is for the greatest part a Translation from Virgil's
Daphnis. I will not forestal your judgment of the rest, only observe in that of
the Nightingale these lines, (speaking of the Musician's playing on the harp.)
Now lightly skimming over the Strings they pass,
Like Winds that gently brush the plying Grass,
And melting Airs arise at their command;
And now, laborious, with a weighty hand,
He sinks into the Cords, with solemn pace,
And gives the swelling Tones a manly grace.


To which nothing can be objected, but that they are too lofty for Pastoral,
especially being put into the mouth of a Shepherd, as they are here; in the
Poet's own person they had heen (I believe) more proper. These are more after
Virgil's manner than that of Theocritus, whom yet in the character of Pastoral
he rather seems to imitate. In the whole, I agree with the Tatler, that we have
no better Eclogues in our language. There is a small copy of the same Author
published in the Tatler No 12. on the Danish Winter: It Is Poetical Painting,
and I recommend it to your perusal.

Dr. Garth's Poem I have not seen, but believe I shall be of that Critic's
opinion you mention at Will's, who swore it was good: For though I am very
cautious of swearing after Critics, yet I think one may do it more safely when
they commend, than when they blame.

I agree with you in your censure of the use of Sea-terms in Mr. Dryden's
Virgil; not only because Helenus was no great Prophet in those matters, but
because no Terms of Art or Cant-Words suit with the Majesty and dignity of
Style which Epic Poetry requires. -- Cui men's divinior atque os magna
soniturum. -- The Tarpawlin Phrase can please none but such Qui Aurem habent
Batavam; they must not expect Auribus Atticis probari, I find by you. (I think
I have brought in two phrases of Martial here very dexterously.)

Though you say you did not rightly take my Meaning in the verse I quoted from
Juvenal, yet I will not explain it; because though it seems you are resolved to
take me for a Critic, I would by no means be thought a Commentator. -- And for
another reason too, because I have quite forgot both the Verse and the
Application.

I hope it will be no offense to give my most hearty service to Mr. Wycherly,
though I perceive by his last to me, I am not to trouble him with my letters,
since he there told me he was going instantly out of Town, and till his return
was my Servant, etc. I guess by yours he is yet with you, and beg you to do
what you may with all truth and honor, that is, assure him I have ever borne
all the Respect and Kindness imaginable to him. I do not know to this hour what
it is that has estranged him from me; but this I know, that he may for the
future be more safely my friend, since no invitation of his shall ever more
make me so free with him. I could not have thought any man had been so very
cautious and suspicious, as not to credit his own Experience of a friend.
Indeed to believe no body, may be a Maxim of Safety, but not so much of
Honesty. There is but one way I know of conversing safely with all men, that
is, not by concealing what we say or do, but by saying or doing nothing that
deserves to be concealed, and I can truly boast this comfort in my affairs with
Mr. Wycherly. But I pardon his Jealousy, which is become his Nature, and shall
never be his enemy whatsoever he says of me.

Your, etc.

Mr. C...... to Mr. POPE.
Nov. 5, 1710.
I Find I am obliged to the sight of your Love-verses, for your opinion of my
sincerity; which had never been called in question, if you had not forced me,
upon so many other occasions to express my esteem.

I have just read and compared Pieces printed in the 6th Vol. of Tonson's
Miscellanies.
Mr. Row's Version of the 9th of Lucan, with very great pleasure, where I find
none of those absurdities so frequent in that of Virgil, except in two places,
for the sake of lashing the Priests; one where Cato says -- Sortilegis egeant
dubii -- and one in the simile of the Haemorhois -- fatidici Sabaei -- He is so
errant a Whig, that he strains even beyond his Author, in passion for Liberty,
and aversion to Tyranny; and errs only in amplification. Lucan in initio 9 ni,
describing the feat of the Semidei manes, says, Quodque patet terras inter
Lunaeque meatus,
Semidei manes habitant --
Mr. Row has this Line, Then looking down on the Sun's feeble Ray.
Pray your opinion, if there be an Error-Sphaericus in this or no?

Yours, etc.

Nov. 11, 1710.
YOU mistake me very much in thinking the freedom you kindly used with my
Love-verses, gave me the first opinion of your sincerity: I assure you it only
did what every good-natured action of yours has done since, confirmed me more
in that opinion. The Fable of the Nightingale in Philips's Pastoral, is taken
from Famianus Strada's Latin Poem on the same subject, in his Prolusiones
Academicae; only the Tomb he erects at the end, is added from Virgil's
conclusion of the Culex. I cannot forbear giving you a passage out of the Latin
Poem I mention, by which you will find the English Poet is indebted to it.
Alternat mira art fides, dum torquet acutas
Inciditque graves operoso verbere pulsat --
Jamque manu per fila volat; simul hos, simul illos
Explorat numeros, chordaque laborat in omni. --
Mox silet. Illa modis totidem respondit, and artem
Art refert; nunc ceu rudis, aut incerta canendi,
Praebet iter liquidum labenti e pectore voci,
Nunc caesim variat, modulisque canora minutis
Delibrat vocem, tremuloque reciprocat ore.


This Poem was many years since imitated by Crashaw, out of whose Verses the
following are very remarkable. From this to that, from that to this he flies,
Feels Musick's Pulse in all its Arteries;
Caught in a net which there Apollo spreads,
His fingers struggle with the vocal threads,


I have (as I think I formerly told you) a very good opinion of Mr. Row's 9th
book of Lucan: Indeed he amplifies too much, as well as Brebaeuf, the famous
French Imitator. If I remember right, he sometimes takes the whole Comment into
the Text of the Version, as particularly in lin. 808. Utque solet pariter totis
se effundere signis Corycii pressura croci. -- And in the place you quote, he
makes of those two lines in the Latin Vidit quanta sub nocte jaceret
Nostra dies, risitque sui ludibria trunci.
no less than eight in English.

What you observe sure cannot be an Error Sphaericus, strictly speaking, either
according to their Ptolomaick, or our Copernican System; Tycho Brahe himself
will be on the Translator's side. For Mr. Row here says no more, than that he
looked down on the Rays of the Sun, which Pompey might do, even though the Body
of the Sun were above him.

You cannot but have remarked what a journey Lucan here makes Cato take for the
sake of his fine Descriptions. From Cyrene he travels by land, for no better
reason than this: Haec eadem sua debat Hyems quae clauserat aequor.
The Winter's effects on the Sea, it seems, were more to be dreaded than all
the Serpents, Whirlwinds, Sands, etc. by Land, which immediately after he
paints out in his speech to the soldiers: Then he fetches a compass a vast way
round about, to the Nasamones and Jupiter Ammon's Temple, purely to ridicule
the Oracles: And Labienus must pardon me, if I do not believe him when he says
-- sors obtulit, and fortuna viae -- either Labienus or the Map, is very much
mistaken here. Thence he returns back to the Syrtes (which he might have taken
first in his way to Utica) and so to Leptis Minor, where our Author leaves him;
who seems to have made Cato speak his own mind, when he tells his Army -- Ire
sat est -- no matter whither. I am,

Your, etc.

Mr. C...... to Mr. POPE.
Nov. 20, 1710.
THE System of Tycho Brahe (were it true, as it is Novel) could have no room
here: Lucan, with the rest of the Latin Poets, seems to follow Plato; whose
order of the Spheres is clear in Cicero, De Natura Deorum, De somnio Scipionis,
and in Macrobius. The Seat of the Semidei manes is Platonic too, for Apuleius
de Deo Socratis assigns the same to the Genii, viz. the Region of the Air for
their intercourse with Gods and Men; so that I fancy, Row mistook the
situation, and I cannot be reconciled to, Look down on the Sun's Rays. I am glad
you agree with me about the latitude he takes; and wish you had told me, if the
sortilegi, and fatidici, could license his invectives against Priests? but I
suppose you think them (with Helena) undeserving of your protection. I agree
with you in Lucan's Errors, and the cause of 'em, his Poetic descriptions: for
the Romans then knew the coast of Africa from Cyrene (to the South-east of
which lies Ammon toward Egypt) to Leptis and Utica: But pray remember how your
Homer nodded while Ulysses slept, and waking knew not where he was, in the
short passage from Corcyra to Ithaca. I like Trapp's Versions for their
justness; his Psalm is excellent, the Prodigies in the first Georgick judicious
(whence I conclude that it is easier to turn Virgil justly in blank verse, than
rhyme.) The Eclogue of Gailus, and Fable of Phaeton pretty well; but he is very
faulty in his Numbers; the fate of Phaeton might run thus, -- The blasted
Phaeton with blazing Hair,
Shot gliding through the vast Abyss of Air,
And tumbled headlong, like a falling Star.


I am, Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
Nov. 24, 1710.
TO make use of that freedom and familiarity of style which we have taken up in
our Correspondence, and which is more properly Talking upon paper, than
Writing; I will tell you without any preface, that I never took Tycho Brahe for
one of the Ancients, or in the least an acquaintance of Lucan's; nay, it is a
mercy on this occasion that I do not give you an account of his Life and
Conversation; as how he lived some years like an enchanted Knight in a certain
Island, with a tale of a King of Denmark's Mistress that shall be nameless. --
But I have compassion on you, and would not for the world you should stay any
longer among the Genii and Semidei Manes, you know where; for if once you get
so near the Moon, Sapho will want your presence in the Clouds and inferior
regions; not to mention the great loss Drury Lane will sustain, when Mr. C^ is
in the Milky way. These celestial thoughts put me in mind of the Priests you
mention, who are a sort of Sortilegi in one sense, because in their Lottery
there are more Blanks than Prizes; the Adventurers being at best in an
uncertainty, whereas the Setters-up are sure of something. Priests indeed in
their Character, as they represent God, are sacred; and so are Constables as
they represent the King; but you will own a great many of 'em are very odd
fellows, and the devil a bit of likeness in 'em. Yet I can assure you, I honor
the good as much as I detest the bad, and I think, that in condemning these, we
praise those. I am so far from esteeming even the worst unworthy of my
protection, that I have defended their Character (in Congreve's and Vanbrugh's
Plays) even against their own Brethren. And so much for Priests in general, now
for Trapp in particular whose Translations from Ovid I have not so good an
opinion of as you; not (I will assure you) from any sort of prejudice to him as
a Priest, but because I think he has little of the main Characteristick of his
Author, a graceful Easiness. For let the sense be ever so exactly rendered,
unless an author looks like himself, in his air, habit, manner, it is a Disguise
and not a Translation. But as to the Psalm, I think David is much more
beholding to him than Ovid; and as he treated the Roman like a Jew, so he has
made the Jew speak like a Roman.

Your, etc.

Mr. C...... to Mr. POPE.
December. 5, 1710.
THE same judgment we made on Row's 9th of Lucan will serve for his part of the
6th, where I find this memorable line, Parque novum Fortuna videt concurrere,
bellum
Atque virum.
For this he employs six Verses, among which is this, As if on Knightly terms
in Lists they ran.
Pray can you trace Chivalry up higher than Pharamond? will you allow it an
Anachronism? -- Tickell in his Version of the Phaenix from Claudian, When
Nature ceases, thou shall still remain,
Nor second Chaos bound thy endless reign.
Claudian thus, Et clades te nulla rapit, solusque superstes,
Edomita Tellure manes --
which plainly refers to the Deluge of Deucalion and the Conflagration of
Phaeton; not to the final Dissolution. Your thought of the Priests Lottery is
very fine; you play the Wit, and not the Critic, upon the errors of your
brother.

Your observations are all very just: Virgil is eminent for adjusting his
diction to his sentiments; and among the moderns, I find your Practice the
Prosodia of your Rules. Your To a Lady, with the Works of Voiture.
Poem shows you to be, what you say of Voiture, with Books well-bred: The state
of the Fair, though satirical, is touched with that delicacy and gallantry, that
not the Court of Augustus, nor -- But hold, I shall lose what I lately
recovered, your opinion of my Sincerity; yet I must say, it is as faultless as
the Fair to whom it is addressed, be she never so perfect. The M. G. (who it
seems had no right notion of you, as you of him) transcribed it by lucubration:
From some discourse of yours, he thought your inclination led you to (what the
men of fashion call Learning) Pedantry; but now he says he has no less, I
assure you, than a Veneration for you.

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. C......
December. 17, 1710.
IT seems that my late mention of Crashaw, and my quotation from him, has moved
your curiosity. I therefore send you the whole Author, who has held a place
among my other books of this nature for some years; in which time having read
him twice or thrice, I find him one of those whose works may just deserve
reading. I take this Poet to have writ like a Gentleman, that is, at leisure
hours, and more to keep out of idleness, than to establish a reputation: so
that nothing regular or just can be expected from him. All that regards Design,
Form, Fable, (which is the Soul of Poetry) all that concerns exactness, or
consent of parts, (which is the Body) will probably be wanting; only pretty
conceptions, fine metaphors, glittering expressions, and something of a neat
cast of Verse, (which are properly the dress, gems, or loose ornaments of
Poetry) may be found in these verses. This is indeed the case of most other
Poetical Writers of Miscellanies; nor can it well be otherwise, since no man
can be a true Poet, who writes for diversion only. These Authors should be
considered as Versifiers and witty Men, rather than as Poets; and under this
head will only fall the Thoughts, the Expression, and the Numbers. These are
only the pleasing parts of Poetry, which may be judged of at a view, and
comprehended all at once. And (to express my self like a Painter) their
Coloring entertains the sight, but the Lines and Life of the Picture are not
to be inspected too narrowly.

This Author formed himself upon Petrarch, or rather upon Marino. His thoughts
one may observe, in the main, are pretty; but oftentimes far fetched, and too
often strained and stiffned to make them appear the greater. For men are never
so apt to think a thing great, as when it is odd or wonderful; and
inconsiderate Authors would rather be admired than understood. This ambition of
surprising a reader, is the true natural cause of all Fustian, or Bombast in
Poetry. To confirm what I have said you need but look into his first Poem of
the Weeper, where the 2d, 4th, 6th, 14th, 21st stanza's are as sublimely dull,
as the 7th, 8th, 9th, 16th, 17th, 20th and 23d stanza's of the same copy, are
soft and pleasing: And if these last want any thing, it is an easier and more
unaffected expression. The remaining thoughts in that Poem might have been
spared, being either but repetitions, or very trivial and mean. And by this
example in the first one may guess at all the rest; to be like this, a mixture
of tender gentile thoughts and suitable expressions, of forced and inextricable
conceits, and of needless fillers-up to the rest. From all which it is plain,
this Author writ fast, and set down what came uppermost. A reader may skim off
the froth, and use the clear underneath; but if he goes too deep will meet with
a mouthful of dregs: either the Top or bottom of him are good for little, but
what he did in his own, natural, middle-way, is best.

To speak of his Numbers is a little difficult, they are so various and
irregular, and mostly Pindarick: it is evident his heroic Verse (the best
example of which is his Musick's Duel) is carelessly made up; but one may
imagine from what it now is, that had he taken more care, it had been musical
and pleasing enough, not extremely majestic, but sweet: And the time considered
of his writing, he was (even as uncorrect as he is) none of the worst
Versificators.

I will just observe, that the best Pieces of this Author are, a Paraphrase on
Psalm. 23. On Lessius, Epitaph on Mr. Ashton, Wishes to his supposed Mistress,
and the Dies Irae.

I am, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. C......
December. 30, 1710.
I Resume my old liberty of throwing out my self upon paper to you, and making
what thoughts float uppermost in my head, the subject of a letter. They are at
present upon Laughter, which (for ought I know) may be the cause you might
sometimes think me too remiss a friend, when I was most entirely so: for I am
never so inclined to mirth as when I am most pleased and most easy, which is in
the company of a friend like your self.

As the fooling and toying with a mistress is a proof of fondness, not
disrespect, so is raillery with a friend. I know there are Prudes in
friendship, who expect distance, awe and adoration, but I know you are not of
them; and I for my part am no Idolworshipper, though a Papist. If I were to
address Jupiter himself in a heathen way, I fancy I should be apt to take hold
of his knee in a familiar manner, if not of his beard like Dionysius; I was
just going to say of his buttons, but I think Jupiter wore none (however I
will not be positive to so nice a Critic as you, but his robe might be Subnected
with a Fibula.) I know some Philosophers define Laughter, A recommending our
selves to our own favor, by comparison with the weakness of another: but I am
sure I very rarely laugh with that view, nor do I believe Children have any
such consideration in their heads, when they express their pleasure this way: I
laugh full as innocently as they, for the most part, and as sillily. There is a
difference too betwixt laughing about a thing and laughing at a thing: One may
find the inferior Man (to make a kind of casuistical distinction) provoked to
folly at the sight or observation of some circumstance of a thing, when the
thing itself appears solemn and august to the superior Man, that is, out
Judgment and Reason. Let an Ambassador speak the best Sense in the world, and
deport himself in the most graceful manner before a Prince, yet if the Tail of
his Shirt happen (as I have known it happen to a very wise man) to hang out
behind, more people shall laugh at that than attend to the other; till they
recollect themselves, and then they will not have a jot the less respect for
the Minister. I must confess the iniquity of my countenance before you; several
Muscles of my Face sometimes take an impertinent liberty with my Judgment, but
then my Judgment soon rises, and sets all right again about my mouth: And I
find I value no man so much, as he in whose sight I have been playing the fool.
I cannot be Sub-Persona before a man I love; and not to laugh with honesty,
when Nature prompts, or Folly (which is more a second Nature than any thing I
know) is but a knavish hypocritical way of making a mask of one's own face. --
To conclude, those that are my friends I laugh with, and those that are not I
laugh at; so am merry in company, and if ever I am wise, it is all by my self.
You take just another course, and to those that are not your friends, are very
civil, and to those that are, very endearing and complaisant: Thus when you and
I meet, there will be the Risus and Blanditiae united together in conversation,
as they commonly are in a verse: But without Laughter on the one side, or
Compliment on the other, I assure you I am with real esteem

Yours, etc.

Mr. C...... to Mr. POPE.
October 26, 1711.
MR. Wycherley visited me at the Bath in my sickness, and expressed much
affection to me: hearing from me how welcome his letters would be, he presently
writ to you; in which I inserted my Scrall, and after a second. He went to
Gloucester in his way to Salop, but was disappointed of a boat and so returned
to the Bath; then he showed me your answer to his letters, in which you speak
of my good nature, but I fear you found me very froward at Reading; yet you
allow for my illness. I could not possibly be in the same house with Mr.
Wycherley, though I sought it earnestly; nor come up to town with him, he being
engaged with others; but whenever we met we talked of you. He praises your
Essay on Criticism.
Poem, and even outvies me in kind expressions of you. As if he had not wrote
two letters to you, he was for writing every Post; I put him in mind he had
already. Forgive me this wrong, I know not whither my talking so much of your
great humanity and tenderness to me, and love to him; or whether the return of
his natural disposition to you, was the cause; but certainly you are now highly
in his favor: now he will come this Winter to your house, and I must go with
him; but first he will invite you speedily to town. -- I arrived on Saturday
last much wearied, yet had wrote sooner, but was told by Mr. Gay (who has writ
a pretty Poem to Lintot, and who gives you his service) that you was gone from
home. Lewis showed me your letter which set me right, and your next letter is
impatiently expected by me. Mr. Wycherley came to town on Sunday last, and
kindly surpised me with a visit on Monday morning. We dined and drank
together; and I saying, To our Loves, he replied, It Is Mr. Pope 's health: He
said he would go to Mr. Thorold's and leave a letter for you. Though I cannot
answer for the event of all this, in respect to him; yet I can assure you, that
when you please to come you will be most desirable to me, as always by
inclination so now by duty, who shall ever be

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. C......
Nov. 12, 1711.
I Received the entertainment of your Letter the day after I had sent you one
of mine, and I am but this morning returned hither. The news you tell me of the
many difficulties you found in your return from Bath, gives me such a kind of
pleasure as we usually take in accompanying our Friends in their mixed
adventures; for methinks I see you laboring through all your inconveniences of
the rough roads, the hard saddle, the trotting horse, and what not? What an
agreeable surprise would it have been to me, to have met you by pure accident,
(which I was within an ace of doing) and to have carried you off triumphantly,
set you on an easier Pad, and relieved the wandering Knight with a Night's
lodging and rural Repast, at our Castle in the Forest? But these are only the
pleasing Imaginations of a disappointed Lover, who must suffer in a melancholy
absence yet these two months. In the mean time, I take up with the Muses for
want of your better company; the Muses, Quae nobiscum pernoctant,
peregrinantur, rusticantur. Those aerial Ladies just discover enough to me of
their beauties to urge my pursuit, and draw me on in a wandering Maze of
thought, still in hopes (and only in hopes) of attaining those favors from
'em, which they confer on their more happy Admirers. We grasp some more
beautiful Idea in our own brain, than our endeavors to express it can set to
the view of others; and still do but labor to fall short of our first
Imagination. The gay Coloring which Fancy gave at the first transient glance
we had of it, goes off in the Execution; like those various figures in the
gilded clouds, which while we gaze long upon, to separate the parts of each
imaginary Image, the whole faints before the eye and decays into confusion.

I am highly pleased with the knowledge you give me of Mr. Wycherley's present
temper, which seems so favorable to me. I shall ever have such a Fund of
Affection for him as to be agreeable to my self when I am so to him, and cannot
but be gay when he is in good humor, as the surface of the Earth (if you will
pardon a poetical similitude) is clearer or gloomier, just as the Sun is
brighter, or more overcast. -- I should be glad to see the Verses to Lintot
which you mention, for methinks, something oddly agreeable may be produced from
that subject. -- For what remains, I am so well, that nothing but the assurance
of your being so can make me better; and if you would have me live with any
satisfaction these dark days in which I cannot see you, it must be by your
writing sometimes to

Your, etc.

Mr. C...... to Mr. POPE.
Dec. 7, 1711.
MR. Wycherley has, I believe, sent you two or three letters of invitation; but
you, like the Fair, will be long solicited before you yield, to make the
favor the more acceptable to the Lover. He is much yours by his talk; for that
unbounded Genius which has ranged at large like a libertine, now seems confined
to you: and I should take him for your Mistress too by your simile of the Sun
and Earth: It Is very fine, but inverted by the application; for the gaiety of
your fancy, and the drooping of his by the withdrawing of your luster,
persuades me it would be juster by the reverse. Oh happy Favorite of the
Muses! how per-noctare, all night long with them? but alas! you do but toy, but
skirmish with them, and decline a close Engagement. Leave Elegy and Translation
to the inferior Class, on wbom the Muses only glance now and then like our
Winter-Sun, and then leave 'em in the dark. Think on the Dignity of Tragedy,
which is of the greater Poetry, as Dennis says, and foil him at his other
weapon, as you have done in Criticism. Every one wonders that a Genius like
yours will not support the sinking Drama; and Mr. Wilks (though I think his
Talent is Comedy) has expressed a furious ambition to swell in your Buskins. We
have had a poor Comedy of Johnson's (not Ben) which held seven nights, and has
got him three hundred pounds, for the town is sharp-set on new Plays. In vain
would I fire you by Interest or Ambition, when your mind is not susceptible of
either; though your Authority (arising from the General esteem, like that of
Pompey) must infallibly assure you of success; for which in all your wishes you
will be attended with those of

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. C......
December. 21, 1711.
IF I have not writ to you so soon as I ought, let my writing now atone for
the delay; as it will infallibly do, when you know what a Sacrifice I make you
at this time, and that every moment my eyes are employed upon this paper, they
are taken off from two of the finest Faces in the universe. But indeed it is
some consolation to me to reflect, that while I but write this period, I escape
some hundred fatal Darts from those unerring Eyes, and about a thousand Deaths,
or better. Now you, that delight in dying, would not once have dreamt of an
absent Friend in these circumstances; you that are so nice an Admirer of
beauty, or (as a Critic would say after Terence) so elegant a Spectator of
Forms? You must have a sober dish of Coffee, and a solitary candle at your
side, to write an Epistle Lucubratory to your friend; whereas I can do it as
well with two pair of radiant lights, that outshine the golden God of Day and
silver Goddess of Night, with all the refulgent Eyes of the Firmament. -- You
fancy now that Sapho's eyes are two of these my Tapers, but it is no such
matter, Sir; these are eyes that have more persuasion in one glance than all
Sapho's Oratory and Gesture together, let her put her body into what moving
postures she pleases. Indeed, indeed, my friend, you could never have found so
improper a time to tempt me with Interest or Ambition: let me but have the
Reputation of these in my keeping, and as for my own, let the Devil, or let
Dennis, take it for ever. How gladly would I give all I am worth, that is to
say, my Pastorals for one of them, and my Essay for the other? I would lay out
all my Poetry in Love; an Original for a Lady, and a Translation for a waiting
Maid! alas! what have I to do with Jane Gray, as long as Miss Molly, Miss
Betty, or Miss Patty are in this world? Shall I write of Beauties murdered long
ago, when there are those at this instant that murder me? I Will even compose my
own Tragedy, and the Poet shall appear in his own person to move compassion:
'Twill be far more effectual than Bays's entering with a rope about his neck,
and the world will own, there never was a more miserable Object brought upon
the stage.

Now you that are a Critic, pray inform me, in what manner I may connect the
foregoing part of this Letter with that which is to follow, according to the
Rules? I would willingly return Mr. Gay my thanks for the favor of his Poem,
and in particular for his kind mention of me; I hoped, when I heard a new
Comedy had met with success upon the Stage, that it had been his, to which I
really wish no less; and (had it been any way in my power) should have been
very glad to have contributed to its Introduction into the world. His Verses to
Lintot These Verses are printed in Dr. Swift's, and our Author's Miscellanies,
in 3 Vols. 8vo.
have put a whim into my head, which you are like to be troubled with in the
opposite page: take it as you find it, the production of half an hour the other
morning. I design very soon to put a task of a more serious nature upon you, in
reviewing a piece of mine that may better deserve Criticism; and by that time
you have done with it, I hope to tell you in person with how much fidelity I am

Your, etc.

LETTERS TO Several LADIES.
LETTER I.
Madam,
I Send you the book of Rudiments of Drawing, which you were pleased to
command, and think my self obliged to inform you at the same time of one of the
many excellencies you possess without knowing of 'em. You are but too good a
Painter already; and no Picture of Raphael's was ever so beautiful, as that
which you have formed in a certain heart of my acquaintance. Indeed it was but
just that the finest lines in nature should be drawn upon the most durable
ground, and none could ever be met with that would so readily receive, or so
faithfully retain them, as this Heart. I may boldly say of it that you will not
find its fellow in all the Parts of the Body in this book. But I must complain
to you of my hand, which is an arrant traitor to my heart; for having been
copying your picture from thence and from Kneller these three days, it has done
all possible injury to the finest Face that ever was made, and to the liveliest
Image that ever was drawn. I have imagination enough in your absence, to trace
some resemblance of you; but I have been so long used to lose my judgment at
the sight of you, that it is past my power to correct it by the life, Your
Picture seems least like when placed before your eyes, and contrary to all
other pictures receives a manifest disadvantage by being set in the fairest
Light in the world. The Painters are a very vain generation, and have a long
time pretended to rival Nature; but to own the truth to you, she made such a
finished piece about three and twenty years ago, (I beg your pardon Madam, I
protest I meant but two and twenty) that it is in vain for them any longer to
contend with her. I know You indeed made one something like it, betwixt five
and six years past: 'Twas a little girl, done with abundance of spirit and
life: and wants nothing but time to be an admirable piece: But not to flatter
your work, I don't think 'twill ever come up to what your Father made. However
I would not discourage you; it is certain you have a strange happiness, in
making fine things of a sudden and at a stroke, with incredible ease and
pleasure.

Madam, I am, etc.

LETTER II.
IT is too much a rule in this town, that when a Lady has once done a man a
favor, he is to be rude to her ever after. It becomes our Sex to take upon us
twice as much as yours allows us: By this method I may write to you most
impudently, because you once answered me modestly; and if you should never do
me that honor for the future, I am to think (like a true Coxcomb) that your
silence gives consent. Perhaps you wonder why this is addressed to you rather
than to Mrs. M^ with whom I have the right of an old acquaintance, whereas you
are a fine Lady, have bright eyes, etc. First Madam, I make choice of you
rather than of your Mother, because you are younger than your Mother. Secondly,
because I fancy you spell better, as having been at school later. Thirdly,
because you have nothing to do but to write if you please, and possibly it may
keep you from employing your self worse: it may save some honest neighboring
Gentleman from three or four of your pestilent glances. Cast your eyes upon
Paper, Madam, there you may look innocently: Men are seducing, books are
dangerous, the amorous one's soften you, and the godly one's give you the
spleen: If you look upon trees, they clasp in embraces; birds and beasts make
love; the Sun is too warm for your blood, the Moon melts you into yiedling and
melancholy. Therefore I say once more, cast your eyes upon Paper, and read only
such Letters as I write, which convey no darts, no flames, but proceed from
Innocence of soul, and simplicity of heart. However, I can allow you a Bonnet
lined with green for your eyes, but take care you don't tarnish it with ogling
too fiercely: I am told, that hand you shade your self with this shining
weather, is tanned pretty much, only with being carried over those Eyes --
thank God I am an hundred miles off from them -- Upon the whole I would sooner
trust your hand than your Eyes for doing me mischief; and though I doubt not some
part of the rancour and iniquity of your heart will drop into your pen, yet
since it will not attack me on a sudden and unprepared, since I may have time
while I break open your letter to cross my self and say a Paternoster, I hope
Providence will protect me from all you can attempt at this distance. Mr. B^
tells me you are at this hour as handsome as an Angel, for my part I have
forgot your face since two winters, I don't know whether you are tall or short,
nor can tell in any respect what sort of creature you are, only that you are a
very mischievous one whom I shall ever pray to be defended from. But when Mr.
B^ sends me word you have the small pox, a good many freckles, or are very
pale, I will desire him to give thanks for it in your Parish Church, which as
soon as he shall inform me he has done I will make you a visit at -- without
Armor: I will eat any thing you give me without suspicion of poison, take you
by the hand without gloves, nay venture to follow you into an arbor without
calling the company. This Madam is the top of my wishes, but how differently
are our desires inclined! You sigh out, in the ardour of your heart, Oh
Play Houses, Parks, Opera's, Assemblies, London! I cry with rapture, Oh Woods,
Gardens, Rookeries, Fishponds, Arbours! Mrs. Betty M^

LETTER III.
To a Lady, written on the opposite pages of a Letter to her Husband from Lady
M.
THE Wits would say, that this must needs be a dull Letter, because it is a
married one. I am afraid indeed you will find what Spirit there is must be on
the side of the Wife, and the Husband's part as usual will prove the dullest.
What an unequal Pair are put together in this sheet? in which though we sin, it
is you must do penance. When you look on both sides of this paper, you may
fancy that our words (according to a Scripture expression) are as a Two-edged
Sword, whereof Lady M. is the shining blade and I only the Handle. But I cannot
proceed without so far mortifying Sir Robert as to tell him, that she writes
this purely in obedience to me, and that it is but one of those honors a
Husband receives for the sake of his Wife.

It is making court ill to one fine Woman to show her the regard we have for
another; and yet I must own there is not a period of this Epistle but squints
toward another overagainst it. It will be in vain to dissemble: Your
penetrating eyes cannot but discover how all the letters that compose these
words lean forward after Lady M's letters, which seem to bend as much from
mine, and fly from them as fast as they are able. Ungrateful letters that they
are! which give themselves to another man in the very presence of him who will
yield to no mortal in knowing how to value them.

You will think I forget my self, and am not writing to you; but let me tell
you, it is you forget your self in that thought, for you are almost the only
Woman to whom one can safely address the praises of another. Besides can you
imagine a Man of my importance so stupid, as to say fine things to you before
your Husband? Let us see how far Lady M. her self dares do any thing like it,
with all the wit and address she is mistress of. If Sir Robert can be so
ignorant (now he is left to himself in the country) to imagine any such matter,
let him know from me, that here in town every thing that Lady says, is taken
for Satire. For my part, every body knows it is my constant practice to speak
Truth, and I never do it more than when I call my self

Your, etc.

LETTER IV.
To a Lady in the Name of her Brother.
IF you have not a chaste ear and a pure heart do not peruse this Letter, for
as Jeremy Tailor says in his holy living and dying, the first thing a Virgin
ought to endeavor, is to be ignorant of the distinction of Sexes.

It is in the confidence I have that you are thus innocent, that I endeavor to
gratify your curiosity in a point in which I am sensible none but a Brother
could do it with decency.

I shall entertain you with the most reigning Curiosity in the town, I mean a
Person who is equally the toast of gentlemen and ladies, and is at present more
universally admired than any of either Sex: You know few proficients have a
greater genius for Monsters than my self; but I never tasted a monster to that
degree I have done this creature: It was not, like other monsters, produced in
the Deserts of Arabia, nor came from the country of the Great Mogul, but is the
production of the joint-endeavours of a Kentish Parson and his Spouse, who
intended in the singleness of heart to have begot a christian but of one sex,
and providence has sent them one of two.

There are various opinions concerning this Creature about town, Mr. Cromwell
observes that the Age is very licentious, and the present Reign very lewd and
corrupt, in permitting a Lady by Authority (as appears by the printed bills) to
expose her personal curiosities for a shilling.

Mr. P. looks upon it as a Prodigy portending some great Revolution in the
State: to strengthen which opinion he produces the following Prophecy of
Nostradamus, which he explains politically. When as two Sexes joined in One,
Shall in the Realm of Brute be shown;
Then Factions shall unite, if I know,
To choose a Prince Jure Divino.
This Prodigy of common Gender
Is neither Sex but a Pretender,
So the Lord shield the Faith's Defender.


Mrs. N^ admires what people wonder at so much? and says she is just so her
self: The Duchess of S^ is of the same opinion.

Among these various conjectures, that I might be informed of the truth, I took
along with me a Physician and a Divine, the one to inspect the state of its
Body, the other to examine that of its Mind: The persons I made choice of were
the ingenious Dr. P^ and the reverend Mr. (...) We were no sooner in the room
but the Party came to us dressed in that habit in which the Ladies affect an
Hermophroditical imitation of Men -- your sharp wit, my dear Sister, will
immediately conclude that I mean a Riding-habit.

I think it not material to inform you, whether the Doctor, the Divine, or my
self looked first. The Priest you will maliciously fancy was in his nature most
an Infidel, and doubted most of this Miracle: we therefore proposed to him to
take the surest method of believing, seeing and feeling: He complied with both
admonitions, and having taken a large pinch of snuff upon it, advised us with a
nod, that we should by no means regard it as a Female but as a Male, for by so
doing we should be guilty of less sinfulness.

The Doctor upon inspection differed from this opinion, he would by no means
allow it a miracle, or at most a natural one: He said upon the whole it was a
woman; that whatever might give a handle to think otherwise, was a trifle,
nothing being more common than for a child to be marked with that thing which
the mother longed for.

As for this Party's temper of mind, it appears to be a most even disposition,
partaking of the good qualities of both sexes: for she is neither so
inaccessible as other Ladies, nor is he so impudent as other Gentlemen. Of how
obliging and complaisant a turn appears by this, that he tells the Ladies he
has the Inclinations of a Gentleman, and that she tells the Gentlemen she has
the Tender of a Lady. As a further proof of this affable disposition, he
formerly received visits of the fair sex in their masks, till an impertinent
fellow in a female disguise mingled with a party of ladies, and impudently
overheard their improving Speculations.

Notwithstanding this, she civilly promised at my request, that my two sisters
should be admitted privately whenever you would do her the honor of your
consideration.

How agreeable soever this sight has been to me, I assure you it cannot be so
pleasing as the sight of you in town, and whatever you may see in the country,
I dare affirm no man or woman can show you the like.

I therefore earnestly desire you to make haste to this place; for though indeed
like most other brothers, I should be sorry you were married at my expense, yet
I would by no means, like them, detain you in the country from your admirers,
for you may believe me, no brother in the world ever loved a sister as I do you.

I am, etc.

LETTER V.
Bath, 1714.
YOU are to understand, Madam, that my passion for your fair self and your
sister, has been divided with the most wonderful regularity in the world. Even
from my infancy I have been in love with one after the other of you, week by
week, and my journey to Bath fell out in the three hundred seventy sixth week
of the Reign of my Sovereign Lady Sylvia. At the present writing hereof it is
the three hundred eighty ninth week of the Reign of your most Serene Majesty,
in whose service I was listed some weeks before I beheld your Sister. This
information will account for my writing to either of you hereafter, as either
shall happen to be Queen-Regent at that time.

Pray tell your sister, all the good qualities and virtuous inclinations she
has, never gave me so much pleasure in her conversation, as that one vice of
her obstinacy will give me mortification this month. Ratcliffe commands her to
the Bath, and she refuses! indeed if I were in Berkshire I should honor her
for this obstinacy, and magnify her no less for disobedience than we do the
Barcelonians. But people change with the change of places (as we see of late)
and virtues become vices when they cease to be for one's interest, with me, as
with others.

Yet let me tell her, she will never look so finely while she is upon earth, as
she would here in the water. It is not here as in most other instances, for
those Ladies that would please extremely, must go out of their own element. She
does not make half so good a figure on horseback as Christina Queen of Sweden;
but were she once seen in the Bath, no man would part with her for the best
Mermaid in christendom. You know I have seen you often, I perfectly know how
you look in black and in white; I have experienced the utmost you can do in
colors; but all your movements, all your graceful steps, deserve not half the
glory you might here attain, of a moving and easy behavior in Buckram:
Something between swimming and walking, free enough, and more
modestly-half-naked, than you can appear any where else. You have conquered
enough already by land; show your ambition, and vanquish also by water. We have
no pretty Admirals on these Seas, but must strike sails to your white Flags,
were they once hoisted up. The Buckram I mention is a dress particularly useful
at this time, when we are told the Princess is bringing over the fashion of
German Ruffs: You ought to use your selves to some degrees of stiffness
beforehand. And when our Ladies chins have been tickled awhile with starched
muslin and wire, they may possibly bear the brush of a German beard and whisker.

I could tell you a delightful story of Dr P. but want room to display it in
all its shining circumstances. He had heard it was an excellent cure for Love,
to kiss the Aunt of the person beloved, who is generally of years and
experience enough to damp the fiercest flame: he tried this course in his
passion, and kissed Mrs. E^ at Mr. D^'s, but he says it will not do, and that
he loves you as much as ever.

Yours, etc.

LETTER VI.
To the Same.
IF you ask how the waters agree with me, I must tell you, so very well, that I
question how you and I should agree if we were in a room by our selves? Mrs. T.
has honestly assured me, that but for some whims which she cannot entirely
conquer, she would go and see the world with me in man's clothes. Even you,
Madam, I fancy (if you would not partake in our adventures) would wait our
coming in at the evening with some impatience, and be well enough pleased to
hear 'em by the fireside. That would be better than reading Romances, unless
Lady M. would be our Historian; for as she is married, she has probably leisure
hours in the nightime, to write or do what she will in. What raises these
desires in me, is an acquaintance I am beginning with my Lady Sandwich, who has
all the spirit of the last age, and all the gay experience of a pleasurable
life. It were as scandalous an omission to come to the Bath and not to see my
Lady Sandwich, as it had formerly been to have traveled to Rome without
visiting the Queen of Sweden. She is, in a word, the best thing this Country
has to boast of; and as she has been all that a woman of spirit could be, so
she still continues that easy and independent creature that a sensible woman
always will be.

I must tell you a truth, which is not however much to my credit. I never
thought so much of your self and your sister, as since I have been fourscore
miles distance from you. In the Forest I looked upon you as good neighbors, at
London as pretty kind of women, but here as divinities, angels, goddesses, or
what you will. In the same manner I never knew at what a rate I valued your
life, till you were upon the point of dying. If Mrs. T. and you will but fall
very sick every season, I shall certainly die for you. Seriously I value you
both so much that I esteem others much the less for your sakes; you have robbed
me of the pleasure of esteeming a thousand pretty qualities in them, by showing
me so many finer in your selves. There are but two things in the world which
could make you indifferent to me, which I believe you are not capable of, I
mean Ill Nature and malice. I have seen enough of you not to overlook any
Frailty you could have, and nothing less than a Vice can make me like you less.
I expect you should discover by my conduct toward you both, that this is true,
and that therefore you should pardon a thousand things in me for that one
disposition. Expect nothing from me but truths and freedom, and I shall always
be thought by you what I always am,

Your, etc.

LETTER VII.
To the Same.
I Returned home as slow and as contemplative after I had parted from you, as
my Lord -- retired from the Court and Glory to his Country seat and Wife, a
week ago. I found here a dismal desponding letter from the son of another great
Courtier who expects the same fate, and who tells me the great one's of the
earth will now take it very kindly of the mean one's, if they will favor them
with a visit by Daylight. With what Joy would they lay down all their schemes
of glory, did they but know you have the generosity to drink their healths once
a day, as soon as they are fallen? Thus the unhappy by the sole merit of their
misfortunes, become the care of heaven and you. I intended to have put this
last into Verse, but in this age of Ingratitude my best friends forsake me, I
mean my rhymes.

I desire Mrs. P^ to stay her stomach with these half hundred Plays, till I can
procure her a Romance big enough to satissy her great Soul with Adventures. As
for Novels, I fear she can depend upon none from me but That of my Life, which
I am still, as I have been, contriving all possible methods to shorten, for the
greater ease both of my Historian and the Reader. May she believe all the
passion and tenderness expressed in these Romances to be but a faint image of
what I bear her, and may you (who read nothing) take the same truth upon
hearing it from me; you will both injure me very much, if you don't think me a
truer friend than ever any romantic lover, or any imitator of their style
could be.

The days of Beauty are as the days of Greatness, and as long as your Eyes make
their sunshine, all the world are your adorers: I am one of those unambitious
people, who will love you forty years hence, when your eyes begin to twinkle in
a retirement, for your own sakes, and without the vanity which every one now
will take to be thought

Your, etc.

LETTER VIII.
YOU have asked me News a hundred times at the first word you spoke to me,
which some would interpret as if you expected nothing better from my lips: And
truly it is not a sign two Lovers are together, when they can be so impertinent
as to enquire what the world does? All I mean by this is, that either you or I
are not in love with the other: I leave you to guess which of the two is that
stupid and insensible creature, so blind to the other's excellencies and charms?

This then shall be a letter of News; and sure if you did not think me the
humblest creature in the world, you could never imagine a Poet could dwindle to
a brother of Dawks and Dyer, from a rival of Tate and Brady.

The Earl of Oxford has behaved so bravely, that in this act at least he might
seem above Man, if he had not just now voided a Stone to prove him subject to
human infirmities. The utmost weight of affliction from princely power and
popular hatred, were almost worth bearing, for the glory of such a dauntless
conduct as he has shown under it.

You may soon have your wish, to enjoy the gallant sights of armies,
incampments, standards waving over your brother's cornfields, and the pretty
windings of the Thames about M^ stained with the blood of men. Your barbarity,
which I have heard so long exclaimed against in town and country, may have its
fill of destruction. I would not add one circumstance usual in all descriptions
of calamity, that of the many Rapes committed or to be committed, upon those
unfortunate women that delight in war. But God forgive me -- in this martial
age, if I could, I would buy a regiment for your sake and Mrs. P^'s and some
others, whom I have cause to fear no fair means will prevail upon.

Those eyes that care not how much mischief is done, or how great slaughter
committed, so they have but a fine Show; those very-female eyes will be
infinitely delighted with the camp which is speedily to be formed in Hyde-Park.
The tents are carried thither this morning, new regiments, with new cloths and
furniture (far exceeding the late cloth and linen designed by his Grace for
the soldiery) The sight of so many gallant fellows, with all the pomp and glare
of War yet undeform'd by Battle, those Scenes which England has for many years
only beheld on Stages, may possibly invite your curiosity to this place.

Mrs. (...) expects the Pretender at her lodgings by Saturday se'nnight. She
has bought a picture of Madam Maintenon to set her features by, against that
time. Three Priests of your acquaintance are very positive, by her interest to
be his Father Confessor.

By our latest accounts from Dukestreet, Westminster, the conversion of T. G.
Esquire; is reported in a manner somewhat more particular: That upon the seizure of
his Flanders-Mares, he seemed more than ordinarily disturbed for some hours,
sent for his ghostly father, and resolved to bear his loss like a christian;
till about the hours of seven or eight the coaches and horses of several of the
Nobility passing by his window toward Hyde-Park, he could no longer endure the
disappointment, but instantly went out, took the Oath of Abjuration, and
recovered his dear Horses which carried him in triumph to the Ring. The poor
distressed Roman Catholics, now un-hors'd and un-charioted, cry out with the
Psalmist, some in Chariots and some in Horses, but we will invocate the name of
the Lord.

I am, etc.

LETTER IX.
I Will not describe Bl^ in particular, not to forestall your expectations
before you see it: Only take a short account, which I will hazard my little
credit is no unjust one. I never saw so great a thing with so much littleness
in it: I think the Architect built it entirely in compliance to the taste of
its Owners: for it is the most inhospitable thing imaginable, and the most
selfish: it has, like their own hearts, no room for strangers, and no reception
for any person of superior quality to themselves. There are but just two
Apartments, for the Master and Mistress, below; and but two apartments above,
(very much inferior to them) in the whole House. When you look upon the
Outside, you would think it large enough for a Prince; when you see the Inside, it
is too little for a Subject; and has not convenience to lodge a common family.
It is a house of Entries and Passages; among which there are three Vista's
through the whole, very uselessly handsome. There is what might have been a
fine Gallery, but spoiled by two Arches toward the End of it, which take away
the sight of several of the windows. There are two ordinary stair-cases instead
of one great one. The best things within the house, are the Hall, which is
indeed noble and well-proportion'd; and the cellars and offices underground,
which are the most commodious, and the best contrived, of the whole. At the top
of the building are several Cupola's and little Turrets that have but an ill
effect, and make the building look at once finical and heavy. What seems of the
best taste, is that Front toward the gardens, which is not yet loaded with
these turrets. The two Sides of the building are entirely spoiled by two
monstrous bowwindows which stand just in the middle, instead of doors: And as
if it were fatal that some trifling littleness should every where destroy the
grandeur, there are in the chief front two semicircles of a lower structure
than the rest, that cut off the angles, and look as if they were purposely
designed to hide a loftier and nobler piece of building, the top of which
appears above them. In a word, the whole is a most expensive absurdity; and the
Duke of Shrewsbury gave a true character of it, when he said, it was a great
Quarry of Stones above ground.

We paid a visit to the spring where Rosamond bathed her self, on a hill where
remains only a piece of a wall of the old Palace of Henry the Second. We
toasted her shade in the cold water, not without a thought or two, scarce so
cold as the liquor we drank it in. I dare not tell you what they were, and so
hasten to conclude,

Your, etc.

LETTER X.
YOU cannot be surprised to find him a dull correspondent whom you have known so
long for a dull companion. And though I am pretty sensible, that if I have any
wit, I may as well write to show it, as not; (because any Lady that has once
seen me, will naturally ask, what I can show that is better?) yet I Will content
my self with giving you as plain a history of my pilgrimage, as Purchase
himself, or as John Bunyan could do of his walking through the wilderness of
this world, etc.

First then I went by water to Hampton Court, unattended by all but my own
virtues; which were not of so modest a nature as to keep themselves, or me,
concealed: For I met the Prince with all his Ladies on horseback, coming from
hunting. Mrs. B^ and Mrs. L^ took me into protection (contrary to the laws
against harboring Papists) and gave me a dinner, with something I liked
better, an opportunity of conversation with Mrs. H^. We all agreed that the
life of a Maid of Honor, was of all things the most miserable; and wished that
every woman who envied it had a specimen of it. To eat Westphalia-Ham in a
morning, ride over hedges and ditches on borrowed Hacks, come home in the heat
of the day with a fever, and (what is worse a hundred times) with a red mark
in the forehead from an uneasy hat; all this may qualify them to make excellent
wives for Fox-hunters, and bear abundance of ruddy-complexion'd children. As
soon as they can wipe off the sweat of the day, they must simper an hour and
catch cold, in the Princess's apartment; from thence (as Shakespeare has it) To
dinner, with what appetite they may -- and after that, 'till midnight, walk,
work, or think, which they please? I can easily believe, no lone-house in
Wales, with a Mountain and a Rookery, is more contemplative than this Court;
and as a proof of it I need only tell you, Mrs. L^ walked all alone with me
three or four Hours by moonlight, and we met no creature of any Quality but the
King, who gave audience to the Vice-Chamberlain, all alone, under the
garden-wall.

In short, I heard of no Ball, Assembly, Basset-Table, or any place where two
or three were gathered together, except Madam Kilmansegg's, to which I had the
honor to be invited, and the grace to stay away.

I was heartily tired, and posted to B^ Park: there we had an excellent
Discourse of Quackery; Dr. Shadwell was mentioned with honor. Lady A. walked a
whole hour abroad without dying after it, at least in the time I stayed, though
she seemed to be fainting, and had convulsive motions several times in her head.

This day I received a Letter with certain advices where women were to be met
with at Oxford. I defy them and all their works: I love no meat but Ortolans,
and no woman but you: though indeed that is no proper comparison, but for fat
Dutchess's; for to love You, is as if one should wish to eat Angels, or to
drink Cherubimbroth.

I arrived in the forest by Tuesday noon, having fled from the face (I wish I
could say the horned face) of Moses B^, who dined in the midway thither. I
past the rest of the day in those Woods where I have so often enjoyed a Book
and a Friend. I made a Hymn as I passed through, which ended with a sigh that I
will not tell you the meaning of.

Your Doctor is gone the way of all his patients, and was hard put to it how to
dispose of an estate miserably unweildy, and splendidly unuseful to him. Sir
Samuel Garth says, that for Ratcliffe to leave a Library, was as if a Eunuch
should found a Seraglio. Dr. She lately told a Lady he wondered she could be
alive after him: she made answer She wondered at it for two reasons, because
Dr. Ratcliffe was dead and because Dr. She was living. I am

Your, etc.

LETTER XI.
To the Same.
NOthing could have more of that melancholy which once used to please me, than
my last days journey; for after having passed through my favorite Woods in the
forest, with a thousand Reveries of past pleasures: I rid over hanging hills,
whose tops were edged with Groves, and whose Feet watered with winding rivers,
listening to the falls of Cataracts below, and the murmuring of the winds above:
The gloomy verdure of Stonor succeeded to these; and then the shades of the
evening overtook me. The Moon rose in the clearest sky I ever saw, by whose
solemn light I paced on slowly, without company, or any interruption to the
range of my thoughts. About a mile before I reached Oxford, all the bells
tolled in different notes; the clocks of every college answered one another;
and sounded forth (some in a deeper, some a softer tone) that it was eleven at
night. All this was no ill preparation to the life I have led since, among
those old walls, venerable galleries, stone portico's, studious walks, and
solitary scenes of the University. I wanted nothing but a black gown and a
salary, to be as mere a bookworm as any there. I conformed my self to the
College hours, was rolled up in books, lay in one of the most ancient, dusky
parts of the University, and was as dead to the world as any Hermit of the
desert. If any thing was alive or awake in me, it was a little Vanity; such as
even those good men used to entertain, when the Monks of their own Order
extolled their piety and abstraction. For I found my self received with a sort
of respect, which this idle part of mankind, the learned, pay to their own
species; who are as considerable here, as the busy, the gay, and the ambitious
are in your world.

Indeed I was treated in such a manner, that I could not but sometimes ask my
self in my mind, what College I was founder of, or what Library I had built?
Methinks I do very ill to return to the world again, to leave the only place
where I make a figure, and from seeing my self seated with dignity in the most
conspicuous shelves of a library, put my self into the abject posture of lying
at a Lady's feet in St. James's Square.

I will not deny, but that like Alexander, in the midst of my glory I am
wounded, and find my self a mere man. To tell you from whence the dart comes,
is to no purpose, since neither of you will take the tender care to draw it out
of my heart, and suck the poison with your lips.

Here, at my Lord H^'s, I see a creature nearer an angel than a woman, (though a
woman be very near as good as an angel;) I think you have formerly heard me
mention Mrs. T^ as a credit to the Maker of Angels; she is a relation of his
Lordship's, and he gravely proposed her to me for a Wife; being tender of her
Interests, and knowing (what is a shame to Providence) that she is less
indebted to Fortune than I. I told him 'twas what he could never have thought
of, if it had not been his misfortune to be blind, and what I never could think
of, while I had eyes to see both her and my self.

I must not conclude without telling you, that I will do the utmost in the
affair you desire. It would be an inexpressible joy to me if I could serve you,
and I will always do all I can to give my self pleasure. I wish as well for you
as for my self; I am in love with you both much as I am with my self, for I
find my self most so with all three, when I least suspect it.

I am, etc.

LETTER XII.
To Mrs. Arabella Fermor on her Marriage.
YOU are by this time satisfied how much the tenderness of one man of merit is
to be preferred to the addresses of a thousand. And by this time, the Gentleman
you have made choice of is sensible, how great is the joy of having all those
charms and good qualities which have pleased so many, now applied to please one
only. It was but just, that the same Virtues which gave you reputation, should
give you happiness; and I can wish you no greater, than that you may receive it
in as high a degree your self, as so much good humor must infallibly give it
to your husband.

It may be expected perhaps, that one who has the title of Poet, should say
something more polite on this occasion: But I am really more a well-wisher to
your felicity, than a celebrater of your beauty. Besides, you are now a married
woman, and in a way to be a great many better things than a fine Lady; such as
an excellent wife, a faithful friend, a tender parent, and at last as the
consequence of them all, a saint in heaven. You ought now to hear nothing but
that, which was all you ever desired to hear (whatever others may have spoken
to you) I mean Truth: And it is with the utmost that I assure you, no friend
you have can more rejoice in any good that befalls you, is more sincerely
delighted with the prospect of your future happiness, or more unfeignedly
desires a long continuance of it. I beg you will think it but just, that a man
who will certainly be spoken of as your admirer, after he is dead, may have the
happiness to be esteemed while he is living

Your, etc.

LETTER XIII.
THE chief cause I have to repent my leaving the town, is the uncertainty I am
in every day of your Sister's state of health. I really expected by every post
to have heard of her recovery, but on the contrary each letter has been a new
awakening to my apprehensions, and I have ever since suffered alarms upon
alarms on her account. No one can be more sensibly touched at this than I; nor
any danger of any I love could affect me with more uneasiness, (though as I never
had a sister I cannot be quite so good a judge as you, how far humanity would
carry me) I have felt some weaknesses of a tender kind, which I would not be
free from, and I am glad to find my value for people so rightly placed, as to
perceive them on this occasion.

I cannot be so good a christian as to be willing (though no less than God should
order it) to resign my own happiness here for hers in another life. I do more
than wish for her safety, for every wish I make I find immediately changed into
a prayer, and a more fervent one than I had learned to make till now.

May her Life be longer and happier than perhaps her self may desire, that is,
as long and as happy as your self can wish: May her Beauty be as great as
possible, that is, as it always was, or as yours is: but whatever ravages a
merciless distemper may commit, I dare promise her boldly, what few (if any) of
her makers of visits and complements dare to do; she shall have one man as much
her admirer as ever. As for your part, Madam, you have me so more than ever,
since I have been a witness to the generous tenderness you have shown upon this
occasion.

Your, etc.

LETTER XIV.
IT is with infinite satisfaction I am made acquainted that your brother will
at last prove your relation, and has entertained such sentiments as become him
in your concern. I have been prepared for this by degrees, having several times
received from Mrs. (...) that which is one of the greatest pleasures, the
knowledge that others entered into my own sentiments concerning you. I ever was
of opinion that you wanted no more to be vindicated than to be known; and like
Truth, could appear no where but you must conquer. As I have often condol'd
with you in your adversities, so I have a right which but few can pretend to,
of congratulating on the prospect of your better fortunes; and I hope for the
future to have the concern I have felt for you overpaid in your felicities.
Though you modestly say the world has left you, yet I verily believe it is coming
to you again as fast as it can: For to give the world its due, it is always
very fond of Merit when it is past its power to oppose it. Therefore if you
should take it into favor again upon its repentance, and continue in it, you
would be so far from leading what is commonly called an unsettled life, (and
what you with too much unjust severity call a Vagabond Life,) that the wise
could only look upon you as a Prince in a progress, who travels to gain the
affections he has not, or to fix those he already has; which he effectually
does wherever he shows himself. But if you are resolved in revenge to rob the
world of so much example as you may afford it, I believe your design will be
vain; for even in a Monastery your devotions cannot carry you so far toward the
next world as to make This lose the sight of you, but you will be like a Star,
that while it is fixed to Heaven shines over all the Earth.

Wheresoever Providence shall dispose of the most valuable thing I know, I
shall ever follow you with my sincerest wishes, and my best thoughts will be
perpetually waiting upon you, when you never hear of me or them. Your own
guardian Angels cannot be more constant, nor more silent. I beg you will never
cease to think me your friend, that you may not be guilty of that which you
never yet knew to commit, an Injustice. As I have hitherto been so in spite of
the world, so hereafter, if it be possible you should ever be more opposed, and
more deserted, I should only be so much the more

Your faithful, etc.

LETTER XV.
I Can say little to recommend the Letters I shall write to you, but that they
will be the most impartial representations of a free heart, and the truest
copies you ever saw, though of a very mean original. Not a feature will be
softened, or any advantageous light employed to make the ugly thing a little
less hideous: but you shall find it in all respects, most horribly like. You
will do me an injustice if you look upon any thing I shall say from this
instant, as a compliment, either to you or to my self: Whatever I write will be
the real thought of that hour; and I know you will no more expect it of me to
persevere till death in every sentiment or notion I now set down, than you
would imagine a man's face should never change when once his picture was drawn.

The freedom I shall use in this manner of thinking aloud, may indeed prove me
a fool; but it will prove me one of the best sort of fools, the honest ones.
And since what folly we have, will infallibly buoy up at one time or other in
spite of all our art to keep it down; methinks it is almost foolish to take any
pains to conceal it at all, and almost knavish to do it from those that are our
friends. If Momus's project had taken, of having windows in our breasts, I
should be for carrying it further, and making those windows, casements; that
while a man showed his heart to all the world, he might do something more for
his friends, even give it them, and trust it to their handling. I think I love
you as well as King Herod did Herodias (though I never had so much as one dance
with you) and would as freely give you my heart in a dish, as he did another's
head. But since Jupiter will not have it so, I must be content to show my taste
in life, as I do my taste in painting, by loving to have as little drapery as
possible. Not that I think every body naked altogether so fine a sight, as your
self and a few more would be; but because it is good to use people to what they
must be acquainted with; and there will certainly come some day of judgment or
other, to uncover every soul of us. We shall then see that the Prudes of this
world owed all their fine figure only to their being straiter-lac'd than the
rest; and that they are naturally as arrant Squabs as those that went more
loose, nay as those that never girded their lions at all. -- But a particular
reason that may engage you to write your thoughts the more freely to me, is,
that I am confident no one knows you better; for I find, when others express
their thoughts of you, they fall very short of mine, and I know at the same
time theirs are such as you would think sufficiently in your favor.

You may easily imagine how desirous I must be of a correspondence with a
person, who had taught me long ago that it was as possible to esteem at first
sight, as to love: and who has since ruined me for all the conversation of one
sex, and almost all the friendship of the other. I am but too sensible through
your means, that the company of men wants a certain softness to recommend it,
and that of women wants every thing else. How often have I been quietly going
to take possession of that tranquillity and indolence I had so long found in the
country; when one evening of your conversation has spoiled me for a Solitaire!
Books have lost their effect upon me, and I was convinced since I saw you, that
there is one alive wiser than all the Sages: a plague of female wisdom! it
makes a man ten times more uneasy than his own. What is very strange, Virtue
her self, (when you have the dressing her) is too amiable for one's repose. You
might have done a world of good in your time, if you had allowed half the fine
gentlemen who have seen you to have conversed with you; they would have been
strangely Bitt, while they thought only to fall in love with a fair Lady, and
you had bewitched them with Reason and Virtue (two Beauties that the very fops
pretend to no acquaintance with.)

The unhappy distance at which we correspond, removes a great many of those
restrictions and punctilious decorums, that oftentimes in nearer conversation
prejudice truth, to save good breeding. I may now hear of my faults, and you of
your good qualities, without a blush; we converse upon such unfortunate
generous terms, as exclude the regards of fear, shame, or design, in either of
us. And methinks it would be as paltry a part, to impose (even in a single
thought) upon each other in this state of separation, as for Spirits of a
different sphere who have so little intercourse with us, to employ that little
(as some would make us think they do) in putting tricks and delusions upon poor
mortals.

Let me begin then, Madam, by asking you a question, that may enable me to
judge better of my own conduct than most instances of my Life. In what manner
did I behave the last hour I saw you? What degree of concern did I discover
when I felt a misfortune which I hope you will never feel, that of parting from
what one most esteems? for if my parting looked but like that of your common
acquaintance, I am the greatest of all the hypocrites that ever Decency made.

I never since pass by your house but with the same sort of melancholy that we
feel upon seeing the Tomb of a friend, which only serves to put us in mind of
what we have lost. I reflect upon the circumstances of your departure which I
was there a witness of (your behavior in what I may call your last moments)
and I indulge a gloomy kind of pleasure in thinking that those last moments
were given to me. I would fain imagine this was not accidental, but proceeded
from a penetration which I know you have, in finding out the truth of people's
sentiments; and that you were willing, the last man that would have parted from
you, should be that last that did. I really looked upon you just as the friends
of Curtius might have done upon that Hero, at the instant when he was devoting
himself to Glory, and running to be lost out of generosity. I was obliged to
admire your resolution, in as great a degree as I deplored it; and had only to
wish, that heaven would reward so much Virtue as was to be taken from us, with
all the felicities it could enjoy elsewhere!

I am, etc.

LETTER XVI.
YOU will find me more troublesome than ever Brutus did his Evil Genius; I
shall meet you in more places than one, and often refresh your memory before
you arrive at your Philippi. These shadows of me (my letters) will be haunting
you from time to time, and putting you in mind of the man who has really
suffered very much from you, and whom you have robbed of the most valuable of
his enjoyments, your conversation. The advantage of hearing your sentiments by
discovering mine, was what I always thought a great one, and even worth the
risque I generally run of manifesting my own indiscretion. You then rewarded my
trust in you the moment it was given, for you pleased or informed me the minute
you answered. I must now be contented with more slow returns. However it is some
pleasure, that your thoughts upon Paper will be a more lasting possession to
me, and that I shall no longer have cause to complain of a loss I have so often
regretted, that of any thing you said, which I happened to forget. In earnest,
Madam, if I were to write to you as often as I think of you, it must be every
day of my life. I attend you in spirit through all your ways, I follow you through
every stage in books of Travels, and fear for you through whole folio's; you make
me shrink at the past dangers of dead travelers; and if I read of a delightful
prospect, or agreeable place, I hope it yet subsists to please you. I enquire
the roads, the amusements, the company, of every town and country through which
you pass, with as much diligence, as if I were to set out next week to overtake
you. In a word, no one can have you more constantly in mind, not even your
guardian Angel (if you have one) and I am willing to indulge so much Popery, as
to fancy some Being takes care of you, who knows your value better than you do
your self: I am willing to think that heaven never gave so much self-neglect
and resolution to a woman, to occasion her calamity, but am pious enough to
believe those qualities must be intended to conduce to her benefit and her
glory.

Your first short letter only serves to show me you are alive: it puts me in
mind of the first Dove that returned to Noah, and just made him know it had
found no rest abroad.

There is nothing in it that pleases me, but when you tell me you had no
Seasickness. I beg your next may give me all the pleasure it can, that is, tell
me any that you receive. You can make no discoveries that will be half so
valuable to me as those of your own mind: Nothing that regards the States or
Kingdoms you pass through, will engage so much of my curiosity or concern, as
what relates to your self: Your welfare, to say truth, is more at my heart than
that of Christendom.

I am sure I may defend the truth, though perhaps not the virtue, of this
declaration. One is ignorant, or doubtful at best, of the Merits of differing
religions and governments: but private virtues one can be sure of. I therefore
know what particular person has desert enough to merit being happier than
others, but not what Nation deserves to conquer or oppress another. You will
say, I am not Publickspirited; let it be so, I may have too many tendernesses,
particular regards, or narrow views; but at the same time I am certain that
whoever wants these, can never have a Publick-spirit; for (as a friend of mine
says) how is it possible for that man to love twenty thousand people, who never
loved one?

I communicated your letter to Mr. C^ he thinks of you and talks of you as he
ought, I mean as I do, and one always thinks that to be just as it ought. His
health and mine are now so good, that we wish with all our souls you were a
witness of it. We never meet but we lament over you: we pay a kind of weekly
rites to your memory, where we strew flowers of rhetoric, and offer such
libations to your name as it would be profane to call Toasting. The Duke of
B^m is sometimes the High Priest of your praises; and upon the whole, I believe
there are as few Men that are not sorry at your departure, as Women that are;
for you know most of your Sex want good sense, and therefore must want
generosity: You have so much of both, that I am sure you pardon them; for one
cannot but forgive whatever one despises. For my part I hate a great many women
for your sake, and undervalue all the rest. It Is you are to blame, and may God
revenge it upon you, with all those blessings and earthly prosperities which
the Divines tell us are the cause of our Perdition; for if he makes you happy
in this world, I dare trust your own virtue to do it in the other. I am,

Your, etc.


