A TREATISE OF Human Nature: BEING An ATTEMPT to introduce the experimental
Method of Reasoning INTO MORAL SUBJECTS.

Rara temporum felicitas, ubi sentire, quae velis; and quae sentias, dicere
licet.

TACIT. VOL. II.

OF THE PASSIONS.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN NOON, at the White-Hart, near Mercers-Chapel, in
Cheapside.

MDCCXXXIX.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK II. Of the PASSIONS.
PART I. Of pride and humility. SECT. I. DIvision of the subject. SECT. II. Of
pride and humility; their objects and causes. SECT. III. Whence these objects
and causes are derived? SECT. IV. Of the relations of impressions and ideas.
SECT. V. Of the influence of these relations on pride and humility. SECT. VI.
Limitations of this system. SECT. VII. Of vice and virtue. SECT. VIII. Of
beauty and deformity. SECT. IX. Of external advantages and disadvantages. SECT.
X. Of property and riches. SECT. XI. Of the love of fame. SECT. XII. Of the
pride and humility of animals.
PART II. Of love and hatred. SECT. I. Of the objects and causes of love and
hatred. SECT. II. Experiments to confirm this system. SECT. III. Difficulties
solved. SECT. IV. Of the love of relations. SECT. V. Of our esteem for the rich
and powerful. SECT. VI. Of benevolence and anger. SECT. VII. Of compassion.
SECT. VIII. Of malice and envy. SECT. IX. Of the mixture of benevolence and
anger with compassion and malice. SECT. X. Of respect and contempt. SECT. XI.
Of the amorous passion, or love betwixt the sexes. SECT. XII. Of the love and
hatred of animals.
PART III. Of the will and direct passions. SECT. I. Of liberty and necessity.
SECT. II. The same subject continued. SECT. III. Of the influencing motives of
the will. SECT. IV. Of the causes of the violent passions. SECT. V. Of the
effects of custom. SECT. VI. Of the influence of the imagination on the
passions. SECT. VII. Of contiguity and distance in space and time. SECT. VIII.
The same subject continued. SECT. IX. Of the direct passions. SECT. X. Of
curiosity, or the love of truth.

A TREATISE OF Human Nature.
BOOK II. Of the PASSIONS.
PART I. Of Pride and Humility.
SECT. I. Division of the Subject.
AS all the perceptions of the mind may be divided into impressions and ideas,
so the impressions admit of another division into original and secondary. This
division of the impressions is the same with that which Book I. Part I. Sect. 2.
I formerly made use of when I distinguished them into impressions of sensation
and reflection. Original impressions or impressions of sensation are such as
without any antecedent perception arise in the soul, from the constitution of
the body, from the animal spirits, or from the application of objects to the
external organs. Secondary, or reflective impressions are such as proceed from
some of these original ones, either immediately or by the interposition of its
idea. Of the first kind are all the impressions of the senses, and all bodily
pains and pleasures: Of the second are the passions, and other emotions
resembling them.

IT IS certain, that the mind, in its perceptions, must begin somewhere; and
that since the impressions precede their correspondent ideas, there must be
some impressions, which without any introduction make their appearance in the
soul. As these depend upon natural and physical causes, the examination of them
would lead me too far from my present subject, into the sciences of anatomy and
natural philosophy. For this reason I shall here confine myself to those other
impressions, which I have called secondary and reflective, as arising either
from the original impressions, or from their ideas. Bodily pains and pleasures
are the source of many passions, both when felt and considered by the mind; but
arise originally in the soul, or in the body, whichever you please to call it,
without any preceding thought or perception. A fit of the gout produces a long
train of passions, as grief, hope, fear; but is not derived immediately from
any affection or idea.

THE reflective impressions may be divided into two kinds, viz. the calm and
the violent. Of the first kind is the sense of beauty and deformity in action,
composition, and external objects. Of the second are the passions of love and
hatred, grief and joy, pride and humility. This division is far from being
exact. The raptures of poetry and music frequently rise to the greatest height;
while those other impressions, properly called passions, may decay into so soft
an emotion, as to become, in a manner, imperceptible. But as in general the
passions are more violent than the emotions arising from beauty and deformity,
these impressions have been commonly distinguished from each other. The subject
of the human mind being so copious and various, I shall here take advantage of
this vulgar and specious division, that I may proceed with the greater order;
and having said all I thought necessary concerning our ideas, shall now explain
those violent emotions or passions, their nature, origin, causes, and effects.

WHEN we take a survey of the passions, there occurs a division of them into
direct and indirect. By direct passions I understand such as arise immediately
from good or evil, from pain or pleasure. By indirect such as proceed from the
same principles, but by the conjunction of other qualities. This distinction I
cannot at present justify or explain any farther. I can only observe in
general, that under the indirect passions I comprehend pride, humility,
ambition, vanity, love, hatred, envy, pity, malice, generosity, with their
dependants. And under the direct passions, desire, aversion, grief, joy, hope,
fear, despair and security. I shall begin with the former.

SECT. II. Of pride and humility; their objects and causes.
THE passions of PRIDE and HUMILITY being simple and uniform impressions, it is
impossible we can ever, by a multitude of words, give a just definition of
them, or indeed of any of the passions. The utmost we can pretend to is a
description of them, by an enumeration of such circumstances, as attend them:
But as these words, pride and humility, are of general use, and the impressions
they represent the most common of any, every one, of himself, will be able to
form a just idea of them, without any danger of mistake. For which reason, not
to lose time upon preliminaries, I shall immediately enter upon the examination
of these passions.

IT IS evident, that pride and humility, though directly contrary, have yet the
same OBJECT. This object is self, or that succession of related ideas and
impressions, of which we have an intimate memory and consciousness. Here the
view always fixes when we are actuated by either of these passions. According
as our idea of ourself is more or less advantageous, we feel either of those
opposite affections, and are elated by pride, or dejected with humility.
Whatever other objects may be comprehended by the mind, they are always
considered with a view to ourselves; otherwise they would never be able either
to excite these passions, or produce the smallest increase or diminution of
them. When self enters not into the confideration, there is no room either for
pride or humility.

BUT though that connected succession of perceptions, which we call self, be
always the object of these two passions, it is impossible it can be their CAUSE,
or be sufficient alone to excite them. For as these passions are directly
contrary, and have the same object in common; were their object also their
cause; it could never produce any degree of the one passion, but at the same
time it must excite an equal degree of the other; which opposition and
contrariety must destroy both. It Is impossible a man can at the same time be
both proud and humble; and where he has different reasons for these passions,
as frequently happens, the passions either take place alternately; or if they
encounter, the one annihilates the other, as far as its strength goes, and the
remainder only of that, which is superior, continues to operate upon the mind.
But in the present case neither of the passions could ever become superior;
because supposing it to be the view only of ourself, which excited them, that
being perfectly indifferent to either, must produce both in the very same
proportion; or in other words, can produce neither. To excite any passion, and
at the same time raise an equal share of its antagonist, is immediately to undo
what was done, and must leave the mind at last perfectly calm and indifferent.

WE must, therefore, make a distinction betwixt the cause and the object of
these passions; betwixt that idea, which excites them, and that to which they
direct their view, when excited. Pride and humility, being once raised,
immediately turn our attention to ourself, and regard that as their ultimate
and final object; but there is something farther requisite in order to raise
them: Something, which is peculiar to one of the passions, and produces not
both in the very same degree. The first idea, that is presented to the mind, is
that of the cause or productive principle. This excites the passion, connected
with it; and that passion, when excited, turns our view to another idea, which
is that of self. Here then is a passion placed betwixt two ideas, of which the
one produces it, and the other is produced by it. The first idea, therefore,
represents the cause, the second the object of the passion.

TO begin with the causes of pride and humility; we may observe, that their
most obvious and remarkable property is the vast variety of subjects, on which
they may be placed. Every valuable quality of the mind, whether of the
imagination, judgment, memory or disposition; wit, good-sense, learning,
courage, justice, integrity; all these are the causes of pride; and their
opposites of humility. Nor are these passions confined to the mind, but extend
their view to the body likewise. A man may be proud of his beauty, strength,
agility, good mein, address in dancing, riding, fencing, and of his dexterity
in any manual business or manufacture. But this is not all. The passion looking
farther, comprehend whatever objects are in the least allied or related to us.
Our country, family, children, relations, riches, houses, gardens, horses,
dogs, clothes; any of these may become a cause either of pride or of humility.

FROM the consideration of these causes, it appears necessary we should make a
new distinction in the causes of the passion, betwixt that quality, which
operates, and the subject, on which it is placed. A man, for instance, is vain
of a beautiful house, which belongs to him, or which he has himself built and
contrived. Here the object of the passion is himself, and the cause is the
beautiful house: Which cause again is sub-divided into two parts, viz. the
quality, which operates upon the passion, and the subject, in which the quality
inheres. The quality is the beauty, and the subject is the house, considered as
his property or contrivance. Both these parts are essential, nor is the
distinction vain and chimerical. Beauty, considered merely as such, unless
placed upon something related to us, never produces any pride or vanity; and
the strongest relation alone, without beauty, or something else in its place,
has as little influence on that passion. Since, therefore, these two
particulars are easily separated, and there is a necessity for their
conjunction, in order to produce the passion, we ought to consider them as
component parts of the cause; and infix in our minds an exact idea of this
distinction.

SECT. III. Whence these objects and causes are derived.
BEING so far advanced as to observe a difference betwixt the object of the
passions and their cause, and to distinguish in the cause the quality, which
operates on the passions, from the subject, in which it inheres; we now proceed
to examine what determines each of them to be what it is, and assigns such a
particular object, and quality, and subject to these affections. By this means
we shall fully understand the origin of pride and humility.

IT IS evident in the first place, that these passions are determined to have
self for their object, not only by a natural but also by an original property.
No one can doubt but this property is natural from the constancy and steadiness
of its operations. It Is always self, which is the object of pride and humility;
and whenever the passions look beyond, it is still with a view to ourselves, nor
can any person or object otherwise have any influence upon us.

THAT this proceeds from an original quality or primary impulse, will likewise
appear evident, if we consider that it is the distinguishing characteristic of
these passions. Unless nature had given some original qualities to the mind, it
could never have any secondary ones; because in that case it would have no
foundation for action, nor could ever begin to exert itself. Now these
qualities, which we must consider as original, are such as are most inseparable
from the soul, and can be resolved into no other: And such is the quality,
which determines the object of pride and humility.

WE may, perhaps, make it a greater question, whether the causes, that produce
the passion, be as natural as the object, to which it is directed, and whether
all that vast variety proceeds from caprice or from the constitution of the
mind. This doubt we shall soon remove, if we cast our eye upon human nature,
and consider that in all nations and ages, the same objects still give rise to
pride and humility; and that upon the view even of a stranger, we can know
pretty nearly, what will either increase or diminish his passions of this kind.
If there be any variation in this particular, it proceeds from nothing but a
difference in the tempers and complexions of men; and is besides very
inconsiderable. Can we imagine it possible, that while human nature remains the
same, men will ever become entirely indifferent to their power, riches, beauty
or personal merit, and that their pride and vanity will not be affected by
these advantages?

BUT though the causes of pride and humility be plainly natural, we shall find
upon examination, that they are not original, and that it is utterly impossible
they should each of them be adapted to these passions by a particular
provision, and primary constitution of nature. Beside their prodigious number,
many of them are the effects of art, and arise partly from the industry, partly
from the caprice, and partly from the good fortune of men. Industry produces
houses, furniture, clothes. Caprice determines their particular kinds and
qualities. And good fortune frequently contributes to all this, by discovering
the effects that result from the different mixtures and combinations of bodies.
It Is absurd, therefore, to imagine, that each of these was foreseen and
provided for by nature, and that every new production of art, which causes
pride or humility; instead of adapting itself to the passion by partaking of
some general quality, that naturally operates on the mind; is itself the object
of an original principle, which till then lay concealed in the soul, and is
only by accident at last brought to light. Thus the first mechanic, that
invented a fine scritoure, produced pride in him, who became possessed of it, by
principles different from those, which made him proud of handsome chairs and
tables. As this appears evidently ridiculous, we must conclude, that each cause
of pride and humility is not adapted to the passions by a distinct original
quality; but that there are some one or more circumstances common to all of
them, on which their efficacy depends.

BESIDES, we find in the course of nature, that though the effects be many, the
principles, from which they arise, are commonly but few and simple, and that
it is the sign of an unskilful naturalist to have recourse to a different
quality, in order to explain every different operation. How much more must this
be true with regard to the human mind, which being so confined a subject may
justly be thought incapable of containing such a monstrous heap of principles,
as would be necessary to excite the passions of pride and humility, were each
distinct cause adapted to the passion by a distinct set of principles?

HERE, therefore, moral philosophy is in the same condition as natural, with
regard to astronomy before the time of Copernicus. The ancients, though sensible
of that maxim, that nature does nothing in vain, contrived such intricate
systems of the heavens, as seemed inconsistent with true philosophy, and gave
place at last to something more simple and natural. To invent without scruple a
new principle to every new phenomenon, instead of adapting it to the old; to
overload our hypotheses with a variety of this kind; are certain proofs; that
none of these principles is the just one, and that we only desire, by a number
of falsehoods, to cover our ignorance of the truth.

SECT. IV. Of the relations of impressions and ideas.
THUS we have established two truths without any obstacle or difficulty, that
it is from natural principles this variety of causes excite pride and humility,
and that it is not by a different principle each different cause is adapted to
its passion. We shall now proceed to enquire how we may reduce these principles
to a lesser number, and find among the causes something common, on which their
influence depends.

IN order to this we must reflect on certain properties of human nature, which
though they have a mighty influence on every operation both of the understanding
and passions, are not commonly much insisted on by philosophers. The first of
these is the association of ideas, which I have so often observed and
explained. It Is impossible for the mind to fix itself steadily upon one idea
for any considerable time; nor can it by its utmost efforts ever arrive at such
a constancy. But however changeable our thoughts may be, they are not entirely
without rule and method in their changes. The rule, by which they proceed, is
to pass from one object to what is resembling, contiguous to, or produced by
it. When one idea is present to the imagination, any other, united by these
relations, naturally follows it, and enters with more facility by means of that
introduction.

THE second property I shall observe in the human mind is a like association of
impressions. All resembling impressions are connected together, and no sooner
one arises than the rest immediately follow. Grief and disappointment give rise
to anger, anger to envy, envy to malice, and malice to grief again, till the
whole circle be completed. In like manner our temper, when elevated with joy,
naturally throws itself into love, generosity, pity, courage, pride, and the
other resembling affections. It Is difficult for the mind, when actuated by any
passion, to confine itself to that passion alone, without any change or
variation. Human nature is too inconstant to admit of any such regularity.
Changeableness is essential to it. And to what can it so naturally change as to
affections or emotions, which are suitable to the temper, and agree with that
set of passions, which then prevail? It Is evident, then, there is an attraction
or association among impressions, as well as among ideas; though with this
remarkable difference, that ideas are associated by resemblance, contiguity,
and causation; and impressions only by resemblance.

IN the third place, it is observable of these two kinds of association, that
they very much assist and forward each other, and that the transition is more
easily made where they both concur in the same object. Thus a man, who, by any
injury from another, is very much discomposed and ruffled in his temper, is apt
to find a hundred subjects of discontent, impatience, fear, and other uneasy
passions; especially if he can discover these subjects in or near the person,
who was the cause of his first passion. Those principles, which forward the
transition of ideas, here concur with those, which operate on the passions; and
both uniting in one action, bestow on the mind a double impulse. The new
passion, therefore, must arise with so much greater violence, and the
transition to it must be rendered so much more easy and natural.

UPON this occasion I may cite the authority of an elegant writer, who
expresses himself in the following manner. As the fancy delights in every thing
that is great, strange, or beautiful, and is still more pleased the more it
finds of these perfections in the same object, so it is capable of receiving a
new satisfaction by the assistance of another sense. Thus any continued sound,
as the music of birds, or a fall of waters, awakens every moment the mind of
the beholder, and makes him more attentive to the several beauties of the
place, that lie before him. Thus if there arises a fragrancy of smells or
perfumes, they heighten the pleasure of the imagination, and make even the
colors and verdure of the landschape appear more agreeable; for the ideas of
both senses recommend each other, and are pleasanter together than when they
enter the mind separately: As the different colors of a picture, when they are
well disposed, set off one anotehr, and receive an additional beauty from the
advantage of the situation. In this phenomenon we may remark the association
both of impressions and ideas, as well as the mutual assistance they lend each
other.

SECT. V. Of the influence of these relations on pride and humility.
THESE principles being established on unquestionable experience, I begin to
consider how we shall apply them, by revolving over all the causes of pride and
humility, whether these causes be regarded, as the qualities, that operate, or
as the subjects, on which the qualities are placed. In examining these
qualities I immediately find many of them to concur in producing the sensation
of pain and pleasure, independent of those affections, which I here endeavor
to explain. Thus the beauty of our person, of itself, and by its very
appearance, gives pleasure, as well as pride; and its deformity, pain as well
as humility. A magnificent feast delights us, and a sordid one displeases. What
I discover to be true in some instances, I suppose to be so in all; and take it
for granted at present, without any farther proof, that every cause of pride,
by its peculiar qualities, produces a separate pleasure, and of humility a
separate uneasiness.

AGAIN, in considering the subjects, to which these qualities adhere, I make a
new supposition, which also appears probable from many obvious instances, viz.
that these subjects are either parts of ourselves, or something nearly related
to us. Thus the good and bad qualities of our actions and manners constitute
virtue and vice, and determine our personal character, than which nothing
operates more strongly on these passions. In like manner, it is the beauty or
deformity of our person, houses, equipage, or furniture, by which we are
rendered either vain or humble. The same qualities, when transferred to
subjects, which bear us no relation, influence not in the smallest degree
either of these affections.

HAVING thus in a manner supposed two properties of the causes of these
affections, viz. that the qualities produce a separate pain or pleasure, and
that the subjects, on which the qualities are placed, are related to self; I
proceed to examine the passions themselves, in order to find something in them,
correspondent to the supposed properties of their causes. First, I find, that
the peculiar object of pride and humility is determined by an original and
natural instinct, and that it is absolutely impossible, from the primary
constitution of the mind, that these passions should ever look beyond self, or
that individual person, of whose actions and sentiments each of us is
intimately conscious. Here at last the view always rests, when we are actuated
by either of these passions; nor can we, in that situation of mind, ever lose
sight of this object. For this I pretend not to give any reason; but consider
such a peculiar direction of the thought as an original quality.

THE second quality, which I discover in these passions, and which I likewise
consider as an original quality, is their sensations, or the peculiar emotions
they excite in the soul, and which constitute their very being and essence.
Thus pride is a pleasant sensation, and humility a painful; and upon the
removal of the pleasure and pain, there is in reality no pride nor humility. Of
this our very feeling convinces us; and beyond our feeling, it is here in vain
to reason or dispute.

IF I compare, therefore, these two established properties of the passions,
viz. their object, which is self, and their sensation, which is either pleasant
or painful, to the two supposed properties of the causes, viz. their relation
to self, and their tendency to produce a pain or pleasure, independent of the
passion; I immediately find, that taking these suppositions to be just, the
true system breaks in upon me with an irresistible evidence. That cause, which
excites the passion, is related to the object, which nature has attributed to
the passion; the sensation, which the cause separately produces, is related to
the sensation of the passion: From this double relation of ideas and
impressions, the passion is derived. The one idea is easily converted into its
cor-relative; and the one impression into that, which resembles and corresponds
to it: With how much greater facility must this transition be made, where these
movements mutually assist each other, and the mind receives a double impulse
from the relations both of its impressions and ideas?

THAT we may comprehend this the better, we must suppose, that nature has given
to the organs of the human mind, a certain disposition fitted to produce a
peculiar impression or emotion, which we call pride: To this emotion she has
assigned a certain idea, viz. that of self, which it never fails to produce.
This contrivance of nature is easily conceived. We have many instances of such
a situation of affairs. The nerves of the nose and palate are so disposed, as
in certain circumstances to convey such peculiar sensations to the mind: The
sensations of lust and hunger always produce in us the idea of those peculiar
objects, which are suitable to each appetite. These two circumstances are
united in pride. The organs are so disposed as to produce the passion; and the
passion, after its production, naturally produces a certain idea. All this
needs no proof. It Is evident we never should be possessed of that passion, were
there not a disposition of mind proper for it; and it is as evident, that the
passion always turns our view to ourselves, and makes us think of our own
qualities and circumstances.

THIS being fully comprehended, it may now be asked, Whether nature produces
the passion immediately, of herself; or whether she must be assisted by the
cooperation of other causes? For it is observable, that in this particular her
conduct is different in the different passions and sensations. The palate must
be excited by an external object, in order to produce any relish: But hunger
arises internally, without the concurrence of any external object. But however
the case may stand with other passions and impressions, it is certain, that
pride requires the assistance of some foreign object, and that the organs,
which produce it, exert not themselves like the heart and arteries, by an
original internal movement. For first, daily experience convinces us, that
pride requires certain causes to excite it, and languishes when unsupported by
some excellency in the character, in bodily accomplishments, in clothes,
equipage or fortune. Secondly, it is evident pride would be perpetual, if it
arose immediately from nature; since the object is always the same, and there
is no disposition of body peculiar to pride, as there is to thirst and hunger.
Thirdly, Humility is in the very same situation with pride; and therefore,
either must, upon this supposition, be perpetual likewise, or must destroy the
contrary passion from the very first moment; so that none of them could ever
make its appearance. Upon the whole, we may rest satisfied with the foregoing
conclusion, that pride must have a cause, as well as an object, and that the
one has no influence without the other.

THE difficulty, then, is only to discover this cause, and find what it is that
gives the first motion to pride, and sets those organs in action, which are
naturally fitted to produce that emotion. Upon my consulting experience, in
order to resolve this difficulty, I immediately find a hundred different
causes, that produce pride; and upon examining these causes, I suppose, what at
first I perceive to be probable, that all of them concur in two circumstances;
which are, that of themselves they produce an impression, allied to the
passion, and are placed on a subject, allied to the object of the passion. When
I consider after this the nature of relation, and its effects both on the
passions and ideas, I can no longer doubt, upon these suppositions, that it is
the very principle, which gives rise to pride, and bestows motion on those
organs, which being naturally disposed to produce that affection, require only
a first impulse or beginning to their action. Any thing, that gives a pleasant
sensation, and is related to self, excites the passion of pride, which is also
agreeable, and has self for its object.

WHAT I have said of pride is equally true of humility. The sensation of
humility is uneasy, as that of pride is agreeable; for which reason the
separate sensation, arising from the causes, must be reversed, while the
relation to self continues the same. Though pride and humility are directly
contrary in their effects, and in their sensations, they have notwithstanding
the same object; so that it is requisite only to change the relation of
impressions, without making any change upon that of ideas. Accordingly we find,
that a beautiful house, belonging to ourselves, produces pride; and that the
same house, still belonging to ourselves, produces humility, when by any
accident its beauty is changed into deformity, and thereby the sensation of
pleasure, which corresponded to pride, is transformed into pain, which is
related to humility. The double relation between the ideas and impressions
subsists in both cases, and produces an easy transition from the one emotion to
the other.

IN a word, nature has bestowed a kind of attraction on certain impressions and
ideas, by which one of them, upon its appearance, naturally introduces its
correlative. If these two attractions or associations of impressions and ideas
concur on the same object, they mutually assist each other, and the transition
of the affections and of the imagination is made with the greatest ease and
facility. When an idea produces an impression, related to an impression, which
is connected with an idea, related to the first idea, these two impressions
must be in a manner inseparable, nor will the one in any case be unattended
with the other. It Is after this manner, that the particular causes of pride and
humility are determined. The quality, which operates on the passion, produces
separately an impression resembling it; the subject, to which the quality
adheres, is related to self, the object of the passion: No wonder the whole
cause, consisting of a quality and of a subject, does so unavoidably give rise
to the passion.

TO illustrate this hypothesis, we may compare it to that, by which I have
already explained the belief attending the judgments, which we form from
causation. I have observed, that in all judgments of this kind, there is always
a present impression, and a related idea; and that the present impression gives
a vivacity to the fancy, and the relation conveys this vivacity, by an easy
transition, to the related idea. Without the present impression, the attention
is not fixed, nor the spirits excited. Without the relation, this attention
rests on its first object, and has no farther consequence. There is evidently a
great analogy betwixt that hypothesis, and our present one of an impression and
idea, that transfuse themselves into another impression and idea by means of
their double relation: Which analogy must be allowed to be no despicable proof
of both hypotheses.

SECT. VI. Limitations of this system.
BUT before we proceed farther in this subject, and examine particularly all
the causes of pride and humility, 'twill be proper to make some limitations to
the general system, that all agreeable objects, related to ourselves, by an
association of ideas and of impressions, produce pride, and disagreeable ones,
humility: And these limitations are derived from the very nature of the subject.

I. SUPPOSE an agreeable object to acquire a relation to self, the first
passion, that appears on this occasion, is joy; and this passion discovers
itself upon a slighter relation than pride and vainglory. We may feel joy upon
being present at a feast, where our senses are regaled with delicacies of every
kind: But it is only the master of the feast, who, beside the same joy, has the
additional passion of self-applause and vanity. It Is true, men sometimes boast
of a great entertainment, at which they have only been present; and by so small
a relation convert their pleasure into pride: But however, this must in general
be owned, that joy arises from a more inconsiderable relation than vanity, and
that many things, which are too foreign to produce pride, are yet able to give
us a delight and pleasure. The reason of the difference may be explained thus.
A relation is requisite to joy, in order to approach the object to us, and make
it give us any satisfaction. But beside this, which is common to both passions,
it is requisite to pride, in order to produce a transition from one passion to
another, and convert the satisfaction into vanity. As it has a double task to
perform, it must be endowed with double force and energy. To which we may add,
that where agreeable objects bear not a very close relation to ourselves, they
commonly do to some other person; and this latter relation not only excels; but
even diminishes, and sometimes destroys the former, as we shall see afterward
Part II. Sect. 4.
.

HERE then is the first limitation, we must make to our general position, that
every thing related to us, which produces pleasure or pain, produces likewise
pride or humility. There is not only a relation required, but a close one, and
a closer than is required to joy.

II. THE second limitation is, that the agreeable or disagreeable object be not
only closely related, but also peculiar to ourselves, or at least common to us
with a few persons. It Is a quality observable in human nature, and which we
shall endeavor to explain afterward, that every thing, which is often
presented, and to which we have been long accustomed, loses its value in our
eyes, and is in a little time despised and neglected. We likewise judge of
objects more from comparison than from their real and intrinsic merit; and
where we cannot by some contrast enhance their value, we are apt to overlook
even what is essentially good in them. These qualities of the mind have an
effect upon joy as well as pride; and it is remarkable, that goods, which are
common to all mankind, and have become familiar to us by custom, give us little
satisfaction; though perhaps of a more excellent kind, than those on which, for
their singularity, we set a much higher value. But though this circumstance
operates on both these passions, it has a much greater influence on vanity. We
are rejoiced for many goods, which, on account of their frequency, give us on
pride. Health, when it returns after a long absence, affords us a very sensible
satisfaction; but is seldom regarded as a subject of vanity, because it is
shared with such vast numbers.

THE reason, why pride is so much more delicate in this particular than joy, I
take to be, as follows. In order to excite pride, there are always two objects
we must contemplate, viz. the cause or that object which produces pleasure; and
self, which is the real object of the passion. But joy has only one object
necessary to its production, viz. that which gives pleasure; and though it be
requisite, that this bear some relation to self, yet that is only requisite in
order to render it agreeable; nor is self, properly speaking, the object of
this passion. Since, therefore, pride has in a manner two objects, to which it
directs our view; it follows, that where neither of them have any singularity,
the passion must be more weakened upon that account, than a passion, which has
only one object. Upon comparing ourselves with others, as we are every moment
apt to do, we find we are not in the least distinguished; and upon comparing
the object we possess, we discover still the same unlucky circumstance. By two
comparisons so disadvantageous the passion must be entirely destroyed.

III. THE third limitation is, that the pleasant or painful object be very
discernible and obvious, and that not only to ourselves, but to others also.
This circumstance, like the two foregoing, has an effect upon joy, as well as
pride. We fancy ourselves more happy, as well as more virtuous or beautiful,
when we appear so to others; but are still more ostentacious of our virtues
than of our pleasures. This proceeds from causes, which I shall endeavor to
explain afterward.

IV. THE fourth limitation is derived from the inconstancy of the cause of
these passions, and from the short duration of its connection with ourselves.
What is casual and inconstant gives but little joy, and less pride. We are not
much satisfied with the thing itself; and are still less apt to feel any new
degrees of self-satisfaction upon its account. We foresee and anticipate its
change by the imagination; which makes us little satisfied with the thing: We
compare it to ourselves, whose existence is more durable; by which means its
inconstancy appears still greater. It seems ridiculous to infer an excellency
in ourselves from an object, which is of so much shorter duration, and attends
us during so small a part of our existence. 'Twill be easy to comprehend the
reason, why this cause operates not with the same force in joy as in pride;
since the idea of self is not so essential to the former passion as to the
latter.

V. I MAY add as a fifth limitation, or rather enlargement of this system, that
general rules have a great influence upon pride and humility, as well as on all
the other passions. Hence we form a notion of different ranks of men, suitable
to the power or riches they are possessed of; and this notion we change not upon
account of any peculiarities of the health or temper of the persons, which may
deprive them of all enjoyment in their possessions. This may be accounted for
from the same principles, that explained the influence of general rules on the
understanding. Custom readily carries us beyond the just bounds in our
passions, as well as in our reasonings.

IT may not be amiss to observe on this occasion, that the influence of general
rules and maxims on the passions very much contributes to facilitate the
effects of all the principles, which we shall explain in the progress of this
treatise. For it is evident, that if a person full-grown, and of the same nature
with ourselves, were on a sudden transported into our world, he would be very
much embarrass'd with every object, and would not readily find what degree of
love or hatred, pride or humility, or any other passion he ought to attribute
to it. The passions are often varied by very inconsiderable principles; and
these do not always play with a perfect regularity, especially on the first
trial. But as custom and practice have brought to light all these principles,
and have settled the just value of every thing; this must certainly contribute
to the easy production of the passions, and guide us, by means of general
established maxims, in the proportions we ought to observe in preferring one
object to another. This remark may, perhaps, serve to obviate difficulties,
that may arise concerning some causes, which I shall hereafter ascribe to
particular passions, and which may be esteemed too refined to operate so
universally and certainly, as they are found to do.

I SHALL close this subject with a reflection derived from these five
limitations. This reflection is, that the persons, who are proudest, and who in
the eye of the world have most reason for their pride, are not always the
happiest; nor the most humble always the most miserable, as may at first sight
be imagined from this system. An evil may be real, though its cause has no
relation to us: It may be real, without being peculiar: It may be real, without
showing itself to others: It may be real, without being constant: And it may be
real, without falling under the general rules. Such evils as these will not
fail to render us miserable, though they have little tendency to diminish pride:
And perhaps the most real and the most solid evils of life will be found of
this nature.

SECT. VII. Of vice and virtue.
TAKING these limitations along with us, let us proceed to examine the causes
of pride and humility; and see, whether in every case we can discover the
double relations, by which they operate on the passions. If we find that all
these causes are related to self, and produce a pleasure or uneasiness separate
from the passion, there will remain no farther scruple with regard to the
present system. We shall principally endeavor to prove the latter point; the
former being in a manner self-evident.

TO begin with VICE and VIRTUE, which are the most obvious causes of these
passions; 'twou'd be entirely foreign to my present purpose to enter upon the
controversy, which of late years has so much excited the curiosity of the
public, whether these moral distinctions be founded on natural and original
principles, or arise from interest and education. The examination of this I
reserve for the following book; and in the mean time shall endeavor to show,
that my system maintains its ground upon either of these hypotheses; which will
be a strong proof of its solidity.

FOR granting that morality had no foundation in nature, it must still be
allowed, that vice and virtue, either from self-interest or the prejudices of
education, produce in us a real pain and pleasure; and this we may observe to
be strenuously asserted by the defenders of that hypothesis. Every passion,
habit, or turn of character (say they) which has a tendency to our advantage or
prejudice, gives a delight or uneasiness; and it is from thence the approbation
or dis-approbation arises. We easily gain from the liberality of others, but
are always in danger of losing by their avarice: Courage defends us, but
cowardice lays us open to every attack: Justice is the support of society, but
injustice, unless checked, would quickly prove its ruin: Humility exalts; but
pride mortifies us. For these reasons the former qualities are esteemed
virtues, and the latter regarded as vices. Now since it is granted there is a
delight or uneasiness still attending merit or demerit of every kind, this is
all that is requisite for my purpose.

BUT I go farther, and observe, that this moral hypothesis and my present
system not only agree together, but also that, allowing the former to be just,
it is an absolute and invincible proof of the latter. For if all morality be
founded on the pain or pleasure, which arises from the prospect of any loss or
advantage, that may result from our own characters, or from those of others,
all the effects of morality must be derived from the same pain or pleasure, and
among the rest, the passions of pride and humility. The very essence of virtue,
according to this hypothesis, is to produce pleasure, and that of vice to give
pain. The virtue and vice must be part of our character in order to excite
pride or humility. What farther proof can we desire for the double relation of
impressions and ideas?

THE same unquestionable argument may be derived from the opinion of those, who
maintain that morality is something real, essential, and founded on nature. The
most probable hypothesis, which has been advanced to explain the distinction
betwixt vice and virtue, and the origin of moral rights and obligations, is,
that from a primary constitution of nature certain characters and passions, by
the very view and contemplation, produce a pain, and others in like manner
excite a pleasure. The uneasiness and satisfaction are not only inseparable
from vice and virtue, but constitute their very nature and essence. To approve
of a character is to feel an original delight upon its appearance. To
disapprove of it is to be sensible of an uneasiness. The pain and pleasure,
therefore, being the primary causes of vice and virtue, must also be the causes
of all their effects, and consequently of pride and humility, which are the
unavoidable attendants of that distinction.

BUT supposing this hypothesis of moral philosophy should be allowed to be
false, it is still evident, that pain and pleasure, if not the causes of vice
and virtue, are at least inseparable from them. A generous and noble character
affords a satisfaction even in the survey; and when presented to us, though only
in a poem or fable, never fails to charm and delight us. On the other hand
cruelty and treachery displease from their very nature; nor is it possible ever
to reconcile us to these qualities, either in ourselves or others. Thus one
hypothesis of morality is an undeniable proof of the foregoing system, and the
other at worst agrees with it.

BUT pride and humility arise not from these qualities alone of the mind,
which, according to the vulgar systems of ethics, have been comprehended as
parts of moral duty, but from any other that has a connection with pleasure and
uneasiness. Nothing flatters our vanity more than the talent of pleasing by our
wit, good humor, or any other accomplishment; and nothing gives us a more
sensible mortification than a disappointment in any attempt of that nature. No
one has ever been able to tell what wit is, and to show why such a system of
thought must be received under that denomination, and such another rejected.
It Is only by taste we can decide concerning it, nor are we possessed of any other
standard, upon which we can form a judgment of this kind. Now what is this
taste, from which true and false wit in a manner receive their being, and
without which no thought can have a title to either of these denominations?
It Is plainly nothing but a sensation of pleasure from true wit, and of
uneasiness from false, without our being able to tell the reasons of that
pleasure or uneasiness. The power of bestowing these opposite sensations is,
therefore, the very essence of true and false wit; and consequently the cause
of that pride or humility, which arises from them.

THERE may, perhaps, be some, who being accustomed to the style of the schools
and pulpit, and having never considered human nature in any other light, than
that in which they place it, may here be surpised to hear me talk of virtue as
exciting pride, which they look upon as a vice; and of vice as producing
humility, which they have been taught to consider as a virtue. But not to
dispute about words, I observe, that by pride I understand that agreeable
impression, which arises in the mind, when the view either of our virtue,
beauty, riches or power makes us satisfied with ourselves: And that by humility
I mean the opposite impression. It Is evident the former impression is not
always vicious, nor the latter virtuous. The most rigid morality allows us to
receive a pleasure from reflecting on a generous action; and it is by none
esteemed a virtue to feel any fruitless remorses upon the thoughts of past
villiany and baseness. Let us, therefore, examine these impressions, considered
in themselves; and enquire into their causes, whether placed on the mind or
body, without troubling ourselves at present with that merit or blame, which
may attend them.

SECT. VIII. Of beauty and deformity.
WHETHER we consider the body as a part of ourselves, or assent to those
philosophers, who regard it as something external, it must still be allowed to
be near enough connected with us to form one of these double relations, which I
have asserted to be necessary to the causes of pride and humility. Wherever,
therefore, we can find the other relation of impressions to join to this of
ideas, we may expect with assurance either of these passions, according as the
impression is pleasant or uneasy. But beauty of all kinds gives us a peculiar
delight and satisfaction; as deformity produces pain, upon whatever subject it
may be placed, and whether surveyed in an animate or inanimate object. If the
beauty or deformity, therefore, be placed upon our own bodies, this pleasure or
uneasiness must be converted into pride or humility, as having in this case all
the circumstances requisite to produce a perfect transition of impressions and
ideas. These opposite sensations are related to the opposite passions. The
beauty or deformity is closely related to self, the object of both these
passions. No wonder, then our own beauty becomes an object of pride, and
deformity of humility.

BUT this effect of personal and bodily qualities is not only a proof of the
present system, by showing that the passions arise not in this case without all
the circumstances I have required, but may be employed as a stronger and more
convincing argument. If we consider all the hypotheses, which have been formed
either by philosophy or common reason, to explain the difference betwixt beauty
and deformity, we shall find that all of them resolve into this, that beauty is
such an order and construction of parts, as either by the primary constitution
of our nature, by custom, or by caprice, is fitted to give a pleasure and
satisfaction to the soul. This is the distinguishing character of beauty, and
forms all the difference betwixt it and deformity, whose natural tendency is to
produce uneasiness. Pleasure and pain, therefore, are not only necessary
attendants of beauty and deformity, but constitute their very essence. And
indeed, if we consider, that a great part of the beauty, which we admire either
in animals or in other objects, is derived from the idea of convenience and
utility, we shall make no scruple to assent to this opinion. That shape, which
produces strength, is beautiful in one animal; and that which is a sign of
agility in another. The order and convenience of a palace are no less essential
to its beauty, than its mere figure and appearance. In like manner the rules of
architecture require, that the top of a pillar should be more slender than its
base, and that because such a figure conveys to us the idea of security, which
is pleasant; whereas the contrary form gives us the apprehension of danger,
which is uneasy. From innumerable instances of this kind, as well as from
considering that beauty like wit, cannot be defined, but is discerned only by a
taste or sensation, we may conclude, that beauty is nothing but a form, which
produces pleasure, as deformity is a structure of parts, which conveys pain;
and since the power of producing pain and pleasure make in this manner the
essence of beauty and deformity, all the effects of these qualities must be
derived from the sensation; and among the rest pride and humility, which of all
their effects are the most common and remarkable.

THIS argument I esteem just and decisive; but in order to give greater
authority to the present reasoning, let us suppose it false for a moment, and
see what will follow. It Is certain, then, that if the power of producing
pleasure and pain forms not the essence of beauty and deformity, the sensations
are at least inseparable from the qualities, and it is even difficult to
consider them apart. Now there is nothing common to natural and moral beauty,
(both of which are the causes of pride) but this power of producing pleasure;
and as a common effect supposes always a common cause, it is plain the pleasure
must in both cases be the real and influencing cause of the passion. Again;
there is nothing originally different betwixt the beauty of our bodies and the
beauty of external and foreign objects, but that the one has a near relation to
ourselves, which is wanting in the other. This original difference, therefore,
must be the cause of all their other differences, and among the rest, of their
different influence upon the passion of pride, which is excited by the beauty
of our person, but is not affected in the least by that of foreign and external
objects. Placing, then, these two conclusions together, we find they compose
the preceding system betwixt them, viz. that pleasure, as a related or
resembling impression, when placed on a related object, by a natural
transition, produces pride; and its contrary, humility. This system, then,
seems already sufficiently confirmed by experience; though we have not yet
exhausted all our arguments.

IT IS not the beauty of the body alone that produces pride, but also its
strength and force. Strength is a kind of power; and therefore the desire to
excel in strength is to be considered as an inferior species of ambition. For
this reason the present phenomenon will be sufficiently accounted for, in
explaining that passion.

CONCERNING all other bodily accomplishments we may observe in general, that
whatever in ourselves is either useful, beautiful, or surprising, is an object
of pride; and it is contrary, of humility. Now it is obvious, that every thing
useful, beautiful or surprising, agrees in producing a separate pleasure, and
agrees in nothing else. The pleasure, therefore, with the relation to self must
be the cause of the passion.

THOUGH it should be questioned, whether beauty be not something real, and
different from the power of producing pleasure, it can never be disputed, that
as surprise is nothing but a pleasure arising from novelty, it is not, properly
speaking, a quality in any object, but merely a passion or impression in the
soul. It must, therefore, be from that impression, that pride by a natural
transition arises. And it arises so naturally, that there is nothing in us or
belonging to us, which produces surprise, that does not at the same time excite
that other passion. Thus we are vain of the surprising adventures we have met
with, the escapes we have made, and dangers we have been exposed to. Hence the
origin of vulgar lying; where men without any interest, and merely out of
vanity, heap up a number of extraordinary events, which are either the fictions
of their brain, or if true, have at least no connection with themselves. Their
fruitful invention supplies them with a variety of adventures; and and where
that talent is wanting, they appropriate such as belong to others, in order to
satisfy their vanity.

IN this phenomenon are contained two curious experiments, which if we compare
them together, according to the known rules, by which we judge of cause and
effect in anatomy, natural philosophy, and other sciences, will be an
undeniable argument for that influence of the double relations abovementioned.
By one of these experiments we find, that an object produces pride merely by
the interposition of pleasure; and that because the quality, by which it
produces pride, is in reality nothing but the power of producing pleasure. By
the other experiment we find, that the pleasure produces the pride by a
transition along related ideas; because when we cut off that relation the
passion is immediately destroyed. A surprising adventure, in which we have been
ourselves engaged, is related to us, and by that means produces pride: But the
adventures of others, though they may cause pleasure, yet for want of this
relation of ideas, never excite that passion. What farther proof can be desired
for the present system?

THERE is only one objection to this system with regard to our body; which is,
that though nothing be more agreeable than health, and more painful than
sickness, yet commonly men are neither proud of the one, nor mortified with the
other. This will easily be accounted for, if we consider the second and fourth
limitations, proposed to our general system. It was observed, that no object
ever produces pride or humility, if it has not something peculiar to ourself;
as also, that every cause of that passion must be in some measure constant, and
hold some proportion to the duration of ourself, which is its object. Now as
health and sickness vary incessantly to all men, and there is none, who is
solely or certainly fixed in either, these accidental blessings and calamities
are in a manner separated from us, and are never considered as connected with
our being and existence. And that this account is just appears hence, that
wherever a malady of any kind is so rooted in our constitution, that we no
longer entertain any hopes of recovery, from that moment it becomes an object
of humility; as is evident in old men, whom nothing mortifies more than the
consideration of their age and infirmities. They endeavor, as long as
possible, to conceal their blindness and deafness, their rheums and gouts; nor
do they ever confess them without reluctance and uneasiness. And though young men
are not ashamed of every headache or cold they fall into, yet no topic is so
proper to mortify human pride, and make us entertain a mean opinion of our
nature, than this, that we are every moment of our lives subject to such
infirmities. This sufficiently proves that bodily pain and sickness are in
themselves proper causes of humility; though the custom of estimating every thing
by comparison more than by its intrinsic worth and value, makes us overlook
these calamities, which we find to be incident to every one, and causes us to
form an idea of our merit and character independent of them.

WE are ashamed of such maladies as affect others, and are either dangerous or
disagreeable to them. Of the epilepsy; because it gives a horror to every one
present: Of the itch; because it is infectious: Of the king's evil; because it
commonly goes to posterity. Men always consider the sentiments of others in
their judgment of themselves. This has evidently appeared in some of the
foregoing reasonings; and will appear still more evidently, and be more fully
explained afterward.

SECT. IX. Of external advantages and disadvantages.
BUT though pride and humility have the qualities of our mind and body, that is
self, for their natural and more immediate causes, we find by experience, that
there are many other objects, which produce these affections, and that the
primary one is, in some measure, obscured and lost by the multiplicity of
foreign and extrinsic. We found a vanity upon houses, gardens, equipages, as
well as upon personal merit and accomplishments; and though these external
advantages be in themselves widely distant from thought or a person, yet they
considerably influence even a passion, which is directed to that as its
ultimate object. This happens when external objects acquire any particular
relation to ourselves, and are associated or connected with us. A beautiful
fish in the ocean, an animal in a desert, and indeed any thing that neither
belongs, nor is related to us, has no manner of influence on our vanity,
whatever extraordinary qualities it may be endowed with, and whatever degree of
surprise and admiration it may naturally occasion. It must be some way
associated with us in order to touch our pride. Its idea must hang in a manner,
upon that of ourselves; and the transition from the one to the other must be
easy and natural.

BUT here it is remarkable, that though the relation of resemblance operates upon
the mind in the same manner as contiguity and causation, in conveying us from
one idea to another, yet it is seldom a foundation either of pride or of
humility. If we resemble a person in any of the valuable parts of his
character, we must, in some degree, possess the quality, in which we resemble
him; and this quality we always choose to survey directly in ourselves rather
than by reflection in another person, when we would found upon it any degree of
vanity. So that though a likeness may occasionally produce that passion by
suggesting a more advantageous idea of ourselves, it is there the view fixes at
last, and the passion finds its ultimate and final cause.

THERE are instances, indeed, wherein men show a vanity in resembling a great
man in his countenance, shape, air, or other minute circumstances, that
contribute not in any degree to his reputation; but it must be confessed, that
this extends not very far, nor is of any considerable moment in these
affections. For this I assign the following reason. We can never have a vanity
of resembling in trifles any person, unless he be possessed of very shining
qualities, which give us a respect and veneration for him. These qualities,
then, are, properly speaking, the causes of our vanity, by means of their
relation to ourselves. Now after what manner are they related to ourselves?
They are parts of the person we value, and consequently connected with these
trifles; which are also supposed to be parts of him. These trifles are
connected with the resembling qualities in us; and these qualities in us, being
parts, are connected with the whole; and by that means form a chain of several
links betwixt ourselves and the shining qualities of the person we resemble.
But besides that this multitude of relations must weaken the connection; it is
evident the mind, in passing from the shining qualities to the trivial ones,
must by that contrast the better perceive the minuteness of the latter, and be
in some measure ashamed of the comparison and resemblance.

THE relation, therefore, of contiguity, or that of causation, betwixt the
cause and object of pride and humility, is alone requisite to give rise to
these passions; and these relations are nothing else but qualities, by which
the imagination is conveyed from one idea to another. Now let us consider what
effect these can possibly have upon the mind, and by what means they become so
requisite to the production of the passions. It Is evident, that the association
of ideas operates in so silent and imperceptible a manner, that we are scarce
sensible of it, and discover it more by its effects than by any immediate
feeling or perception. It produces no emotion, and gives rise to no new
impression of any kind, but only modifies those ideas, of which the mind was
formerly possessed, and which it could recall upon occasion. From this
reasoning, as well as from undoubted experience, we may conclude, that an
association of ideas, however necessary, is not alone sufficient to give rise
to any passion.

IT IS evident, then, that when the mind feels the passion either of pride or
humility upon the appearance of a related object, there is, beside the relation
or transition of thought, an emotion or original impression produced by some
other principle. The question is, whether the emotion first produced be the
passion itself, or some other impression related to it. This question we cannot
be long in deciding. For besides all the other arguments, with which this
subject abounds, it must evidently appear, that the relation of ideas, which
experience shows to be so requisite a circumstance to the production of the
passion, would be entirely superfluous, were it not to second a relation of
affections, and facilitate the transition from one impression to another. If
nature produced immediately the passion of pride or humility, it would be
completed in itself, and would require no farther addition or increase from
any other affection. But supposing the first emotion to be only related to
pride or humility, it is easily conceived to what purpose the relation of
objects may serve, and how the two different associations, of impressions and
ideas, by uniting their forces, may assist each other's operation. This is not
only easily conceived, but I will venture to affirm it is the only manner, in
which we can conceive this subject. An easy transition of ideas, which, of
itself, causes no emotion, can never be necessary, or even useful to the
passions, but by forwarding the transition betwixt some related impressions.
Not to mention, that the same object causes a greater or smaller degree of
pride, not only in proportion to the increase or decrease of its qualities, but
also to the distance or nearness of the relalation; which is a clear argument
for the transition of affections along the relation of ideas; since every
change in the relation produces a proportionable change in the passion. Thus
one part of the preceding system, concerning the relations of ideas is a
sufficient proof of the other, concerning that of impressions; and is itself so
evidently founded on experience, that 'twou'd be lost time to endeavor farther
to prove it.

THIS will appear still more evidently in particular instances. Men are vain of
the beauty of their country, of their county, of their parish. Here the idea of
beauty plainly produces a pleasure. This pleasure is related to pride. The
object or cause of this pleasure is, by the supposition, related to self, or
the object of pride. By this double relation of impressions and ideas, a
transition is made from the one impression to the other.

MEN are also vain of the temperature of the climate, in which they were born;
of the fertility of their native soil; of the goodness of the wines, fruits or
victuals, produced by it; of the softness or force of their language; with
other particulars of that kind. These objects have plainly a reference to the
pleasures of the senses, and are originally considered as agreeable to the
feeling, taste or hearing. How is it possible they could ever become objects of
pride, except by means of that transition above-explain'd?

THERE are some, that discover a vanity of an opposite kind, and affect to
depreciate their own country, in comparison of those, to which they have
traveled. These persons find, when they are at home, and surrounded with their
countrymen, that the strong relation betwixt them and their own nation is
shared with so many, that it is in a manner lost to them; whereas their distant
relation to a foreign country, which is formed by their having seen it and
lived in it, is augmented by their considering how few there are who have done
the same. For this reason they always admire the beauty, utility and rarity of
what is abroad, above what is at home.

SINCE we can be vain of a country, climate or any inanimate object, which
bears a relation to us, it is no wonder we are vain of the qualities of those,
who are connected with us by blood or friendship. Accordingly we find, that the
very same qualities, which in ourselves produce pride, produce also in a lesser
degree the same affection, when discovered in persons related to us. The
beauty, address, merit, credit and honors of their kindred are carefully
displayed by the proud, as some of their most considerable sources of their
vanity.

AS we are proud of riches in ourselves, so to satisfy our vanity we desire
that every one, who has any connection with us, should likewise be possessed of
them, and are ashamed of any one, that is mean or poor, among our friends and
relations. For this reason we remove the poor as far from us as possible; and
as we cannot prevent poverty in some distant collaterals, and our forefathers
are taken to be our nearest relations; upon this account every one affects to
be of a good family, and to be descended from a long succession of rich and
honorable ancestors.

I HAVE frequently observed, that those, who boast of the antiquity of their
families, are glad when they can join this circumstance, that their ancestors
for many generations have been uninterrupted proprietors of the same portion of
land, and that their family has never changed its possessions, or been
transplanted into any other county or province. I have also observed, that it is
an additional subject of vanity, when they can boast, that these possessions
have been transmitted through a descent composed entirely of males, and that the
honors and fortune have never past through any female. Let us endeavor to
explain these phenomenon by the foregoing system.

IT IS evident, that when any one boasts of the antiquity of his family, the
subjects of his vanity are not merely the extent of time and number of
ancestors, but also their riches and credit, which are supposed to reflect a
luster on himself on account of his relation to them. He first considers these
objects; is affected by them in an agreeable manner; and then returning back to
himself, through the relation of parent and child, is elevated with the passion
of pride, by means of the double relation of impressions and ideas. Since
therefore the passion depends on these relations, whatever strengthens any of
the relations must also increase the passion, and whatever weakens the
relations must diminish the passion. Now it is certain the identity of the
possession strengthens the relation of ideas arising from blood and kindred,
and conveys the fancy with greater facility from one generation to another,
from the remotest ancestors to their posterity, who are both their heirs and
their descendants. By this facility the impression is transmitted more entire,
and excites a greater degree of pride and vanity.

THE case is the same with the transmission of the honors and fortune through a
succession of males without their passing through any female. It Is a quality of
human nature, which we shall consider Part II. Sect. 2.
afterward, that the imagination naturally turns to whatever is important and
considerable; and where two objects are presented to it, a small and a great
one, usually leaves the former, and dwells entirely upon the latter. As in the
society of marriage, the male sex has the advantage above the female, the
husband first engages our attention; and whether we consider him directly, or
reach him by passing through related objects, the thought both rests upon him
with greater satisfaction, and arrives at him with greater facility than his
consort. It Is easy to see, that this property must strengthen the child's
relation to the father, and weaken that to the mother. For as all relations are
nothing but a propensity to pass from one idea to another, whatever strengthens
the propensity strengthens the relation; and as we have a stronger propensity
to pass from the idea of the children to that of the father, than from the same
idea to that of the mother, we ought to regard the former relation as the
closer and more considerable. This is the reason why children commonly bear
their father's name, and are esteemed to be of nobler or baser birth, according
to his family. And though the mother should be possessed of a superior spirit and
genius to the father, as often happens, the general rule prevails,
notwithstanding the exception, according to the doctrine above-explain'd. Nay
even when a superiority of any kind is so great, or when any other reasons have
such an effect, as to make the children rather represent the mother's family
than the father's, the general rule still retains such an efficacy that it
weakens the relation, and makes a kind of break in the line of ancestors. The
imagination runs not along them with facility, nor is able to transfer the
honor and credit of the ancestors to their posterity of the same name and
family so readily, as when the transition is conformable to the general rules,
and passes from father to son, or from brother to brother.

SECT. X. Of property and riches.
BUT the relation, which is esteemed the closest, and which of all others
produces most commonly the passion of pride, is that of property. This relation
'twill be impossible for me fully to explain before I come to treat of justice
and the other moral virtues. It Is sufficient to observe on this occasion, that
property may be defined, such a relation betwixt a person and an object as
permits him, but forbids any other, the free use and possession of it, without
violating the laws of justice and moral equity. If justice, therefore, be a
virtue, which has a natural and original influence on the human mind, property
may be looked upon as a particular species of causation; whether we consider
the liberty it gives the proprietor to operate as he please upon the object, or
the advantages, which he reaps from it. It Is the same case, if justice,
according to the system of certain philosophers, should be esteemed an
artificial and not a natural virtue. For then honor, and custom, and civil
laws supply the place of natural conscience, and produce, in some degree, the
same effects. This in the mean time is certain, that the mention of the
property naturally carries our thought to the proprietor, and of the proprietor
to the property; which being a proof of a perfect relation of ideas is all that
is requisite to our present purpose. A relation of ideas, joined to that of
impressions, always produces a transition of affections; and therefore,
whenever any pleasure or pain arises from an object, connected with us by
property, we may be certain, that either pride or humility must arise from this
conjunction of relations; if the foregoing system be solid and satisfactory.
And whether it be so or not, we may soon satisfy ourselves by the most cursory
view of human life.

EVERY thing belonging to a vain man is the best that is any where to be found.
His houses, equipage, furniture, clothes, horses, hounds, excel all others in
his conceit; and it is easy to observe, that from the least advantage in any of
these, he draws a new subject of pride and vanity. His wine, if you will believe
him, has a finer flavor than any other; his cookery is more exquisite; his
table more orderly; his servants more expert; the air, in which he lives, more
healthful; the soil he cultivates more fertile; his fruits ripen earlier and to
greater perfection: Such a thing is remarkable for its novelty; such another
for its antiquity: This is the workmanship of a famous artist; that belonged
once to such a prince or great man: All objects, in a word, that are useful,
beautiful ot surprising, or are related to such, may, by means of property,
give rise to this passion. These agree in giving pleasure, and agree in nothing
else. This alone is common to them; and therefore must be the quality that
produces the passion, which is their common effect. As every new instance is a
new argument, and as the instances are here without number, I may venture to
affirm, that scarce any system was ever so fully proved by experience, as that
which I have here advanced.

IF the property of any thing, that gives pleasure either by its utility,
beauty or novelty, produces also pride by a double relation of impressions and
ideas; we need not be surpised, that the power of acquiring this property,
should have the same effect. Now riches are to be considered as the power of
acquiring the property of what pleases; and it is only in this view they have
any influence on the passions. Paper will, on many occasions, be considered as
riches, and that because it may convey the power of acquiring money: And money
is not riches, as it is a metal endowed with certain qualities of solidity,
weight and fusibility; but only as it has a relation to the pleasures and
conveniences of life. Taking then this for granted, which is in itself so
evident, we may draw from it one of the strongest arguments I have yet employed
to prove the influence of the double relations on pride and humility.

IT has been observed in treating of the understanding, that the distinction,
which we sometimes make betwixt a power and the exercise of it, is entirely
frivolous, and that neither man nor any other being ought ever to be thought
possessed of any ability, unless it be exerted and put in action. But though this
be strictly true in a just and philosophical way of thinking, it is certain it
is not the philosophy of our passions; but that many things operate upon them
by means of the idea and supposition of power, independent of its actual
exercise. We are pleased when we acquire an ability of procuring pleasure, and
are displeased when another acquires a power of giving pain. This is evident
from experience; but in order to give a just explication of the matter, and
account for this satisfaction and uneasiness, we must weigh the following
reflections.

IT IS evident the error of distinguishing power from its exercise proceeds not
entirely from the scholastic doctrine of free will, which, indeed, enters very
little into common life, and has but small influence on our vulgar and popular
ways of thinking. According to that doctrine, motives deprive us not of
free will, nor take away our power of performing or forbearing any action. But
according to common notions a man has no power, where very considerable motives
lie betwixt him and the satisfaction of his desires, and determine him to
forbear what he wishes to perform. I do not think I have fallen into my enemies
power, when I see him pass me in the streets with a sword by his side, while I
am unprovided of any weapon. I know that the fear of the civil magistrate is as
strong a restraint as any of iron, and that I am in as perfect safety as if he
were chained or imprisoned. But when a person acquires such an authority over
me, that not only there is no external obstacle to his actions; but also that
he may punish or reward me as he pleases, without any dread of punishment in
his turn, I then attribute a full power to him, and consider myself as his
subject or vassal.

NOW if we compare these two cases, that of a person, who has very strong
motives of interest or safety to forbear any action, and that of another, who
lies under no such obligation, we shall find, according to the philosophy
explained in the foregoing book, that the only known difference betwixt them
lies in this, that in the former case we conclude from past experience, that
the person never will perform that action, and in the latter, that he possibly
or probably will perform it. Nothing is more fluctuating and inconstant on many
occasions, than the will of man; nor is there any thing but strong motives,
which can give us an absolute certainty in pronouncing concerning any of his
future actions. When we see a person free from these motives, we suppose a
possibility either of his acting or forbearing; and though in general we may
conclude him to be determined by motives and causes, yet this removes not the
uncertainty of our judgment concerning these causes, nor the influence of that
uncertainty on the passions. Since therefore we ascribe a power of performing
an action to every one, who has no very powerful motive to forbear it, and
refuse it to such as have; it may justly be concluded, that power has always a
reference to its exercise, either actual or probable, and that we consider a
person as endowed with any ability when we find from past experience, that it is
probable, or at least possible he may exert it. And indeed, as our passions
always regard the real existence of objects, and we always judge of this
reality from past instances; nothing can be more likely of itself, without any
farther reasoning, than that power consists in the possibility or probability
of any action, as discovered by experience and the practice of the world.

NOW it is evident, that wherever a person is in such a situation with regard to
me, that there is no very powerful motive to deter him from injuring me, and
consequently it is uncertain whether he will injure me or not, I must be uneasy
in such a situation, and cannot consider the possibility or probability of that
injury without a sensible concern. The passions are not only affected by such
events as are certain and infallible, but also in an inferior degree by such as
are possible and contingent. And though perhaps I never really feel any harm, and
discover by the event, that, philosophically speaking, the person never had any
power of harming me; since he did not exert any; this prevents not my
uneasiness from the preceding uncertainty. The agreeable passions may here
operate as well as the uneasy, and convey a pleasure when I perceive a good to
become either possible or probable by the possibility or probability of
another's bestowing it on me, upon the removal of any strong motives, which
might formerly have hindered him.

BUT we may farther observe, that this satisfaction increases, when any good
approaches in such a manner that it is in one's own power to take or leave it,
and there neither is any physical impediment, nor any very strong motive to
hinder our enjoyment. As all men desire pleasure, nothing can be more probable,
than its existence when there is no external obstacle to the producing it, and
men perceive no danger in following their inclinations. In that case their
imagination easily anticipates the satisfaction, and conveys the same joy, as
if they were persuaded of its real and actual existence.

BUT this accounts not sufficiently for the satisfaction, which attends riches.
A miser receives delight from his money; that is, from the power it affords him
of procuring all the pleasures and conveniences of life, though he knows he has
enjoyed his riches for forty years without ever employing them; and
consequently cannot conclude by any species of reasoning, that the real
existence of these pleasures is nearer, than if he were entirely deprived of
all his possessions. But though he cannot form any such conclusion in a way of
reasoning concerning the nearer approach of the pleasure, it is certain he
imagines it to approach nearer, whenever all external obstacles are removed,
along with the more powerful motives of interest and danger, which oppose it.
For farther satisfaction on this head I must refer to my account of the will,
where I shall Part III. Sect. 2.
explain that false sensation of liberty, which makes us imagine we can perform
any thing, that is not very dangerous or destructive. Whenever any other person
is under no strong obligations of interest to forbear any pleasure, we judge
from experience, that the pleasure will exist, and that he will probably obtain
it. But when ourselves are in that situation, we judge from an illusion of the
fancy, that the pleasure is still closer and more immediate. The will seems to
move easily every way, and casts a shadow or image of itself, even to that
side, on which it did not settle. By means of this image the enjoyment seems to
approach nearer to us, and gives us the same lively satisfaction, as if it were
perfectly certain and unavoidable.

'TWILL now be easy to draw this whole reasoning to a point, and to prove, that
when riches produce any pride or vanity in their possessors, as they never fail
to do, it is only by means of a double relation of impressions and ideas. The
very essence of riches consists in the power of procuring the pleasures and
conveniences of life. The very essence of this power consists in the
probability of its exercise, and in its causing us to anticipate, by a true or
false reasoning, the real existence of the pleasure. This anticipation of
pleasure is, in itself, a very considerable pleasure; and as its cause is some
possession or property, which we enjoy, and which is thereby related to us, we
here clearly see all the parts of the foregoing system most exactly and
distinctly drawn out before us.

FOR the same reason, that riches cause pleasure and pride, and poverty excites
uneasiness and humility, power must produce the former emotions, and slavery
the latter. Power or an authority over others makes us capable of satisfying
all our desires; as slavery, by subjecting us to the will of others, exposes us
to a thousand wants, and mortifications.

IT IS here worth observing, that the vanity of power, or shame of slavery, are
much augmented by the consideration of the persons, over whom we exercise our
authority, or who exercise it over us. For supposing it possible to frame
statues of such an admirable mechanism, that they could move and act in
obedience to the will; it is evident the possession of them would give pleasure
and pride, but not to such a degree, as the same authority, when exerted over
sensible and rational creatures, whose condition, being compared to our own,
makes it seem more agreeable and honorable. Comparison is in every case a sure
method of augmenting our esteem of any thing. A rich man feels the felicity of
his condition better by opposing it to that of a beggar. But there is a
peculiar advantage in power, by the contrast, which is, in a manner, presented
to us, betwixt ourselves and the person we command. The comparison is obvious
and natural: The imagination finds it in the very subject: The passage of the
thought to its conception is smooth and easy. And that this circumstance has a
considerable effect in augmenting its influence, will appear afterward in
examining the nature of malice and envy.

SECT. XI. Of the love of fame.
BUT beside these original causes of pride and humility, there is a secondary
one in the opinions of others, which has an equal influence on the affections.
Our reputation, our character, our name are considerations of vast weight and
importance; and even the other causes of pride; virtue, beauty and riches; have
little influence, when not seconded by the opinions and sentiments of others.
In order to account for this phenomenon 'twill be necessary to take some
compass, and first explain the nature of sympathy.

NO quality of human nature is more remarkable, both in itself and in its
consequences, than that propensity we have to sympathize with others, and to
receive by communication their inclinations and sentiments, however different
from, or even contrary to our own. This is not only conspicuous in children,
who implicitly embrace every opinion proposed to them; but also in men of the
greatest judgment and understanding, who find it very difficult to follow their
own reason or inclination, in opposition to that of their friends and daily
companions. To this principle we ought to ascribe the great uniformity we may
observe in the humors and turn of thinking of those of the same nation; and
it is much more probable, that this resemblance arises from sympathy, than from
any influence of the soil and climate, which, though they continue invariably the
same, are not able to preserve the character of a nation the same for a century
together. A good-natured man finds himself in an instant of the same humor
with his company; and even the proudest and most surly take a tincture from
their countrymen and acquaintance. A cheerful countenance infuses a sensible
complacency and serenity into my mind; as an angry or sorrowful one throws a
sudden damp upon me. Hatred, resentment, esteem, love, courage, mirth and
melancholy; all these passions I feel more from communication than from my own
natural temper and disposition. So remarkable a phenomenon merits our
attention, and must be traced up to its first principles.

WHEN any affection is infused by sympathy, it is at first known only by its
effects, and by those external signs in the countenance and conversation, which
convey an idea of it. This idea is presently converted into an impression, and
acquires such a degree of force and vivacity, as to become the very passion
itself, and produce an equal emotion, as any original affection. However
instantaneous this change of the idea into an impression may be, it proceeds
from certain views and reflections, which will not escape the strict scrutiny
of a philosopher, though they may the person himself, who makes them.

IT IS evident, that the idea, or rather impression of ourselves is always
intimately present with us, and that our consciousness gives us so lively a
conception of our own person, that it is not possible to imagine, that any thing
can in this particular go beyond it. Whatever object, therefore, is related to
ourselves must be conceived with a like vivacity of conception, according to
the foregoing principles; and though this relation should not be so strong as
that of causation, it must still have a considerable influence. Resemblance and
contiguity are relations not to be neglected; especially when by an inference
from cause and effect, and by the observation of external signs, we are
informed of the real existence of the object, which is resembling or contiguous.

NOW it is obvious, that nature has preserved a great resemblance among all
human creatures, and that we never remark any passion or principle in others,
of which, in some degree or other, we may not find a parallel in ourselves. The
case is the same with the fabric of the mind, as with that of the body. However
the parts may differ in shape or size, their structure and composition are in
general the same. There is a very remarkable resemblance, which preserves
itself amidst all their variety; and this resemblance must very much contribute
to make us enter into the sentiments of others, and embrace them with facility
and pleasure. Accordingly we find, that where, beside the general resemblance
of our natures, there is any peculiar similarity in our manners, or character,
or country, or language, it facilitates the sympathy. The stronger the relation
is betwixt ourselves and any object, the more easily does the imagination make
the transition, and convey to the related idea the vivacity of conception, with
which we always form the idea of our own person.

NOR is resemblance the only relation, which has this effect, but receives new
force from other relations, that may accompany it. The sentiments of others
have little influence, when far removed from us, and require the relation of
contiguity, to make them communicate themselves entirely. The relations of
blood, being a species of causation, may sometimes contribute to the same
effect; as also acquaintance, which operates in the same manner with education
and custom; as we shall see more fully Part II. Sect. 3.
afterward. All these relations, when united together, convey the impression
or consciousness of our own person to the idea of the sentiments or passions of
others, and makes us conceive them in the strongest and most lively manner.

IT has been remarked in the beginning of this treatise, that all ideas are
borrowed from impressions, and that these two kinds of perceptions differ only
in the degrees of force and vivacity, with which they strike upon the soul. The
component parts of ideas and impressions are precisely alike. The manner and
order of their appearance may be the same. The different degrees of their force
and vivacity are, therefore, the only particulars, that distinguish them: And
as this difference may be removed, in some measure, by a relation betwixt the
impressions and ideas, it is no wonder an idea of a sentiment or passion, may by
this means be so inliven'd as to become the very sentiment or passion. The
lively idea of any object always approaches its impression; and it is certain we
may feel sickness and pain from the mere force of imagination, and make a
malady real by often thinking of it. But this is most remarkable in the
opinions and affections; and it is there principally that a lively idea is
converted into an impression. Our affections depend more upon ourselves, and
the internal operations of the mind, than any other impressions; for which
reason they arise more naturally from the imagination, and from every lively
idea we form of them. This is the nature and cause of sympathy; and it is after
this manner we enter so deep into the opinions and affections of others,
whenever we discover them.

WHAT is principally remarkable in this whole affair is the strong confirmation
these phenomenon give to the foregoing system concerning the understanding, and
consequently to the present one concerning the passions; since these are
analogous to each other. It Is indeed evident, that when we sympathize with the
passions and sentiments of others, these movements appear at first in our mind
as mere ideas, and are conceived to belong to another person, as we conceive
any other matter of fact. It Is also evident, that the ideas of the affections
of others are converted into the very impressions they represent, and that the
passions arise in conformity to the images we form of them. All this is an
object of the plainest experience, and depends not on any hypothesis of
philosophy. That science can only be admitted to explain the phenomenon; though
at the same time it must be confessed, they are so clear of themselves, that
there is but little occasion to employ it. For besides the relation of cause
and effect, by which we are convinced of the reality of the passion, with which
we sympathize; besides this, I say, we must be assisted by the relations of
resemblance and contiguity, in order to feel the sympathy in its full
perfection. And since these relations can entirely convert an idea into an
impression, and convey the vivacity of the latter into the former, so perfectly
as to lose nothing of it in the transition, we may easily conceive how the
relation of cause and effect alone, may serve to strengthen and inliven an
idea. In sympathy there is an evident conversion of an idea into an impression.
This conversion arises from the relation of objects to ourself. Ourself is
always intimately present to us. Let us compare all these circumstances, and we
shall find, that sympathy is exactly correspondent to the operations of our
understanding; and even contains something more surprising and extraordinary.

IT IS now time to turn our view from the general consideration of sympathy, to
its influence on pride and humility, when these passions arise from praise and
blame, from reputation and infamy. We may observe, that no person is ever
praised by another for any quality, which would not, if real, produce, of
itself, a pride in the person possessed of it. The elogiums either turn upon his
power, or riches, or family, or virtue; all of which are subjects of vanity,
that we have already explained and accounted for. It Is certain, then, that if a
person considered himself in the same light, in which he appears to his
admirer, he would first receive a separate pleasure, and afterward a pride or
self-satisfaction, according to the hypothesis above explained. Now nothing is
more natural than for us to embrace the opinions of others in this particular;
both from sympathy, which renders all their sentiments intimately present to
us; and from reasoning, which makes us regard their judgment, as a kind of
argument for what they affirm. These two principles of authority and sympathy
influence almost all our opinions; but must have a peculiar influence, when we
judge of our own worth and character. Such judgments are always attended with
passion Book I. Part III. Sect. 10.
; and nothing tends more to disturb our understanding, and precipitate us into
any opinions, however unreasonable, than their connection with passion; which
diffuses itself over the imagination, and gives an additional force to every
related idea. To which we may add, that being conscious of great partiality in
our own favor, we are peculiarly pleased with any thing, that confirms the
good opinion we have of ourselves, and are easily shocked with whatever opposes
it.

ALL this appears very probable in theory; but in order to bestow a full
certainty on this reasoning, we must examine the phenomenon of the passions,
and see if they agree with it.

AMONG these phenomenon we may esteem it a very favorable one to our present
purpose, that though fame in general be agreeable, yet we receive a much greater
satisfaction from the approbation of those, whom we ourselves esteem and
approve of, than of those, whom we hate and despise. In like manner we are
principally mortified with the contempt of persons, upon whose judgment we set
some value, and are, in a great measure, indifferent about the opinions of the
rest of mankind. But if the mind received from any original instinct a desire
of fame, and aversion to infamy, fame and infamy would influence us without
distinction; and every opinion, according as it were favorable or
unfavourable, would equally excite that desire or aversion. The judgment of a
fool is the judgment of another person, as well as that of a wise man, and is
only inferior in its influence on our own judgment.

WE are not only better pleased with the approbation of a wise man than with
that of a fool, but receive an additional satisfaction from the former, when
it is obtained after a long and intimate acquaintance. This is accounted for
after the same manner.

THE praises of others never give us much pleasure, unless they concur with our
own opinion, and extol us for those qualities, in which we chiefly excel. A
mere soldier little values the character of eloquence: A gownman of courage: A
bishop of humor: Or a merchant of learning. Whatever esteem a man may have for
any quality, abstractedly considered; when he is conscious he is not possessed of
it; the opinions of the whole world will give him little pleasure in that
particular, and that because they never will be able to draw his own opinion
after them.

NOTHING is more usual than for men of good families, but narrow circumstances,
to leave their friends and country, and rather seek their livelihood by mean
and mechanical employments among strangers, than among those, who are
acquainted with their birth and education. We shall be unknown, say they, where
we go. No body will suspect from what family we are sprung. We shall be removed
from all our friends and acquaintance, and our poverty and meanness will by
that means sit more easy upon us. In examining these sentiments, I find they
afford many very convincing arguments for my present purpose.

FIRST, We may infer from them, that the uneasiness of being contemned depends
on sympathy, and that sympathy depends on the relation of objects to ourselves;
since we are most uneasy under the contempt of persons, who are both related to
us by blood, and contiguous in place. Hence we seek to diminish this sympathy
and uneasiness by separating these relations, and placing ourselves in a
contiguity to strangers, and at a distance from relations.

SECONDLY, We may conclude, that relations are requisite to sympathy, not
absolutely considered as relations, but by their influence in converting our
ideas of the sentiments of others into the very sentiments, by means of the
association betwixt the idea of their persons, and that of our own. For here
the relations of kindred and contiguity both subsist; but not being united in
the same persons, they contribute in a less degree to the sympathy.

THIRDLY, This very circumstance of the diminution of sympathy by the
separation of relations is worthy of our attention. Suppose I am placed in a
poor condition among strangers, and consequently am but lightly treated; I yet
find myself easier in that situation, than when I was every day exposed to the
contempt of my kindred and countrymen. Here I feel a double contempt; from my
relations, but they are absent; from those about me, but they are strangers.
This double contempt is likewise strengthened by the two relations of kindred
and contiguity. But as the persons are not the same, who are connected with me
by those two relations, this difference of ideas separates the impressions
arising from the contempt, and keeps them from running into each other. The
contempt of my neighbors has a certain influence; as has also that of my
kindred: But these influences are distinct, and never unite; as when the
contempt proceeds from persons who are at once both my neighbors and kindred.
This phenomenon is analogous to the system of pride and humility
above-explain'd, which may seem so extraordinary to vulgar apprehensions.

FOURTHLY, A person in these circumstances naturally conceals his birth from
those among whom he lives, and is very uneasy, if any one suspects him to be of
a family, much superior to his present fortune and way of living. Every thing
in this world is judged of by comparison. What is an immense fortune for a
private gentleman is beggary for a prince. A peasant would think himself happy
in what cannot afford necessaries for a gentleman. When a man has either been
acustom'd to a more splendid way of living, or thinks himself entitled to it by
his birth and quality, every thing below is disagreeable and even shameful; and
it is with the greatest industry he conceals his pretensions to a better
fortune. Here he himself knows his misfortunes; but as those, with whom he
lives, are ignorant of them, he has the disagreeable reflection and comparison
suggested only by his own thoughts, and never receives it by a sympathy with
others; which must contribute very much to his ease and satisfaction.

IF there be any objections to this hypothesis, that the pleasure, which we
receive from praise, arises from a communication of sentiments, we shall find,
upon examination, that these objections, when taken in a proper light, will
serve to confirm it. Popular fame may be agreeable even to a man, who despises
the vulgar; but it is because their multitude gives them additional weight and
authority. Plagiaries are delighted with praises, which they are conscious they
do not deserve; but this is a kind of castlebuilding, where the imagination
amuses itself with its own fictions, and strives to render them firm and stable
by a sympathy with the sentiments of others. Proud men are most shocked with
contempt, though they do not most readily assent to it; but it is because of the
opposition betwixt the passion, which is natural to them, and that received by
sympathy. A violent lover in like manner is very much displeased when you blame
and condemn his love; though it is evident your opposition can have no influence,
but by the hold it takes of himself, and by his sympathy with you. If he
despises you, or perceives you are in jest, whatever you say has no effect upon
him.

SECT. XII. Of the pride and humility of animals.
THUS in whatever light we consider this subject, we may still observe, that
the causes of pride and humility correspond exactly to our hypothesis, and that
nothing can excite either of these passions, unless it be both related to
ourselves, and produces a pleasure or pain independent of the passion. We have
not only proved, that a tendency to produce pleasure or pain is common to all
the causes of pride or humility, but also that it is the only thing, which is
common; and consequently is the quality, by which they operate. We have farther
proved, that the most considerable causes of these passions are really nothing
but the power of producing either agreeable or uneasy sensations; and therefore
that all their effects, and amongst the rest, pride and humility, are derived
solely from that origin. Such simple and natural principles, founded on such
solid proofs, cannot fail to be received by philosophers, unless opposed by
some objections, that have escaped me.

IT IS usual with anatomists to join their observations and experiments on human
bodies to those on beasts, and from the agreement of these experiments to
derive an additional argument for any particular hypothesis. It Is indeed
certain, that where the structure of parts in brutes is the same as in men, and
the operation of these parts also the same, the causes of that operation cannot
be different, and that whatever we discover to be true of the one species, may
be concluded without hesitation to be certain of the other. Thus though the
mixture of humors and the composition of minute parts may justly be presumed
to be somewhat different in men from what it is in mere animals; and therefore
any experiment we make upon the one concerning the effects of medicines will
not always apply to the other; yet as the structure of the veins and muscles,
the fabric and situation of the heart, of the lungs, the stomach, the liver and
other parts, are the same or nearly the same in all animals, the very same
hypothesis, which in one species explains muscular motion, the progress of the
chyle, the circulation of the blood, must be applicable to every one; and
according as it agrees or disagrees with the experiments we may make in any
species of creatures, we may draw a proof of its truth or falsehood on the
whole. Let us, therefore, apply this method of enquiry, which is found so just
and useful in reasonings concerning the body, to our present anatomy of the
mind, and see what discoveries we can make by it.

IN order to this we must first show the correspondence of passions in men and
animals, and afterward compare the causes, which produce these passions.

IT IS plain, that almost in every species of creatures, but especially of the
nobler kind, there are many evident marks of pride and humility. The very port
and gait of a swan, or turkey, or peacock show the high idea he has entertained
of himself, and his contempt of all others. This is the more remarkable, that
in the two last species of animals, the pride always attends the beauty, and is
discovered in the male only. The vanity and emulation of nightingales in
singing have been commonly remarked; as likewise that of horses in swiftness,
of hounds in sagacity and smell, of the bull and cock in strength, and of every
other animal in his particular excellency. Add to this, that every species of
creatures, which approach so often to man, as to familiarize themselves with
him, show an evident pride in his approbation, and are pleased with his praises
and caresses, independent of every other consideration. Nor are they the
caresses of every one without distinction, which give them this vanity, but
those principally of the persons they know and love; in the same manner as that
passion is excited in mankind. All these are evident proofs, that pride and
humility are not merely human passions, but extend themselves over the whole
animal creation.

THE causes of these passions are likewise much the same in beasts as in us,
making a just allowance for our superior knowledge and understanding. Thus
animals have little or no sense of virtue or vice; they quickly lose sight of
the relations of blood; and are incapable of that of right and property: For
which reason the causes of their pride and humility must lie solely in the
body, and can never be placed either in the mind or external objects. But so
far as regards the body, the same qualities cause pride in the animal as in the
human kind; and it is on beauty, strength, swiftness or some other useful or
agreeable quality that this passion is always founded.

THE next question is, whether, since those passions are the same, and arise
from the same causes through the whole creation, the manner, in which the causes
operate, be also the same. According to all rules of analogy, this is justly to
be expected; and if we find upon trial, that the explication of these
phenomenon, which we make use of in one species, will not apply to the rest, we
may presume that that explication, however specious, is in reality without
foundation.

IN order to decide this question, let us consider, that there is evidently the
same relation of ideas, and derived from the same causes, in the minds of
animals as in those of men. A dog, that has hid a bone, often forgets the
place; but when brought to it, his thought passes easily to what he formerly
concealed, by means of the contiguity, which produces a relation among his
ideas. In like manner, when he has been heartily beat in any place, he will
tremble on his approach to it, even though he discover no signs of any present
danger. The effects of resemblance are not so remarkable; but as that relation
makes a considerable ingredient in causation, of which all animals show so
evident a judgment, we may conclude that the three relations of resemblance,
contiguity and causation operate in the same manner upon beasts as upon human
creatures.

THERE are also instances of the relation of impressions, sufficient to
convince us, that there is an union of certain affections with each other in
the inferior species of creatures as well as in the superior, and that their
minds are frequently conveyed through a series of connected emotions. A dog, when
elevated with joy, runs naturally into love and kindness, whether of his master
or of the sex. In like manner, when full of pain and sorrow, he becomes
quarrelsome and ill-natured; and that passion, which at first was grief, is by
the smallest occasion converted into anger.

THUS all the internal principles, that are necessary in us to produce either
pride or humility, are common to all creatures; and since the causes, which
excite these passions, are likewise the same, we may justly conclude, that
these causes operate after the same manner through the whole animal creation. My
hypothesis is so simple, and supposes so little reflection and judgment, that
it is applicable to every sensible creature; which must not only be allowed to
be a convincing proof of its veracity, but, I am confident, will be found an
objection to every other system.

PART II. Of love and hatred.
SECT. I. Of the object and causes of love and hatred.
IT IS altogether impossible to give any definition of the passions of love and
hatred; and that because they produce merely a simple impression, without any
mixture or composition. 'Twou'd be as unnecessary to attempt any description of
them, drawn from their nature, origin, causes and objects; and that both
because these are the subjects of our present enquiry, and because these
passions of themselves are sufficiently known from our common feeling and
experience. This we have already observed concerning pride and humility, and
here repeat it concerning love and hatred; and indeed there is so great a
resemblance betwixt these two sets of passions, that we shall be obliged to
begin with a kind of abridgment of our reasonings concerning the former, in
order to explain the latter.

As the immediate object of pride and humility is self or that identical
person, of whose thoughts, actions, and sensations we are intimately conscious;
so the object of love and hatred is some other person, of whose thoughts,
actions, and sensations we are not conscious. This is sufficiently evident from
experience. Our love and hatred are always directed to some sensible being
external to us; and when we talk of self-love, it is not in a proper sense, nor
has the sensation it produces any thing in common with that tender emotion,
which is excited by a friend or mistress. It Is the same case with hatred. We
may be mortified by our own faults and follies; but never feel any anger or
hatred, except from the injuries of others.

BUT though the object of love and hatred be always some other person, it is plain
that the object is not, properly speaking, the cause of these passions, or
alone sufficient to excite them. For since love and hatred are directly
contrary in their sensation, and have the same object in common, if that object
were also their cause, it would produce these opposite passions in an equal
degree; and as they must, from the very first moment, destroy each other, none
of them would ever be able to make its appearance. There must, therefore, be
some cause different from the object.

IF we consider the causes of love and hatred, we shall find they are very much
diversified, and have not many things in common. The virtue, knowledge, wit,
good sense, good humor of any person, produce love and esteem; as the opposite
qualities, hatred and contempt. The same passions arise from bodily
accomplishments, such as beauty, force, swiftness, dexterity; and from their
contraries; as likewise from the external advantages and disadvantages of
family, possessions, clothes, nation and climate. There is not one of these
objects, but what by its different qualities may produce love and esteem, or
hatred and contempt.

FROM the view of these causes we may derive a new distinction betwixt the
quality that operates, and the subject on which it is placed. A prince, that is
possessed of a stately palace, commands the esteem of the people upon that
account; and that first, by the beauty of the palace, and secondly, by the
relation of property, which connects it with him. The removal of either of
these destroys the passion; which evidently proves that the cause is a
compounded one.

'TWOU'D be tedious to trace the passions of love and hatred, through all the
observations which we have formed concerning pride and humility, and which are
equally applicable to both sets of passions. 'Twill be sufficient to remark in
general, that the object of love and hatred is evidently some thinking person;
and that the sensation of the former passion is always agreeable, and of the
latter uneasy. We may also suppose with some show of probability, that the
cause of both these passions is always related to a thinking being, and that
the cause of the former produce a separate pleasure, and of the latter a
separate uneasiness.

ONE of these suppositions, viz. that the cause of love and hatred must be
related to a person or thinking being, in order to produce these passions, is
not only probable, but too evident to be contested. Virtue and vice, when
considered in the abstract; beauty and deformity, when placed on inanimate
objects; poverty and riches, when belonging to a third person, excite no degree
of love or hatred, esteem or contempt toward those, who have no relation to
them. A person looking out at a window, sees me in the street, and beyond me a
beautiful palace, with which I have no concern: I believe none will pretend,
that this person will pay me the same respect, as if I were owner of the palace.

IT IS not so evident at first sight, that a relation of impressions is
requisite to these passions, and that because in the transition the one
impression is so much confounded with the other, that they become in a manner
undistinguishable. But as in pride and humility, we have easily been able to
make the separation, and to prove, that every cause of these passions produces
a separate pain or pleasure, I might here observe the same method with the same
success, in examining particularly the several causes of love and hatred. But
as I hasten to a full and decisive proof of these systems, I delay this
examination for a moment: And in the mean time shall endeavor to convert to my
present purpose all my reasonings concerning pride and humility, by an argument
that is founded on unquestionable experience.

THERE are few persons, that are satisfied with their own character, or genius,
or fortune, who are not desirous of showing themselves to the world, and of
acquiring the love and approbation of mankind. Now it is evident, that the very
same qualities and circumstances, which are the causes of pride or self-esteem,
are also the causes of vanity or the desire of reputation; and that we always
put to view those particulars with which in ourselves we are best satisfied.
But if love and esteem were not produced by the same qualities as pride,
according as these qualities are related to ourselves or others, this method of
proceeding would be very absurd, nor could men expect a correspondence in the
sentiments of every other person, with those themselves have entertained. It Is
true, few can form exact systems of the passions, or make reflections on their
general nature and resemblances. But without such a progress in philosophy, we
are not subject to many mistakes in this particular, but are sufficiently
guided by common experience, as well as by a kind of presensation; which tells
us what will operate on others, by what we feel immediately in ourselves. Since
then the same qualities that produce pride or humility, cause love or hatred;
all the arguments that have been employed to prove, that the causes of the
former passions excite a pain or pleasure independent of the passion, will be
applicable with equal evidence to the causes of the latter.

SECT. II. Experiments to confirm this system.
UPON duly weighing these arguments, no one will make any scruple to assent to
that conclusion I draw from them, concerning the transition along related
impressions and ideas, especially as it is a principle, in itself, so easy and
natural. But that we may place this system beyond doubt both with regard to
love and hatred, pride and humility, 'twill be proper to make some new
experiments upon all these passions, as well as to recall a few of these
observations, which I have formerly touched upon.

IN order to make these experiments, let us suppose I am in company with a
person, whom I formerly regarded without any sentiments either of friendship or
enmity. Here I have the natural and ultimate object of all these four passions
placed before me. Myself am the proper object of pride or humility; the other
person of love or hatred.

REGARD now with attention the nature of these passions, and their situation
with respect to each other. It Is evident here are four affections, placed, as
it were, in a square or regular connection with, and distance from each other.
The passions of pride and humility, as well as those of love and hatred, are
connected together by the identity of their object, which to the first set of
passions is self, to the second some other person. These two lines of
communication or connection form two opposite sides of the square. Again, pride
and love are agreeable passions; hatred and humility uneasy. This similitude of
sensation betwixt pride and love, and that betwixt humility and hatred form a
new connection, and may be considered as the other two sides of the square. Upon
the whole, pride is connected with humility, love with hatred, by their objects
or ideas: Pride with love, humility with hatred, by their sensations or
impressions.

I SAY then, that nothing can produce any of these passions without bearing it
a double relation, viz. of ideas to the object of the passion, and of sensation
to the passion itself. This we must prove by our experiments.

FIRST EXPERIMENT. To proceed with the greater order in these experiments, let
us first suppose, that being placed in the situation abovementioned, viz. in
company with some other person, there is an object presented, that has no
relation either of impressions or ideas to any of these passions. Thus suppose
we regard together an ordinary stone, or other common object, belonging to
neither of us, and causing of itself no emotion, or independent pain and
pleasure: It Is evident such an object will produce none of these four passions.
Let us try it upon each of them successively. Let us apply it to love, to
hatred, to humility, to pride; none of them ever arises in the smallest degree
imaginable. Let us change the object, as often as we please; provided still we
choose one, that has neither of these two relations. Let us repeat the
experiment in all the dispositions, of which the mind is susceptible. No
object, in the vast variety of nature, will, in any disposition, produce any
passion without these relations.

SECOND EXPERIMENT. Since an object, that wants both these relations can ever
produce any passion, let us bestow on it only one of these relations; and see
what will follow. Thus suppose, I regard a stone or any common object, that
belongs either to me or my companion, and by that means acquires a relation of
ideas to the object of the passions: It Is plain, that to consider the matter a
priori, no emotion of any kind can reasonably be expected. For besides, that a
relation of ideas operates secretly and calmly on the mind, it bestows an equal
impulse toward the opposite passions of pride and humility, love and hatred,
according as the object belongs to ourselves or others; which opposition of the
passions must destroy both, and leave the mind perfectly free from any
affection or emotion. This reasoning a priori is confirmed by experience. No
trivial or vulgar object, that causes not a pain or pleasure, independent of
the passion, will ever, by its property or other relations, either to ourselves
or others, be able to produce the affections of pride or humility, love or
hatred.

THIRD EXPERIMENT. It Is evident, therefore, that a relation of ideas is not
able alone to give rise to these affections. Let us now remove this relation,
and in its stead place a relation of impressions, by presenting an object,
which is agreeable or disagreeable, but has no relation either to ourself or
companion; and let us observe the consequences. To consider the matter first a
priori, as in the preceding experiment; we may conclude, that the object will
have a small, but an uncertain connection with these passions. For besides, that
this relation is not a cold and imperceptible one, it has not the inconvenience
of the relation of ideas, nor directs us with equal force to two contrary
passions, which by their opposition destroy each other. But if we consider, on
the other hand, that this transition from the sensation to the affection is not
forwarded by any principle, that produces a transition of ideas; but, on the
contrary, that though the one impression be easily transfused into the other, yet
the change of objects is supposed contrary to all the principles, that cause a
transition of that kind; we may from thence infer, that nothing will ever be a
steady or durable cause of any passion, that is connected with the passion
merely by a relation of impressions. What our reason would conclude from
analogy, after ballancing these arguments, would be, that an object, which
produces pleasure or uneasiness, but has no manner of connection either with
ourselves or others, may give such a turn to the disposition, as that it may
naturally fall into pride or love, humility or hatred, and search for other
objects, upon which, by a double relation, it can found these affections; but
that an object, which has only one of these relations, though the most
advantageous one, can never give rise to any constant and established passion.

MOST fortunately all this reasoning is found to be exactly conformable to
experience, and the phenomenon of the passions. Suppose I were traveling with
a companion through a country, to which we are both utter strangers; it is
evident, that if the prospects be beautiful, the roads agreeable, and the inns
commodious, this may put me into good humor both with myself and
fellow-traveller. But as we suppose, that this country has no relation either
to myself or friend, it can never be the immediate cause of pride or love; and
therefore if I found not the passion on some other object, that bears either of
us a closer relation, my emotions are rather to be considered as the
overflowings of an elevate or humane disposition, than as an established
passion. The case is the same where the object produces uneasiness.

FOURTH EXPERIMENT. Having found, that neither an object without any relation
of ideas or impressions, nor an object, that has only one relation, can ever
cause pride or humility, love or hatred; reason alone may convince us, without
any farther experiment, that whatever has a double relation must necessarily
excite these passions; since it is evident they must have some cause. But to
leave as little room for doubt as possible, let us renew our experiments, and
see whether the event in this case answers our expectation. I choose an object,
such as virtue, that causes a separate satisfaction: On this object I bestow a
relation to self; and find, that from this disposition of affairs, there
immediately arises a passion. But what passion? That very one of pride, to
which this object bears a double relation. Its idea is related to that of self,
the object of the passion: The sensation it causes resembles the sensation of
the passion. That I may be sure I am not mistaken in this experiment, I remove
first one relation; then another; and find, that each removal destroys the
passion, and leaves the object perfectly indifferent. But I am not content with
this. I make a still farther trial; and instead of removing the relation, I
only change it for one of a different kind. I suppose the virtue to belong to
my companion, not to myself; and observe what follows from this alteration. I
immediately perceive the affections wheel about, and leaving pride, where there
is only one relation, viz. of impressions, fall to the side of love, where they
are attracted by a double relation of impressions and ideas. By repeating the
same experiment, in changing anew the relation of ideas, I bring the affections
back to pride; and by a new repetition I again place them at love or kindness.
Being fully convinced of the influence of this relation, I try the effects of
the other; and by changing virtue for vice, convert the pleasant impression,
which arises from the former, into the disagreeable one, which proceeds from
the latter. The effect still answers expectation. Vice, when placed on another,
excites, by means of its double relations, the passion of hatred, instead of
love, which for the same reason arises from virtue. To continue the experiment,
I change anew the relation of ideas, and suppose the vice to belong to myself.
What follows? What is usual. A subsequent change of the passion from hatred to
humility. This humility I convert into pride by a new change of the impression;
and find after all that I have completed the round, and have by these changes
brought back the passion to that very situation, in which I first found it.

BUT to make the matter still more certain, I alter the object; and instead of
vice and virtue, make the trial upon beauty and deformity, riches and poverty,
power and servitude. Each of these objects runs the circle of the passions in
the same manner, by a change of their relations: And in whatever order we
proceed, whether through pride, love, hatred, humility, or through humility,
hatred, love, pride, the experiment is not in the least diversified. Esteem and
contempt, indeed, arise on some occasions instead of love and hatred; but these
are at the bottom the same passions, only diversified by some causes, which we
shall explain afterward.

FIFTH EXPERIMENT. To give greater authority to these experiments, let us
change the situation of affairs as much as possible, and place the passions and
objects in all the different positions, of which they are susceptible. Let us
suppose, beside the relations abovementioned, that the person, along with whom
I make all these experiments, is closely connected with me either by blood or
friendship. He is, we shall suppose, my son or brother, or is united to me by a
long and familiar acquaintance. Let us next suppose, that the cause of the
passion acquires a double relation of impressions and ideas to this person; and
let us see what the effects are of all these complicated attractions and
relations.

BEFORE we consider what they are in fact, let us determine what they ought to
be, conformable to my hypothesis. It Is plain, that, according as the impression
is either pleasant or uneasy, the passion of love or hatred must arise toward
the person, who is thus connected to the cause of the impression by these
double relations, which I have all along required. The virtue of a brother must
make me love him; as his vice or infamy must excite the contrary passion. But
to judge only from the situation of affairs, I should not expect, that the
affections would rest there, and never transfuse themselves into any other
impression. As there is here a person, who by means of a double relation is the
object of my passion, the very same reasoning leads me to think the passion
will be carried farther. The person has a relation of ideas to myself,
according to the supposition; the passion, of which he is the object, by being
either agreeable or uneasy, has a relation of impressions to pride or humility.
It Is evident, then, that one of these passions must arise from the love or
hatred.

THIS is the reasoning I form in conformity to my hypothesis; and am pleased to
find upon trial that every thing answers exactly to my expectation. The virtue
or vice of a son or brother not only excites love or hatred, but by a new
transition, from similar causes, gives rise to pride or humility. Nothing
causes greater vanity than any shining quality in our relations; as nothing
mortifies us more than their vice or infamy. This exact conformity of
experience to our reasoning is a convincing proof of the solidity of that
hypothesis, upon which we reason.

SIXTH EXPERIMENT. This evidence will be still augmented, if we reverse the
experiment, and preserving still the same relations, begin only with a
different passion. Suppose, that instead of the virtue or vice of a son or
brother, which causes first love or hatred, and afterward pride or humility,
we place these good or bad qualities on ourselves, without any immediate
connection with the person, who is related to us: Experience shows us, that by
this change of situation the whole chain is broke, and that the mind is not
conveyed from one passion to another, as in the preceding instance. We never
love or hate a son or brother for the virtue or vice we discern in ourselves;
though it is evident the same qualities in him give us a very sensible pride or
humility. The transition from pride or humility to love or hatred is not so
natural as from love or hatred to pride or humility. This may at first sight be
esteemed contrary to my hypothesis; since the relations of impressions and
ideas are in both cases precisely the same. Pride and humility are impressions
related to love and hatred. Myself am related to the person. It should,
therefore, be expected, that like causes must produce like effects, and a
perfect transition arise from the double relation, as in all other cases. This
difficulty we may easily solve by the following reflections.

IT IS evident, that as we are at all times intimately conscious of ourselves,
our sentiments and passions, their ideas must strike upon us with greater
vivacity than the ideas of the sentiments and passions of any other person. But
every thing, that strikes upon us with vivacity, and appears in a full and
strong light, forces itself, in a manner, into our consideration, and becomes
present to the mind on the smallest hint and most trivial relation. For the
same reason, when it is once present, it engages the attention, and keeps it
from wandering to other objects, however strong may be their relation to our
first object. The imagination passes easily from obscure to lively ideas, but
with difficulty from lively to obscure. In the one case the relation is aided
by another principle: In the other case, it is opposed by it.

Now I have observed, that those two faculties of the mind, the imagination and
passions, assist each other in their operation, when their propensities are
similar, and when they act upon the same object. The mind has always a
propensity to pass from a passion to any other related to it; and this
propensity is forwarded when the object of the one passion is related to that
of the other. The two impulses concur with each other, and render the whole
transition more smooth and easy. But if it should happen, that while the
relation of ideas, strictly speaking, continues the same, its influence, in
causing a transition of the imagination, should no longer take place, it is
evident its influence on the passions must also cease, as being dependent
entirely on that transition. This is the reason why pride or humility is not
transfused into love or hatred with the same ease, that the latter passions are
changed into the former. If a person be my brother I am his likewise: But though
the relations be reciprocal, they have very different effects on the
imagination. The passage is smooth and open from the consideration of any
person related to us to that of ourself, of whom we are every moment conscious.
But when the affections are once directed to ourself, the fancy passes not with
the same facility from that object to any other person, how closely so ever
connected with us. This easy or difficult transition of the imagination
operates upon the passions, and facilitates or retards their transition; which
is a clear proof, that these two faculties of the passions and imagination are
connected together, and that the relations of ideas have an influence upon the
affections. Besides innumerable experiments that prove this, we here find, that
even when the relation remains; if by any particular circumstance its usual
effect upon the fancy in producing an association or transition of ideas, is
prevented; its usual effect upon the passions, in conveying us from one to
another, is in like manner prevented.

SOME may, perhaps, find a contradiction betwixt this phenomenon and that of
sympathy, where the mind passes easily from the idea of ourselves to that of
any other object related to us. But this difficulty will vanish, if we consider
that in sympathy our own person is not the object of any passion, nor is there
any thing, that fixes our attention on ourselves; as in the present case, where
we are supposed to be actuated with pride or humility. Ourself, independent of
the perception of every other object, is in reality nothing: For which reason
we must turn our view to external objects; and it is natural for us to consider
with most attention such as lie contiguous to us, or resemble us. But when self
is the object of a passion, it is not natural to quit the consideration of it,
till the passion be exhausted; in which case the double relations of
impressions and ideas can no longer operate.

SEVENTH EXPERIMENT. To put this whole reasoning to a farther trial, let us
make a new experiment; and as we have already seen the effects of related
passions and ideas, let us here suppose an identity of passions along with a
relation of ideas; and let us consider the effects of this new situation. It Is
evident a transition of the passions from the one object to the other is here
in all reason to be expected; since the relation of ideas is supposed still to
continue, and an identity of impressions must produce a stronger connection,
than the most perfect resemblance, that can be imagined. If a double relation,
therefore, of impressions and ideas is able to produce a transition from one to
the other, much more an identity of impressions with a relation of ideas.
Accordingly we find, that when we either love or hate any person, the passions
seldom continue within their first bounds; but extend themselves toward all
the contiguous objects, and comprehend the friends and relations of him we love
or hate. Nothing is more natural than to bear a kindness to one brother on
account of our friendship for another, without any farther examination of his
character. A quarrel with one person gives us a hatred for the whole family,
though entirely innocent of that, which displeases us. Instances of this kind are
every where to be met with.

THERE is only one difficulty in this experiment, which it will be necessary to
account for, before we proceed any farther. It Is evident, that though all
passions pass easily from one object to another related to it, yet this
transition is made with greater facility, where the more considerable object is
first presented, and the lesser follows it, than where this order is reversed,
and the lesser takes the precedence. Thus it is more natural for us to love the
son upon account of the father, than the father upon account of the son; the
servant for the master, than the master for the servant; the subject for the
prince, than the prince for the subject. In like manner we more readily
contract a hatred against a whole family, where our first quarrel is with the
head of it, than where we are displeased with a son, or servant, or some
inferior member. In short, our passions, like other objects, descend with
greater facility than they ascend.

THAT we may comprehend, wherein consists the difficulty of explaining this
phenomenon, we must consider, that the very same reason, which determines the
imagination to pass from remote to contiguous objects, with more facility than
from contiguous to remote, causes it likewise to change with more ease, the
less for the greater, than the greater for the less. Whatever has the greatest
influence is most taken notice of; and whatever is most taken notice of,
presents itself most readily to the imagination. We are more apt to overlook
in any subject, what is trivial, than what appears of considerable moment; but
especially if the latter takes the precedence, and first engages our attention.
Thus if any accident makes us consider the Satellites of Jupiter, our fancy is
naturally determined to form the idea of that planet; but if we first reflect
on the principal planet, it is more natural for us to overlook its attendants.
The mention of the provinces of any empire conveys our thought to the seat of
the empire; but the fancy returns not with the same facility to the
consideration of the provinces. The idea of the servant makes us think of the
master; that of the subject carries our view to the prince. But the same
relation has not an equal influence in conveying us back again. And on this is
founded that reproach of Cornelia to her sons, that they ought to be ashamed
she should be more known by the title of the daughter of Scipio, than by that
of the mother of the Gracchi. This was, in other words, exhorting them to
render themselves as illustrious and famous as their grandfather, otherwise the
imagination of the people, passing from her who was intermediate, and placed in
an equal relation to both, would always leave them, and denominate her by what
was more considerable and of greater moment. On the same principle is founded
that common custom of making wives bear the name of their husbands, rather than
husbands that of their wives; as also the ceremony of giving the precedence to
those, whom we honor and respect. We might find many other instances to
confirm this principle, were it not already sufficiently evident.

NOW since the fancy finds the same facility in passing from the lesser to the
greater, as from remote to contiguous, why does not this easy transition of
ideas assist the transition of passions in the former case, as well as in the
latter? The virtues of a friend or brother produce first love, and then pride;
because in that case the imagination passes from remote to contiguous,
according to its propensity. Our own virtues produce not first pride, and then
love to a friend or brother; because the passage in that case would be from
contiguous to remote, contrary to its propensity. But the love or hatred of an
inferior causesnot readily any passion to the superior, though that be the
natural propensity of the imagination: While the love or hatred of a superior,
causes a passion to the inferior, contrary to its propensity. In short, the
same facility of transition operates not in the same manner upon superior and
inferior as upon contiguous and remote. These two phenomenon appear
contradictory, and require some attention to be reconciled.

As the transition of ideas is here made contrary to the natural propensity of
the imagination, that faculty must be overpowered by some stronger principle of
another kind; and as there is nothing ever present to the mind but impressions
and ideas, this principle must necessarily lie in the impressions. Now it has
been observed, that impressions or passions are connected only by their
resemblance, and that where any two passions place the mind in the same or in
similar dispositions, it very naturally passes from the one to the other: As on
the contrary, a repugnance in the dispositions produces a difficulty in the
transition of the possions. But it is observable, that this repugnance may arise
from a difference of degree as well as of kind; nor do we experience a greater
difficulty in passing suddenly from a small degree of love to a small degree of
hatred, than from a small to a great degree of either of these affections. A
man, when calm or only moderately agitated, is so different, in every respect,
from himself, when disturbed with a violent passion, that no two persons can be
more unlike; nor is it easy to pass from the one extreme to the other, without
a considerable interval betwixt them.

THE difficulty is not less, if it be not rather greater, in passing from the
strong passion to the weak, than in passing from the weak to the strong,
provided the one passion upon its appearance destroys the other, and they do
not both of them exist at once. But the case is entirely altered, when the
passions unite together, and actuate the mind at the same time. A weak passion,
when added to a strong, makes not so considerable change in the disposition, as
a strong when added to a weak; for which reason there is a closer connection
betwixt the great degree and the small, than betwixt the small degree and the
great.

THE degree of any passion depends upon the nature of its object; and an
affection directed to a person, who is considerable in our eyes, fills and
possesses the mind much more than one, which has for its object a person we
esteem of less consequence. Here then the contradiction betwixt the
propensities of the imagination and passion displays itself. When we turn our
thought to a great and a small object, the imagination finds more facility in
passing from the small to the great, than from the great to the small; but the
affections find a greater difficulty: And as the affections are a more powerful
principle than the imagination, no wonder they prevail over it, and draw the
mind to their side. In spite of the difficulty of passing from the idea of
great to that of little, a passion directed to the former, produces always a
similar passion toward the latter; when the great and little are related
together. The idea of the servant conveys our thought most readily to the
master; but the hatred or love of the master produces with greater facility
anger or good will to the servant. The strongest passion in this case takes the
precedence; and the addition of the weaker making no considerable change on the
disposition, the passage is by that means rendered more easy and natural
betwixt them.

As in the foregoing experiment we found, that a relation of ideas, which, by
any particular circumstance, ceases to produce its usual effect of facilitating
the transition of ideas, ceases likewise to operate on the passions; so in the
present experiment we find the same property of the impressions. Two different
degrees of the same passion are surely related together; but if the smaller be
first present, it has little or no tendency to introduce the greater; and that
because the addition of the great to the little, produces a more sensible
alteration on the temper, than the addition of the little to the great. These
phenomenon, when duly weighed, will be found convincing proofs of this
hypothesis.

AND these proofs will be confirmed, if we consider the manner in which the
mind here reconciles the contradiction, I have observed betwixt the passions
and the imagination. The fancy passes with more facility from the less to the
greater, than from the greater to the less: But on the contrary a violent
passion produces more easily a feeble, than that does a violent. In this
opposition the passion in the end prevails over the imagination; but it is
commonly by complying with it, and by seeking another quality, which may
counter-ballance that principle, from whence the opposition arises. When we
love the father or master of a family, we little think of his children or
servants. But when these are present with us, or when it lies any ways in our
power to serve them, the nearness and contiguity in this case increases their
magnitude, or at least removes that opposition, which the fancy makes to the
transition of the affections. If the imagination finds a difficulty in passing
from greater to less, it finds an equal facility in passing from remote to
contiguous, which brings the matter to an equality, and leaves the way open
from the one passion to the other.

EIGHTH EXPERIMENT. I have observed that the transition from love or hatred to
pride or humility, is more easy than from pride or humility to love or hatred;
and that the difficulty, which the imagination finds in passing from contiguous
to remote, is the cause why we scarce have any instance of the latter
transition of the affections. I must, however, make one exception, viz. when
the very cause of the pride and humility is placed in some other person. For in
that case the imagination is necessitated to consider the person, nor can it
possibly confine its view to ourselves. Thus nothing more readily produces
kindness and affection to any person, than his approbation of our conduct and
character: As on the other hand, nothing inspires us with a stronger hatred,
than his blame or contempt. Here it is evident, that the original passion is
pride or humility, whose object is self; and that this passion is transfused
into love or hatred, whose object is some other person, notwithstanding the
rule I have already established, that the imagination passes with difficulty
from contiguous to remote. But the transition in this case is not made merely
on account of the relation betwixt ourselves and the person; but because that
very person is the real cause of our first passion, and of consequence is
intimately connected with it. It Is his approbation that produces pride; and
disapprobation, humility. No wonder, then, the imagination returns back again
attended with the related passions of love and hatred. This is not a
contradiction, but an exception to the rule; and an exception that arises from
the same reason with the rule itself.

SUCH an exception as this is, therefore, rather a confirmation of the rule.
And indeed, if we consider all the eight experiments I have explained, we shall
find that the same principle appears in all of them, and that it is by means of
a transition arising from a double relation of impressions and ideas, pride and
humility, love and hatred are produced. An object without First Experiment
a relation, or Second and Third Experiments.
with but one, never produces either of these passions; and it is Fourth
Experiment.
found that the passion always varies in conformity to the relation. Nay we may
observe, that where the relation, by any particular circumstance, has not its
usual effect of producing a transition either of Sixth Experiment.
ideas or of impressions, it ceases to operate upon the passions, and gives
rise neither to pride nor love, humility nor hatred. This rule we find still to
hold good Seventh and Eighth Experiments.
, even under the appearance of its contrary; and as relation is frequently
experienced to have no effect; which upon examination is found to proceed from
some particular circumstance, that prevents the transition; so even in
instances, where that circumstance, though present, prevents not the transition,
it is found to arise from some other circumstance, which counter-ballances it.
Thus not only the variations resolve themselves into the general principle, but
even the variations of these variations.

SECT. III. Difficulties solved.
AFTER so many and such undeniable proofs drawn from daily experience and
observation, it may seem superfluous to enter into a particular examination of
all the causes of love and hatred. I shall, therefore, employ the sequel of
this part, First, In removing some difficulties, concerning particular causes
of these passions. Secondly, In examining the compound affections, which arise
from the mixture of love and hatred with other emotions.

NOTHING is more evident, than that any person acquires our kindness, or is
exposed to our ill will, in proportion to the pleasure or uneasiness we receive
from him, and that the passions keep pace exactly with the sensations in all
their changes and variations. Whoever can find the means either by his
services, his beauty, or his flattery, to render himself useful or agreeable to
us, is sure of our affections: As on the other hand, whoever harms or
displeases us never fails to excite our anger or hatred. When our own nation is
at war with any other, we detest them under the character of cruel, perfidious,
unjust and violent: But always esteem ourselves and allies equitable, moderate,
and merciful. If the general of our enemies be successful, it is with difficulty
we allow him the figure and character of a man. He is a sorcerer: He has a
communication with demons; as is reported of Oliver Cromwell, and the Duke of
Luxembourg: He is bloody-minded, and takes a pleasure in death and destruction.
But if the success be on our side, our commander has all the opposite good
qualities, and is a pattern of virtue, as well as of courage and conduct. His
treachery we call policy: His cruelty is an evil inseparable from war. In
short, every one of his faults we either endeavor to extenuate, or dignify it
with the name of that virtue, which approaches it. It Is evident the same method
of thinking runs through common life.

THERE are some, who add another condition, and require not only that the pain
and pleasure arise from the person, but likewise that it arise knowingly, and
with a particular design and intention. A man, who wounds and harms us by
accident, becomes not our enemy upon that account, nor do we think ourselves
bound by any ties of gratitude to one, who does us any service after the same
manner. By the intention we judge of the actions, and according as that is good
or bad, they become causes of love or hatred.

BUT here we must make a distinction. If that quality in another, which pleases
or displeases, be constant and inherent in his person and character, it will
cause love or hatred independent of the intention: But otherwise a knowledge
and design is requisite, in order to give rise to these passions. One that is
disagreeable by his deformity or folly is the object of our aversion, though
nothing be more certain, than that he has not the least intention of
displeasing us by these qualities. But if the uneasiness proceed not from a
quality, but an action, which is produced and annihilated in a moment, it is
necessary, in order to produce some relation, and connect this action
sufficiently with the person, that it be derived from a particular forethought
and design. It Is not enough, that the action arise from the person, and have
him for its immediate cause and author. This relation alone is too feeble and
inconstant to be a foundation for these passions. It reaches not the sensible
and thinking part, and neither proceeds from any thing durable in him, nor
leaves any thing behind it; but passes in a moment, and is as if it had never
been. On the other hand, an intention shows certain qualities, which remaining
after the action is performed, connect it with the person, and facilitate the
transition of ideas from one to the other. We can never think of him without
reflecting on these qualities; unless repentance and a change of life have
produced an alteration in that respect: In which case the passion is likewise
altered. This therefore is one reason, why an intention is requisite to excite
either love or hatred.

BUT we must farther consider, that an intention, besides its strengthening the
relation of ideas, is often necessary to produce a relation of impressions, and
give rise to pleasure and uneasiness. For it is observable, that the principal
part of an injury is the contempt and hatred, which it shows in the person,
that injures us; and without that, the mere harm gives us a less sensible
uneasiness. In like manner, a good office is agreeable, chiefly because it
flatters our vanity, and is a proof of the kindness and esteem of the person,
who performs it. The removal of the intention, removes the mortification in the
one case, and vanity in the other; and must of course cause a remarkable
diminution in the passions of love and hatred.

I GRANT, that these effects of the removal of design, in diminishing the
relations of impressions and ideas, are not entire, nor able to remove every
degree of these relations. But then I ask, if the removal of design be able
entirely to remove the passion of love and hatred? Experience, I am sure,
informs us of the contrary, nor is there any thing more certain, than that men
often fall into a violent anger for injuries, which they themselves must own to
be entirely involuntary and accidental. This emotion, indeed, cannot be of long
continuance; but still is sufficient to show, that there is a natural connection
betwixt uneasiness and anger, and that the relation of impressions will operate
upon a very small relation of ideas. But when the violence of the impression is
once a little abated, the defect of the relation begins to be better felt; and
as the character of a person is no wise interested in such injuries as are
casual and involuntary, it seldom happens that on their account, we entertain a
lasting enmity.

To illustrate this doctrine by a parallel instance, we may observe, that not
only the uneasiness, which proceeds from another by accident, has but little
force to excite our passion, but also that which arises from an acknowledged
necessity and duty. One that has a real design of harming us, proceeding not
from hatred and ill will, but from justice and equity, draws not upon him our
anger, if we be in any degree reasonable; notwithstanding he is both the cause,
and the knowing cause of our sufferings. Let us examine a little this
phenomenon.

IT IS evident in the first place, that this circumstance is not decisive; and
though it may be able to diminish the passions, it is seldom it can entirely
remove them. How few criminals are there, who have no ill will to the person,
that accuses them, or to the judge, that condemns them, even though they be
conscious of their own deserts? In like manner our antagonist in a lawsuit,
and our competitor for any office, are commonly regarded as our enemies; though
we must acknowledge, if we would but reflect a moment, that their motive is
entirely as justifiable as our own.

BESIDES we may consider, that when we receive harm from any person, we are apt
to imagine him criminal, and it is with extreme difficulty we allow of his
justice and innocence. This is a clear proof, that, independent of the opinion
of iniquity, any harm of uneasiness has a natural tendency to excite our
hatred, and that afterward we seek for reasons upon which we may justify and
establish the passion. Here the idea of injury produces not the passion, but
arises from it.

NOR is it any wonder that passion should produce the opinion of injury; since
otherwise it must suffer a considerable diminution, which all the passions
avoid as much possible. The removal of injury may remove the anger, without
proving that the anger arises only from the injury. The harm and the justice
are two contrary objects, of which the one has a tendency to produce hatred,
and the other love; and it is according to their different degrees, and our
particular turn of thinking, that either of the objects prevails, and excites
its proper passion.

SECT. IV. Of the love of relations.
HAVING given a reason, why several actions, that cause a real pleasure or
uneasiness, excite not any degree, or but a small one, of the passion of love
or hatred toward the actors; 'twill be necessary to show, wherein consists the
pleasure or uneasiness of many objects, which we find by experience to produce
these passions.

ACCORDING to the preceding system there is always required a double relation
of impressions and ideas betwixt the cause and effect, in order to produce
either love or hatred. But though this be universally true, it is remarkable that
the passion of love may be excited by only one relation of a different kind,
viz. betwixt ourselves and the object; or more properly speaking, that this
relation is always attended with both the others. Whoever is united to us by
any connection is always sure of a share of our love, proportioned to the
connection, without enquiring into his other qualities. Thus the relation of
blood produces the strongest tie the mind is capable of in the love of parents
to their children, and a lesser degree of the same affection, as the relation
lessens. Nor has consanguinity alone this effect, but any other relation
without exception. We love our countrymen, our neighbors, those of the same
trade, profession, and even name with ourselves. Every one of these relations
is esteemed some tie, and gives a title to a share of our affection.

THERE is another phenomenon, which is parallel to this, viz. that
acquaintance, without any kind of relation, gives rise to love and kindness.
When we have contracted a habitude and intimacy with any person; though in
frequenting his company we have not been able to discover any very valuable
quality, of which he is possessed; yet we cannot forbear preferring him to
strangers, of whose superior merit we are fully convinced. These two phenomenon
of the effects of relation and acquaintance will give mutual light to each
other, and may be both explained from the same principle.

THOSE, who take a pleasure in declaiming against human nature, have observed,
that man is altogether insufficient to support himself; and that when you
loosen all the holds, which he has of external objects, he immediately drops
down into the deepest melancholy and despair. From this, say they, proceeds
that continual search after amusement in gaming, in hunting, in business; by
which we endeavor to forget ourselves, and excite our spirits from the
languide state, into which they fall, when not sustained by some brisk and
lively emotion. To this method of thinking I so far agree, that I own the mind
to be insufficient, of itself, to its own entertainment, and that it naturally
seeks after foreign objects, which may produce a lively sensation, and agitate
the spirits. On the appearance of such an object it awakes, as it were, from a
dream: The blood flows with a new tide: The heart is elevated: And the whole
man acquires a vigor, which he cannot command in his solitary and calm
moments. Hence company is naturally so rejoicing, as presenting the liveliest
of all objects, viz. a rational and thinking Being like ourselves, who
communicates to us all the actions of his mind; makes us privy to his inmost
sentiments and affections; and lets us see, in the very instant of their
production, all the emotions, which are caused by any object. Every lively idea
is agreeable, but especially that of a passion, because such an idea becomes a
kind of passion, and gives a more sensible agitation to the mind, than any
other image or conception.

THIS being once admitted, all the rest is easy. For as the company of
strangers is agreeable to us for a short time, by inlivening our thought; so
the company of our relations and acquaintance must be peculiarly agreeable,
because it has this effect in a greater degree, and is of more durable
influence. Whatever is related to us is conceived in a lively manner by the
easy transition from ourselves to the related object. Custom also, or
acquaintance facilitates the entrance, and strengthens the conception of any
object. The first case is parallel to our reasonings from cause and effect; the
second to education. And as reasoning and education concur only in producing a
lively and strong idea of any object; so is this the only particular, which is
common to relation and acquaintance. This must, therefore, be the influencing
quality, by which they produce all their common effects; and love or kindness
being one of these effects, it must be from the force and liveliness of
conception, that the passion is derived. Such a conception is peculiarly
agreeable, and makes us have an affectionate regard for every thing, that
produces it, when the proper object of kindness and good will.

IT IS obvious, that people associate together according to their particular
tempers and dispositions, and that men of gay tempers naturally love the gay;
as the serious bear an affection to the serious. This not only happens, where
they remark this resemblance betwixt themselves and others, but also by the
natural course of the disposition, and by a certain sympathy, which always
arises betwixt similar characters. Where they remark the resemblance, it
operates after the manner of a relation, by producing a connection of ideas.
Where they do not remark it, it operates by some other principle; and if this
latter principle be similar to the former, it must be received as a
confirmation of the foregoing reasoning.

THE idea of ourselves is always intimately present to us, and conveys a
sensible degree of vivacity to the idea of any other object, to which we are
related. This lively idea changes by degrees into a real impression; these two
kinds of perception being in a great measure the same, and differing only in
their degrees of force and vivacity. But this change must be produced with the
greater ease, that our natural temper gives us a propensity to the same
impression, which we observe in others, and makes it arise upon any slight
occasion. In that case resemblance converts the idea into an impression, not
only by means of the relation, and by transfusing the original vivacity into
the related idea; but also by presenting such materials as take fire from the
least spark. And as in both cases a love or affection arises from the
resemblance, we may learn that a sympathy with others is agreeable only by
giving an emotion to the spirits, since an easy sympathy and correspondent
emotions are alone common to relation, acquaintance, and resemblance.

THE great propensity men have to pride may be considered as another similar
phenomenon. It often happens, that after we have lived a considerable time in
any city; however at first it might be disagreeable to us; yet as we become
familiar with the objects, and contract an acquaintance, though merely with the
streets and buildings, the aversion diminishes by degrees, and at last changes
into the opposite passion. The mind finds a satisfaction and ease in the view
of objects, to which it is accustomed, and naturally prefers them to others,
which, though, perhaps, in themselves more valuable, are less known to it. By the
same quality of the mind we are seduced into a good opinion of ourselves, and
of all objects, that belong to us. They appear in a stronger light; are more
agreeable; and consequently fitter subjects of pride and vanity, than any other.

IT may not be amiss, in treating of the affection we bear our acquaintance and
relations, to observe some pretty curious phenomenon, which attend it. It Is
easy to remark in common life, that children esteem their relation to their
mother to be weakened, in a great measure, by her second marriage, and no
longer regard her with the same eye, as if she had continued in her state of
widow-hood. Nor does this happen only, when they have felt any inconveniences
from her second marriage, or when her husband is much her inferior; but even
without any of these considerations, and merely because she has become part of
another family. This also takes place with regard to the second marriage of a
father; but in a much less degree: And it is certain the ties of blood are not
so much loosened in the latter case as by the marriage of a mother. These two
phenomenon are remarkable in themselves, but much more so when compared.

IN order to produce a perfect relation betwixt two objects, it is requisite,
not only that the imagination be conveyed from one to the other by resemblance,
contiguity or causation, but also that it return back from the second to the
first with the same ease and facility. At first sight this may seem a necessary
and unavoidable consequence. If one object resemble another, the latter object
must necessarily resemble the former. If one object be the cause of another,
the second object is effect to its cause. It Is the same case with contiguity:
And therefore the relation being always reciprocal, it may be thought, that the
return of the imagination from the second to the first must also, in every
case, be equally natural as its passage from the first to the second. But upon
farther examination we shall easily discover our mistake. For supposing the
second object, beside its reciprocal relation to the first, to have also a
strong relation to a third object; in that case the thought, passing from the
first object to the second, returns not back with the same facility, though the
relation continues the same; but is readily carried on to the third object, by
means of the new relation, which presents itself, and gives a new impulse to
the imagination. This new relation, therefore, weakens the tie betwixt the
first and second objects. The fancy is by its very nature wavering and
inconstant; and considers always two objects as more strongly related together,
where it finds the passage equally easy both in going and returning, than where
the transition is easy only in one of these motions. The double motion is a
kind of a double tie, and binds the objects together in the closest and most
intimate manner.

THE second marriage of a mother breaks not the relation of child and parent;
and that relation suffices to convey my imagination from myself to her with the
greatest ease and facility. But after the imagination is arrived at this point
of view, it finds its object to be surrounded with so many other relations,
which challenge its regard, that it knows not which to prefer, and is at a loss
what new object to pitch upon. The ties of interest and duty bind her to
another family, and prevent that return of the fancy from her to myself, which
is necessary to support the union. The thought has no longer the vibration,
requisite to set it perfectly at ease, and indulge its inclination to change.
It goes with facility, but returns with difficulty; and by that interruption
finds the relation much weakened from what it would be were the passage open
and easy on both sides.

NOW to give a reason, why this effect follows not in the same degree upon the
second marriage of a father: we may reflect on what has been proved already,
that though the imagination goes easily from the view of a lesser object to that
of a greater, yet it returns not with the same facility from the greater to the
less. When my imagination goes from myself to my father, it passes not so
readily from him to his second wife, nor considers him as entering into a
different family, but as continuing the head of that family, of which I am
myself a part. His superiority prevents the easy transition of the thought from
him to his spouse, but keeps the passage still open for a return to myself
along the same relation of child and parent. He is not sunk in the new relation
he acquires; so that the double motion or vibration of thought is still easy
and natural. By this indulgence of the fancy in its inconstancy, the tie of
child and parent still preserves its full force and influence.

A MOTHER thinks not her tie to a son weakened, because it is shared with her
husband: Nor a son his with a parent, because it is shared with a brother. The
third object is here related to the first, as well as to the second; so that
the imagination goes and comes along all of them with the greatest facility.

SECT. V. Of our esteem for the rich and powerful.
NOTHING has a greater tendency to give us an esteem for any person, than his
power and riches; or a contempt, than his poverty and meanness: And as esteem
and contempt are to be considered as species of love and hatred, 'twill be
proper in this place to explain these phenomenon.

HERE it happens most fortunately, that the greatest difficulty is not to
discover a principle capable of producing such an effect, but to choose the
chief and predominant among several, that present themselves. The satisfaction
we take in the riches of others, and the esteem we have for the possessors may
be ascribed to three different causes. First, To the objects they possess; such
as houses, gardens, equipages; which, being agreeable in themselves,
necessarily produce a sentiment of pleasure in every one, that either considers
or surveys them. Secondly, To the expectation of advantage from the rich and
powerful by our sharing their possessions. Thirdly, To sympathy, which makes us
partake of the satisfaction of every one, that approaches us. All these
principles may concur in producing the present phenomenon. The question is, to
which of them we ought principally to ascribe it.

IT IS certain, that the first principle, viz. the reflection on agreeable
objects, has a greater influence, than what, at first sight, we may be apt to
imagine. We seldom reflect on what is beautiful or ugly, agreeable or
disagreeable, without an emotion of pleasure or uneasiness; and though these
sensations appear not much in our common indolent way of thinking, it is easy,
either in reading or conversation, to discover them. Men of wit always turn the
discourse on subjects that are entertaining to the imagination; and poets never
present any objects but such as are of the same nature. Mr. Philips has chosen
Cider for the subject of an excellent poem. Beer would not have been so proper,
as being neither so agreeable to the taste nor eye. But he would certainly have
preferred wine to either of them, could his native country have afforded him so
ageeeable a liquor. We may learn from thence, that every thing, which is
agreeable to the senses, is also in some measure agreeable to the fancy, and
conveys to the thought an image of that satisfaction, which it gives by its
real application to the bodily organs.

BUT though these reasons may induce us to comprehend this delicacy of the
imagination among the causes of the respect, which we pay the rich and
powerful, there are many other reasons, that may keep us from regarding it as
the sole or principal. For as the ideas of pleasure can have an influence only
by means of their vivacity, which makes them approach impressions, it is most
natural those ideas should have that influence, which are favored by most
circumstances, and have a natural tendency to become strong and lively; such as
our ideas of the passions and sensations of any human creature. Every human
creature resembles ourselves, and by that means has an advantage above any
other object, in operating on the imagination.

BESIDES, if we consider the nature of that faculty, and the great influence
which all relations have upon it, we shall easily be persuaded, that however
the ideas of the pleasant wines, music, or gardens, which the rich man enjoys,
may become lively and agreeable, the fancy will not confine itself to them, but
will carry its view to the related objects; and in particular, to the person,
who possesses them. And this is the more natural, that the pleasant idea or
image produces here a passion toward the person, by means of his relation to
the object; so that it is unavoidable but he must enter into the original
conception, since he makes the object of the derivative passion. But if he
enters into the original conception, and is considered as enjoying these
agreeable objects, it is sympathy, which is properly the cause of the affection;
and the third principle is more powerful and universal than the first.

ADD to this, that riches and power alone, even though unemploy'd, naturally
cause esteem and respect: And consequently these passions arise not from the
idea of any beautiful or agreeable objects. It Is true; money implies a kind of
representation of such objects, by the power it affords of obtaining them; and
for that reason may still be esteemed proper to convey those agreeable images,
which may give rise to the passion. But as this prospect is very distant, it is
more natural for us to take a contiguous object, viz. the satisfaction, which
this power affords the person, who is possessed of it. And of this we shall be
farther satisfied, if we consider, that riches represent the goods of life,
only by means of the will; which employs them; and therefore imply in their
very nature an idea of the person, and cannot be considered without a kind of
sympathy with his sensations and enjoyments.

THIS we may confirm by a reflection, which to some will, perhaps, appear too
subtle and refined. I have already observed, that power, as distinguished from
its exercise, has either no meaning at all, or is nothing but a possibility or
probability of existence; by which any object approaches to reality, and has a
sensible influence on the mind. I have also observed, that this approach, by an
illusion of the fancy, appears much greater, when we ourselves are possessed of
the power, than when it is enjoyed by another; and that in the former case the
objects seem to touch upon the very verge of reality, and convey almost an
equal satisfaction, as if actually in our possession. Now I assert, that where
we esteem a person upon account of his riches, we must enter into this
sentiment of the proprietor, and that without such a sympathy the idea of the
agreeable objects, which they give him the power to produce, would have but a
feeble influence upon us. An avaritious man is respected for his money, though he
scarce is possessed of a power; that is, there scarce is a probability or even
possibility of his employing it in the acquisition of the pleasures and
conveniences of life. To himself alone this power seems perfect and entire; and
therefore we must receive his sentiments by sympathy, before we can have a
strong intense idea of these enjoyments, or esteem him upon account of them.

THUS we have found, that the first principle, viz. the agreeable idea of those
objects, which riches afford the enjoyment of; resolves itself in a great
measure into the third, and becomes a sympathy with the person we esteem or
love. Let us now examine the second principle, viz. the agreeable expectation
of advantage, and see what force we may justly attribute to it.

IT IS obvious, that though riches and authority undoubtedly give their owner a
power of doing us service, yet this power is not to be considered as on the
same footing with that, which they afford him, of pleasing himself, and
satisfying his own appetites. Self-love approaches the power and exercise very
near each other in the latter case; but in order to produce a similar effect in
the former, we must suppose a friendship and good will to be conjoined with the
riches. Without that circumstance it is difficult to conceive on what we can
found our hope of advantage from the riches of others, though there is nothing
more certain, than that we naturally esteem and respect the rich, even before
we discover in them any such favorable disposition toward us.

BUT I carry this farther, and observe, not only that we respect the rich and
powerful, where they show no inclination to serve us, but also when we lie so
much out of the sphere of their activity, that they cannot even be supposed to
be endowed with that power. Prisoners of war are always treated with a respect
suitable to their condition; and it is certain riches go very far toward fixing
the condition of any person. If birth and quality enter for a share, this still
affords us an argument of the same kind. For what is it we call a man of birth,
but one who is descended from a long succession of rich and powerful ancestors,
and who acquires our esteem by his relation to persons whom we esteem? His
ancestors, therefore, though dead, are respected, in some measure, on account of
their riches, and consequently without any kind of expectation.

BUT not to go so far as prisoners of war and the dead to find instances of
this disinterested esteem for riches, let us observe with a little attention
those phenomenon that occur to us in common life and conversation. A man, who
is himself of a competent fortune, upon coming into a company of strangers,
naturally treats them with different degrees of respect and deference, as he is
informed of their different fortunes and conditions; though it is impossible he
can ever propose, and perhaps would not accept of any advantage from them. A
traveller is always admitted into company, and meets with civility, in
proportion as his train and equipage speak him a man of great or moderate
fortune. In short, the different ranks of men are, in a great measure,
regulated by riches, and that with regard to superiors as well as inferiors,
strangers as well as acquaintance.

THERE is, indeed, an answer to these arguments, drawn from the influence of
general rules. It may be pretended, that being accustomed to expect succor and
protection from the rich and powerful, and to esteem them upon that account, we
extend the same sentiments to those, who resemble them in their fortune, but
from whom we can never hope for any advantage. The general rule still prevails,
and by giving a bent to the imagination draws along the passion, in the same
manner as if its proper object were real and existent.

BUT that this principle does not here take place, will easily appear, if we
consider, that in order to establish a general rule, and extend it beyond its
proper bounds, there is required a certain uniformity in our experience, and a
great superiority of those instances, which are conformable to the rule, above
the contrary. But here the case is quite otherwise. Of a hundred men of credit
and fortune I meet with, there is not, perhaps, one from whom I can expect
advantage; so that it is impossible any custom can ever prevail in the present
case.

UPON THE WHOLE, there remains nothing, which can give us an esteem for power
and riches, and a contempt for meanness and poverty, except the principle of
sympathy, by which we enter into the sentiments of the rich and poor, and
partake of their pleasure and uneasiness. Riches give satisfaction to their
possessor; and this satisfaction is conveyed to the beholder by the
imagination, which produces an idea resembling the original impression in force
and vivacity. This agreeable idea or impression is connected with love, which
is an agreeable passion. It proceeds from a thinking conscious being, which is
the very object of love. From this relation of impressions, and identity of
ideas, the passion arises, according to my hypothesis.

THE best method of reconciling us to this opinion is to take a general survey
of the universe, and observe the force of sympathy through the whole animal
creation, and the easy communication of sentiments from one thinking being to
another. In all creatures, that prey not upon others, and are not agitated with
violent passions, there appears a remarkable desire of company, which
associates them together, without any advantages they can ever propose to reap
from their union. This is still more conspicuous in man, as being the creature
of the universe, who has the most ardent desire of society, and is fitted for
it by the most advantages. We can form no wish, which has not a reference to
society. A perfect solitude is, perhaps, the greatest punishment we can suffer.
Every pleasure languishes when enjoyed apart from company, and every pain
becomes more cruel and intolerable. Whatever other passions we may be actuated
by; pride, ambition, avarice, curiosity, revenge or lust; the soul or animating
principle of them all is sympathy; nor would they have any force, were we to
abstract entirely from the thoughts and sentiments of others. Let all the
powers and elements of nature conspire to serve and obey one man: Let the sun
rise and set at his command: The sea and rivers roll as he pleases, and the
earth furnish spontaneously whatever may be useful or agreeable to him: He will
still be miserable, till you give him some one person at least, with whom he
may share his happiness, and whose esteem and friendship he may enjoy.

THIS conclusion from a general view of human nature, we may confirm by
particular instances, wherein the force of sympathy is very remarkable. Most
kinds of beauty are derived from this origin; and though our first object be some
senseless inanimate piece of matter, it is seldom we rest there, and carry not
our view to its influence on sensible and rational creatures. A man, who shows
us any house or building, takes particular care among other things to point out
the convenience of the apartments, the advantages of their situation, and the
little room lost in the stairs, anti-chambers and passages; and indeed it is
evident, the chief part of the beauty consists in these particulars. The
observation of convenience gives pleasure, since convenience is a beauty. But
after what manner does it give pleasure? It Is certain our own interest is not
in the least concerned; and as this is a beauty of interest, not of form, so to
speak, it must delight us merely by communication, and by our sympathizing with
the proprietor of the lodging. We enter into his interest by the force of
imagination, and feel the same satisfaction, that the objects naturally
occasion in him.

THIS observation extends to tables, chairs, scritoires, chimneys, coaches,
sadles, ploughs, and indeed to every work of art; it being an universal rule,
that their beauty is chiefly derived from their utility, and from their fitness
for that purpose, to which they are destined. But this is an advantage, that
concerns only the owner, nor is there any thing but sympathy, which can
interest the spectator.

IT IS evident, that nothing renders a field more agreeable than its fertility,
and that scarce any advantages of ornament or situation will be able to equal
this beauty. It Is the same case with particular trees and plants, as with the
field on which they grow. I know not but a plain, overgrown with furze and
broom, may be, in itself, as beautiful as a hill covered with vines or
olive trees; though it will never appear so to one, who is acquainted with the
value of each. But this is a beauty merely of imagination, and has no
foundation in what appears to the senses. Fertility and value have a plain
reference to use; and that to riches, joy, and plenty; in which though we have no
hope of partaking, yet we enter into them by the vivacity of the fancy, and
share them, in some measure, with the proprietor.

THERE is no rule in painting more reasonable than that of ballancing the
figures, and placing them with the greatest exactness on their proper center of
gravity. A figure, which is not justly balanced, is disagreeable; and that
because it conveys the ideas of its fall, of harm, and of pain: Which ideas are
painful, when by sympathy they acquire any degree of force and vivacity.

ADD to this, that the principal part of personal beauty is an air of health
and vigor, and such a construction of members as promises strength and
activity. This idea of beauty cannot be accounted for but by sympathy.

IN general we may remark, that the minds of men are mirrors to one another,
not only because they reflect each others emotions, but also because those rays
of passions, sentiments and opinions may be often reverberated, and may decay
away by insensible degrees. Thus the pleasure, which a rich man receives from
his possessions, being thrown upon the beholder, causes a pleasure and esteem;
which sentiments again, being perceived and sympathiz'd with, increase the
pleasure of the possessor; and being once more reflected, become a new
foundation for pleasure and esteem in the beholder. There is certainly an
original satisfaction in riches derived from that power, which they bestow, of
enjoying all the pleasures of life; and as this is their very nature and
essence, it must be the first source of all the passions, which arise from
them. One of the most considerable of these passions is that of love or esteem
in others, which therefore proceeds from a sympathy with the pleasure of the
possessor. But the possessor has also a secondary satisfaction in riches
arising from the love and esteem he acquires by them, and this satisfaction is
nothing but a second reflection of that original pleasure, which proceeded from
himself. This secondary satisfaction or vanity becomes one of the principal
recommendations of riches, and is the chief reason, why we either desire them
for ourselves, or esteem them in others. Here then is a third rebound of the
original pleasure; after which it is difficult to distinguish the images and
reflections, by reason of their faintness and confusion.

SECT. VI. Of benevolence and anger.
IDEAS may be compared to the extension and solidity of matter, and
impressions, especially reflective ones, to colors. tastes, smells and other
sensible qualities. Ideas never admit of a total union, but are endowed with a
kind of impenetrability, by which they exclude each other, and are capable of
forming a compound by their conjunction, not by their mixture. On the other
hand, impressions and passions are susceptible of an entire union; and like
colors, may be blended so perfectly together, that each of them may lose
itself, and contribute only to vary that uniform impression, which arises from
the whole. Some of the most curious phenomenon of the human mind are derived
from this property of the passions.

IN examining those ingredients, which are capable of uniting with love and
hatred, I begin to be sensible, in some measure, of a misfortune, that has
attended every system of philosophy, with which the world has been yet
acquainted. It Is commonly found, that in accounting for the operations of
nature by any particular hypothesis; among a number of experiments, that
quadrate exactly with the principles we would endeavor to establish; there is
always some phenomenon, which is more stubborn, and will not so easily bend to
our purpose. We need not be surpised, that this should happen in natural
philosophy. The essence and composition of external bodies are so obscure, that
we must necessarily, in our reasonings, or rather conjectures concerning them,
involve ourselves in contradictions and absurdities. But as the perceptions of
the mind are perfectly known, and I have used all imaginable caution in forming
conclusions concerning them, I have always hoped to keep clear of those
contradictions, which have attended every other system. Accordingly the
difficulty, which I have at present in my eye, is no-wise contrary to my
system; but only departs a little from that simplicity, which has been hitherto
its principal force and beauty.

THE passions of love and hatred are always followed by, or rather conjoined
with benevolence and anger. It Is this conjunction, which chiefly distinguishes
these affections from pride and humility. For pride and humility are pure
emotions in the soul, unattended with any desire, and not immediately exciting
us to action. But love and hatred are not completed within themselves, nor
rest in that emotion, which they produce, but carry the mind to something
farther. Love is always followed by a desire of the happiness of the person
beloved, and an aversion to his misery: As hatred produces a desire of the
misery and an aversion to the happiness of the person hated. So remarkable a
difference betwixt these two sets of passions of pride and humility, love and
hatred, which in so many other particulars correspond to each other, merits our
attention.

THE conjunction of this desire and aversion with love and hatred may be
accounted for by two different hypotheses. The first is, that love and hatred
have not only a cause, which excites them, viz. pleasure and pain; and an
object, to which they are directed, viz. a person or thinking being; but
likewise an end, which they endeavor to attain, viz. the happiness or misery
of the person beloved or hated; all which views, mixing together, make only one
passion. According to this system, love is nothing but the desire of happiness
to another person, and hatred that of misery. The desire and aversion
constitute the very nature of love and hatred. They are not only inseparable
but the same.

BUT this is evidently contrary to experience. For though it is certain we never
love any person without desiring his happiness, nor hate any without wishing
his misery, yet these desires arise only upon the ideas of the happiness or
misery of our friend or enemy being presented by the imagination, and are not
absolutely essential to love and hatred. They are the most obvious and natural
sentiments of these affections, but not the only ones. The passions may express
themselves in a hundred ways, and may subsist a considerable time, without our
reflecting on the happiness or misery of their objects; which clearly proves,
that these desires are not the same with love and hatred, nor make any
essential part of them.

WE may, therefore, infer, that benevolence and anger are passions different
from love and hatred, and only conjoined with them, by the original
constitution of the mind. As nature has given to the body certain appetites and
inclinations, which she increases, diminishes, or changes according to the
situation of the fluids or solids; she has proceeded in the same manner with
the mind. According as we are possessed with love or hatred, the correspondent
desire of the happiness or misery of the person, who is the object of these
passions, arises in the mind, and varies with each variation of these opposite
passions. This order of things, abstractedly considered, is not necessary. Love
and hatred might have been unattended with any such desires, or their
particular connection might have been entirely reversed. If nature had so
pleased, love might have had the same effect as hatred, and hatred as love. I
see no contradiction in supposing a desire of producing misery annexed to love,
and of happiness to hatred. If the sensation of the passion and desire be
opposite, nature could have altered the sensation without altering the tendency
of the desire, and by that means made them compatible with each other.

SECT. VII. Of compassion.
BUT though the desire of the happiness or misery of others, according to the
love or hatred we bear them, be an arbitrary and original instinct implanted in
our nature, we find it may be counterfeited on many occasions, and may arise
from secondary principles. Pity is a concern for, and malice a joy in the
misery of others, without any friendship or enmity to occasion this concern or
joy. We pity even strangers, and such as are perfectly indifferent to us: And
if our ill will to another proceed from any harm or injury, it is not, properly
speaking, malice, but revenge. But if we examine these affections of pity and
malice we shall find them to be secondary ones, arising from original
affections, which are varied by some particular turn of thought and imagination.

'TWILL be easy to explain the passion of pity, from the precedent reasoning
concerning sympathy. We have a lively idea of every thing related to us. All
human creatures are related to us by resemblance. Their persons, therefore,
their interests, their passions, their pains and pleasures must strike upon us
in a lively manner, and produce an emotion similar to the original one; since a
lively idea is easily converted into an impression. If this be true in general,
it must be more so of affliction and sorrow. These have always a stronger and
more lasting influence than any pleasure or enjoyment.

A SPECTATOR of a tragedy passes through a long train of grief, terror,
indignation, and other affections, which the poet represents in the persons he
introduces. As many tragedies end happily, and no excellent one can be composed
without some reverses of fortune, the spectator must sympathize with all these
changes, and receive the fictitious joy as well as every other passion. Unless,
therefore, it be asserted, that every distinct passion is communicated by a
distinct original quality, and is not derived from the general principle of
sympathy above-explain'd, it must be allowed, that all of them arise from that
principle. To except any one in particular must appear highly unreasonable. As
they are all first present in the mind of one person, and afterward appear in
the mind of another; and as the manner of their appearance, first as an idea,
then as an impression, is in every case the same, the transition must arise
from the same principle. I am at least sure, that this method of reasoning
would be considered as certain, either in natural philosophy or common life.

ADD to this, that pity depends, in a great measure, on the contiguity, and
even sight of the object; which is a proof, that it is derived from the
imagination. Not to mention that women and children are most subject to pity,
as being most guided by that faculty. The same infirmity, which makes them
faint at the sight of a naked sword, though in the hands of their best friend,
makes them pity extremely those, whom they find in any grief or affliction.
Those philosophers, who derive this passion from I know not what subtle
reflections on the instability of fortune, and our being liable to the same
miseries we behold, will find this observation contrary to them among a great
many others, which it were easy to produce.

THERE remains only to take notice of a pretty remarkable phenomenon of this
passion; which is, that the communicated passion of sympathy sometimes acquires
strength from the weakness of its original, and even arises by a transition
from affections, which have no existence. Thus when a person obtains any
honorable office, or inherits a great fortune, we are always the more rejoiced
for his prosperity, the less sense he seems to have of it, and the greater
equanimity and indifference he shows in its enjoyment. In like manner a man,
who is not dejected by misfortunes, is the more lamented on account of his
patience; and if that virtue extends so far as utterly to remove all sense of
uneasiness, it still farther increases our compassion. When a person of merit
falls into what is vulgarly esteemed a great misfortune, we form a notion of
his condition; and carrying our fancy from the cause to the usual effect, first
conceive a lively idea of his sorrow, and then feel an impression of it,
entirely over-looking that greatness of mind, which elevates him above such
emotions, or only considering it so far as to increase our admiration, love and
tenderness for him. We find from experience, that such a degree of passion is
usually connected with such a misfortune; and though there be an exception in the
present case, yet the imagination is affected by the general rule, and makes us
conceive a lively idea of the passion, or rather feel the passion itself, in
the same manner, as if the person were really actuated by it. From the same
principles we blush for the conduct of those, who behave themselves foolishly
before us; and that though they show no sense of shame, nor seem in the least
conscious of their folly. All this proceeds from sympathy; but it is of a
partial kind, and views its objects only on one side, without considering the
other, which has a contrary effect, and would entirely destroy that emotion,
which arises from the first appearance.

WE have also instances, wherein an indifference and insensibility under
misfortune increases our concern for the misfortunate, even though the
indifference proceed not from any virtue and magnanimity. It Is an aggravation
of a murder, that it was committed upon persons asleep and in perfect security;
as historians readily observe of any infant prince, who is captive in the hands
of his enemies, that he is more worthy of compassion the less sensible he is of
his miserable condition. As we ourselves are here acquainted with the wretched
situation of the person, it gives us a lively idea and sensation of sorrow,
which is the passion that generally attends it; and this idea becomes still
more lively, and the sensation more violent by a contrast with that security
and indifference, which we observe in the person himself. A contrast of any
kind never fails to affect the imagination, especially when presented by the
subject; and it is on the imagination that pity entirely depends To prevent all
ambiguity, I must observe, that where I oppose the imagination to the memory, I
mean in general the faculty that presents our fainter ideas. In all other
places, and particularly when it is opposed to the understanding, I understand
the same faculty, excluding only our demonstrative and probable reasonings.
.

SECT. VIII. Of malice and envy.
WE must now proceed to account for the passion of malice, which imitates the
effects of hatred, as pity does those of love; and gives us a joy in the
sufferings and miseries of others, without any offense or injury on their part.

So little are men governed by reason in their sentiments and opinions, that
they always judge more of objects by comparison than from their intrinsic worth
and value. When the mind considers, or is accustomed to, any degree of
perfection, whatever falls short of it, though really esteemable, has
notwithstanding the same effect upon the passions, as what is defective and
ill. This is an original quality of the soul, and similar to what we have every
day experience of in our bodies. Let a man heat one hand and cool the other;
the same water will, at the same time, seem both hot and cold, according to the
disposition of the different organs. A small degree of any quality, succeeding
a greater, produces the same sensation, as if less than it really is, and even
sometimes as the opposite quality. Any gentle pain, that follows a violent one,
seems as nothing, or rather becomes a pleasure; as on the other hand a violent
pain, succeeding a gentle one, is doubly grievous and uneasy.

THIS no one can doubt of with regard to our passions and sensations. But there
may arise some difficulty with regard to our ideas and objects. When an object
augments or diminishes to the eye or imagination from a comparison with others,
the image and idea of the object are still the same, and are equally extended
in the retina, and in the brain or organ of perception. The eyes refract the
rays of light, and the optic nerves convey the images to the brain in the very
same manner, whether a great or small object has preceded; nor does even the
imagination alter the dimensions of its object on account of a comparison with
others. The question then is, how from the same impression and the same idea we
can form such different judgments concerning the same object, and at one time
admire its bulk, and at another despise its littleness. This variation in our
judgments must certainly proceed from a variation in some perception; but as
the variation lies not in the immediate impression or idea of the object, it
must lie in some other impression, that accompanies it.

IN order to explain this matter, I shall just touch upon two principles, one
of which shall be more fully explained in the progress of this treatise; the
other has been already accounted for. I believe it may safely be established
for a general maxim, that no object is presented to the senses, nor image
formed in the fancy, but what is accompanied with some emotion or movement of
spirits proportioned to it; and however custom may make us insensible of this
sensation, and cause us to confound it with the object or idea, 'twill be easy,
by careful and exact experiments, to separate and distinguish them. For to
instance only in the cases of extension and number; it is evident, that any very
bulky object, such as the ocean, an extended plain, a vast chain of mountains,
a wide forest; or any very numerous collection of objects, such as an army, a
fleet, a crowd, excite in the mind a sensible emotion; and that the admiration,
which arises on the appearance of such objects, is one of the most lively
pleasures, which human nature is capable of enjoying. Now as this admiration
increases or diminishes by the increase or diminution of the objects, we may
conclude, according to our foregoing Book I. Part III. Sect. 15.
principles, that it is a compound effect, proceeding from the conjunction of
the several effects, which arise from each part of the cause. Every part, then,
of extension, and every unite of number has a separate emotion attending it,
when conceived by the mind; and though that emotion be not always agreeable, yet
by its conjunction with others, and by its agitating the spirits to a just
pitch, it contributes to the production of admiration, which is always
agreeable. If this be allowed with respect to extension and number, we can make
no difficulty with respect to virtue and vice, wit and folly, riches and
poverty, happiness and misery, and other objects of that kind, which are always
attended with an evident emotion.

THE second principle I shall take notice of is that of our adherence to
general rules; which has such a mighty influence on the actions and
understanding, and is able to impose on the very senses. When an object is
found by experience to be always accompanied with another; whenever the first
object appears, though changed in very material circumstances; we naturally fly
to the conception of the second, and form an idea of it in as lively and strong
a manner, as if we had inferred its existence by the justest and most authentic
conclusion of our understanding. Nothing can undeceive us, not even our senses,
which, instead of correcting this false judgment, are often perverted by it,
and seem to authorize its errors.

THE conclusion I draw from these two principles, joined to the influence of
comparison abovementioned, is very short and decisive. Every object is
attended with some emotion proportioned to it; a great object with a great
emotion, a small object with a small emotion. A great object, therefore,
succeeding a small one makes a great emotion succeed a small one. Now a great
emotion succeeding a small one becomes still greater, and rises beyond its
ordinary proportion. But as there is a certain degree of an emotion, which
commonly attends every magnitude of an object; when the emotion increases, we
naturally imagine that the object has likewise increased. The effect conveys
our view to its usual cause, a certain degree of emotion to a certain magnitude
of the object; nor do we consider, that comparison may change the emotion
without changing any thing in the object. Those, who are acquainted with the
metaphysical part of optics, and know how we transfer the judgments and
conclusions of the understanding to the senses, will easily conceive this whole
operation.

BUT leaving this new discovery of an impression, that secretly attends every
idea; we must at least allow of that principle, from whence the discovery
arose, that objects appear greater or less by a comparison with others. We have
so many instances of this, that it is impossible we can dispute its veracity;
and it is from this principle I derive the passions of malice and envy.

IT IS evident we must receive a greater or less satisfaction or uneasiness from
reflecting on our own condition and circumstances, in proportion as they appear
more or less fortunate or unhappy, in proportion to the degrees of riches, and
power, and merit, and reputation, which we think ourselves possessed of. Now as
we seldom judge of objects from their intrinsic value, but form our notions of
them from a comparison with other objects; it follows, that according as we
observe a greater or less share of happipiness or misery in others, we must
make an estimate of our own, and feel a consequent pain or pleasure. The misery
of another gives us a more lively idea of our happiness, and his happiness of
our misery. The former, therefore, produces delight; and the latter uneasiness.

HERE then is a kind of pity reverst, or contrary sensations arising in the
beholder, from those which are felt by the person, whom he considers. In
general we may observe, that in all kinds of comparison an object makes us
always receive from another, to which it is compared, a sensation contrary to
what arises from itself in its direct and immediate survey. A small object
makes a great one appear still greater. A great object makes a little one
appear less. Deformity of itself produces uneasiness; but makes us receive new
pleasure by its contrast with a beautiful object, whose beauty is augmented by
it; as on the other hand, beauty, which of itself produces pleasure, makes us
receive a new pain by the contrast with any thing ugly, whose deformity it
augments. The case, therefore, must be the same with happiness and misery. The
direct survey of another's pleasure naturally gives us pleasure, and therefore
produces pain when compared with our own. His pain, considered in itself, is
painful to us, but augments the idea of our own happiness, and gives us
pleasure.

NOR will it appear strange, that we may feel a reverst sensation from the
happiness and misery of others; since we find the same comparison may give us a
kind of malice against ourselves, and make us rejoice for our pains, and grieve
for our pleasures. Thus the prospect of past pain is agreeable, when we are
satisfied with our present condition; as on the other hand our past pleasures
give us uneasiness, when we enjoy nothing at present equal to them. The
comparison being the same, as when we reflect on the sentiments of others, must
be attended with the same effects.

NAY a person may extend this malice against himself, even to his present
fortune, and carry it so far as designedly to seek affliction, and increase his
pains and sorrows. This may happen upon two occasions. First, Upon the distress
and misfortune of a friend, or person dear to him. Secondly, Upon the feeling
any remorses for a crime, of which he has been guilty. It Is from the principle
of comparison that both these irregular appetites for evil arise. A person, who
indulges himself in any pleasure, while his friend lies under affliction, feels
the reflected uneasiness from his friend more sensibly by a comparison with the
original pleasure, which he himself enjoys. This contrast, indeed, ought also
to inliven the present pleasure. But as grief is here supposed to be the
predominant passion, every addition falls to that side, and is swallowed up in
it, without operating in the least upon the contrary affection. It Is the same
case with those penances, which men inflict on themselves for their past sins
and failings. When a criminal reflects on the punishment he deserves, the idea
of it is magnified by a comparison with his present ease and satisfaction;
which forces him, in a manner, to seek uneasiness, in order to avoid so
disagreeable a contrast.

THIS reasoning will account for the origin of envy as well as of malice. The
only difference betwixt these passions lies in this, that envy is excited by
some present enjoyment of another, which by comparison diminishes our idea of
our own: Whereas malice is the unprovoked desire of producing evil to another,
in order to reap a pleasure from the comparison. The enjoyment, which is the
object of envy, is commonly superior to our own. A superiority naturally seems
to overshade us, and presents a disagreeable comparison. But even in the case
of an inferiority, we still desire a greater distance, in order to augment
still more the idea of ourself. When this distance diminishes, the comparison
is less to our advantage; and consequently gives us less pleasure, and is even
disagreeable. Hence arises that species of envy, which men feel, when they
perceive their inferiors approaching or overtaking them in the pursuit of glory
or happiness. In this envy we may see the effects of comparison twice repeated.
A man, who compares himself to his inferior, receives a pleasure from the
comparison: And when the inferiority decreases by the elevation of the
inferior, what should only have been a decrease of pleasure, becomes a real
pain, by a new comparison with its preceding condition.

IT IS worthy of observation concerning that envy, which arises from a
superiority in others, that it is not the great disproportion betwixt ourself
and another, which produces it; but on the contrary, our proximity. A common
soldier bears no such envy to his general as to his sergeant or corporal; nor
does an eminent writer meet with so great jealousy in common hackney scriblers,
as in authors, that more nearly approach him. It may, indeed, be thought, that
the greater the disproportion is, the greater must be the uneasiness from the
comparison. But we may consider on the other hand, that the great disproportion
cuts off the relation, and either keeps us from comparing ourselves with what
is remote from us, or diminishes the effects of the comparison. Resemblance and
proximity always produce a relation of ideas; and where you destroy these ties,
however other accidents may bring two ideas together; as they have no bond or
connecting quality to join them in the imagination; it is impossible they can
remain long united, or have any considerable influence on each other.

I HAVE observed in considering the nature of ambition, that the great feel a
double pleasure in authority from the comparison of their own condition with
that of their slaves; and that this comparison has a double influence, because
it is natural, and presented by the subject. When the fancy, in the comparison
of objects, passes not easily from the one object to the other, the action of
the mind is, in a great measure, broke, and the fancy, in considering the
second object, begins, as it were, upon a new footing. The impression, which
attends every object, seems not greater in that case by succeeding a less of
the same kind; but these two impressions are distinct, and produce their
distinct effects, without any communication together. The want of relation in
the ideas breaks the relation of the impressions, and by such a separation
prevents their mutual operation and influence.

To confirm this we may observe, that the proximity in the degree of merit is
not alone sufficient to give rise to envy, but must be assisted by other
relations. A poet is not apt to envy a philosopher, or a poet of a different
kind, of a different nation, or of a different age. All these differences
prevent or weaken the comparison, and consequently the passion.

THIS too is the reason, why all objects appear great or little, merely by a
comparison with those of the same species. A mountain neither magnifies nor
diminishes a horse in our eyes; but when a Flemish and a Welsh horse are seen
together, the one appears greater and the other less, than when viewed apart.

FROM the same principle we may account for that remark of historians, that any
party in a civil war always choose to call in a foreign enemy at any hazard
rather than submit to their fellow-citizens. Guicciardin applies this remark to
the wars in Italy, where the relations betwixt the different states are,
properly speaking, nothing but of name, language, and contiguity. Yet even
these relations, when joined with superiority, by making the comparison more
natural, make it likewise more grievous, and cause men to search for some other
superiority, which may be attended with no relation, and by that means may have
a less sensible influence on the imagination. The mind quickly perceives its
several advantages and disadvantages; and finding its situation to be most
uneasy, where superiority is conjoined with other relations, seeks its repose
as much as possible, by their separation, and by breaking that association of
ideas, which renders the comparison so much more natural and efficacious. When
it cannot break the association, it feels a stronger desire to remove the
superiority; and this is the reason why travelers are commonly so lavish of
their praises to the Chinese and Persians, at the same time, that they
depreciate those neighboring nations, which may stand upon a foot of rivalship
with their native country.

THESE examples from history and common experience are rich and curious; but we
may find parallel ones in the arts, which are no less remarkable. Should an
author compose a treatise, of which one part was serious and profound, another
light and humorous, every one would condemn so strange a mixture, and would
accuse him of the neglect of all rules of art and criticism. These rules of art
are founded on the qualities of human nature; and the quality of human nature,
which requires a consistency in every performance, is that which renders the
mind incapable of passing in a moment from one passion and disposition to a
quite different one. Yet this makes us not blame Mr. Prior for joining his Alma
and his Solomon in the same volume; though that admirable poet has succeeded
perfectly well in the gaiety of the one, as well as in the melancholy of the
other. Even supposing the reader should peruse these two compositions without
any interval, he would feel little or no difficulty in the change of passions:
Why, but because he considers these performances as entirely different, and by
this break in the ideas, breaks the progress of the affections, and hinders the
one from influencing or contradicting the other?

AN heroic and burlesque design, united in one picture, would be monstrous;
though we place two pictures of so opposite a character in the same chamber, and
even close by each other, without any scruple or difficulty.

IN a word, no ideas can affect each other, either by comparison, or by the
passions they separately produce, unless they be united together by some
relation, which may cause an easy transition of the ideas, and consequently of
the emotions or impressions, attending the ideas; and may preserve the one
impression in the passage of the imagination to the object of the other. This
principle is very remarkable, because it is analogous to what we have observed
both concerning the understanding and the passions. Suppose two objects to be
presented to me, which are not connected by any kind of relation. Suppose that
each of these objects separately produces a passion; and that these two
passions are in themselves contrary: We find from experience, that the want of
relation in the objects or ideas hinders the natural contrariety of the
passions, and that the break in the transition of the thought removes the
affections from each other, and prevents their opposition. It Is the same case
with comparison; and from both these phenomenon we may safely conclude, that
the relation of ideas must forward the transition of impressions; since its
absence alone is able to prevent it, and to separate what naturally should have
operated upon each other. When the absence of an object or quality removes any
usual or natural effect, we may certainly conclude that its presence
contributes to the production of the effect.

SECT. IX. Of the mixture of benevolence and anger with compassion and malice.
THUS we have endeavored to account for pity and malice. Both these affections
arise from the imagination, according to the light, in which it places its
object. When our fancy considers directly the sentiments of others, and enters
deep into them, it makes us sensible of all the passions it surveys, but in a
particular manner of grief or sorrow. On the contrary, when we compare the
sentiments of others to our own, we feel a sensation directly opposite to the
original one, viz. a joy from the grief of others, and a grief from their joy.
But these are only the first foundations of the affections of pity and malice.
Other passions are afterward confounded with them. There is always a mixture
of love or tenderness with pity, and of hatred or anger with malice. But it
must be confessed, that this mixture seems at first sight to be contradictory
to my system. For as pity is an uneasiness, and malice a joy, arising from the
misery of others, pity should naturally, as in all other cases, produce hatred;
and malice, love. This contradiction I endeavor to reconcile, after the
following manner.

IN order to cause a transition of passions, there is required a double
relation of impressions and ideas, nor is one relation sufficient to produce
this effect. But that we may understand the full force of this double relation,
we must consider, that it is not the present sensation alone or momentary pain
or pleasure, which determines the character of any passion, but the whole bent
or tendency of it from the beginning to the end. One impression may be related
to another, not only when their sensations are resembling, as we have all along
supposed in the preceding cases; but also when their impulses or directions are
similar and correspondent. This cannot take place with regard to pride and
humility; because these are only pure sensations, without any direction or
tendency to action. We are, therefore, to look for instances of this peculiar
relation of impressions only in such affections, as are attended with a certain
appetite or desire; such as those of love and hatred.

BENEVOLENCE or the appetite, which attends love, is a desire of the happiness
of the person beloved, and an aversion to his misery; as anger or the appetite,
which attends hatred, is a desire of the misery of the person hated, and an
aversion to his happiness. A desire, therefore, of the happiness of another,
and aversion to his misery, are similar to benevolence; and a desire of his
misery and aversion to his happiness are correspondent to anger. Now pity is a
desire of happiness to another, and aversion to his misery; as malice is the
contrary appetite. Pity, then, is related to benevolence; and malice to anger:
And as benevolence has been already found to be connected with love, by a
natural and original quality, and anger with hatred; it is by this chain the
passions of pity and malice are connected with love and hatred.

THIS hypothesis is founded on sufficient experience. A man, who from any
motives has entertained a resolution of performing an action, naturally runs
into every other view or motive, which may fortify that resolution, and give it
authority and influence on the mind. To confirm us in any design, we search for
motives drawn from interest, from honor, from duty. What wonder, then, that
pity and benevolence, malice, and anger, being the same desires arising from
different principles, should so totally mix together as to be
undistinguishable? As to the connection betwixt benevolence and love, anger and
hatred, being original and primary, it admits of no difficulty.

WE may add to this another experiment, viz. that benevolence and anger, and
consequently love and hatred, arise when our happiness or misery have any
dependence on the happiness or misery of another person, without any farther
relation. I doubt not but this experiment will appear so singular as to excuse
us for stopping a moment to consider it.

SUPPOSE, that two persons of the same trade should seek employment in a town,
that is not able to maintain both, it is plain the success of one is perfectly
incompatible with that of the other, and that whatever is for the interest of
either is contrary to that of his rival, and so vice versa. Suppose again, that
two merchants, though living in different parts of the world, should enter into
co-partnership together, the advantage or loss of one becomes immediately the
advantage or loss of his partner, and the same fortune necessarily attends
both. Now it is evident, that in the first case, hatred always follows upon the
contrariety of interests; as in the second, love arises from their union. Let
us consider to what principle we can ascribe these passions.

IT IS plain they arise not from the double relations of impressions and ideas,
if we regard only the present sensation. For taking the first case of
rivalship; though the pleasure and advantage of an antagonist necessarily causes
my pain and loss, yet to counter-ballance this, his pain and loss causes my
pleasure and advantage; and supposing him to be unsuccessful, I may by this
means receive from him a superior degree of satisfaction. In the same manner
the success of a partner rejoices me, but then his misfortunes afflict me in an
equal proportion; and it is easy to imagine, that the latter sentiment may in
many cases preponderate. But whether the fortune of a rival or partner be good
or bad, I always hate the former and love the latter.

THIS love of a partner cannot proceed from the relation or connection betwixt
us; in the same manner as I love a brother or countryman. A rival has almost as
close a relation to me as a partner. For as the pleasure of the latter causes
my pleasure, and his pain my pain; so the pleasure of the former causes my
pain, and his pain my pleasure. The connection, then, of cause and effect is the
same in both cases; and if in the one case, the cause and effect has a farther
relation of resemblance, they have that of contrariety in the other; which,
being also a species of resemblance, leaves the matter pretty equal.

THE only explication, then, we can give of this phenomenon is derived from
that principle of a parallel direction abovementioned. Our concern for our own
interest gives us a pleasure in the pleasure, and a pain in the pain of a
partner, after the same manner as by sympathy we feel a sensation correspondent
to those, which appear in any person, who is present with us. On the other
hand, the same concern for our interest makes us feel a pain in the pleasure,
and a pleasure in the pain of a rival; and in short the same contrariety of
sentiments as arises from comparison and malice. Since, therefore, a parallel
direction of the affections, proceeding from interest, can give rise to
benevolence or anger, no wonder the same parallel direction, derived from
sympathy and from comparison, should have the same effect.

IN general we may observe, that it is impossible to do good to others, from
whatever motive, without feeling some touches of kindness and good will toward
'em; as the injuries we do, not only cause hatred in the person, who suffers
them, but even in ourselves. These phenomenon, indeed, may in part be accounted
for from other principles.

BUT here there occurs a considerable objection, which 'twill be necessary to
examine before we proceed any farther. I have endeavored to prove, that power
and riches, or poverty and meanness; which give rise to love or hatred, without
producing any original pleasure or uneasiness; operate upon us by means of a
secondary sensation derived from a sympathy with that pain or satisfaction,
which they produce in the person, who possesses them. From a sympathy with his
pleasure there arises love; from that with his uneasiness, hatred. But it is a
maxim, which I have just now established, and which is absolutely necessary to
the explication of the phenomenon of pity and malice, That it is not the present
sensation or momentary pain or pleasure, which determines the character of any
passion, but the general bent or tendency of it from the beginning to the end.
For this reason, pity or a sympathy with pain produces love, and that because
it interests us in the fortunes of others, good or bad, and gives us a
secondary sensation correspondent to the primary; in which it has the same
influence with love and benevolence. Since then this rule holds good in one
case, why does it not prevail throughout, and why does sympathy in uneasiness
ever produce any passion beside good will and kindness? Is it becoming a
philosopher to alter his method of reasoning, and run from one principle to its
contrary, according to the particular phenomenon, which he would explain?

I HAVE mentioned two different causes, from which a transition of passion may
arise, viz. a double relation of ideas and impressions, and what is similar to
it, a conformity in the tendency and direction of any two desires, which arise
from different principles. Now I assert, that when a sympathy with uneasiness
is weak, it produces hatred or contempt by the former cause; when strong, it
produces love or tenderness by the latter. This is the solution of the
foregoing difficulty, which seems so urgent; and this is a principle founded on
such evident arguments, that we ought to have established it, even though it were
not necessary to the explication of any phenomenon.

IT IS certain, that sympathy is not always limited to the present moment, but
that we often feel by communication the pains and pleasures of others, which
are not in being, and which we only anticipate by the force of imagination. For
supposing I saw a person perfectly unknown to me, who, while asleep in the
fields, was in danger of being trod under foot by horses, I should immediately
run to his assistance; and in this I should be actuated by the same principle
of sympathy, which makes me concerned for the present sorrows of a stranger.
The bare mention of this is sufficient. Sympathy being nothing but a lively
idea converted into an impression, it is evident, that, in considering the
future possible or probable condition of any person, we may enter into it with
so vivid a conception as to make it our own concern; and by that means be
sensible of pains and pleasures, which neither belong to ourselves, nor at the
present instant have any real existence.

BUT however we may look forward to the future in sympathizing with any person,
the extending of our sympathy depends in a great measure upon our sense of his
present condition. It Is a great effort of imagination, to form such lively
ideas even of the present sentiments of others as to feel these very
sentiments; but it is impossible we could extend this sympathy to the future,
without being aided by some circumstance in the present, which strikes upon us
in a lively manner. When the present misery of another has any strong influence
upon me, the vivacity of the conception is not confined merely to its immediate
object, but diffuses its influence over all the related ideas, and gives me a
lively notion of all the circumstances of that person, whether past, present,
or future; possible, probable or certain. By means of this lively notion I am
interested in them; take part with them; and feel a sympathetic motion in my
breast, conformable to whatever I imagine in his. If I diminish the vivacity of
the first conception, I diminish that of the related ideas; as pipes can convey
no more water than what arises at the fountain. By this diminution I destroy
the future prospect, which is necessary to interest me perfectly in the fortune
of another. I may feel the present impression, but carry my sympathy no
farther, and never transfuse the force of the first conception into my ideas of
the related objects. If it be another's misery, which is presented in this
feeble manner, I receive it by communication, and am affected with all the
passions related to it: But as I am not so much interested as to concern myself
in his good fortune, as well as his bad, I never feel the extensive sympathy,
nor the passions related to it.

NOW in order to know what passions are related to these different kinds of
sympathy, we must consider, that benevolence is an original pleasure arising
from the pleasure of the person beloved, and a pain proceeding from his pain:
From which correspondence of impressions there arises a subsequent desire of
his pleasure, and aversion to his pain. In order, then, to make, a passion run
parallel with benevolence, it is requisite we should feel these double
impressions, correspondent to those of the person, whom we consider; nor is any
one of them alone sufficient for that purpose. When we sympathize only with one
impression, and that a painful one, this sympathy is related to anger and to
hatred, upon account of the uneasiness it conveys to us. But as the extensive
or limited sympathy depends upon the force of the first sympathy; it follows,
that the passion of love or hatred depends upon the same principle. A strong
impression, when communicated, gives a double tendency of the passions; which
is related to benevolence and love by a similarity of direction; however
painful the first impression might have been. A weak impression, that is
painful, is related to anger and hatred by the resemblance of sensations.
Benevolence, therefore, arises from a great degree of misery, or any degree
strongly sympathiz'd with: Hatred or contempt from a small degree, or one
weakly sympathiz'd with; which is the principle I intended to prove and explain.

NOR have we only our reason to trust to for this principle, but also
experience. A certain degree of poverty produces contempt; but a degree beyond
causes compassion and good will. We may under-value a peasant or servant; but
when the misery of a beggar appears very great, or is painted in very lively
colors, we sympathize with him in his afflictions, and feel in our heart
evident touches of pity and benevolence. The same object causes contrary
passions according to its different degrees. The passions, therefore, must
depend upon principles, that operate in such certain degrees, according to my
hypothesis. The increase of the sympathy has evidently the same effect as the
increase of the misery.

A BARREN or desolate country always seems ugly and disagreeable, and commonly
inspires us with contempt for the inhabitants. This deformity, however,
proceeds in a great measure from a sympathy with the inhabitants, as has been
already observed; but it is only a weak one, and reaches no farther than the
immediate sensation, which is disagreeable. The view of a city in ashes conveys
benevolent sentiments; because we there enter so deep into the interests of the
miserable inhabitants, as to wish for their prosperity, as well as feel their
adversity.

BUT though the force of the impression generally produces pity and benevolence,
it is certain, that by being carried too far it ceases to have that effect.
This, perhaps, may be worth our notice. When the uneasiness is either small in
itself, or remote from us, it engages not the imagination, nor is able to
convey an equal concern for the future and contingent good, as for the present
and real evil. Upon its acquiring greater force, we become so interested in the
concerns of the person, as to be sensible both of his good and bad fortune; and
from that complete sympathy there arises pity and benevolence. But 'twill
easily be imagined, that where the present evil strikes with more than ordinary
force, it may entirely engage our attention, and prevent that double sympathy,
abovementioned. Thus we find, that though every one, but especially women, are
apt to contract a kindness for criminals, who go to the scaffold, and readily
imagine them to be uncommonly handsome and well-shap'd; yet one, who is present
at the cruel execution of the rack, feels no such tender emotions; but is in a
manner overcome with horror, and has no leisure to temper this uneasy sensation
by any opposite sympathy.

BUT the instance, which makes the most clearly for my hypothesis, is that
wherein by a change of the objects we separate the double sympathy even from a
midling degree of the passion; in which case we find, that pity, instead of
producing love and tenderness as usual, always gives rise to the contrary
affection. When we observe a person in misfortunes, we are affected with pity
and love; but the author of that misfortune becomes the object of our strongest
hatred, and is the more detested in proportion to the degree of our compassion.
Now for what reason should the same passion of pity produce love to the person,
who suffers the misfortune, and hatred to the person, who causes it; unless it
be because in the latter case the author bears a relation only to the
misfortune; whereas in considering the sufferer we carry our view on every
side, and wish for his prosperity, as well as are sensible of his affliction?

I SHALL just observe, before I leave the present subject, that this
phenomenon of the double sympathy, and its tendency to cause love, may
contribute to the production of the kindness, which we naturally bear our
relations and acquaintance. Custom and relation make us enter deeply into the
sentiments of others; and whatever fortune we suppose to attend them, is
rendered present to us by the imagination, and operates as if originally our
own. We rejoice in their pleasures, and grieve for their sorrows, merely from
the force of sympathy. Nothing that concerns them is indifferent to us; and as
this correspondence of sentiments is the natural attendant of love, it readily
produces that affection.

SECT. X. Of respect and contempt.
THERE now remains only to explain the passions of respect and contempt, along
with the amorous affection, in order to understand all the passions which have
any mixture of love or hatred. Let us begin with respect and contempt.

IN considering the qualities and circumstances of others, we may either regard
them as they really are in themselves; or may make a comparison betwixt them
and our own qualities and circumstances; or may join these two methods of
consideration. The good qualities of others, from the first point of view,
produce love; from the second, humility; and from the third, respect; which is
a mixture of these two passions. Their bad qualities, after the same manner,
cause either hatred, or pride, or contempt, according to the light in which we
survey them.

THAT there is a mixture of pride in contempt, and of humility in respect, is,
I think, too evident, from their very feeling or appearance, to require any
particular proof. That this mixture arises from a tacit comparison of the
person contemned or respected with ourselves is no less evident. The same man
may cause either respect, love, or contempt by his condition and talents,
according as the person, who considers him, from his inferior becomes his equal
or superior. In changing the point of view, though the object may remain the
same, its proportion to ourselves entirely alters; which is the cause of an
alteration in the passions. These passions, therefore, arise from our observing
the proportion; that is, from a comparison.

I HAVE already observed, that the mind has a much stronger propensity to pride
than to humility, and have endeavored, from the principles of human nature, to
assign a cause for this phenomenon. Whether my reasoning be received or not,
the phenomenon is undisputed, and appears in many instances. Among the rest,
it is the reason why there is a much greater mixture of pride in contempt, than
of humility in respect, and why we are more elevated with the view of one below
us, than mortified with the presence of one above us. Contempt or scorn has so
strong a tincture of pride, that there scarce is any other passion discernable:
Whereas in esteem or respect, love makes a more considerable ingredient than
humility. The passion of vanity is so prompt, that it rouzes at the least call;
while humility requires a stronger impulse to make it exert itself.

BUT here it may reasonably be asked, why this mixture takes place only in some
cases, and appears not on every occasion. All those objects, which cause love,
when placed on another person, are the causes of pride, when transferred to
ourselves; and consequently ought to be causes of humility, as well as love,
while they belong to others, and are only compared to those, which we ourselves
possess. In like manner every quality, which, by being directly considered,
produces hatred, ought always to give rise to pride by comparison, and by a
mixture of these passions of hatred and pride ought to excite contempt or
scorn. The difficulty then is, why any objects ever cause pure love or hatred,
and produce not always the mixed passions of respect and contempt.

I HAVE supposed all along, that the passions of love and pride, and those of
humility and hatred are similar in their sensations, and that the two former
are always agreeable, and the two latter painful. But though this be universally
true, it is observable, that the two agreeable, as well as the two painful
passions, have some differences, and even contrarieties, which distinguish
them. Nothing invigorates and exalts the mind equally with pride and vanity;
though at the same time love or tenderness is rather found to weaken and infeeble
it. The same difference is observable betwixt the uneasy passions. Anger and
hatred bestow a new force on all our thoughts and actions; while humility and
shame deject and discourage us. Of these qualities of the passions, 'twill be
necessary to form a distinct idea. Let us remember, that pride and hatred
invigorate the soul; and love and humility infeeble it.

FROM this it follows, that though the conformity betwixt love and hatred in the
agreeableness of their sensation makes them always be excited by the same
objects, yet this other contrariety is the reason, why they are excited in very
different degrees. Genius and learning are pleasant and magnificent objects,
and by both these circumstances are adapted to pride and vanity; but have a
relation to love by their pleasure only. Ignorance and simplicity are
disagreeable and mean, which in the same manner gives them a double connection
with humility, and a single one with hatred. We may, therefore, consider it as
certain, that though the same object always produces love and pride, humility and
hatred, according to its different situations, yet it seldom produces either
the two former or the two latter passions in the same proportion.

IT IS here we must seek for a solution of the difficulty abovementioned, why
any object ever excites pure love or hatred, and does not always produce
respect or contempt, by a mixture of humility or pride. No quality in another
gives rise to humility by comparison, unless it would have produced pride by
being placed in ourselves; and vice versa no object excites pride by
comparison, unless it would have produced humility by the direct survey. This
is evident, objects always produce by comparison a sensation directly contrary
to their original one. Suppose, therefore, an object to be presented, which is
peculiarly fitted to produce love, but imperfectly to excite pride; this
object, belonging to another, gives rise directly to a great degree of love,
but to a small one of humility by comparison; and consequently that latter
passion is scarce felt in the compound, nor is able to convert the love into
respect. This is the case with good nature, good humor, facility, generosity,
beauty, and many other qualities. These have a peculiar aptitude to produce
love in others; but not so great a tendency to excite pride in ourselves: For
which reason the view of them, as belonging to another person, produces pure
love, with but a small mixture of humility and respect. It Is easy to extend the
same reasoning to the opposite passions.

BEFORE we leave this subject, it may not be amiss to account for a pretty
curious phenomenon, viz. why we commonly keep at a distance such as we
contemn, and allow not our inferiors to approach too near even in place and
situation. It has already been observed, that almost every kind of idea is
attended with some emotion, even the ideas of number and extension, much more
those of such objects as are esteemed of consequence in life, and fix our
attention. It Is not with entire indifference we can survey either a rich man or
a poor one, but must feel some faint touches, at least, of respect in the
former case, and of contempt in the latter. These two passions are contrary to
each other; but in order to make this contrariety be felt, the objects must be
someway related; otherwise the affections are totally separate and distinct,
and never encounter. The relation takes place wherever the persons become
contiguous; which is a general reason why we are uneasy at seeing such
disproportioned objects, as a rich man and a poor one, a nobleman and a porter,
in that situation.

THIS uneasiness, which is common to every spectator, must be more sensible to
the superior; and that because the near approach of the inferior is regarded as
a piece of illbreeding, and shows that he is not sensible of the disproportion,
and is no way affected by it. A sense of superiority in another breeds in all
men an inclination to keep themselves at a distance from him, and determines
them to redouble the marks of respect and reverence, when they are obliged to
approach him; and where they do not observe that conduct, it is a proof they are
not sensible of his superiority. From hence too it proceeds, that any great
difference in the degrees of any quality is called a distance by a common
metaphor, which, however trivial it may appear, is founded on natural
principles of the imagination. A great difference inclines us to produce a
distance. The ideas of distance and difference are, therefore, connected
together. Connected ideas are readily taken for each other; and this is in
general the source of the metaphor, as we shall have occasion to observe
afterward.

SECT. XI. Of the amorous passion, or love betwixt the sexes.
OF all the compound passions, which proceed from a mixture of love and hatred
with other affections, no one better deserves our attention, than that love,
which arises betwixt the sexes, as well on account of its force and violence,
as those curious principles of philosophy, for which it affords us an
uncontestable argument. It Is plain, that this affection, in its most natural
state, is derived from the conjunction of three different impressions or
passions, viz. The pleasing sensation arising from beauty; the bodily appetite
for generation; and a generous kindness or good will. The origin of kindness
from beauty may be explained from the foregoing reasoning. The question is how
the bodily appetite is excited by it.

THE appetite of generation, when confined to a certain degree, is evidently of
the pleasant kind, and has a strong connection with all the agreeable emotions.
Joy, mirth, vanity, and kindness are all incentives to this desire; as well as
music, dancing, wine, and good cheer. On the other hand, sorrow, melancholy,
poverty, humility are destructive of it. From this quality it is easily
conceived why it should be connected with the sense of beauty.

BUT there is another principle that contributes to the same effect. I have
observed that the parallel direction of the desires is a real relation, and no
less than a resemblance in their sensation, produces a connection among them.
That we may fully comprehend the extent of this relation, we must consider,
that any principal desire may be attended with subordinate ones, which are
connected with it, and to which if other desires are parallel, they are by that
means related to the principal one. Thus hunger may often be considered as the
primary inclination of the soul, and the desire of approaching the meat as the
secondary one; since it is absolutely necessary to the satisfying that appetite.
If an object, therefore, by any separate qualities, inclines us to approach the
meat, it naturally increases our appetite; as on the contrary, whatever
inclines us to set our victuals at a distance, is contradictory to hunger, and
diminishes our inclination to them. Now it is plain that beauty has the first
effect, and deformity the second: Which is the reason why the former gives us a
keener appetite for our victuals, and the latter is sufficient to disgust us at
the most savoury dish, that cookery has invented. All this is easily applicable
to the appetite for generation.

FROM these two relations, viz. resemblance and a parallel desire, there arises
such a connection betwixt the sense of beauty, the bodily appetite, and
benevolence, that they become in a manner inseparable: And we find from
experience, that it is indifferent which of them advances first; since any of
them is almost sure to be attended with the related affections. One, who is
inflamed with lust, feels at least a momentary kindness toward the object of
it, and at the same time fancies her more beautiful than ordinary; as there are
many, who begin with kindness and esteem for the wit and merit of the person,
and advance from that to the other passions. But the most common species of
love is that which first arises from beauty, and afterward diffuses itself
into kindness and into the bodily appetite. Kindness or esteem, and the
appetite to generation, are too remote to unite easily together. The one is,
perhaps, the most refined passion of the soul; the other the most gross and
vulgar. The love of beauty is placed in a just medium betwixt them, and
partakes of both their natures: From whence it proceeds, that it is so
singularly fitted to produce both.

THIS account of love is not peculiar to my system, but is unavoidable on any
hypothesis. The three affections, which compose this passion, are evidently
distinct, and has each of them its distinct object. It Is certain, therefore,
that it is only by their relation they produce each other. But the relation of
passions is not alone sufficient. It Is likewise necessary, there should be a
relation of ideas. The beauty of one person never inspires us with love for
another. This then is a sensible proof of the double relation of impressions
and ideas. From one instance so evident as this we may form a judgment of the
rest.

THIS may also serve in another view to illustrate what I have insisted on
concerning the origin of pride and humility, love and hatred. I have observed,
that though self be the object of the first set of passions, and some other
person of the second, yet these objects cannot alone be the causes of the
passions; as having each of them a relation to two contrary affections, which
must from the very first moment destroy each other. Here then is the situation
of the mind, as I have already described it. It has certain organs naturally
fitted to produce a passion; that passion, when produced, naturally turns the
view to a certain object. But this not being sufficient to produce the passion,
there is required some other emotion, which by a double relation of impressions
and ideas may set these principles in action, and bestow on them their first
impulse. This situation is still more remarkable with regard to the appetite of
generation. Sex is not only the object, but also the cause of the appetite. We
not only turn our view to it, when actuated by that appetite; but the
reflecting on it suffices to excite the appetite. But as this cause loses its
force by too great frequency, it is necessary it should be quickened by some new
impulse; and that impulse we find to arise from the beauty of the person; that
is, from a double relation of impressions and ideas. Since this double relation
is necessary where an affection has both a distinct cause, and object, how much
more so, where it has only a distinct object, without any determinate cause?

SECT. XII. Of the love and hatred of animals.
BUT to pass from the passions of love and hatred, and from their mixtures and
compositions, as they appear in man, to the same affections, as they display
themselves in brutes; we may observe, not only that love and hatred are common
to the whole sensitive creation, but likewise that their causes, as
above-explain'd, are of so simple a nature, that they may easily be supposed to
operate on mere animals. There is no force of reflection or penetration
required. Every thing is conducted by springs and principles, which are not
peculiar to man, or any one species of animals. The conclusion from this is
obvious in favor of the foregoing system.

LOVE in animals, has not for its only object animals of the same species, but
extends itself farther, and comprehends almost every sensible and thinking
being. A dog naturally loves a man above his own species, and very commonly
meets with a return of affection.

AS animals are but little susceptible either of the pleasures or pains of the
imagination, they can judge of objects only by the sensible good or evil, which
they produce, and from that must regulate their affections toward them.
Accordingly we find, that by benefits or injuries we produce their love or
hatred; and that by feeding and cherishing any animal, we quickly acquire his
affections; as by beating and abusing him we never fail to draw on us his
enmity and ill will.

LOVE in beasts is not caused so much by relation, as in our species; and that
because their thoughts are not so active as to trace relations, except in very
obvious instances. Yet it is easy to remark, that on some occasions it has a
considerable influence upon them. Thus acquaintance, which has the same effect
as relation, always produces love in animals either to men or to each other.
For the same reason any likeness among them is the source of affection. An ox
confined to a park with horses, will naturally join their company, if I may so
speak, but always leaves it to enjoy that of his own species, where he has the
choice of both.

THE affection of parents to their young proceeds from a peculiar instinct in
animals, as well as in our species.

IT IS evident, that sympathy, or the communication of passions, takes place
among animals, no less than among men. Fear, anger, courage and other
affections are frequently communicated from one animal to another, without
their knowledge of that cause, which produced the original passion. Grief
likewise is received by sympathy; and produces almost all the same
consequences, and excites the same emotions as in our species. The howlings and
lamentations of a dog produce a sensible concern in his fellows. And it is
remarkable, that though almost all animals use in play the same member, and
nearly the same action as in fighting; a lion, a tiger, a cat their paws; an ox
his horns; a dog his teeth; a horse his heels: Yet they most carefully avoid
harming their companion, even though they have nothing to fear from his
resentment; which is an evident proof of the sense brutes have of each other's
pain and pleasure.

EVERY one has observed how much more dogs are animated when they hunt in a
pack, than when they pursue their game apart; and it is evident this can proceed
from nothing but from sympathy. It Is also well known to hunters, that this
effect follows in a greater degree, and even in too great a degree, where two
packs, that are strangers to each other, are joined together. We might,
perhaps, be at a loss to explain this phenomenon, if we had not experience of
a similar in ourselves.

ENVY and malice are passions very remarkable in animals. They are perhaps more
common than pity; as requiring less effort of thought and imagination.

PART III. Of the will and direct passions.
SECT. I. Of liberty and necessity.
WE come now to explain the direct passions, or the impressions, which arise
immediately from good or evil, from pain or pleasure. Of this kind are, desire
and aversion, grief and joy, hope and fear.

OF all the immediate effects of pain and pleasure, there is none more
remarkable than the WILL; and though, properly speaking, it be not comprehended
among the passions, yet as the full understanding of its nature and properties,
is necessary to the explanation of them, we shall here make it the subject of
our enquiry. I desire it may be observed, that by the will, I mean nothing but
the internal impression we feel and are conscious of, when we knowingly give
rise to any new motion of our body, or new preception of our mind. This
impression, like the preceding ones of pride and humility, love and hatred,
it is impossible to define, and needless to describe any farther; for which
reason we shall cut off all those definitions and distinctions, with which
philosophers are wont to perplex rather than clear up this question; and
entering at first upon the subject, shall examine that long disputed question
concerning liberty and necessity; which occurs so naturally in treating of the
will.

IT IS universally acknowledged, that the operations of external bodies are
necessary, and that in the communication of their motion, in their attraction,
and mutual cohesion, there are not the least traces of indifference or liberty.
Every object is determined by an absolute fate to a certain degree and
direction of its motion, and can no more depart from that precise line, in
which it moves, than it can convert itself into an angel, or spirit, or any
superior substance. The actions, therefore, of matter are to be regarded as
instances of necessary actions; and whatever is in this respect on the same
footing with matter, must be acknowledged to be necessary. That we may know
whether this be the case with the actions of the mind, we shall begin with
examining matter, and considering on what the idea of a necessity in its
operations are founded, and why we conclude one body or action to be the
infallible cause of another.

IT has been observed already, that in no single instance the ultimate
connection of any objects is discoverable, either by our senses or reason, and
that we can never penetrate so far into the essence and construction of bodies,
as to perceive the principle, on which their mutual influence depends. It Is
their constant union alone, with which we are acquainted; and it is from the
constant union the necessity arises. If objects had not an uniform and regular
conjunction with each other, we should never arrive at any idea of cause and
effect; and even after all, the necessity, which enters into that idea, is
nothing but a determination of the mind to pass from one object to its usual
attendant, and infer the existence of one from that of the other. Here then are
two particulars, which we are to consider as essential to necessity, viz. the
constant union and the inference of the mind; and wherever we discover these we
must acknowledge a necessity. As the actions of matter have no necessity, but
what is derived from these circumstances, and it is not by any insight into the
essence of bodies we discover their connection, the absence of this insight,
while the union and inference remain, will never, in any case, remove the
necessity. It Is the observation of the union, which produces the inference; for
which reason it might be thought sufficient, if we prove a constant union in
the actions of the mind, in order to establish the inference, along with the
necessity of these actions. But that I may bestow a greater force on my
reasoning, I shall examine these particulars apart, and shall first prove from
experience, that our actions have a constant union with our motives, tempers,
and circumstances, before I consider the inferences we draw from it.

To this end a very slight and general view of the common course of human
affairs will be sufficient. There is no light, in which we can take them, that
does not confirm this principle. Whether we consider mankind according to the
difference of sexes, ages, governments, conditions, or methods of education;
the same uniformity and regular operation of natural principles are
discernible. Like causes still produce like effects; in the same manner as in
the mutual action of the elements and powers of nature.

THERE are different trees, which regularly produce fruit, whose relish is
different from each other; and this regularity will be admitted as an instance
of necessity and causes in external bodies. But are the products of Guienne and
of Champagne more regularly different than the sentiments, actions, and
passions of the two sexes, of which the one are distinguished by their force
and maturity, the other by their delicacy and softness?

ARE the changes of our body from infancy to old age more regular and certain
than those of our mind and conduct? And would a man be more ridiculous, who
would expect that an infant of four years old will raise a weight of three
hundred pound, than one, who from a person of the same age, would look for a
philosophical reasoning, or a prudent and wellconcerted action?

WE must certainly allow, that the cohesion of the parts of matter arises from
natural and necessary principles, whatever difficulty we may find in explaining
them: And for a like reason we must allow, that human society is founded on
like principles; and our reason in the latter case, is better than even that in
the former; because we not only observe, that men always seek society, but can
also explain the principles, on which this universal propensity is founded. For
is it more certain, that two flat pieces of marble will unite together, than
that two young savages of different sexes will copulate? Do the children arise
from this copulation more uniformly, than does the parents care for their
safety and preservation? And after they have arrived at years of discretion by
the care of their parents, are the inconveniences attending their separation
more certain than their foresight of these inconveniences, and their care of
avoiding them by a close union and confederacy?

THE skin, pores, muscles, and nerves of a day-labourer are different from
those of a man of quality: So are his sentiments, actions and manners. The
different stations of life influence the whole fabric, external and internal;
and these different stations arise necessarily, because uniformly, from the
necessary and uniform principles of human nature. Men cannot live without
society, and cannot be associated without government. Government makes a
distinction of property, and establishes the different ranks of men. This
produces industry, traffic, manufactures, lawsuits, war, leagues, alliances,
voyages, travels, cities, fleets, ports, and all those other actions and
objects, which cause such a diversity, and at the same time maintain such an
uniformity in human life.

SHOULD a traveller, returning from a far country, tell us, that he had seen a
climate in the fiftieth degree of northern latitude, where all the fruits ripen
and come to perfection in the winter, and decay in the summer, after the same
manner as in England they are produced and decay in the contrary seasons, he
would find few so credulous as to believe him. I am apt to think a travellar
would meet with as little credit, who should inform us of people exactly of the
same character with those in Plato's republic on the one hand, or those in
Hobbes's Leviathan on the other. There is a general course of nature in human
actions, as well as in the operations of the sun and the climate. There are
also characters peculiar to different nations and particular persons, as well
as common to mankind. The knowledge of these characters is founded on the
observation of an uniformity in the actions, that flow from them; and this
uniformity forms the very essence of necessity.

I CAN imagine only one way of eluding this argument, which is by denying that
uniformity of human actions, on which it is founded. As long as actions have a
constant union and connection with the situation and temper of the agent,
however we may in words refuse to acknowledge the necessity, we really allow
the thing. Now some may, perhaps, find a pretext to deny this regular union and
connection. For what is more capricious than human actions? What more inconstant
than the desires of man? And what creature departs more widely, not only from
right reason, but from his own character and disposition? An hour, a moment is
sufficient to make him change from one extreme to another, and overturn what
cost the greatest pain and labor to establish. Necessity is regular and
certain. Human conduct is irregular and uncertain. The one, therefore, proceeds
not from the other.

TO this I reply, that in judging of the actions of men we must proceed upon
the same maxims, as when we reason concerning external objects. When any
phenomenon are constantly and invariably conjoined together, they acquire such
a connection in the imagination, that it passes from one to the other, without
any doubt or hesitation. But below this there are many inferior degrees of
evidence and probability, nor does one single contrariety of experiment
entirely destroy all our reasoning. The mind balances the contrary
experiments, and deducting the inferior from the superior, proceeds with that
degree of assurance or evidence, which remains. Even when these contrary
experiments are entirely equal, we remove not the notion of causes and
necessity; but supposing that the usual contrariety proceeds from the operation
of contrary and concealed causes, we conclude, that the chance or indifference
lies only in our judgment on account of our imperfect knowledge, not in the
things themselves, which are in every case equally necessary, though to
appearance not equally constant or certain. No union can be more constant and
certain, than that of some actions with some motives and characters; and if in
other cases the union is uncertain, it is no more than what happens in the
operations of body, nor can we conclude any thing from the one irregularity,
which will not follow equally from the other.

IT IS commonly allowed that madmen have no liberty. But were we to judge by
their actions, these have less regularity and constancy than the actions of
wisemen, and consequently are farther removed from necessity. One way of
thinking in this particular is, therefore, absolutely inconsistent; but is a
natural consequence of these confused ideas and undefin'd terms, which we so
commonly make use of in our reasonings, especially on the present subject.

WE must now show, that as the union betwixt motives and actions has the same
constancy, as that in any natural operations, so its influence on the
understanding is also the same, in determining us to infer the existence of one
from that of another. If this shall appear, there is no known circumstance,
that enters into the connection and production of the actions of matter, that is
not to be found in all the operations of the mind; and consequently we cannot,
without a manifest absurdity, attribute necessity to the one, and refuse it to
the other.

THERE is no philosopher, whose judgment is so riveted to this fantastical
system of liberty, as not to acknowledge the force of moral evidence, and both
in speculation and proceed upon it, as upon a reasonable foundation. Now moral
evidence is nothing but a conclusion concerning the actions of men, derived
from the consideration of their motives, temper and situation. Thus when we see
certain characters or figures described upon paper, we infer that the person,
who produced them, would affirm such facts, the death of Caesar, the success of
Augustus, the cruelty of Nero; and remembering many other concurrent testimonies
we conclude, that those facts were once really existent, and that so many men,
without any interest, would never conspire to deceive us; especially since they
must, in the attempt, expose themselves to the derision of all their
contemporaries, when these facts were asserted to be recent and universally
known. The same kind of reasoning runs through politics, war, commerce, economy,
and indeed mixes itself so entirely in human life, that it is impossible to act
or subsist a moment without having recourse to it. A prince, who imposes a tax
upon his subjects, expects their compliance. A general, who conducts an army,
makes account of a certain degree of courage. A merchant looks for fidelity and
skill in his factor or super-cargo. A man, who gives orders for his dinner,
doubts not of the obedience of his servants. In short, as nothing more nearly
interests us than our own actions and those of others, the greatest part of our
reasonings is employed in judgments concerning them. Now I assert, that whoever
reasons after this manner, does ipso facto believe the actions of the will to
arise from necessity, and that he knows not what he means, when he denies it.

ALL those objects, of which we call the one cause and the other effect,
considered in themselves, are as distinct and separate from each other, as any
two things in nature, nor can we ever, by the most accurate survey of them,
infer the existence of the one from that of the other. It Is only from
experience and the observation of their constant union, that we are able to
form this inference; and even after all, the inference is nothing but the
effects of custom on the imagination. We must not here be content with saying,
that the idea of cause and effect arises from objects constantly united; but
must affirm, that it is the very same with the idea of these objects, and that
the necessary connection is not discovered by a conclusion of the understanding,
but is merely a perception of the mind. Wherever, therefore, we observe the
same union, and wherever the union operates in the same manner upon the belief
and opinion, we have the idea of causes and necessity, though perhaps we may
avoid those expressions. Motion in one body in all past instances, that have
fallen under our observation, is followed upon impulse by motion in another.
It Is impossible for the mind to penetrate farther. From this constant union it
forms the idea of cause and effect, and by its influence feels the necessity.
As there is the same constancy, and the same influence in what we call moral
evidence, I ask no more. What remains can only be a dispute of words.

AND indeed, when we consider how aptly natural and moral evidence cement
together, and form only one chain of argument betwixt them, we shall make no
scruple to allow, that they are of the same nature, and derived from the same
principles. A prisoner, who has neither money nor interest, discovers the
impossibility of his escape, as well from the obstinacy of the jailer, as from
the walls and bars with which he is surrounded; and in all attempts for his
freedom chooses rather to work upon the stone and iron of the one, than upon the
inflexible nature of the other. The same prisoner, when conducted to the
scaffold, foresees his death as certainly from the constancy and fidelity of
his guards as from the operation of the ax or wheel. His mind runs along a
certain train of ideas: The refusal of the soldiers to consent to his escape,
the action of the executioner; the separation of the head and body; bleeding,
convulsive motions, and death. Here is a connected chain of natural causes and
voluntary actions; but the mind feels no difference betwixt them in passing
from one link to another; nor is less certain of the future event than if it
were connected with the present impressions of the memory and senses by a train
of causes cemented together by what we are pleased to call a physical
necessity. The same experienced union has the same effect on the mind, whether
the united objects be motives, volitions and actions; or figure and motion. We
may change the names of things; but their nature and their operation on the
understanding never change.

I DARE be positive no one will ever endeavor to refute these reasouings
otherwise than by altering my definitions, and assigning a different meaning to
the terms of cause, and effect, and necessity, and liberty, and chance.
According to my definitions, necessity makes an essential part of causation;
and consequently liberty, by removing necessity, removes also causes, and is
the very same thing with chance. As chance is commonly thought to imply a
contradiction, and is at least directly contrary to experience, there are
always the same arguments against liberty or free will. If any one alters the
definitions, I cannot pretend to argue with him, 'till I know the meaning he
assigns to these terms.

SECT. II. The same subject continued.
I BELIEVE we may assign the three following reasons for the prevalence of the
doctrine of liberty, however absurd it may be in one sense, and unintelligible
in any other. First, After we have performed any action; though we confess we
were influenced by particular views and motives; it is difficult for us to
persuade ourselves we were governed by necessity, and that 'twas utterly
impossible for us to have acted otherwise; the idea of necessity seeming to
imply something of force, and violence, and constraint, of which we are not
sensible. Few are capable of distinguishing betwixt the liberty of spontaniety,
as it is called in the schools, and the liberty of indifference; betwixt that
which is opposed to violence, and that which means a negation of necessity and
causes. The first is even the most common sense of the word; and as it is only
that species of liberty, which it concerns us to preserve, our thoughts have
been principally turned toward it, and have almost universally confounded it
with the other.

SECONDLY, There is a false sensation or experience even of the liberty of
indifference; which is regarded as an argument for its real existence. The
necessity of any action, whether of matter or of the mind, is not properly a
quality in the agent, but in any thinking or intelligent being, who may
consider the action, and consists in the determination of his thought to infer
its existence from some preceding objects: As liberty or chance, on the other
hand, is nothing but the want of that determination, and a certain looseness,
which we feel in passing or not passing from the idea of one to that of the
other. Now we may observe, that though in reflecting on human actions we seldom
feel such a looseness or indifference, yet it very commonly happens, that in
performing the actions themselves we are sensible of something like it: And as
all related or resembling objects are readily taken for each other, this has
been employed as a demonstrative or even an intuitive proof of human liberty.
We feel that our actions are subject to our will on most occasions, and imagine
we feel that the will itself is subject to nothing; because when by a denial of
it we are provoked to try, we feel that it moves easily every way, and produces
an image of itself even on that side, on which it did not settle. This image or
faint motion, we persuade ourselves, could have been completed into the thing
itself; because, should that be denied, we find, upon a second trial, that it
can. But these efforts are all in vain; and whatever capricious and irregular
actions we may perform; as the desire of showing our liberty is the sole motive
of our actions; we can never free ourselves from the bonds of necessity. We may
imagine we feel a liberty within ourselves; but a spectator can commonly infer
our actions from our motives and character; and even where he cannot, he
concludes in general, that he might, were he perfectly acquainted with every
circumstance of our situation and temper, and the most secret springs of our
complexion and disposition. Now this is the very essence of necessity,
according to the foregoing doctrine.

A THIRD reason why the doctrine of liberty has generally been better received
in the world, than its antagonist, proceeds from religion, which has been very
unnecessarily interested in this question. There is no method of reasoning more
common, and yet none more blameable, than in philosophical debates to endeavor
to refute any hypothesis by a pretext of its dangerous consequences to religion
and morality. When any opinion leads us into absurdities, it is certainly false;
but it is not certain an opinion is false, because it is of dangerous
consequence. Such topics, therefore, ought entirely to be foreborn, as serving
nothing to the discovery of truth, but only to make the person of an antagonist
odious. This I observe in general, without pretending to draw any advantage
from it. I submit myself frankly to an examination of this kind, and dare
venture to affirm, that the doctrine of necessity, according to my explication
of it, is not only innocent, but even advantageous to religion and morality.

I DEFINE necessity two ways, conformable to the two definitions of cause, of
which it makes an essential part. I place it either in the constant union and
conjunction of like objects, or in the inference of the mind from the one to
the other. Now necessity, in both these senses, has universally, though tacitly,
in the schools, in the pulpit, and in common life, been allowed to belong to
the will of man, and no one has ever pretended to deny, that we can draw
inferences concerning human actions, and that those inferences are founded on
the experienced union of like actions with like motives and circumstances. The
only particular in which any one can differ from me, is either, that perhaps he
will refuse to call this necessity. But as long as the meaning is understood, I
hope the word can do no harm. Or that he will maintain there is something else
in the operations of matter. Now whether it be so or not is of no consequence
to religion, whatever it may be to natural philosophy. I may be mistaken in
asserting, that we have no idea of any other connection in the actions of body,
and shall be glad to be farther instructed on that head: But sure I am, I
ascribe nothing to the actions of the mind, but what must readily be allowed
of. Let no one, therefore, put an invidous construction on my words, by saying
simply, that I assert the necessity of human actions, and place them on the
same footing with the operations of senseless matter. I do not ascribe to the
will that unintelligible necessity, which is supposed to lie in matter. But I
ascribe to matter, that intelligible quality, call it necessity or not, which
the most rigorous orthodoxy does or must allow to belong to the will. I change,
therefore, nothing in the received systems, with regard to the will, but only
with regard to material objects.

NAY I shall go farther, and assert, that this kind of necessity is so
essential to religion and morality, that without it there must ensue an
absolute subversion of both, and that every other supposition is entirely
destructive to all laws both divine and human. It Is indeed certain, that as all
human laws are founded on rewards and punishments, it is supposed as a
fundamental principle, that these motives have an influence on the mind, and
both produce the good and prevent the evil actions. We may give to this
influence what name we please; but as it is usually conjoined with the action,
common sense requires it should be esteemed a cause, and be looked upon as an
instance of that necessity, which I would establish.

THIS reasoning is equally solid, when applied to divine laws, so far as the
deity is considered as a legislator, and is supposed to inflict punishment and
bestow rewards with a design to produce obedience. But I also maintain, that
even where he acts not in his magisterial capacity, but is regarded as the
avenger of crimes merely on account of their odiousness and deformity, not only
it is impossible, without the necessary connection of cause and effect in human
actions, that punishments could be inflicted compatible with justice and moral
equity; but also that it could ever enter into the thoughts of any reasonable
being to inflict them. The constant and universal object of hatred or anger is
a person or creature endowed with thought and consciousness; and when any
criminal or injurious actions excite that passion, it is only by their relation
to the person or connection with him. But according to the doctrine of liberty
or chance, this connection is reduced to nothing, nor are men more accountable
for those actions, which are designed and premeditated, than for such as are
the most casual and accidental. Actions are by their very nature temporary and
perishing; and where they proceed not from some cause in the characters and
disposition of the person, who performed them, they infix not themselves upon
him, and can neither redound to his honor, if good, nor infamy, if evil. The
action itself may be blameable; it may be contrary to all the rules of morality
and religion: But the person is not responsible for it; and as it proceeded
from nothing in him, that is durable or constant, and leaves nothing of that
nature behind it, it is impossible he can, upon its account, become the object
of punishment or vengeance. According to the hypothesis of liberty, therefore,
a man is as pure and untainted, after having committed the most horrid crimes,
as at the first moment of his birth, nor is his character any way concerned in
his actions; since they are not derived from it, and the wickedness of the one
can never be used as a proof of the depravity of the other. It Is only upon the
principles of necessity, that a person acquires any merit or demerit from his
actions, however the common opinion may incline to the contrary.

BUT so inconsistent are men with themselves, that though they often assert, that
necessity utterly destroys all merit and demerit either toward mankind or
superior powers, yet they continue still to reason upon these very principles
of necessity in all their judgments concerning this matter. Men are not blamed
for such evil actions as they perform ignorantly and casually, whatever may be
their consequences. Why? but because the causes of these actions are only
momentary, and terminate in them alone. Men are less blamed for such evil
actions, as they perform hastily and unpremeditately, than for such as proceed
from thought and deliberation. For what reason? but because a hasty temper,
though a constant cause in the mind, operates only by intervals, and infects not
the whole character. Again, repentance wipes off every crime, especially if
attended with an evident reformation of life and manners. How is this to be
accounted for? But by asserting that actions render a person criminal, merely
as they are proofs of criminal passions or principles in the mind; and when by
any alteration of these principles they cease to be just proofs, they likewise
cease to be criminal. But according to the doctrine of liberty or chance they
never were just proofs, and consequently never were criminal.

HERE then I turn to my adversary, and desire him to free his own system from
these odious consequences before he charge them upon others. Or if he rather
chooses, that this question should be decided by fair arguments before
philosophers, than by declamations before the people, let him return to what I
have advanced to prove that liberty and chance are synonimous; and concerning
the nature of moral evidence and the regularity of human actions. Upon a review
of these reasonings, I cannot doubt of an entire victory; and therefore having
proved, that all actions of the will have particular causes, I proceed to
explain what these causes are, and how they operate.

SECT. III. Of the influencing motives of the will.
NOTHING is more usual in philosophy, and even in common life, than to talk of
the combat of passion and reason, to give the preference to reason, and assert
that men are only so far virtuous as they conform themselves to its dictates.
Every rational creature, it is said, is obliged to regulate his actions by
reason; and if any other motive or principle challenge the direction of his
conduct, he ought to oppose it, 'till it be entirely subdued, or at least
brought to a conformity with that superior principle. On this method of
thinking the greatest part of moral philosophy, ancient and modern, seems to be
founded; nor is their an ampler field, as well for metaphysical arguments, as
popular declamations, than this supposed pre-eminence of reason above passion.
The eternity, invariableness, and divine origin of the former have been
displayed to the best advantage: The blindness, unconstancy, and deceitfulness
of the latter have been as strongly insisted on. In order to show the fallacy
of all this philosophy, I shall endeavor to prove first, that reason alone can
never be a motive to any action of the will; and secondly, that it can never
oppose passion in the direction of the will.

THE understanding exerts itself after two different ways, as it judges from
demonstration or probability; as it regards the abstract relations of our
ideas, or those relations of objects, of which experience only gives us
information. I believe it scarce will be asserted, that the first species of
reasoning alone is ever the cause of any action. As it is proper province is the
world of ideas, and as the will always places us in that of realities,
demonstration and volition seem, upon that account, to be totally removed, from
each other. Mathematics, indeed, are useful in all mechanical operations, and
arithmetic in almost every art and profession: But it is not of themselves they
have any influence. Mechanics are the art of regulating the motions of bodies
to some designed end or purpose; and the reason why we employ arithmetic in
fixing the proportions of numbers, is only that we may discover the proportions
of their influence and operation. A merchant is desirous of knowing the sum
total of his accounts with any person: Why? but that he may learn what sum will
have the same effects in paying his debt, and going to market, as all the
particular articles taken together. Abstract or demonstrative reasoning,
therefore, never influences any of our actions, but only as it directs our
judgment concerning causes and effects; which leads us to the second operation
of the understanding.

IT IS obvious, that when we have the prospect of pain or pleasure from any
object, we feel a consequent emotion of aversion or propensity, and are carried
to avoid or embrace what will give us this uneasiness or satisfaction. It Is
also obvious, that this emotion rests not here, but making us cast our view on
every side, comprehends whatever objects are connected with its original one by
the relation of cause and effect. Here then reasoning takes place to discover
this relation; and according as our reasoning varies, our actions receive a
subsequent variation. But it is evident in this case, that the impulse arises
not from reason, but is only directed by it. It Is from the prospect of pain or
pleasure that the aversion or propensity arises toward any object: And these
emotions extend themselves to the causes and effects of that object, as they
are pointed out to us by reason and experience. It can never in the least
concern us to know, that such objects are causes, and such others effects, if
both the causes and effects be indifferent to us. Where the objects themselves
do not affect us, their connection can never give them any influence; and it is
plain, that as reason is nothing but the discovery of this connection, it cannot
be by its means that the objects are able to affect us.

SINCE reason alone can never produce any action, or give rise to volition, I
infer, that the same faculty is as incapable of preventing volition, or of
disputing the preference with any passion or emotion. This consequence is
necessary. It Is impossible reason could have the latter effect of preventing
volition, but by giving an impulse in a contrary direction to our passion; and
that impulse, had it operated alone, would have been able to produce volition.
Nothing can oppose or retard the impulse of passion, but a contrary impulse;
and if this contrary impulse ever arises from reason, that latter faculty must
have an original influence on the will, and must be able to cause, as well as
hinder any act of volition. But if reason has no original influence, it is
impossible it can withstand any principle, which has such an efficacy, or ever
keep the mind in suspense a moment. Thus it appears, that the principle, which
opposes our passion, cannot be the same with reason, and is only called so in
an improper sense. We speak not strictly and philosophically when we talk of
the combat of passion and of reason. Reason is, and ought only to be the slave
of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and
obey them. As this opinion may appear somewhat extraordinary, it may not be
improper to confirm it by some other considerations.

A PASSION is an original existence, or, if you will, modification of
existence, and contains not any representative quality, which renders it a copy
of any other existence or modification. When I am angry, I am actually possessed
with the passion, and in that emotion have no more a reference to any other
object, than when I am thirsty, or sick, or more than five foot high. It Is
impossible, therefore, that this passion can be opposed by, or be contradictory
to truth and reason; since this contradiction consists in the disagreement of
ideas, considered as copies, with those objects, which they represent.

WHAT may at first occur on this head, is, that as nothing can be contrary to
truth or reason, except what has a reference to it, and as the judgments of our
understanding only have this reference, it must follow, that passions can be
contrary to reason only so far as they are accompanied with some judgment or
opinion. According to this principle, which is so obvious and natural, it is
only in two senses, that any affection can be called unreasonable. First, When
a passion, such as hope or fear, grief or joy, despair or security, is founded
on the supposition of the existence of objects, which really do not exist.
Secondly, When in exerting any passion in action, we choose means insufficient
for the designed end, and deceive ourselves in our judgment of causes and
effects. Where a passion is neither founded on false suppositions, nor chooses
means insufficient for the end, the understanding can neither justify nor
condemn it. It Is not contrary to reason to prefer the destruction of the whole
world to the scratching of my finger. It Is not contrary to reason for me to
choose my total ruin, to prevent the least uneasiness of an Indian or person
wholly unknown to me. It Is as little contrary to reason to prefer even my own
acknowledged lesser good to my greater, and have a more ardent affection for
the former than the latter. A trivial good may, from certain circumstances,
produce a desire superior to what arises from the greatest and most valuable
enjoyment; nor is there any thing more extraordinary in this, than in mechanics
to see one pound weight raise up a hundred by the advantage of its situation.
In short, a passion must be accompanied with some false judgment, in order to
its being unreasonable; and even then it is not the passion, properly speaking,
which is unreasonable, but the judgment.

THE consequences are evident. Since a passion can never, in any sense, be
called unreasonable, but when founded on a false supposition, or when it chooses
means insufficient for the designed end, it is impossible, that reason and
passion can ever oppose each other, or dispute for the government of the will
and actions. The moment we perceive the falsehood of any supposition, or the
insufficiency of any means our passions yield to our reason without any
opposition. I may desire any fruit as of an excellent relish; but whenever you
convince me of my mistake, my longing ceases. I may will the performance of
certain actions as means of obtaining any desired good; but as my willing of
these actions is only secondary, and founded on the supposition, that they are
causes of the proposed effect; as soon as I discover the falsehood of that
supposition, they must become indifferent to me.

IT IS natural for one, that does not examine objects with a strict philosophic
eye, to imagine, that those actions of the mind are entirely the same, which
produce not a different sensation, and are not immediately distinguishable to
the feeling and perception. Reason, for instance, exerts itself without
producing any sensible emotion; and except in the more sublime disquisitions of
philosophy, or in the frivolous subtilties of the schools, scarce ever conveys
any pleasure or uneasiness. Hence it proceeds, that every action of the mind,
which operates with the same calmness and tranquillity, is confounded with
reason by all those, who judge of things from the first view and appearance.
Now it is certain, there are certain calm desires and tendencies, which, though
they be real passions, produce little emotion in the mind, and are more known
by their effects than by the immediate feeling or sensation. These desires are
of two kinds; either certain instincts originally implanted in our natures,
such as benevolence and resentment, the love of life, and kindness to children;
or the general appetite to good, and aversion to evil, considered merely as
such. When any of these passions are calm, and cause no disorder in the soul,
they are very readily taken for the determinations of reason, and are supposed
to proceed from the same faculty, with that, which judges of truth and
falsehood. Their nature and principles have been supposed the same, because
their sensations are not evidently different.

BESIDE these calm passions, which often determine the will, there are certain
violent emotions of the same kind, which have likewise a great influence on
that faculty. When I receive any injury from another, I often feel a violent
passion of resentment, which makes me desire his evil and punishment,
independent of all considerations of pleasure and advantage to myself, When I
am immediately threatened with any grievous ill, my fears, apprehensions, and
aversions rise to a great height, and produce a sensible emotion.

THE common error of metaphysicians has lain in ascribing the direction of the
will entirely to one of these principles, and supposing the other to have no
influence. Men often act knowingly against their interest: For which reason the
view of the greatest possible good does not always influence them. Men often
counter-act a violent passion in prosecution of their interests and designs:
It Is not therefore the present uneasiness alone, which determines them. In
general we may observe, that both these principles operate on the will; and
where they are contrary, that either of them prevails, according to the general
character or present disposition of the person. What we call strength of mind,
implies the prevalence of the calm passions above the violent; though we may
easily observe, there is no man so constantly possessed of this virtue, as
never on any occasion to yield to the solicitations of passion and desire.
From these variations of temper proceeds the great difficulty of deciding
concerning the actions and resolutions of men, where there is any contrariety
of motives and passions.

SECT. IV. Of the causes of the violent passions.
THERE is not in philosophy a subject of more nice speculation than this of the
different causes and effects of the calm and violent passions. It Is evident
passions influence not the will in proportion to their violence, or the
disorder they occasion in the temper; but on the contrary, that when a passion
has once become a settled principle of action, and is the predominant
inclination of the soul, it commonly produces no longer any sensible agitation.
As repeated custom and its own force have made every thing yield to it, it
directs the actions and conduct without that opposition and emotion, which so
naturally attend every momentary gust of passion. We must, therefore,
distinguish betwixt a calm and a weak passion; betwixt a violent and a strong
one. But notwithstanding this, it is certain, that when we would govern a man,
and push him to any action, 'twill commonly be better policy to work upon the
violent than the calm passions, and rather take him by his inclination, than
what is vulgarly called his reason. We ought to place the object in such
particular situations as are proper to increase the violence of the passion.
For we may observe, that all depends upon the situation of the object, and that
a variation in this particular will be able to change the calm and the violent
passions into each other. Both these kinds of passions pursue good, and avoid
evil; and both of them are increased or diminished by the increase or
diminution of the good or evil. But herein lies the difference betwixt them:
The same good, when near, will cause a violent passion, which, when remote,
produces only a calm one. As this subject belongs very properly to the present
question concerning the will, we shall here examine it to the bottom, and shall
consider some of those circumstances and situations of objects, which render a
passion either calm or violent.

IT IS a remarkable property of human nature, that any emotion, which attends a
passion, is easily converted into it, though in their natures they be originally
different from, and even contrary to each other. It Is true; in order to make a
perfect union among passions, there is always required a double relation of
impressions and ideas; nor is one relation sufficient for that purpose. But
though this be confirmed by undoubted experience, we must understand it with its
proper limitations, and must regard the double relation, as requisite only to
make one passion produce another. When two passions are already produced by
their separate causes, and are both present in the mind, they readily mingle
and unite, though they have but one relation, and sometimes without any. The
predominant passion swallows up the inferior, and converts it into itself. The
spirits, when once excited, easily receive a change in their direction; and
it is natural to imagine this change will come from the prevailing affection.
The connection is in many respects closer betwixt any two passions, than betwixt
any passion and indifference.

WHEN a person is once heartily in love, the little faults and caprice of his
mistress, the jealousies and quarrels, to which that commerce is so subject;
however unpleasant and related to anger and hatred; are yet found to give
additional force to the prevailing passion. It Is a common artifice of
politicians, when they would affect any person very much by a matter of fact,
of which they intend to inform him, first to excite his curiosity; delay as
long as possible the satisfying it; and by that means raise his anxiety and
impatience to the utmost, before they give him a full insight into the
business. They know that his curiosity will precipitate him into the passion
they design to raise, and assist the object in its influence on the mind. A
soldier advancing to the battle, is naturally inspired with courage and
confidence, when he thinks on his friends and fellow soldiers; and is struck
with fear and terror, when he reflects on the enemy. Whatever new emotion,
therefore, proceeds from the former naturally increases the courage; as the
same emotion, proceeding from the latter, augments the fear; by the relation of
ideas, and the conversion of the inferior emotion into the predominant. Hence
it is that in martial discipline, the uniformity and luster of our habit, the
regularity of our figures and motions, with all the pomp and majesty of war,
encourage ourselves and allies; while the same objects in the enemy strike
terror into us, though agreeable and beautiful in themselves.

SINCE passions, however independent, are naturally transfused into each other,
if they are both present at the same time; it follows, that when good or evil
is placed in such a situation, as to cause any particular emotion, beside its
direct passion of desire or aversion, that latter passion must acquire new
force and violence.

THIS happens, among other cases, whenever any object excites contrary
passions. For it is observable that an opposition of passions commonly causes a
new emotion in the spirits, and produces more disorder, than the concurrence of
any two affections of equal force. This new emotion is easily converted into
the predominant passion, and increases its violence, beyond the pitch it would
have arrived at had it met with no opposition. Hence we naturally desire what
is forbid, and take a pleasure in performing actions, merely because they are
unlawful. The notion of duty, when opposite to the passions, is seldom able to
overcome them; and when it fails of that effect, is apt rather to increase
them, by producing an opposition in our motives and principles.

THE same effect follows whether the opposition arises from internal motives or
external obstacles. The passion commonly acquires new force and violence in
both cases. The efforts, which the mind makes to surmount the obstacle, excite
the spirits and inliven the passion.

UNCERTAINTY has the same influence as opposition. The agitation of the
thought; the quick turns it makes from one view to another; the variety of
passions, which succeed each other, according to the different views: All these
produce an agitation in the mind, and transfuse themselves into the predominant
passion.

THERE is not in my opinion any other natural cause, why security diminishes
the passions, than because it removes that uncertainty, which increases them.
The mind, when left to itself, immediately languishes; and in order to preserve
its ardour, must be every moment supported by a new flow of passion. For the
same reason, despair, though contrary to security, has a like influence.

IT IS certain nothing more powerfully animates any affection, than to conceal
some part of its objects by throwing it into a kind of shade, which at the same
time that it shows enough to pre-possess us in favor of the object, leaves
still some work for the imagination. Besides that obscurity is always attended
with a kind of uncertainty; the effort, which the fancy makes to complete the
idea, rouzes the spirits, and gives an additional force to the passion.

As despair and security, though contrary to each other, produce the same
effects; so absence is observed to have contrary effects, and in different
circumstances either increases or diminishes our affections. The Duc de la
Rochefoucault has very well observed, that absence destroys weak passions, but
increases strong; as the wind extinguishes a candle, but blows up a fire. Long
absence naturally weakens our idea, and diminishes the passion: But where the
idea is so strong and lively as to support itself, the uneasiness, arising from
absence, increases the passion, and gives it new force and violence.

SECT. V. Of the effects of custom.
BUT nothing has a greater effect both to increase and diminish our passions,
to convert pleasure into pain, and pain into pleasure, than custom and
repetition. Custom has two original effects upon the mind, in bestowing a
facility in the performance of any action or the conception of any object; and
afterward a tendency or inclination toward it; and from these we may account
for all its other effects, however extraordinary.

WHEN the soul applies itself to the performance of any action, or the
conception of any object, to which it is not accustomed, there is a certain
unpliableness in the faculties, and a difficulty of the spirit's moving in
their new direction. As this difficulty excites the spirits, it is the source of
wonder, surprise, and of all the emotions, which arise from novelty; and is in
itself very agreeable, like every thing, which inlivens the mind to a moderate
degree. But though surprise be agreeable in itself, yet as it puts the spirits in
agitation, it not only augments our agreeable affections, but also our painful,
according to the foregoing principle, that every emotion, which precedes or
attends a passion, is easily converted into it. Hence every thing, that is new,
is most affecting, and gives us either more pleasure or pain, than what,
strictly speaking, naturally belongs to it. When it often returns upon us, the
novelty wears off; the passions subside; the hurry of the spirits is over; and
we survey the objects with greater tranquillity.

BY degrees the repetition produces a facility, which is another very powerful
principle of the human mind, and an infallible source of pleasure, where the
facility goes not beyond a certain degree. And here it is remarkable that the
pleasure, which arises from a moderate facility, has not the same tendency with
that which arises from novelty, to augment the painful, as well as the
agreeable affections. The pleasure of facility does not so much consist in any
ferment of the spirits, as in their orderly motion; which will sometimes be so
powerful as even to convert pain into pleasure, and give us a relish in time
for what at first was most harsh and disagreeable.

BUT again, as facility converts pain into pleasure, so it often converts
pleasure into pain, when it is too great, and renders the actions of the mind
so faint and languid, that they are no longer able to interest and support it.
And indeed, scarce any other objects become disagreeable through custom; but such
as are naturally attended with some emotion or affection, which is destroyed by
the too frequent repetition. One can consider the clouds, and heavens, and
trees, and stones, however frequently repeated, without ever feeling any
aversion. But when the fair sex, or music, or good cheer, or any thing, that
naturally ought to be agreeable, becomes indifferent, it easily produces the
opposite affection.

BUT custom not only gives a facility to perform any action, but likewise an
inclination and tendency toward it, where it is not entirely disagreeable, and
can never be the object of inclination. And this is the reason why custom
increases all active habits, but diminishes passive, according to the
observation of a late eminent philosopher. The facility takes off from the
force of the passive habits by rendering the motion of the spirits faint and
languid. But as in the active, the spirits are sufficiently supported of
themselves, the tendency of the mind gives them new force, and bends them more
strongly to the action.

SECT. VI. Of the influence of the imagination on the passions.
IT IS remarkable, that the imagination and affections have a close union
together, and that nothing, which affects the former, can be entirely
indifferent to the latter. Wherever our ideas of good or evil acquire a new
vivacity, the passions become more violent; and keep pace with the imagination
in all its variations. Whether this proceeds from the principle
abovementioned, that any attendant emotion is easily converted into the
predominant, I shall not determine. It Is sufficient for my present purpose,
that we have many instances to confirm this influence of the imagination upon
the passions.

ANY pleasure, with which we are acquainted, affects us more than any other,
which we own to be superior, but of whose nature we are wholly ignorant. Of the
one we can form a particular and determinate idea: The other we conceive under
the general notion of pleasure; and it is certain, that the more general and
universal any of our ideas are, the less influence they have upon the
imagination. A general idea, though it be nothing but a particular one considered
in a certain view, is commonly more obscure; and that because no particular
idea, by which we represent a general one, is ever fixed or determinate, but
may easily be changed for other particular ones, which will serve equally in
the representation.

THERE is a noted passage in the history of Greece, which may serve for our
present purpose. Themistocles told the Athenians, that he had formed a design,
which would be highly useful to the public, but which 'twas impossible for him
to communicate to them without ruining the execution, since its success
depended entirely on the secrecy with which it should be conducted. The
Athenians, instead of granting him full power to act as he thought fitting,
ordered him to communicate his design to Aristides, in whose prudence they had
an entire confidence, and whose opinion they were resolved blindly to submit
to. The design of Themistocles was secretly to set fire to the fleet of all the
Grecian commonwealths, which was assembled in a neighboring port, and which
being once destroyed, would give the Athenians the empire of the sea without
any rival. Aristides returned to the assembly, and told them, that nothing
could be more advantageous than the design of Themistocles; but at the same
time that nothing could be more unjust: Upon which the people unanimously
rejected the project.

A LATE celebrated Mons. Rollin.
historian admires this passage of ancient history, as one of the most singular
that is any where to be met with. Here, says he, they are not philosophers, to
whom it is easy in their schools to establish the finest maxims and most sublime
rules of morality, who decide that interest ought never to prevail above
justice. It Is a whole people interested in the proposal, which is made to them,
who consider it as of importance to the public good, and who notwithstanding
reject it unanimously, and without hesitation, merely because it is contrary to
justice. For my part I see nothing so extraordinary in this proceeding of the
Athenians. The same reasons, whieh render it so easy for philosophers to
establish these sublime maxims, tend, in part, to diminish the merit of such a
conduct in that people. Philosophers never balance betwixt profit and honesty,
because their decisions are general, and neither their passions nor
imaginations are interested in the objects. And though in the present case the
advantage was immediate to the Athenians, yet as it was known only under the
general notion of advantage, without being conceived by any particular idea, it
must have had a less considerable influence on their imaginations, and have
been a less violent temptation, than if they had been acquainted with all its
circumstances: Otherwise it is difficult to conceive, that a whole people,
unjust and violent as men commonly are, should so unanimously have adhered to
justice, and rejected any considerable advantage.

ANY satisfaction, which we lately enjoyed, and of which the memory is fresh
and recent, operates on the will with more violence, than another of which the
traces are decayed, and almost obliterated. From whence does this proceed, but
that the memory in the first case assists the fancy, and gives an additional
force and vigor to its conceptions? The image of the past pleasure being
strong and violent, bestows these qualities on the idea of the future pleasure,
which is connected with it by the relation of resemblance.

A PLEASURE, which is suitable to the way of life, in which we are engaged,
excites more our desires and appetites than another, which is foreign to it.
This phenomenon may be explained from the same principle.

NOTHING is more capable of infusing any passion into the mind, than eloquence,
by which objects are represented in their strongest and most lively colors. We
may of ourselves acknowledge, that such an object is valuable, and such another
odious; but 'till an orator excites the imagination, and gives force to these
ideas, they may have but a feeble influence either on the will or the
affections.

BUT eloquence is not always necessary. The bare opinion of another, especially
when enforced with passion, will cause an idea of good or evil to have an
influence upon us, which would otherwise have been entirely neglected. This
proceeds from the principle of sympathy or communication; and sympathy, as I
have already observed, is nothing but the conversion of an idea into an
impression by the force of imagination.

IT IS remarkable, that lively passions commonly attend a lively imagination. In
this respect, as well as others, the force of the passion depends as much on
the temper of the person, as the nature or situation of the object.

I HAVE already observed, that belief is nothing but a lively idea related to a
present impression. This vivacity is a requisite circumstance to the exciting
all our passions, the calm as well as the violent; nor has a mere fiction of
the imagination any considerable influence upon either of them. It Is too weak
to take any hold of the mind, or be attended with emotion.

SECT. VII. Of contiguity and distance in space and time.
THERE is an easy reason, why every thing contiguous to us, either in space or
time, should be conceived with a peculiar force and vivacity, and excel every
other object, in its influence on the imagination. Ourself is intimately
present to us, and whatever is related to self must partake of that quality.
But where an object is so far removed as to have lost the advantage of this
relation, why, as it is farther removed, its idea becomes still fainter and
more obscure, would, perhaps, require a more particular examination.

IT IS obvious, that the imagination can never totally forget the points of
space and time, in which we are existent; but receives such frequent
advertisements of them from the passions and senses, that however it may turn
its attention to foreign and remote objects, it is necessitated every moment to
reflect on the present. It Is also remarkable, that in the conception of those
objects, which we regard as real and existent, we take them in their proper
order and situation, and never leap from one object to another, which is
distant from it, without running over, at least in a cursory manner, all those
objects, which are interposed betwixt them. When we reflect, therefore, on any
object distant from ourselves, we are obliged not only to reach it at first by
passing through all the intermediate space betwixt ourselves and the object, but
also to renew our progress every moment; being every moment recalled to the
consideration of ourselves and our present situation. It Is easily conceived,
that this interruption must weaken the idea by breaking the action of the mind,
and hindering the conception from being so intense and continued, as when we
reflect on a nearer object. The fewer steps we make to arrive at the object,
and the smoother the road is, this diminution of vivacity is less considerably
felt, but still may be observed more or less in proportion to the degrees of
distance and difficulty.

HERE then we are to consider two kinds of objects, the contiguous and remote;
of which the former, by means of their relation to ourselves, approach an
impression in force and vivacity; the latter by reason of the interruption in
our manner of conceiving them, appear in a weaker and more imperfect light.
This is their effect on the imagination. If my reasoning be just, they must
have a proportionable effect on the will and passions. Contiguous objects must
have an influence much superior to the distant and remote. Accordingly we find
in common life, that men are principally concerned about those objects, which
are not much removed either in space or time, enjoying the present, and leaving
what is afar off to the care of chance and fortune. Talk to a man of his
condition thirty years hence, and he will not regard you. Speak of what is to
happen tomorrow, and he will lend you attention. The breaking of a mirror
gives us more concern when at home, than the burning of a house, when abroad,
and some hundred leagues distant.

BUT farther; though distance both in space and time has a considerable effect on
the imagination, and by that means on the will and passions, yet the
consequence of a removal in space are much inferior to those of a removal in
time. Twenty years are certainly but a small distance of time in comparison of
what history and even the memory of some may inform them of, and yet I doubt if
a thousand leagues, or even the greatest distance of place this globe can admit
of, will so remarkably weaken our ideas, and diminish our passions. A WestIndia
merchant will tell you, that he is not without concern about what passes in
Jamaica; though few extend their views so far into futurity, as to dread very
remote accidents.

THE cause of this phenomenon must evidently lie in the different properties
of space and time. Without having recourse to metaphysics, any one may easily
observe, that space or extension consists of a number of co-existent parts
disposed in a certain order, and capable of being at once present to the sight
or feeling. On the contrary, time or succession, though it consists likewise of
parts, never presents to us more than one at once; nor is it possible for any
two of them ever to be co-existent. These qualities of the objects have a
suitable effect on the imagination. The parts of extension being susceptible of
an union to the senses, acquire an union in the fancy; and as the appearance of
one part excludes not another, the transition or passage of the thought through
the contiguous parts is by that means rendered more smooth and easy. On the
other hand, the incompatibility of the parts of time in their real existence
separates them in the imagination, and makes it more difficult for that faculty
to trace any long succession or series of events. Every part must appear single
and alone, nor can regularly have entrance into the fancy without banishing
what is supposed to have been immediately precedent. By this means any distance
in time causes a greater interruption in the thought than an equal distance in
space, and consequently weakens more considerably the idea, and consequently
the passions; which depend in a great measure, on the imagination, according to
my system.

THERE is another phenomenon of a like nature with the foregoing, viz. the
superior effects of the same distance in futurity above that in the past. This
difference with respect to the will is easily accounted for. As none of our
actions can alter the past, it is not strange it should never determine the
will. But with respect to the passions the question is yet entire, and well
worth the examining.

BESIDES the propensity to a gradual progression through the points of space and
time, we have another peculiarity in our method of thinking, which concurs in
producing this phenomenon. We always follow the succession of time in placing
our ideas, and from the consideration of any object pass more easily to that,
which follows immediately after it, than to that which went before it. We may
learn this, among other instances, from the order, which is always observed in
historical narrations. Nothing but an absolute necessity can oblige an
historian to break the order of time, and in his narration give the precedence
to an event, which was in reality posterior to another.

THIS will easily be applied to the question in hand, if we reflect on what I
have before observed, that the present situation of the person is always that
of the imagination, and that it is from thence we proceed to the conception of
any distant object. When the object is past, the progression of the thought in
passing to it from the present is contrary to nature, as proceeding from one
point of time to that which is preceding, and from that to another preceding,
in opposition to the natural course of the succession. On the other hand, when
we turn our thought to a future object, our fancy flows along the stream of
time, and arrives at the object by an order, which seems most natural, passing
always from one point of time to that which is immediately posterior to it.
This easy progression of ideas favors the imagination, and makes it conceive
its object in a stronger and fuller light, than when we are continually opposed
in our passage, and are obliged to overcome the difficulties arising from the
natural propensity of the fancy. A small degree of distance in the past has,
therefore, a greater effect, in interupting and weakening the conception, than
a much greater in the future. From this effect of it on the imagination is
derived its influence on the will and passions.

THERE is another cause, which both contributes to the same effect, and
proceeds from the same quality of the fancy, by which we are determined to
trace the succession of time by a similar succession of ideas. When from the
present instant we consider two points of time equally distant in the future
and in the past, it is evident, that, abstractedly considered, their relation to
the present is almost equal. For as the future will sometime be present, so the
past was once present. If we could, therefore, remove this quality of the
imagination, an equal distance in the past and in the future, would have a
similar influence. Nor is this only true, when the fancy remains fixed, and
from the present instant surveys the future and the past; but also when it
changes its situation, and places us in different periods of time. For as on
the one hand, in supposing ourselves existent in a point of time interposed
betwixt the present instant and the future object, we find the future object
approach to us, and the past retire, and become more distant: So on the other
hand, in supposing ourselves existent in a point of time interposed betwixt the
present and the past, the past approaches to us, and the future becomes more
distant. But from the property of the fancy abovementioned we rather choose to
fix our thought on the point of time interposed betwixt the present and the
future, than on that betwixt the present and the past. We advance, rather than
retard our existence; and following what seems the natural succession of time,
proceeed from past to present, and from present to future By which means we
conceive the future as flowing every moment nearer us, and the past as
retiring. An equal distance, therefore, in the past and in the future, has not
the same effect on the imagination; and that because we consider the one as
continually increasing, and the other as continually diminishing. The fancy
anticipates the course of things, and surveys the object in that condition, to
which it tends, as well as in that, which is regarded as the present.

SECT. VIII. The same subject continued.
THUS we have accounted for three phenomenon, which seem pretty remarkable. Why
distance weakens the conception and passion: Why distance in time has a greater
effect than that in space: And why distance in past time has still a greater
effect than that in future. We must now consider three phenomenon, which seem
to be, in a manner, the reverse of these: Why a very great distance increases
our esteem and admiration for an object: Why such a distance in time increases
it more than that in space: And a distance in past time more than that in
future. The curiousness of the subject will, I hope, excuse my dwelling on it
for some time.

To begin with the first phenomenon, why a great distance increases our esteem
and admiration for an object; it is evident that the mere view and contemplation
of any greatness, whether successive or extended, enlarges the soul, and give
it a sensible delight and pleasure. A wide plain, the ocean, eternity, a
succession of several ages; all these are entertaining objects, and excel every
thing, however beautiful, which accompanies not its beauty with a suitable
greatness. Now when any very distant object is presented to the imagination, we
naturally reflect on the interposed distance, and by that means, conceiving
something great and magnificent, receive the usual satisfaction. But as the
fancy passes easily from one idea to another related to it, and transports to
the second all the passions excited by the first, the admiration, which is
directed to the distance, naturally diffuses itself over the distant object.
Accordingly we find, that it is not necessary the object should be actually
distant from us, in order to cause our admiration; but that it is sufficient,
if, by the natural association of ideas, it conveys our view to any
considerable distance. A great traveller, though in the same chamber, will pass
for a very extraordinary person; as a Greek medal, even in our cabinet, is
always esteemed a valuable curiosity. Here the object, by a natural transition,
conveys our view to the distance; and the admiration, which arises from that
distance, by another natural transition, returns back to the object.

BUT though every great distance produces an admiration for the distant object, a
distance in time has a more considerable effect than that in space. Ancient
busts and inscriptions are more valued than Japan tables: And not to mention
the Greeks and Romans, it is certain we regard with more veneration the old
Chaldeans and Egyptians, than the modern Chinese and Persians, and bestow more
fruitless pains to clear up the history and chronology of the former, than it
would cost us to make a voyage, and be certainly informed of the character,
learning and government of the latter. I shall be obliged to make a digression
in order to explain this phenomenon.

IT IS a quality very observable in human nature, that any opposition, which
does not entirely discourage and intimidate us, has rather a contrary effect,
and inspires us with a more than ordinary grandeur and magnanimity. In
collecting our force to overcome the opposition, we invigorate the soul, and
give it an elevation with which otherwise it would never have been acquainted.
Compliance, by rendering our strength useless, makes us insensible of it; but
opposition awakens and employs it.

THIS is also true in the inverse. Opposition not only enlarges the soul; but
the soul, when full of courage and magnanimity, in a manner seeks opposition.

Spumantemque dari pecora inter inertia votis
Optat aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte leonem.
WHATEVER supports and fills the passions is agreeable to us; as on the
contrary, what weakens and infeebles them is uneasy. As opposition has the
first effect, and facility the second, no wonder the mind, in certain
dispositions, desires the former, and is averse to the latter.

THESE principles have an effect on the imagination as well as on the passions.
To be convinced of this we need only consider the influence of heights and
depths on that faculty. Any great elevation of place communicates a kind of
pride or sublimity of imagination, and gives a fancied superiority over those
that lie below; and, vice versa, a sublime and strong imagination conveys the
idea of ascent and elevation. Hence it proceeds, that we associate, in a
manner, the idea of whatever is good with that of height, and evil with
lowness. Heaven is supposed to be above, and hell below. A noble genius is
called an elevate and sublime one. Atque udam spernit humum fugiente penna. On
the contrary, a vulgar and trivial conception is styled indifferently low or
mean. Prosperity is denominated ascent, and adversity descent. Kings and
princes are supposed to be placed at the top of human affairs; as peasants and
day-labourers are said to be in the lowest stations. These methods of thinking,
and of expressing ourselves, are not of so little consequence as they may
appear at first sight.

IT IS evident to common sense, as well as philosophy, that there is no natural
nor essential difference betwixt high and low, and that this distinction arises
only from the gravitation of matter, which produces a motion from the one to
the other. The very same direction, which in this part of the globe is called
ascent, is denominated descent in our antipodes; which can proceed from nothing
but the contrary tendency of bodies. Now it is certain, that the tendency of
bodies, continually operating upon our senses, must produce, from custom, a
like tendency in the fancy, and that when we consider any object situated in an
ascent, the idea of its weight gives us a propensity to transport it from the
place, in which it is situated, to the place immediately below it, and so on,
'till we come to the ground, which equally stops the body and our imagination.
For a like reason we feel a difficulty in mounting, and pass not without a kind
of reluctance from the inferior to that which is situated above it; as if our
ideas acquired a kind of gravity from their objects. As a proof of this, do we
not find, that the facility, which is so much studied in music and poetry, is
called the fall or cadency of the harmony or period; the idea of facility
communicating to us that of descent, in the same manner as descent produces a
facility?

SINCE the imagination, therefore, in running from low to high, finds an
opposition in its internal qualities and principles, and since the soul, when
elevated with joy and courage, in a manner seeks opposition, and throws itself
with alacrity into any scene of thought or action, where its courage meets with
matter to nourish and employ it; it follows, that every thing, which
invigorates and inlivens the soul, whether by touching the passions or
imagination, naturally conveys to the fancy this inclination for ascent, and
determines it to run against the natural stream of its thoughts and
conceptions. This aspiring progress of the imagination suits the present
disposition of the mind; and the difficulty, instead of extinguishing its
vigor and alacrity, has the contrary effect, of sustaining and increasing it.
Virtue, genius, power, and riches are for this reason associated with height
and sublimity; as poverty, slavery, and folly are conjoined with descent and
lowness. Were the case the same with us as Milton represents it to be with the
angels, to whom descent is adverse, and who cannot sink without labor and
compulsion, this order of things would be entirely inverted; as appears hence,
that the very nature of ascent and descent is derived from the difficulty and
propensity, and consequently every one of their effects proceeds from that
origin.

ALL this is easily applied to the present question, why a considerable
distance in time produces a greater veneration for the distant objects than a
like removal in space. The imagination moves with more difficulty in passing
from one portion of time to another, than in a transition through the parts of
space; and that because space or extension appears united to our senses, while
time or succession is always broken and divided. This difficulty, when joined
with a small distance, interrupts and weakens the fancy: But has a contrary
effect in a great removal. The mind, elevated by the vastness of its object, is
still farther elevated by the difficulty of the conception; and being obliged
every moment to renew its efforts in the transition from one part of time to
another, feels a more vigorous and sublime disposition, than in a transition
through the parts of space, where the ideas flow along with easiness and
facility. In this disposition, the imagination, passing, as is usual, from the
consideration of the distance to the view of the distant objects, gives us a
proportionable veneration for it; and this is the reason why all the relicts of
antiquity are so precious in our eyes, and appear more valuable than what is
brought even from the remotest parts of the world.

THE third phenomenon I have remarked will be a full confirmation of this.
It Is not every removal in time, which has the effect of producing veneration
and esteem. We are not apt to imagine our posterity will excel us, or equal our
ancestors. This phenomenon is the more remarkable, because any distance in
futurity weakens not our ideas so much as an equal removal in the past. Though a
removal in the past, when very great, increases our passions beyond a like
removal in the future, yet a small removal has a greater influence in
diminishing them.

IN our common way of thinking we are placed in a kind of middle station
betwixt the past and future; and as our imagination finds a kind of difficulty
in running along the former, and a facility in following the course of the
latter, the difficulty conveys the notion of ascent, and the facility of the
contrary. Hence we imagine our ancestors to be, in a manner, mounted above us,
and our posterity to lie below us. Our fancy arrives not at the one without
effort, but easily reaches the other: Which effort weakens the conception,
where the distance is small; but enlarges and elevates the imagination, when
attended with a suitable object. As on the other hand, the facility assists the
fancy in a small removal, but takes off from its force when it contemplates any
considerable distance.

IT may not be improper, before we leave this subject of the will, to resume,
in a few words, all that has been said concerning it, in order to set the whole
more distinctly before the eyes of the reader. What we commonly understand by
passion is a violent and sensible emotion of mind, when any good or evil is
presented, or any object, which, by the original formation of our faculties, is
fitted to excite an appetite. By reason we mean affections of the very same
kind with the former; but such as operate more calmly, and cause no disorder in
the temper: Which tranquillity leads us into a mistake concerning them, and
causes us to regard them as conclusions only of our intellectual faculties.
Both the causes and effects of these violent and calm passions are pretty
variable, and depend, in a great measure, on the peculiar temper and
disposition of every individual. Generally speaking, the violent passions have
a more powerful influence on the will; though it is often found, that the calm
ones, when corroborated by reflection, and seconded by resolution, are able to
control them in their most furious movements. What makes this whole affair
more uncertain, is, that a calm passion may easily be changed into a violent
one, either by a change of temper, or of the circumstances and situation of the
object, as by the borrowing of force from any attendant passion, by custom, or
by exciting the imagination. Upon the whole, this struggle of passion and of
reason, as it is called, diversifies human life, and makes men so different not
only from each other, but also from themselves in different times. Philosophy
can only account for a few of the greater and more sensible events of this war;
but must leave all the smaller and more delicate revolutions, as dependent on
principles too fine and minute for her comprehension.

SECT. IX. Of the direct passions.
IT IS easy to observe, that the passions, both direct and indirect, are founded
on pain and pleasure, and that in order to produce an affection of any kind,
it is only requisite to present some good or evil. Upon the removal of pain and
pleasure there immediately follows a removal of love and hatred, pride and
humility, desire and aversion, and of most of our reflective or secondary
impressions.

THE impressions, which arise from good and evil most naturally, and with the
least preparation are the direct passions of desire and aversion, grief and
joy, hope and fear, along with volition. The mind by an original instinct tends
to unite itself with the good, and to avoid the evil, though they be conceived
merely in idea, and be considered as to exist in any future period of time.

BUT supposing that there is an immediate impression of pain or pleasure, and
that arising from an object related to ourselves or others, this does not
prevent the propensity or aversion, with the consequent emotions, but by
concurring with certain dormant principles of the human mind, excites the new
impressions of pride or humility, love or hatred. That propensity, which unites
us to the object, or seperates us from it, still continues to operate, but in
conjunction with the indirect passions, which arise from a double relation of
impressions and ideas.

THESE indirect passions, being always agreeable or uneasy, give in their turn
additional force to the direct passions, and increase our desire and aversion
to the object. Thus a suit of fine clothes produces pleasure from their beauty;
and this pleasure produces the direct passions, or the impressions of volition
and desire. Again, when these clothes are considered as belonging to ourself,
the double relation conveys to us the sentiment of pride, which is an indirect
passion; and the pleasure, which attends that passion, returns back to the
direct affections, and gives new force to our desire or volition, joy or hope.

WHEN good is certain or probable, it produces JOY. When evil is in the same
situation there arises GRIEF or SORROW.

WHEN either good or evil is uncertain, it gives rise to FEAR or HOPE,
according to the degrees of uncertainty on the one side or the other.

DESIRE arises from good considered simply, and AVERSION is derived from evil.
The WILL exerts itself, when either the good or the absence of the evil may be
attained by any action of the mind or body.

BESIDE good and evil, or in other words, pain and pleasure, the direct
passions frequently arise from a natural impulse or instinct, which is
perfectly unaccountable. Of this kind is the desire of punishment to our
enemies, and of happiness to our friends; hunger, lust, and a few other bodily
appetites. These passions, properly speaking, produce good and evil, and
proceed not from them, like the other affections.

NONE of the direct affections seem to merit our particular attention, except
hope and fear, which we shall here endeavor to account for. It Is evident that
the very same event, which by its certainty would produce grief or joy, gives
always rise to fear or hope, when only probable and uncertain. In order,
therefore, to understand the reason why this circumstance makes such a
considerable difference, we must reflect on what I have already advanced in the
preceding book concerning the nature of probability.

PROBABILITY arises from an opposition of contrary chances or causes, by which
the mind is not allowed to fix on either side, but is incessantly tossed from one
to another, and at one moment is determined to consider an object as existent,
and at another moment as the contrary. The imagination or understanding, call
it which you please, fluctuates betwixt the opposite views; and though perhaps it
may be oftener turned to the one side than the other, it is impossible for it, by
reason of the opposition of causes or chances, to rest on either. The pro and
con of the question alternately prevail; and the mind, surveying the object in
its opposite principles, finds such a contrariety as utterly destroys all
certainty and established opinion.

SUPPOSE, then, that the object, concerning whose reality we are doubtful, is
an object either of desire or aversion, it is evident, that, according as the
mind turns itself either to the one side or the other, it must feel a momentary
impression of joy or sorrow. An object, whose existence we desire, gives
satisfaction, when we reflect on those causes, which produce it; and for the
same reason excites grief or uneasiness from the opposite consideration: So
that as the understanding, in all probable questions, is divided betwixt the
contrary points of view, the affections must in the same manner be divided
betwixt opposite emotions.

NOW if we consider the human mind, we shall find, that with regard to the
passions, it is not of the nature of a windinstrument of music, which in running
over all the notes immediately loses the sound after the breath ceases; but
rather resembles a string-instrument, where after each stroke the vibrations
still retain some sound, which gradually and insensibly decays. The imagination
is extreme quick and agile; but the passions are slow and restive: For which
reason, when any object is presented, that affords a variety of views to the
one, and emotions to the other; though the fancy may change its views with great
celerity; each stroke will not produce a clear and distinct note of passion,
but the one passion will always be mixed and confounded with the other.
According as the probability inclines to good or evil, the passion of joy or
sorrow predominates in the composition: Because the nature of probability is to
cast a superior number of views or chances on one side; or, which is the same
thing, a superior number of returns of one passion; or since the dispersed
passions are collected into one, a superior degree of that passion. That is, in
other words, the grief and joy being intermingled with each other, by means of
the contrary views of the imagination, produce by their union the passions of
hope and fear.

UPON this head there may be started a very curious question concerning that
contrariety of passions, which is our present subject. It Is observable, that
where the objects of contrary passions are presented at once, beside the
increase of the predominant passion (which has been already explained, and
commonly arises at their first shock or rencounter) it sometimes happens, that
both the passions exist successively, and by short intervals; sometimes, that
they destroy each other, and neither of them takes place; and sometimes that
both of them remain united in the mind. It may, therefore, be asked, by what
theory we can explain these variations, and to what general principle we can
reduce them.

WHEN the contrary passions arise from objects entirely different, they take
place alternately, the want of relation in the ideas seperating the impressions
from each other, and preventing their opposition. Thus when a man is afflicted
for the loss of a lawsuit, and joyful for the birth of a son, the mind running
from the agreeable to the calamitous object, with whatever celerity it may
perform this motion, can scarcely temper the one affection with the other, and
remain betwixt them in a state of indifference.

IT more easily attains that calm situation, when the same event is of a mixed
nature, and contains something adverse and something prosperous in its
different circumstances. For in that case, both the passions, mingling with
each other by means of the relation, become mutually destructive, and leave the
mind in perfect tranquillity.

BUT suppose, in the third place, that the object is not a compound of good or
evil, but is considered as probable or improbable in any degree; in that case I
assert, that the contrary passions will both of them be present at once in the
soul, and instead of destroying and tempering each other, will subsist
together, and produce a third impression or affection by their union. Contrary
passions are not capable of destroying each other, except when their contrary
movements exactly rencounter, and are opposite in their direction, as well as
in the sensation they produce. This exact rencounter depends upon the relations
of those ideas, from which they are derived, and is more or less perfect,
according to the degrees of the relation. In the case of probability the
contrary chances are so far related, that they determine concerning the
existence or nonexistence of the same object. But this relation is far from
being perfect; since some of the chances lie on the side of existence, and
others on that of nonexistence; which are objects altogether incompatible.
It Is impossible by one steady view to survey the opposite chances, and the
events dependent on them; but it is necessary, that the imagination should run
alternately from the one to the other. Each view of the imagination produces
its peculiar passion, which decays away by degrees, and is followed by a
sensible vibration after the stroke. The incompatibility of the views keeps the
passions from shocking in a direct line, if that expression may be allowed; and
yet their relation is sufficient to mingle their fainter emotions. It Is after
this manner that hope and fear arise from the different mixture of these
opposite passions of grief and joy, and from their imperfect union and
conjunction.

UPON the whole, contrary passions succeed each other alternately, when they
arise from different objects: They mutually destroy each other, when they
proceed from different parts of the same: And they subsist both of them, and
mingle together, when they are derived from the contrary and incompatible
chances or possibilities, on which any one object depends. The influence of the
relations of ideas is plainly seen in this whole affair. If the objects of the
contrary passions be totally different, the passions are like two opposite
liquors in different bottles, which have no influence on each other. If the
objects be intimately connected, the passions are like an alcali and an acid,
which, being mingled, destroy each other. If the relation be more imperfect,
and consists in the contradictory views of the same object, the passions are
like oil and vinegar, which, however mingled, never perfectly unite and
incorporate.

AS the hypothesis concerning hope and fear carries its own evidence along with
it, we shall be the more concise in our proofs. A few strong arguments are
better than many weak ones.

THE passions of fear and hope may arise when the chances are equal on both
sides, and no superiority can be discovered in the one above the other. Nay, in
this situation the passions are rather the strongest, as the mind has then the
least foundation to rest upon, and is tossed with the greatest uncertainty.
Throw in a superior degree of probability to the side of grief, you immediately
see that passion diffuse itself over the composition, and tincture it into
fear. Increase the probability, and by that means the grief, the fear prevails
still more and more, till at last it runs insensibly, as the joy continually
diminishes, into pure grief. After you have brought it to this situation,
diminish the grief, after the same manner that you increased it; by diminishing
the probability on that side, and you will see the passion clear every moment,
'till it changes insensibly into hope; which again runs, after the same manner,
by slow degrees, into joy, as you increase that part of the composition by the
increase of the probability. Are not these as plain proofs, that the passions
of fear and hope are mixtures of grief and joy, as in optics it is a proof, that
a colored ray of the sun passing through a prism, is a composition of two
others, when, as you diminish or increase the quantity of either, you find it
prevail proportionably more or less in the composition? I am sure neither
natural nor moral philosophy admits of stronger proofs.

PROBABILITY is of two kinds, either when the object is really in itself
uncertain, and to be determined by chance; or when, though the object be already
certain, yet it is uncertain to our judgment, which finds a number of proofs on
each side of the question. Both these kinds of probabilities cause fear and
hope; which can only proceed from that property, in which they agree, viz. the
uncertainty and fluctuation they bestow on the imagination by that contrariety
of views, which is common to both.

IT IS a probable good or evil, that commonly produces hope or fear; because
probability, being a wavering and unconstant method of surveying an object,
causes naturally a like mixture and uncertainty of passion. But we may observe,
that wherever from other causes this mixture can be produced, the passions of
fear and hope will arise, even though there be no probability; which must be
allowed to be a convincing proof of the present hypothesis.

WE find that an evil, barely conceived as possible, does sometimes produce
fear; especially if the evil be very great. A man cannot think of excessive
pains and tortures without trembling, if he be in the least danger of suffering
them. The smallness of the probability is compensated by the greatness of the
evil; and the sensation is equally lively, as if the evil were more probable.
One view or glimpse of the former, has the same effect as several of the latter.

BUT they are not only possible evils, that cause fear, but even some allowed
to be impossible; as when we tremble on the brink of a precipice, though we know
ourselves to be in perfect security, and have it in our choice whether we will
advance a step farther. This proceeds from the immediate presence of the evil,
which influences the imagination in the same manner as the certainty of it
would do; but being encountered by the reflection on our security, is
immediately retracted, and causes the same kind of passion, as when from a
contrariety of chances contrary passions are produced.

EVILS, that are certain, have sometimes the same effect in producing fear, as
the possible or impossible. Thus a man in a strong prison well-guarded, without
the least means of escape, trembles at the thought of the rack, to which he is
sentenced. This happens only when the certain evil is terrible and confounding;
in which case the mind continually rejects it with horror, while it continually
presses in upon the thought. The evil is there fixed and established, but the
mind cannot endure to fix upon it; from which fluctuation and uncertainty there
arises a passion of much the same appearance with fear.

BUT it is not only where good or evil is uncertain, as to its existence, but
also as to its kind, that fear or hope arises. Let one be told by a person,
whose veracity he cannot doubt of, that one of his sons is suddenly killed,
it is evident the passion this event would occasion, would not settle into pure
grief, till he got certain information, which of his sons he had lost. Here
there is an evil certain, but the kind of it uncertain: Consequently the fear
we feel on this occasion is without the least mixture of joy, and arises merely
from the fluctuation of the fancy betwixt its objects. And though each side of
the question produces here the same passion, yet that passion cannot settle,
but receives from the imagination a tremulous and unsteady motion, resembling
in its cause, as well as in its sensation, the mixture and contention of grief
and joy.

FROM these principles we may account for a phenomenon in the passions, which
at first sight seems very extraordinary, viz. that surprise is apt to change
into fear, and every thing that is unexpected affrights us. The most obvious
conclusion from this is, that human nature is in general pusilanimous; since
upon the sudden appearance of any object we immediately conclude it to be an
evil, and without waiting till we can examine its nature, whether it be good or
bad, are at first affected with fear. This I say is the most obvious
conclusion; but upon farther examination we shall find that the phenomenon is
otherwise to be accounted for. The suddenness and strangeness of an appearance
naturally excite a commotion in the mind, like every thing for which we are not
prepared, and to which we are not accustomed. This commotion, again, naturally
produces a curiosity or inquisitiveness, which being very violent, from the
strong and sudden impulse of the object, becomes uneasy, and resembles in its
fluctuation and uncertainty, the sensation of fear or the mixed passions of
grief and joy. This image of fear naturally converts into the thing itself, and
gives us a real apprehension of evil, as the mind always forms its judgments
more from its present disposition than from the nature of its objects.

THUS all kinds of uncertainty have a strong connection with fear, even though
they do not cause any opposition of passions by the opposite views and
considerations they present to us. A person, who has left his friend in any
malady, will feel more anxiety upon his account, than if he were present, though
perhaps he is not only incapable of giving him assistance, but likewise of
judging of the event of his sickness. In this case, though the principal object
of the passion, viz. the life or death of his friend, be to him equally
uncertain when present as when absent; yet there are a thousand little
circumstances of his friend's situation and condition, the knowledge of which
fixes the idea, and prevents that fluctuation and uncertainty so near allied to
fear. Uncertainty is, indeed, in one respect as near allied to hope as to fear,
since it makes an essential part in the composition of the former passion; but
the reason, why it inclines not to that side, is, that uncertainty alone is
uneasy, and has a relation of impressions to the uneasy passions.

IT IS thus our uncertainty concerning any minute circumstance relating to a
person increases our apprehensions of his death or misfortune. Horace has
remarked this phenomenon.

Ut assidens implumibus pullus avis
Serpentium allapsus timet,
Magis relictis; non, ut adsit, auxili
Latura plus presentibus.
BUT this principle of the connection of fear with uncertainty I carry farther,
and observe that any doubt produces that passion, even though it presents nothing
to us on any side but what is good and desirable. A virgin, on her
bridal-night goes to bed full of fears and apprehensions, though she expects
nothing but pleasure of the highest kind, and what she has long wished for. The
newness and greatness of the event, the confusion of wishes and joys, so
embarrass the mind, that it knows not on what passion to fix itself; from
whence arises a fluttering or unsettledness of the spirits, which being, in
some degree, uneasy, very naturally degenerates into fear.

THUS we still find, that whatever causes any fluctuation or mixture of
passions, with any degree of uneasiness, always produces fear, or at least a
passion so like it, that they are scarcely to be distinguished.

I HAVE here confined myself to the examination of hope and fear in their most
simple and natural situation, without considering all the variations they may
receive from the mixture of different views and reflections. Terror,
consternation, astonishment, anxiety, and other passions of that kind, are
nothing but different species and degrees of fear. It Is easy to imagine how a
different situation of the object, or a different turn of thought, may change
even the sensation of a passion; and this may in general account for all the
particular sub-divisions of the other affections, as well as of fear. Love may
show itself in the shape of tenderness, friendship, intimacy, esteem,
good will, and in many other appearances; which at the bottom are the same
affections, and arise from the same causes, though with a small variation, which
it is not necessary to give any particular account of. It Is for this reason I
have all along confined myself to the principal passion.

THE same care of avoiding prolixity is the reason why I wave the examination
of the will and direct passions, as they appear in animals; since nothing is
more evident, than that they are of the same nature, and excited by the same
causes as in human creatures. I leave this to the reader's own observation;
desiring him at the same time to consider the additional force this bestows on
the present system.

SECT. X. Of curiosity, or the love of truth.
BUT methinks we have been not a little inattentive to run over so many
different parts of the human mind, and examine so many passions, without taking
once into the consideration that love of truth, which was the first source of
all our enquiries. 'Twill therefore be proper, before we leave this subject, to
bestow a few reflections on that passion, and show its origin in human nature.
It Is an affection of so peculiar a kind, that 'twoud have been impossible to
have treated of it under any of those heads, which we have examined, without
danger of obscurity and confusion.

TRUTH is of two kinds, consisting either in the discovery of the proportions
of ideas, considered as such, or in the conformity of our ideas of objects to
their real existence. It Is certain, that the former species of truth, is not
desired merely as truth, and that it is not the justness of our conclusions,
which alone gives the pleasure. For these conclusions are equally just, when we
discover the equality of two bodies by a pair of compasses, as when we learn it
by a mathematical demonstration; and though in the one case the proofs be
demonstrative, and in the other only sensible, yet generally speaking, the mind
acquiesces with equal assurance in the one as in the other. And in an
arithmetical operation, where both the truth and the assurance are of the same
nature, as in the most profound algebraical problem, the pleasure is very
inconsiderable, if rather it does not degenerate into pain: Which is an evident
proof, that the satisfaction, which we sometimes receive from the discovery of
truth, proceeds not from it, merely as such, but only as endowed with certain
qualities.

THE first and most considerable circumstance requisite to render truth
agreeable, is the genius and capacity, which is employed in its invention and
discovery. What is easy and obvious is never valued; and even what is in itself
difficult, if we come to the knowledge of it without difficulty, and without
any stretch of thought or judgment, is but little regarded. We love to trace
the demonstrations of mathematicians; but should receive small entertainment
from a person, who should barely inform us of the proportions of lines and
angles, though we reposed the utmost confidence both in his judgment and
veracity. In this case it is sufficient to have ears to learn the truth. We
never are obliged to fix our attention or exert our genius; which of all other
exercises of the mind is the most pleasant and agreeable.

BUT though the exercise of genius be the principal source of that satisfaction
we receive from the sciences, yet I doubt, if it be alone sufficient to give us
any considerable enjoyment. The truth we discover must also be of some
importance. It Is easy to multiply algebraical problems to infinity, nor is
there any end in the discovery of the proportions of conic sections; though few
mathematicians take any pleasure in these researches, but turn their thoughts
to what is more useful and important. Now the question is, after what manner
this utility and importance operate upon us? The difficulty on this head arises
from hence, that many philosophers have consurn'd their time, have destroyed
their health, and neglected their fortune, in the search of such truths, as
they esteemed important and useful to the world, though it appeared from their
whole conduct and behavior, that they were not endowed with any share of
public spirit, nor had any concern for the interests of mankind. Were they
convinced, that their discoveries were of no consequence, they would entirely
lose all relish for their studies, and that though the consequences be entirely
indifferent to them; which seems to be a contradiction.

TO remove this contradiction, we must consider, that there are certain desires
and inclinations, which go no farther than the imagination, and are rather the
faint shadows and images of passions, than any real affections. Thus, suppose a
man, who takes a survey of the fortifications of any city; considers their
strength and advantages, natural or acquired; observes the disposition and
contrivance of the bastions, ramparts, mines, and other military works; it is
plain, that in proportion as all these are fitted to attain their ends, he will
receive a suitable pleasure and satisfaction. This pleasure, as it arises from
the utility, not the form of the objects, can be no other than a sympathy with
the inhabitants, for whose security all this art is employed; though it is
possible, that this person, as a stranger or an enemy, may in his heart have no
kindness for them, or may even entertain a hatred against them.

IT may indeed be objected, that such a remote sympathy is a very slight
foundation for a passion, and that so much industry and application, as we
frequently observe in philosophers, can never be derived from so inconsiderable
an original. But here I return to what I have already remarked, that the
pleasure of study consists chiefly in the action of the mind, and the exercise
of the genius and understanding in the discovery or comprehension of any truth.
If the importance of the truth be requisite to complete the pleasure, it is not
on account of any considerable addition, which of itself it brings to our
enjoyment, but only because it is, in some measure, requisite to fix our
attention. When we are careless and inattentive, the same action of the
understanding has no effect upon us, nor is able to convey any of that
satisfaction, which arises from it, when we are in another disposition.

BUT beside the action of the mind, which is the principal foundation of the
pleasure, there is likewise required a degree of success in the attainment of
the end, or the discovery of that truth we examine. Upon this head I shall make
a general remark, which may be useful on many occasions, viz. that where the
mind pursues any end with passion; though that passion be not derived originally
from the end, but merely from the action and pursuit; yet by the natural course
of the affections, we acquire a concern for the end itself, and are uneasy
under any disappointment we meet with in the pursuit of it. This proceeds from
the relation and parallel direction of the passions abovementioned.

TO illustrate all this by a similar instance, I shall observe, that there
cannot be two passions more nearly resembling each other, than those of hunting
and philosophy, whatever disproportion may at first sight appear betwixt them.
It Is evident, that the pleasure of hunting consists in the action of the mind
and body; the motion, the attention, the difficulty, and the uncertainty. It Is
evident likewise, that these actions must be attended with an idea of utility,
in order to their having any effect upon us. A man of the greatest fortune, and
the farthest removed from avarice, though he takes a pleasure in hunting after
patridges and pheasants, feels no satisfaction in shooting crows and magpies;
and that because he considers the first as fit for the table, and the other as
entirely useless. Here it is certain, that the utility or importance of itself
causes no real passion, but is only requisite to support the imagination; and
the same person, who over-looks a ten times greater profit in any other
subject, is pleased to bring home half a dozen woodcocks or plovers, after
having employed several hours in hunting after them. To make the parallel
betwixt hunting and philosophy more complete, we may observe, that though in both
cases the end of our action may in itself be despised, yet in the heat of the
action we acquire such an attention to this end, that we are very uneasy under
any disappointments, and are sorry when we either miss our game, or fall into
any error in our reasoning.

IF we want another parallel to these affections, we may consider the passion
of gaming, which affords a pleasure from the same principles as hunting and
philosophy. It has been remarked, that the pleasure of gaming arises not from
interest alone; since many leave a sure gain for this entertainment: Neither is
it derived from the game alone; since the same persons have no satisfaction,
when they play for nothing: But proceeds from both these causes united, though
separately they have no effect. It Is here, as in certain chemical preparations,
where the mixture of two clear and transparent liquids produces a third, which
is opaque and colored.

THE interest, which we have in any game, engages our attention, without which
we can have no enjoyment, either in that or in any other action. Our attention
being once engaged, the difficulty, variety, and sudden reverses of fortune,
still farther interest us; and it is from that concern our satisfaction arises.
Human life is so tiresome a scene, and men generally are of such indolent
dispositions, that whatever amuses them, though by a passion mixed with pain, does
in the main give them a sensible pleasure. And this pleasure is here increased
by the nature of the objects, which being sensible, and of a narrow compass,
are entered into with facility; and are agreeable to the imagination.

THE same theory, that accounts for the love of truth in mathematics and
algebra, may be extended to morals, politics, natural philosophy, and other
studies, where we consider not the abstract relations of ideas, but their real
connexions and existence. But beside the love of knowledge, which displays
itself in the sciences, there is a certain curiosity implanted in human nature,
which is a passion derived from a quite different principle. Some people have
an insatiable desire of knowing the actions and circumstances of their
neighbors, though their interest be no way concerned in them, and they must
entirely depend on others for their information; in which case there is no room
for study or application. Let us search for the reason of this phenomenon.

IT has been proved at large, that the influence of belief is at once to
inliven and infix any idea in the imagination, and prevent all kind of
hesitation and uncertainty about it. Both these circumstances are advantageous.
By the vivacity of the idea we interest the fancy, and produce, though in a
lesser degree, the same pleasure, which arises from a moderate passion. As the
vivacity of the idea gives pleasure, so its certainty prevents uneasiness, by
fixing one particular idea in the mind, and keeping it from wavering in the
choice of its objects. It Is a quality of human nature, which is conspicuous on
many occasions, and is common both to the mind and body, that too sudden and
violent a change is unpleasant to us, and that however any objects may in
themselves be indifferent, yet their alteration gives uneasiness. As it is the
nature of doubt to cause a variation in the thought, and transport us suddenly
from one idea to another, it must of consequence be the occasion of pain. This
pain chiefly takes place, where interest, relation, or the greatness and
novelty of any event interests us in it. It Is not every matter of fact, of
which we have a curiosity to be informed; neither are they such only as we have
an interest to know. It Is sufficient if the idea strikes on us with such force,
and concerns us so nearly, as to give us an uneasiness in its instability and
inconstancy. A stranger, when he arrives first at any town, may be entirely
indifferent about knowing the history and adventures of the inhabitants; but as
he becomes farther acquainted with them, and has lived any considerable time
among them, he acquires the same curiosity as the natives. When we are reading
the history of a nation, we may have an ardent desire of clearing up any doubt
or difficulty, that occurs in it; but become careless in such researches, when
the ideas of these events are, in a great measure, obliterated.

FINIS.
BOOKS printed for JOHN NOON, at the White-Hart near Mercer's-Chapel, Cheapside.
I. A Paraphase and Notes on the Epistles of St. Paul to the Colossians,
Philippians, and Hebrews: after the Manner of Mr. LOCK. To which are annexed,
Several critical Dissertations on particular Texts of Scripture. By the late
Reverend Mr. JAMES PIERCE of Exon. The second Edition. price 16s.

II. A Paraphase and Notes on the Revelation of St. John; with large Historical
Observations, and a Preface giving an Account of the Design and Use of this
Book; with a Scheme and Order of the Prophecies. By MOSES LOWMAN. price 9s.

III. A Paraphrase with Notes on the Revelation of St. John, in the Manner of
Dr. CLARKE; with a Preface concerning the Usefulness and Intelligibleness of
this Book. By THOMAS PYLE, M. A. Prebendary of the Cathedral Church of
Salisbury. price 4s.

IV. A Paraphrase on the seven Catholic Epistles: after the Manner of Dr.
CLARKE on the four Evangelists. Useful for Families. price 3s. 6d.

V. A Paraphrase on Christ's Sermon on the Mount, contained in the 5th, 6th,
and 7th Chapters of St. Matthew; with proper Soliloquies, at every Period. In a
Letter from a Father to his Son. price 1s.

VI. SERMONS on various Subjects, in two Volumes, 8vo. Vol. I. treating, 1. Of
the universal Sense of Good and Evil. 2. The Characters of the righteous and
good Man compared; or Benevolence the noblest Branch of social Virtue. 3. The
perfection of the Christian Scheme of Benevolence; in answer to the Objection
from its not having particularly recommended private Friendship, and the Love
of our Country. 5. Of the Image of GOD in Man; or, The Excellency of human
Nature. 5. GOD not an arbitrary Being. 6. Of the Abuses of Free-thinking. 7. Of
Mysteries. 8. Agur's Prayer; or, The middle Condition of Life, generally, the
most eligible. 9. The Mischiefs of slavish Complaisance, and Cowardice. 10.
Rules for the profitable reading the Holy Scriptures. 11. Of Heresy. 12. Of
Schism. 13. Of the Pleasures of a religious Life. 14. Religion founded on
Reason, and the Right of private Judgment. 15. The Evidence of a future State,
on the Principles of Reason and Revelation, distinctly considered. 16. The
Nature, Folly, and Danger of scoffing at Religion.

VII. Vol. II.] 1. Of moral and natural Evil. 2. Of the true Principle of
Virtue. 3. Of the Nature, Divine Original, and Authority of Conscience. 4. The
Plea of an erroneous Conscience distinctly considered, and argued. 5. The
Influences of the Spirit entirely persuasive and moral; and its Fruits of the
same kind with the Dictates of natural Conscience. 6. Of Anger. 7. The time
when Christianity was made known proved to be the fittest, from the State and
Circumstances of the World. 8. The Wisdom of GOD in the various Ranks and
Subordinations of Human Life. 9. The Glory of GOD best promoted by the moral
Rectitude and Happiness of his Creatures. 10. The Folly of imitating popular
and fashionable Vices. 11. The Sublimity and Extent of Christian Morals. 12. Of
Sincerity, as opposed to Prejudice. 13. Of the Idea and Improvement of Human
Life. 14. The Kingdom of GOD, under the Dispensation of the Gospel, not an
external and ritual, but a moral Constitution. 15. Universal Charity the
Essence and Life of Religion. 16. The peculiar Guilt and Infamy of prevailing
Wickedness in an enlightened and polite Age. 2 vol. price 10s.

VIII. The Usefulness, Truth, and Excellency of the Christian Revelation
defended against the Objections contained in a late Book, entitled,
Christianity as old as the Creation, etc. The third Edition, corrected.

IX. Three Letters to Dr. STEBBING, on the Subject of Heresy. price 2s. 6d.
These three last by the Rev. Mr. JAMES FOSTER.

X. A Free and Impartial Study of the Holy Scriptures recommended: In three
Vols. 8vo. Containing, Notes on many peculiar Texts of Scripture, and
Discourses on various Subjects; some of which are, viz. Of the Septuagint
Version of the Bible, and the Difference between the Citations as they lie in
the New Testament, and the original Passages in the Old. Christians not bound
by any Authority of the Law of Moses in the Ten Commandments. Of the Soul, its
Immortality, Immateriality, etc. with the Impossibility of proving a Future
State by the Light of Nature; and of the Place where Good Men shall dwell after
the Resurrection. Of our Savior's Miracles. The Nature of Sacrifices,
particularly of the Sacrifice of Christ. The Origin of Evil. The original
Meaning of the Ten Commandments. The Lord's Day. Moral and Positive Duties. The
Agapae, or Love Feasts. Circumcision and Baptism. Schism and Heresy. The
Restoration of the Jews. The End of the World. price 15s.

XI. The Laws and Liberties of the Gospel: or, The Duties and Privileges common
to all Christians explained and recommended, in several practical Discourses.
Designed to promote Christian Truth and Charity, Peace and Unity. By GILBERT
MICHELL, M. A. Rector of Bredsall near Derby. price 5s.

XII. Eight Sermons preached on several Occasions. By the late Mr. JAMES
BUROUGHS. price 3s. 6d.

XIII. Fifteen Sermons on several Occasions. To which is added, a
Scripture-Catechism, or the Principles of the Christian Religion laid down in
the Words of the Bible. By the late Reverend Mr. JAMES PIERCE. price 5s.

XIV. Funeral Discourses: In two Parts. Containing, 1. Consolations on the
Death of our Friends. 2. Preparations for our own Death. By WILLIAM HARRIS, D.
D. price 5s.

XV. Bibliotheca Technologica: Or, a philological Library of Literary Arts and
Sciences, viz. 1. Theology, or the first Principles of Natural Religion. 2.
Ethics, or Morality, the Doctrine of moral Virtues. 3. Christianity, or the
Substance of the Christian Religion. Judaism, or the Religion and State of the
Jews. 5. Mahometanism, or the Life, Religion, and Polity of Mahomet. 6.
Gentilism, or the Deities and Religion of the Heathen. 7. Mythology, or an
Explanation of Fabulous Histories. 8. Grammar and Language, particularly of the
English Tongue. 9. Rhetoric and Oratory, or the Art of speaking eloquently. 10.
Logic, or the Art of Reasoning and Persuasion. 11. Ontology, or the Science of
Being abstractedly considered. 12. Poetry, or the Art of making Verses or
Poems. 13. Criticism, or the Art of judging well of Men and Things. 14.
Geography, or a Description of the World. 15. Chronology, or the Doctrine of
Time. 16. History, with the Original of Nations and Kingdoms. 17. Physiology,
or Science of Natural Philosophy. 18. Botany, or the Doctrine of Plants and
Vegetables. 19. Anatomy, or a Description of the Parts of an Human Body. 20.
Pharmacy, or the Art of making Medicines. 21. Medicine, or the Theory of
Physic and Diseases. 22. Polity and Oeconomics, or the Doctrine of Society and
Government. 23. Jurisprudence, or the Knowledge of Law or Right. 24. Heraldry,
or the Art of Blazoning Coat Armor. 25. Miscellanies, an Account of the
Mathematical Arts and Sciences. price 6s. 6d.

XVI. The Philosophical Grammar of Experimental Natural Philosophy, in the
familiar Way of Dialogue; adapted to the Capacities of Youth, and illustrated
with Variety of Copper Plates, Maps, etc. The Second Edition, with large
Additions.

XVII. The young Student's Memorial-Book, or Pocket-Library of the
Mathematics; containing for Illustration, above 120 Cuts. Price 3s.

XVIII. A new and universal System, or Body of Decimal Arithmetic; containing
the Doctrine, Application and Use, in all the Parts of Arithmetic,
Mathematics, etc. price 6s.

XIX. The young Trigonometer's Complete Guide, being plain and spherical
Trigonometry made plain and easy. In 2 vols. 8vo. price 10s. These five last by
BENJAMIN MARTIN, Teacher of the Mathematics, etc.

XX. Novatiani Opera, cum copiosissimis Observationibus and Notis, in quibus
totum argumentum auctoris de Regula Fidei ex veterum Patrum Monumentis late
discutitur. Praemittitur Dissertatio de Filii Dei Homoousio. five
Coessentialitate uni Deo Patri. Studio JOHANNIS JACKSON, Eccles. Angl. Presb.
price 7s.

XXI. A second Edition, of a Defense of Human Liberty, in answer to the
principal Arguments which have been alleged against it, and particularly to
CATO'S Letters on that Subject. In which Defense, the Opinion of the Ancients.
concerning Fate, is also distinctly and largely considered. To which is added a
Vindication of Human Liberty: In answer to a Dissertation on Liberty and
Necessity; Written by A. C. Es Esquire By JOHN JACKSON Rector of Rossington in the
County of York, and Master of Wigston's Hospital in Leicester. price 4s. 6d.

XXII. CYROPAEDIA: or, the Institution of CYRUS, concerning Religion and
Government. Translated from the Greek Original of XENOPHON, by the late
Honorable MAURICE ASHLEY, Esquire (Brother to the late Earl of SHAFTSBURY.)
Addressed to the Lady ELIZABETH HARRIS, in a Dissertation upon the true Liberty
of Thinking, in Matters both Ecclesiastical and Civil. By the Translator. In
two Vol. 8vo. price 9s.

XXIII. The History of the SEVARAMBIANS, a People of the South-Continent: In
five Parts. Containing an Account of the Government, Laws, Religion, Manners,
and Language of that Nation. Translated from the Memoirs of Captain SIDEN, who
lived near fifteen Years amongst them. price 5s.

XXIV. ALKIBLA. A Disquisition upon Worshipping toward the East: In two Parts.
Part I. Contains the general Antiquity, the Rise and Reasonableness of this
religious Ceremony in the Gentile World: Its early Adoption into the Church of
Christ; with a free and impartial Examination of the Reasons assigned for it by
the ancient Fathers. Part II. Contains an historical Account of this Ceremony
in the Christian Church, from the primitive to the present Times: With a
serious and impartial Examination of the Reasons assigned for the Practice by
our Modern Divines. To the second Part are prefixed, Some Thoughts by way of
Preface, concerning the proper Use of Ridicule in Controversies styled
Religious. By WILLIAM ASPLIN, M. A. Rector of Bowthorp. Price 3s. 6d.

XXV. The Nature and Design of Christianity considered: In two Discourses. Dis.
I. Shows, That the Peace and Happiness of this World is the immediate Design
of Christianity; with an Address in the close to the Deists, or those who deny
the Christian Revelation. Dis. II. Is concerning the Simplicity and
Reasonableness of the Christian Institution. Designed to obviate those
Prejudices against it, which are both the most common, and likewise observed to
have the greatest Influence. By THOMAS BOTT, M. A. Rector of Spixwell near
Norwich. price 3s. 6d.

XXVI. Human Osseogeny explained, in two Lectures read in the Anatomical
Theater of the Surgeons of London. In which not only the Beginning and gradual
Increase of the Bones of Human Foetus's are described, but also the Nature of
Ossification is considered; and the general Notion, that all Bones are formed
from Cartilages, is demonstrated to be a Mistake. By ROBERT NESBITT, M. D.
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and of the Royal Society, and Reader
of Anatomy at Surgeons-Hall. price 6s.

XXVII. Anatomy Epitomized and Illustrated: Containing, 1. A concise and plain
Description of all the Parts of the Human Body; together with their various
Uses in the Animal Economy. 2. A large and choice Collection of Sculptures,
exhibiting a just Idea of the Figure, Size, Situation, Connection, and Uses of
the several Parts of the Body, in seventeen Folio Copper Plates. By M. N. B. A.
price 6s.

XXVIII. A Paraphrase and critical Commentary on the Prophecy of Joel. By
SAMUEL CHANDLER. price 4s.

XXIX. An Essay toward explaining the History and Revelation of Scripture in
their several Periods. To which is added, a Dissertion on the Fall of Man. By
JEREMIAH HUNT. D. D. pr. 4s.

XXX. The plain Account of the Nature and End of the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, vindicated from the Misrepresentations and false Reasonings of
Richard Warren, D. D. and particularly from his abusive Charge of Socinianism;
in Remarks on the three Parts of his Answer to that Book, and also on his
Appendix. price 2s. 6d.

XXXI. The Morality of Religion and the Doctrine of the Sacrament put in a true
Light. price 1s.

XXXII. The Doctrine of Hell Torments distinctly and impartially discussed.
price 1s. The three last by one Author.

XXXIII. An Enquiry into the Law of Nature and Revelation. To which is annexed,
A Discourse concerning the Mediator bebetween God and Man. price 1s. 6d.

XXXIV. The Argument a priori concerning the Existence and Perfections of God,
and its Importance to Virtue and True Religion, stated and considered. Together
with the Difficulties and Objections which have any where occurred;
particularly in a Dissertation, by a learned Hand, at the End of Mr. Law's
Treatise of Space, etc. price 1s.

XXXV. A Discourse concerning Virtue and Religion: Occasioned by some late
Writings. pr. 6d. The two last writ by one Author.

XXXVI. Divine Benevolence: or an Attempt to prove that the principal End of
the Divine Providence and Government is the Happiness of his Creatures. Being
an Answer to a Pamphlet, entitled, Divine Rectitude; or an Enquiry concerning
the Moral Perfections of the Deity. With the Refutation of the Notions therein
advanced concerning Beauty and Order, the Reason of Punishment, and the
Necessity of a State of Trial antecedent to perfect Happiness. price 1s.

XXXVII. An Introduction to the Doctrine of Fluxions, and Defense of the
Mathematicians against the Objections of the Author of the Analyst, so far as
they are designed to affect their general Methods of Reasoning. pr. 1s. These
two last by the same Author.

XXXVIII. An Essay in Vindication of the Use and Advantage of Prayer. Wherein
Objections raised from the Attributes and Decrees of God, and the settled
Course and Order of Things, are considered and answered. By the late Rev. Mr.
John Archer. pr. 6d.

XXXIX. A Question proposed by the Author of an Address to the Inhabitants of
London and Westminster, viz. Whether God is an arbitrary Being and commands
only for Commanding's sake, such Things as only oblige by Virtue of the
Command, and can oblige no longer, considered. price 6d.

XL. A Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion, and the Relation they bear
to each other. By the late Right Hon. the Lord Viscount Barrington. price 6d.

XLI. An Argument to prove the Unity and Perfections of God a priori. price 6d.

XLII. The Principles of Popery schismatical. A Sermon. By Moses Lowman. price
6d.

XLIII. The Period of Human Life not unalterably fixed, but variable by Men's
virtuous or vicious Behavior, by Henry Fysh, M. A. Vicar of Middleton in
Norfolk. price 4d.

XLIV. A Sermon on the Death of the Queen, with a short Account or Character of
her Majesty. By John Dickenson, M. A. price 6d.

XLV. The Acceptableness of Sincerity to God, and the Unprofitableness of a
mere speculative Faith to any Man's Salvation. A Sermon. By Jacob Ball. price
6d.

XLVI. The Importance of right Apprehensions of God, with respect to Religion
and Virtue, considered. By Jacob Ball. price 6d.

XLVII. A Sermon occasioned by the Death of Mrs. Mary Wilks. By the Rev. Mr.
James Foster. price 6d.

XLVIII. The Suddenness of Christ's Coming considered and improved. A Sermon
occasioned by the Death of the Rev. Mr. Henry Grove. By James Strong. price 6d.

XLIX. Of the Use of public Instruction. A Sermon. By Rich. White, Vicar of
Abbotsham, Devon. price 4d.

L. Reflections on the Duty of Masters, Mistresses and Servants, in which
several Irregularities are reproved, and certain plain and useful Rules
proposed for promoting the Peace and Tranquillity of Families. By Matthew
Randall. price 6d.

LI. The Hope of a good Man in the View of Death, and the proper Temper of his
Mind with Reference to it; considered in a Sermon on the Death of Mrs. Mary
Mottershed. By Jer. Tidcomb. price 6d.

LII. The wonderful Works of God in the Deep, considered and recommended to all
the seafaring Men. A Sermon on the Death of a Sea Captain. By Jer. Tidcomb.
price 6d.

LIII. Eight Discourses upon the Mystery of Godliness, from 1 Timothy 3. 16. price
2s. 6d.

LIVE. The uninterrupted Succession of Bishops, proved not necessary to the
Conveyance of the Ministerial Office, and the Validity of Ordinances in the
Church: Wherein is considered the Nature of the Sanhedrim, the Synagogue, and
the Rights of Societies, before the Writings of the Sacred Books, and since
they were written. price 1s.

LV. An Essay for allaying the Animosities among British Protestants, in a
Discourse founded upon the 14th and part of the 15th Chapter of the Epistle to
the Romans. price 4d.

LVI. An Historical Account of the several Attempts for a further Reformation
of the Established Church of England. price 6d. The four last by the late Rev.
Mr. John Platts.

LVII. The principal and peculiar Notion advanced in a late Book, entitled, The
Religion of Nature delineated; considered and refuted. In a Letter to a
Gentleman. price 4d.

LVIII. Remarks upon Dr. Butler's sixth Chapter of The Analogy of Religion,
etc. Concerning Necessity; and also upon The Dissertation of the Nature of
Virtue. By Philanthropus. The two last by one Author.

LIX. A Defense of Christianity against the Power of Enthusiasm, in Answer to
Mr. Bradbury. By Thomas Morgan. price 4d.

LX. Jesus Christ the Mediator between God and Man, an Advocate for us with the
Father, and a Propitiation for the Sin of the World. price 2s.

LXI. An Answer to Mr. Watts concerning the Trinity. Being a sober Appeal to a
Turk or an Indian. price 2s.

LXII. A calm Enquiry, whether we have any Warrant from Scripture for
addressing ourselves in a way of Prayer or Praise directly to the Holy Spirit.
Humbly offered to the Consideration of all Christians, particularly of
Protestant Dissenters. To which is prefixed, a Preface to the Rev. Mr. Barker
of Hackney. By Martin Tomkins. price 6d.

LXIII. The Nature of the Lord's Supper, and the Obligations to it briefly
considered; with a serious Exhortation to a due Attendance on it: Four
Discourses, preached by William Harris, D. D. price 1s.

LXIV. A Defense of a Discourse on the Impossibility of proving a future State
by the Light of Nature. With an Answer to the Reverend Mr. Groves's Thoughts on
the same Subject. price 1s. 6d.

LXV. A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Enty, being a Defense of several Notes and
Discourses contained in a Book, entitled, A free and impartial Study of the
Scriptures recommended. price 6d.

LXVI. An Answer to Mr. Mudge's Sermon, entitled, Liberty. price 6d.

LXVII. The consistent Christian: Being a Confutation of the Errors advanced in
Mr. Chubb's late Book, entitled, The true Gospel of Jesus Christ asserted;
relating to the Necessity of Faith, the Nature of the Gospel, the Inspiration
of the Apostles, etc. With Remarks on his Dissertation on Providence. price 6d.

LXVIII. The Immorality of the moral Philosopher and its Vindication; being
Answers to a Book, entitled, The moral Philosopher. price 1s. 6d.

LXIX. An Essay on the Use of Miracles. Designed against the Assertion, That
they are no proper Proof of a Divine Mission. To which is prefixed, an Answer
to some other Objections against Revealed Religion, contained in a late Book,
entitled, Christianity as old as the Creation. price 1s.

LXX. The Christian Creed, concerning the Son of God as professed by those
Christians, who are (falsely) called Arians. price 3d.

LXXI. The Truth and Importance of the Scripture-Doctrine of the Trinity and
Incarnation demonstrated, in a Defense of the late learned Mr. Peirce's
thirteen Queries, and a Reply to Dr. W -- d, and a Gentleman's Answers to them;
together with a full Confutation of Dr. Waterland's late Book of the
Importance, etc. price 1s.

LXXII. The Reconciler; or an Essay to show that Christians are much more
agreed in their Notions concerning the Holy Trinity than has been commonly
represented. With a Reply to Mr. Ball's (of Honiton) Answer to some common
Objections. price 6d.

LXXIII. Index Librorum MSS. Graecorum and Versionum Antiquarum Novi Foederis
viri Eruditissimi J. Millius, and L. Kusterus, cum tertia Editione Stephanica
contulerunt. price 1 s. The ten last writ by Mr. Joseph Hallett, Jun.

LXXIV. Remarks on Dr. Waterland's second Defense. With an Appendix, showing
the true Sense of Creation, Eternity, and Consubstantiality. In a Letter to the
Doctor. By Philalethes Cantabrigiensis. price 1 s.

LXXV. Farther Remarks on Dr. Waterland's farther Vindication of Christ's
Divinity. By Philalethes Cantabrigiensis. price 1 s.

LXXVI. A true Narrative of the Controversy concerning the Doctrine of the
Trinity; being a Reply to Dr. Berriman's Historical Account. Wherein the
Partiality and Mis-representations of that Author are fully shown. By the
Author of the Reply to Dr. Waterland's Defenses. price 1 s. 6d.

LXXVII.: Christian Liberty asserted, and the Scripture-Doctrine of the Trinity
vindicated; against a Book written by Dr. Waterland, and entitled, The
Importance of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity Asserted, etc. By a Clergyman in
the Country. price 2.

LXXVIII. A Confutation of the Fifth of Mr. Moore's Propositions of Natural and
Revealed Religion, which relates to the Doctrine of the Trinity. In a Letter to
a Clergyman. To which is added, a Letter to Dr. Waterland. price 1 s.

LXXIX. Memoirs on the Life and Writings of Dr. Waterland: being a summary View
of the Trinitarian Controversy for twenty Years, between the Dr. and a
Clergyman in the Country; wherein, in defense of a Book, entitled, Christian
Liberty Asserted, etc. in answer to some Animadversions upon it, and to a
Defense of Dr. Waterland's, is shown the Pravity of the Dr.'s Book, called, The
Importance, etc. and the Tendency of it to introduce Heresy, Schism, and
Persecution into the Church. By a Clergyman. price 2 s.

LXXX. An Answer to a Book, entitled, Things Divine and Supernatural, conceived
by Analogy with Things Natural and Human. price 1 s.

LXXXI. A Dissertation on Matter and Spirit, with some Remarks on a Book,
entitled, An Enquiry into the Nature of the Human Soul. price 1 s.

LXXXII. The second Part of the Plea for Human Reason, in answer to a Letter
written to the Author of the Plea for Human Reason. price 1 s.

LXXXIII. A Narrative of the Case of the Rev. Mr. Jackson, being refused the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper at Bath, by Dr. Coney, Minister of Bath: with
some Observations upon it, worthy the Consideration of all Friends to true
Religion, and Liberty of Conscience. price 3 d. The ten last Pieces were
written by a Country Clergyman.


