portrait of Alexander Pope Mr. POPE.


Mr POPE's Literary Correspondence For Thirty Years; from 1704 to 1734. BEING,
A COLLECTION of LETTERS, Which passed between him and Several Eminent Persons.

VOLUME the First.

LONDON: Printed for E. CURLL, in Rose-street, Covent Garden. M.DCC.XXXV.

PREFACE.
WE presume we want no Apology to the Reader for this Publication, but some may
be thought needful to Mr Pope: However he cannot think our Offense so great as
Theirs, who first separately published what we have here but collected in a
better Form and Order. As for the Letters we have procured to be added, they
serve but to complete, explain, and sometimes set in a true light, those
others, which it was not in the Writer's or Our power to recall.

This Collection has been owing to several Cabinets; some drawn from thence by
Accidents, and others (even of those to Ladies) voluntarily given. It is to one
of that Sex we are beholden for the whole Correspondence with H. C. Esquire which
Letters being lent her by that Gentleman, she took the Liberty to print; as
appears by the following, which we shall give at length, both as it is
something curious, and as it may serve for an Apology for our selves.

To HENRY CROMWELL, Esquire
June 27, 1727.
AFTER so long a silence, as the many and great oppressions I have sighed under
has occasioned, one is at a Loss how to begin a letter to so kind a friend as
your self. But as it was always my resolution, if I must sink, to do it as
decently [that is as silently] as I could: so when I found my self plunged into
unforeseen, and unavoidable ruin, I retreated from the world, and in a manner
buried my self in a dismal place, where I knew none, nor none knew me. In this
dull unthinking way, I have protracted a lingering death, [for life it cannot be
call'd] ever since you saw me, sequestered from company, deprived of my books,
and nothing left to converse with but the Letters of my dead, or absent,
friends, amongst which latter I always placed yours, and Mr Pope's, in the
first rank. I lent some of them indeed to an ingenious person, who was so
delighted with the specimen, that he importuned me for a sight of the rest,
which having obtained, he conveyed them to the Press, I must not say altogether
with my consent, nor wholly without it. I thought them too good to be lost in
oblivion, and had no cause to apprehend the disobliging of any. The public,
viz. all persons of taste and judgment, would be pleased with so agreeable an
amusement; Mr Cromwell could not be angry, since it was but justice to his
merit, to publish the solemn, and private professions of Love, Gratitude, and
Veneration, made him by so celebrated an Author; and surely Mr Pope ought not
to resent the publication, since the early pregnancy of his Genius was no
dishonor to his character. And yet had either of you been asked, common
modesty would have obliged you to refuse, what you would not be displeased
with, if done without your knowledge: And besides to end all dispute, you had
been pleased to make me a free gift of them, to do what I pleased with them:
and every one knows that the person to whom a Letter is addressed, has the same
right to dispose of it, as he has of goods purchased with his money. I doubt
not but your generosity and honor will do me the right, of owning by a line,
that I came honestly by them. I flatter my self, in a few months I shall again
be visible to the world, and whenever through good providence that Turn shall
happen, I shall joyfully acquaint you with it, there being none more truly your
obliged Servant, than, Sir,

Your faithful, and most humble Servant, E. THOMAS.
P. S. A Letter, Sir, directed to Mrs Thomas, to be left at my house, will be
safely transmitted to her, by

Yours, etc. E. CURLL.




To Mr POPE.
Epsom, July 6, 1727.
WHEN these Letters were first printed, I wond'red how Curll could come by 'em,
and could not but laugh at the pompous title; since whatever you wrote to me
was humor, and familiar Raillery. As soon as I came from Epsom, I heard you
had been to see me, and I writ you a short letter from Will's, that I longed to
see you. Mr D^s, about that time, charged me, with giving 'em to a Mistress,
which I positively denied; not in the least, at that time, thinking of it: but
some time after, finding in the newspapers Letters from Lady Packington, Lady
Chudleigh, and Mr Norris, to the same Sapho or E. T. I began to fear that I was
guilty. I have never seen these Letters of Curll's, nor would go to his shop
about them; I have not seen this Sapho, alias E. T. these seven years; -- her
writing, That I gave her 'em, to do what she would with 'em, is straining the
point too far: I thought not of it; nor do I think she did then: But severe
Necessity, which catches hold of a Twig, has produced all this; which has lain
hid, and forgot by me, so many years. Curll sent me a Letter last week,
desiring a positive answer about this matter, but finding I would give him
none, he went to E. T. and writ a Postscript, in her long romantic Letter, to
direct my Answer to his house, but they not expecting an Answer, sent a young
man to me, whose name, it seems, is Pattisson: I told him, I should not write
any thing, but I believed it might be so, as she writ in her Letter. I am
extremely concerned, that my former Indiscretion in putting 'em into the hands
of this Pretieuse, should have given you so much disturbance; for the last
thing I should do would be to disoblige you; for whom I have ever preserved the
greatest esteem, and shall ever be, Sir,

Your faithful Friend, and most humble Servant, HENRY CROMWELL.


To Mr POPE.
August 1, 1727.
THOUGH I writ my long Narrative from Epsom 'till I was tired, yet was I not
satisfied; lest any doubt should rest upon your mind. I could not make
protestations of my Innocence of a grievous crime; but I was impatient 'till I
came to Town, that I might send you those Letters, as a clear evidence, that I
was a perfect stranger to all their proceeding: Should I have protested against
it, after the printing, it might have been taken for an attempt to decry his
purchase; and as the little exception you have taken, has served him to play
his game upon us, for these two years; a new incident from me might enable him
to play it on for two more: -- The great value she expresses for all you write,
and her passion for having 'em, I believe, was what prevailed upon me to let
her keep 'em. By the interval of twelve years at least, from her possession, to
the time of printing 'em, it is manifest, that I had not the least ground to
apprehend such a design: But as People in great straits, bring forth their
hoards of old Gold, and most valued Jewels, so Sapho had recourse to her hid
treasure of Letters, and played off, not only yours to me, but all those to
herself (as the Lady's last-stake) into the press. -- As for me, I hope, when
you shall cooly consider the many thousand instances of our being deluded by
the females, since that great Original of Adam by Eve, you will have a more
favorable thought of the undesigning error of.

Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, HENRY CROMWELL.


Now, should our Apology for this Publication be as ill received, as the Lady's
seems to have been by the Gentlemen concerned; we shall at least have Her
Comfort of being Thanked by the rest of the world. Nor has Mr P. himself any
great cause to think it much Offense to his Modesty, or Reflection on his
Judgment; when we take care to inform the Public, that there are few Letters of
his in this Collection which were not written under Twenty years of Age: On the
other hand, we doubt not the Reader will be much more surpised to find, at
that early period, so much variety of Style, Affecting Sentiment, and Justness
of Criticism, in pieces which must have been writ in haste, very few perhaps
ever re-view'd, and none intended for the Eye of the Public.

LETTERS OF Sir WILLIAM TRUMBULL, Mr. STEEL, Mr. ADDISON, and Mr. POPE. From
1711 to 1715.
portrait of Joseph Addison Mr Addison.


Secretary of State to King William the Third.
Sir WILLIAM TRUMBULL to Mr. POPE.
I HAVE this moment received the favor of yours of the 8th instant; and will
make you a true excuse, (though perhaps no very good one) that I deferred the
troubling you with a letter, when I sent back your Papers, in hopes of seeing
you at Binfield before this time. If I had met with any fault in your
performance, I should freely now (as I have done too presumptuously in
conversation with you) tell you my opinion; which I have frequently ventured to
give you, rather in compliance with your desires, than that I could think it
reasonable. For I am not yet satisfied upon what grounds I can pretend to judge
of Poetry, who never have been practiced in the Art. There may possibly be some
happy genius's, who may judge of some of the natural beauties of a Poem, as a
man may of the proportions of a building, without having read Vitruvius, or
knowing any thing of the rules of architecture: But this, though it may sometimes
be in the right, must be subject to many mistakes, and is certainly but a
superficial knowledge; without entering into the art, the methods, and the
particular excellencies of the whole composure, in all the parts of it.

Besides my want of skill, I have another reason why I ought to suspect my
self, by reason of the great affection I have for you, which might give too
much biass, to be kind to every thing that comes from you; but after all, I
must say (and I do it with an old-fashioned sincerity.) that I entirely approve
of your Translation of those Pieces of Homer, both as to the versification and
the true sense that shines through the whole; nay I am confirmed in my former
application to you, and give me leave to renew it upon this occasion, that you
would proceed in translating that incomparable Poet, to make him speak good
English, to dress his admirable characters in your proper, significant, and
expressive conceptions, and to make his works as useful and instructive to this
degenerate age, as he was to our friend Horace, when he read him at Praeneste,
Qui, quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non, etc. I break off with
that quid non? with which I confess I am charmed.

Upon the whole matter, I entreat you to send this presently to be added to the
Miscellanies, and I hope it will come time enough for that purpose.

I have nothing to say of my Nephew B's observations, for he sent them to me so
late, that I had not time to consider them; I dare say he endeavored very
faithfully (though he told me very hastily) to execute your commands.

All I can add is, that if your excess of modesty should hinder you from
publishing this Essay, I shall only be sorry that I have no more credit with
you, to persuade you to oblige the public, and very particularly, dear Sir,

Your most faithful humble Servant, W. Trumbull.
April 9, 1708.
Mr. POPE to the Hon. J. C. Esquire
June 15, 1711.
I Send you Dennis's remarks on the On Criticism.
Essay, which equally abound in just Criticisms and fine Railleries: The few
observations in my hand in the margins, are what a morning's leisure permitted
me to make, purely for your perusal. For I am of opinion, that such a Critic as
you will find him by the latter part of his book, is but one way to be properly
answered, and that way I would not take after what he informs me in his
preface, that he is at this time persecuted by Fortune. This I knew not before;
if I had, his name had been spared in the Essay, for that only reason. I cannot
conceive what ground he has for so excessive a resentment; nor imagine how
those But Appius reddens at each word you speak,
And stares tremendous with a threatening eye,
Like some fierce Tyrant in old Tapestry.

three lines can be called a reflection on his Person, which only describe him
subject a little to Anger on some occasions. I have heard of combatants so very
furious, as to fall down themselves with that very blow which they designed to
lay heavy on their antagonists. But if Mr. Dennis's rage proceeds only from a
zeal to discourage young and unexperienced writers from scribbling, he should
frighten us with his Verse not Prose: for I have often known, that when all the
precepts in the world would not reclaim a sinner, some very sad example has
done the business. This Thought we find afterward put into Verse in the
Dunciad, Book 1.
Yet to give this man his due, he has objected to one or two lines with reason,
and I will alter 'em in case of another edition; I will make my enemy do me a
kindness where he meant an injury, and so serve instead of a friend. What he
observes at the bottom of page 20th of his reflections, was objected to by
yourself, and had been mended but for the haste of the press: It Is right
Hibernian, and I confess it what the English call a Bull in the expression,
though the sense be manifest enough: Mr. Dennis's Bulls are seldom in the
expression, they are always in the sense.

I shall certainly never make the least reply to him, not only because you
advise me, but because I have ever been of opinion, that if a book cannot answer
for itself to the public, it is to no sort of purpose for its author to do it.
If I am wrong in any sentiment of that Essay, I protest sincerely, I don't
desire all the world should be deceived (which would be of very ill
consequence) merely that I my self may be thought right, which is of very
little consequence.) I Would be the first to recant, for the benefit of others, and
the glory of my self; for (as I take it) when a man owns himself to have been
in an error, he does but tell you in other words, that he is wiser than he was.
But I have had an advantage by the publishing that book of D^s's, which
otherwise I should never have known: It has been the occasion of making me
friends, and open abetters, of several gentlemen of known sense and wit; and of
proving to me what I have till now doubted, that my writings are taken some
notice of by the world in general, or I should never be attacked thus in
particular. I have read that 'twas a custom among the Romans, while a General
rode in triumph, to have common soldiers in the streets that railed at him and
reproached him; to put him in mind, that though his services were in the main
approved and rewarded, yet he had faults enough to keep him humble.

You will see by this, that whoever sets up for wit in these days, ought to
have the constancy of a primitive Christian, and be prepared to suffer
martyrdom in the cause of it. But sure this is the first time that a Wit was
attacked for his Religion, as you will find I am most zealously in this treatise:
and you know, Sir, what alarms I have had from the Sea the ensuing Letters.
opposite side on this account. Have I not reason to cry out, with the poor
fellow in Virgil, Quid jam misero mihi denique restat?
Cui neque apud Danaos usquam locus, and super ipsi
Dardanidae infensi paenas cum Sanguine poscunt!


It Is however my happiness that you, Sir, are impartial, Jove was alike to
Latian and to Phrygian,
For you well know, that Wit's of no Religion.


The manner in which Mr. D. takes to pieces several particular lines, detached
from their natural places, may show how easy it is to a caviller to give a new
sense, or a new nonsense to any thing. And indeed his constructions are not
more wrested from the genuine meaning, than theirs who objected to the
heterodox parts, as they called 'em.

Our friend the Abbe is not of that sort, who with the utmost candor and
freedom, has modestly told me what others thought, and shown himself one (as he
very well expresses it) rather of a Number than a Party. The only difference
between us in relation to the Monks, is, that he thinks most sorts of learning
flourished among 'em, and I am of opinion that only some sort of learning was
barely kept alive by 'em: he believes, that in the most natural and obvious
sense, that line ( A second deluge Learning overrun) will be understood of
Learning in general; and I fancy 'twill be understood only (as it is meant) of
polite Learning, Criticism, Poetry, etc. which is the only learning concerned
in the subject of the Essay. It is true, that the Monks did preserve what
learning there was, about Nicholas the Fifth's time; but those who succeeded
fell into the depth of Barbarism, or at least stood at a stay while others rose
from thence, insomuch that even Erasmus and Reuchlin could hardly laugh them
out of it. I am highly obliged to the Abbe's zeal in my commendation, and
goodness in not concealing what he thinks my error. And his testifying some
esteem for the book, just at a time when his brethren raised a clamor against
it, is an instance of great generosity and candor, which I shall ever
acknowledge.

Your, etc.

To the same.
June 18, 1711.
IN your last you informed me of the mistaken zeal of some people, who seem to
make it no less their business to persuade men they are erroneous, than Doctors
do that they are sick; only that they may magnify their own cure, and triumph
over an imaginary distemper. The Simile objected to in my Essay, (Thus wit,
like faith, by each man is applied
To one small Sect, and all are damned beside.)
plainly concludes at this second line, where stands a full stop: and what
follows ( Meanly they seek, etc.) speaks only of Wit, (which is meant by that
blessing, and that sun) for how can the sun of faith be said to sublime the
southern wits, and to ripen the genius's of northern climates? I fear these
gentlemen understand grammar as little as they do criticism; and perhaps out of
good nature to the Monks, are willing to take from 'em the censure of
ignorance, and to have it to themselves. The word They refers (as I am sure I
meant, and as I thought every one must have known) to those critics there
spoken of, who are partial to some particular set of writers, to the prejudice
of all others. And the very simile it self, if twice read, may convince them,
that the censure here of damning, lies not on our Church at all, unless they
call our Church one small Sect: and the cautious words, ( by each Man)
manifestly show it a general reflection on all such (whoever they are) who
entertain those narrow and limited notions of the mercy of the Almighty; which
the Reformed ministers and Presbyterians are as guilty of as any people living.

Yet after all, I promise you, Sir, if the alteration of a word or two will
gratify any man of sound faith though weak understanding, I will (though it were
from no other principle than that of common good nature) comply with it. And if
you please but to particularize the spot where their objection lies, for it is
in a very narrow compass) that stumbling block, though it be but a little pebble,
shall be removed out of their way. If the heat of these good disputants (who, I
am afraid, being bred up to wrangle in the schools, cannot get rid of the humor
all their lives) should proceed so far as to personal reflections upon me, I
assure you notwithstanding I will do, or say nothing, however provoked (for
some people can no more provoke than oblige) that is unbecoming the character
of a true Catholic. I will set before me the example of that great man, and
great Saint Erasmus; who in the midst of calumny proceeded with all the
calmness of innocence, and the unrevenging spirit of primitive christianity.
However I would advise them to suffer the mention of him to pass unregarded,
lest I should be forced to do that for his reputation which I would never do
for my own; I mean, to vindicate so great a light of our Church from the malice
of past times, and the ignorance of the present, in a language which may extend
farther than that in which the Trifle about Criticism is written. I wish these
gentlemen would be contented with finding fault with me only, who will submit
to 'em right or wrong, as far as I only am concerned; I have a greater regard
to the quiet of mankind than to disturb it for things of so little consequence
as my credit and my sense. A little humility can do a Poet no hurt, and a
little Charity would do a Priest none: For as St. Austin finely says, Ubi
Charitas, ibi Humilitas; ubi Humilitas, ibi Pax.

Yours, etc.

To the same.
July 19, 1711.
THE concern which you more than seem to be affected with for my reputation, by
the several accounts you have so obligingly given of what reports and censures
the holy Vandals have thought fit to pass upon me, makes me desirous of telling
so good a friend my whole thoughts of this matter; and of letting before you in
a clear light the true state of it.

I have ever believed the best piece of service one could do to our religion,
was openly to express our detestation and scorn of all those mean artifices and
Piae frauds, which it stands so little in need of, and which have laid it
under so great a scandal among its enemies.

Nothing has been so much a scarecrow to them, as that too peremptory and
seemingly-uncharitable assertion of an utter Impossibility of Salvation to all
but ourselves; invincible ignorance excepted, which indeed some people define
under so great limitations, and with such exclusions, that it seems as if that
word were rather invented as a salvo, or expedient, not to be thought too bold
with the thunderbolts of God (which are hurled about so freely on almost all
mankind by the Hands of ecclesiastics) than as a real exception to
almost-universal damnation. For, besides the small number of the truly faithful
in our Church, we must again subdivide; the Jansenist is damned by the Jesuit,
the Jesuit by the Jansenist, the Scotist by the Thomist, and so forth.

There may be errors I grant, but I cannot think 'em of such consequence as to
destroy utterly the charity of mankind; the very greatest bond in which we are
engaged by God to one another. Therefore I own to you, I was glad of any
opportunity to express my dislike of so shocking a sentiment as those of the
religion I profess are commonly charged with; and I hoped, a slight
insinuation, introduced so easily by a casual similitude only, could never have
given offense; but on the contrary must needs have done good; in a nation and
time, where we are the smaller party, and consequently most misrepresented, and
most in need of vindication.

For the same reason, I took occasion to mention the Superstition of some ages
after the subversion of the Roman Empire, which is too manifest a truth to be
denied, and does in no sort reflect upon the present professors of our faith
who are free from it. Our silence in these points may with some reason make our
adversaries think we allow and persist in those bigottries; which yet in
reality all good and sensible Men despise, though they are persuaded not to speak
against 'em; I cannot tell why, since now it is no way the interest even of the
worst of our Priesthood (as it might have been then) to have them smothered in
silence: For as the opposite Sects are now prevailing, it is too late to hinder
our church from being slandered; it is our business now to show it is slandered
unjustly, and to vindicate ourselves from being thought abettors of what they
charge us with. This cannot so well be brought about with serious faces; we must
laugh with them at what deserves it; and then we need not doubt of being
cleared, even in their opinions.

As to particulars: you cannot but have observed that at first the whole
objection against the simile of wit and faith lay to the word They: When that
was beyond contradiction removed (the very Grammar serving to confute 'em) then
the objection lies against the Simile itself; or if that simile will not be
objected to (sense and common reason being indeed a little stubborn, and not
apt to give way to every body) next the mention of Superstition must become a
crime (as if Religion and she were sisters, or that it were a scandal upon the
family of Christ, to say a word against the Devil's bastard.) Afterward, more
mischief is discovered in a place that seemed innocent at first, the two lines
about Schismatics, at the bottom of page 24. An ordinary man would imagine the
author plainly declared against those schismatics, for quitting the true faith
out of contempt of the understanding of some few of its believers: But these
believers are called Dull, and because I say that those Schismatics think some
believers dull, therefore these charitable interpreters of my meaning will have
it, that I think all believers dull. I was telling lately Mr. (...) these
objections: who assured me I had said nothing which a Catholic need to disown,
and I have cause to know that gentleman's fault (if he has any) is not want of
zeal: He put a notion into my head, which I confess I cannot but perfectly
acquiesce in; that when a set of people are piqu'd at any truth which they
think to their own disadvantage, their method of revenge on the truth-speaker
is to attack his reputation a By-way, and not openly to object to the place
they are really galled by: What these therefore (in his opinion) are in earnest
angry at, is, that Erasmus whom their tribe oppressed and persecuted should be
vindicated after an age of obloquy by one of their own people, willing to utter
an honest truth in behalf of the dead, whom no man sure will flatter, and to
whom few will do justice. Others, you know, were as angry that I mentioned Mr.
Walsh with honor; who as he never refused to any one of merit of any party the
praise due to him, so honestly deserved it from all others, though of ever so
different interests or sentiments. May I be ever guilty of this sort of
liberty, and latitude of principle! which gives us the hardiness of speaking
well of those whom envy oppresses even after death. As I would always speak
well of my living friends when they are absent, nay because they are absent; so
would I much more of the dead, in that eternal absence; and the rather because
I expect no thanks for it.

Thus, Sir, you see I do in my conscience persist in what I have written; yet
in my friendship I will recant and alter whatever you please, in case of a
second edition (which I think the book will not so soon arrive at, for
Tonsons's printer told me he drew off a thousand copies in this first
impression, and I fancy a treatise of this nature, which not one gentleman in
threescore even of a liberal education can understand, can hardly exceed the
vent of that number.) You shall find me a true Trojan in my faith, and
friendship, in both which I will presevere to the end.

Your, etc.

To General........ upon his having translated into French Verse the Essay on
Criticism.
IF I could as well express, or (if you will allow me to say it) translate the
sentiments of my heart, as you have done those of my head, in your excellent
version of my Essay; I should not only appear the best writer in the world, but
what I much more desire to be thought, the most your servant of any man living.
It Is an advantage very rarely known, to receive at once a great honor and a
great improvement. This, Sir, you have afforded me, having at the same time
made others take my sense, and taught me to understand my own; if I may call
that my own, which is indeed more properly yours: Your verses are no more a
translation of mine, than Virgil's are of Homer, but are, like his, the justest
Imitation, and the noblest Commentary.

In putting me into a French dress, you have not only adorned my outside, but
mended my shape; and if I am now a good figure, I must consider you have
naturalized me into a country which is famous for making every man a fine
gentleman. It is by your means, that (contrary to most young travelers) I am
come back much better than I went out.

I cannot but wish we had a bill of commerce for Translation established the
next parliament; we could not fail of being gainers by that, nor of making our
selves amends for all we have lost by the war. Nay though we should insist upon
the demolishing of Boileau's works; the French, as long as they have writers of
your form; might have as good an Equivalent.

Upon the whole, I am really as proud, as our ministers can be, of the terms I
have gained from abroad; and I design, like them, to publish speedily to the
world the benefits accruing from them; for I cannot resist the temptation of
printing your admirable translation here This was never done, for the two
printed French Versions are neither of this hand The one was the work of
Monsieur Roboton, private ^ecretary to King George the first, printed in 4o at
Amsterdam and at London 1717. The other by the Abbe Resnel, in 8o with a large
Preface and Notes, at Paris, 1730.
; to which if you will be so obliging to give me leave to prefix your name, it
will be the only addition you can make to the honor already done me. I am,

Your, etc.

The Hon. J. C. to Mr. POPE.
May 23, 1712.
I AM very glad for the sake of the Widow, and for the credit of the deceased,
that A Translation of some Part of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, the Prologues,
etc. printed in a Miscellany with some works of Mr. Pope, in 2 Vol. 12o by B.
Lintot.
Betterton's remains are fallen into such hands as may render 'em reputable to
the one and beneficial to the other. Besides the public acquaintance I long
had with that poor man, I also had a slender knowledge of his parts and
capacity by private conversation, and ever thought it pity, he was necessitated
by the straitness of his fortune, to act (and especially to his latest hours)
an imaginary and fictitious part, who was capable of exhibiting a real one,
with credit to himself and advantage to his neighbor.

I hope your health permitted you to execute your design of giving us an
imitation of Pollio; I am satisfied 'twill be doubly Divine, and I shall long
to see it. I ever thought church-musick the most ravishing of all harmonious
compositions, and must also believe sacred subjects, well handled, the most
inspiring of all Poetry.

But where hangs the Lock now? (though I know that rather than draw any just
reflection upon your self, of the least shadow of ill nature, you would freely
have suppressed one of the best of Poems.) I hear no more of it -- will it comee
out in Lintot's Miscellany or not? I wrote to Lord Petre upon the subject of
the Lock, some time since, but have as yet had no answer, nor indeed do I know
when he will be in London. I have since I saw you corresponded with Mrs. W. I
hope she is now with her Aunt, and that her journey thither was something
facilitated by my writing to that Lady as pressingly as possible, not to let
any thing whatsoever obstruct it. I sent her obliging answer to the party it
most concerned; and when I hear Mrs. W. is certainly there, I will write again
to my Lady, to urge as much as possible the effecting the only thing that in my
opinion can make her Niece easy. I have run out my extent of paper, and am,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
May 28, 1712.
IT is not only the disposition I always have of conversing with you, that
makes me so speedily answer your obliging letter, but the apprehension lest
your charitable intent of writing to my Lady A. on Mrs. W's affair should be
frustrated, by the short stay she makes there. She went thither on the 25th
with that mixture of expectation and anxiety, with which people usually go into
unknown or half-discover'd countries, utterly ignorant of the dispositions of
the inhabitants, and the treatment they are to meet with. The Unfortunate of
all people are the most unfit to be left alone; yet we see the world generally
takes care they shall be so. Whereas if we took a considerate prospect of human
nature, the business and study of the happy and easy should be to divert and
humor, as well as comfort and pity, the distressed. I cannot therefore excuse
some near Allies of mine for their conduct of late toward this Lady, which has
given me a great deal of anger as well as sorrow. All I shall say to you of 'em
at present is, that they have not been my relations these two months: The
consent of opinions in our minds is certainly a nearer tie than can be
contracted by all the blood in our bodies; and I am proud of finding I have
something congenial with you. Will you permit me to confess to you, that all
the favors and kind offices you have shown toward Me, have not so strongly
cemented me yours, as the discovery of that generous and manly compassion you
manifested in the case of this unhappy Lady? I am afraid to insinuate to you
how much I esteem you: Flatterers have taken up the style which was once
peculiar to friends, and an honest man has now no way left to express himself,
besides the common one of knaves: So that true friends nowadays differ in
their address from flatterers, much as right mastiffs do from sp^niels, and
show themselves by a dumb surly sort of fidelity, rather than by their
complaisant and open kindness. -- Will you never leave commending my Poetry? In
fair truth, Sir, I like it but too well myself already -- Expose me no more, I
beg you, to the great danger of Vanity, (the rock of all men, but most of young
men) and be kindly content for the future, when you would please me thoroughly,
to say only you like what I write.

Your, etc.

Mr. STEEL to Mr. POPE.
June 1, 1712.
I AM at a solitude, an house between Hampstead and London wherein Sir Charles
Sedley died. This circumstance set me a thinking and ruminating upon the
employments in which Men of wit exercise themselves. It was said of Sir
Charles, who breathed his last in this room, Sedley has that prevailing gentle
art,
Which can with a resistless charm impart,
The loosest wishes to the chastest heart;
Raise such a conflict, kindle such a fire
Between declining Virtue and Desire,
Till the poor vanquished Maid dissolves away
In dreams all night, in sighs and tears all day.
This was an happy talent to a man of the Town, but I dare say, without
presuming to make uncharitable conjectures on the author's present condition,
he would rather have had it said of him that he had prayed, -- Oh thou my voice
inspire,
Who touched Isaiah's ballow'd lips with fire!


I have turned to every verse and chapter, and think you have preserved the
sublime heavenly spirit throughout the whole, especially at -- Hark a glad
voice -- and -- The lamb with wolves shall graze -- There is but one line which
I think below the original, He wipes the tears for ever from our eyes.


You have expressed it with a good and pious, but not with so exalted and
poetical a spirit as the prophet. The Lord God will wipe away tears from off
all faces. If you agree with me in this, alter it by way of paraphrase or
otherwise, that when it comes into a volume it may be amended. Your Poem is
already better than the Pollio. I am,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. STEEL.
June 18, 1712.
YOU have obliged me with a very kind letter, by which I find you shift the
seen of your life from the town to the country, and enjoy that mixed state
which wise men both delight in, and are qualified for. Methinks the Moralists
and Philosophers have generally run too much into extremes in commending
entirely either solitude, or public life. In the former, men for the most part
grow useless by too much rest, and in the latter are destroyed by too much
precipitation; as waters lying still, putrify and are good for nothing, and
running violently on do but the more mischief in their passage to others, and
are swallowed up and lost the sooner themselves. Those indeed who can be useful
to all states, should be like gentle streams, that not only glide through lonely
valleys and forests amidst the flocks and the shepherds, but visit populous
towns in their course, and are at once of ornament and service to them. But
there are another sort of people who seem designed for solitude, such I mean as
have more to hide than to show: As for my own part, I am one of those of whom
Seneca says, Tam umbratiles sunt, ut putent in turbido esse quicquid in luce
est. Some men like some pictures, are fitter for a corner than a full light;
and I believe such as have a natural bent to solitude (to carry on the former
similitude) are like waters which may be forced into fountains and exalted into
a great height, may make a noble figure and a louder noise, but after all they
would run more smoothly, quietly and plentifully, in their own natural course
upon the ground. The consideration of this would These foregoing Similitudes
our Author had put into Verse some years before, and inserted into Mr.
Wycherleys's Poem on Mixed Life. We find him apparently in the Versification of
them, as they are since printed in Wycherley's eosthumous Works, 8o Page 3 d
and 4 th.
make me very well contented with the possession only of that Quiet which
Cowley calls the Companion of obscurity. But whoever has the Muses too for his
companions, can never be idle enough to be uneasy. Thus Sir, you see I would
flatter myself into a good opinion of my own way of living. Plutarch just now
told me, that it is in human life as in a game at tables, where a man may wish
for the highest cast, but if his chance be otherwise, he is even to play it as
well as he can, and to make the best of it. I am,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. STEEL.
June 15, 1712.
YOU formerly observed to me, that nothing made a more ridiculous figure in a
man's life, than the disparity we often find in him sick and well: Thus one of
an unfortunate constitution is perpetually exhibiting a miserable example of
the weakness of his mind, and of his body, in their turns. I have had frequent
opportunities of late to consider myself in these different views, and I hope
have received some advantage by it, if what Mr. Waller says be true, that The
soul's dark cottage, battered and decayed,
Lets in new light through chinks that time has made.


Then surely sickness, contributing no less than old age to the shaking down
this scaffolding of the body, may discover the inward structure more plainly.
Sickness is a sort of early old age; it teaches us a diffidence in our earthly
state, and inspires us with the thoughts of a future, better than a thousand
volumes of philosophers and divines. It gives so warning a concussion to those
props of our vanity, our strength and youth, that we think of fortifying
ourselves within, when there is so little dependence upon our outworks. Youth
at the very best is but a betrayer of human life in a gentler and smoother
manner than age: It Is like a stream that nourishes a plant upon a bank, and
causes it to flourish and blossom to the sight, but at the same time is
undermining it at the root in secret. My youth has dealt more fairly and openly
with me, it has afforded several Prospects of my danger, and given me an
advantage not very common to young men, that the attractions of the world have
nor dazzled me very much; and I begin where most people end, with a full
conviction of the emptiness of all sorts of ambition, and the unsatisfactory
nature of all human pleasures. When a smart fit of sickness tells me this
scurvy tenement of my body will fall in a little time, I am even as unconcerned
as was that honest Hibernian, who being in bed in the great storm some years
ago, and told the house would tumble over his head, made answer, What care I
for the house? I am only a lodger. I fancy it is the best time to die when one
is in the best humor, and so excessively weak as I now am I may say with
conscience, that I am not at all uneasy at the thought that many men whom I
never had any esteem for, are likely to enjoy this world after me. When I
reflect what an inconsiderable little atome every single man is, with respect
to the whole creation, methinks it is a shame to be concerned at the removal of
such a trivial animal as I am. The morning after my Exit, the sun will rise as
bright as ever, the flowers smell as sweet, the plants spring as green, the
world will proceed in its old course, people will laugh as heartily, and marry
as fast as they were used to do. The memory of man, (as it is elegantly
expressed in the wisdom of Solomon) passes away as the remembrance of a guest
that tarrieth but one day. There are reasons enough, in the fourth chapter of
the same book, to make any young man contented with the prospect of death. For
honorable age is not that which stands in length of time, or is measured by
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair to men, and an unspotted life is
old age. He was taken away speedily, lest wickedness should alter his
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul, etc. I am

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. STEEL.
Nov. 7, 1712.
I Was the other day in company with five or six men of some learning; where
chancing to mention the famous verses which the Emperor Adrian spoke on his
deathbed, they were all agreed that 'twas a piece of Gaiety unworthy of that
Prince in those circumstances. I could not but differ from this opinion:
Methinks it was by no means a gay, but a very serious soliloquy to his soul at
the point of his departure; in which sense I naturally took the verses at my
first reading them when I was very young, and before I knew what interpretation
the world generally put upon them.

Animula vagula, blandula,
Hospes comesque corporis,
Quae nune abibis in loca?
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec (ut soles) dabis joca!
"Alas, my soul! thou pleasing companion of this body, thou fleeting thing that
art now deserting it! whither art thou flying? to what unknown Scene? all
trembling, fearful, and pensive. Now what is become of thy former wit and
humor? thou shall jest and be gay no more."

I confess I cannot apprehend where lies the trifling in all this? It Is the
most natural and obvious reflection imaginable to a dying man: and if we
consider the Emperor was a heathen, that doubt concerning the future fate of
his soul will seem so far from being the effect of want of thought, that 'twas
scarce reasonable he should think otherwise; not to mention that here is a
plain confession included of his belief in its immortality. The diminutive
epithets of vagula, blandula, and the rest, appear not to me as expressions of
levity, but rather of endearment and concern; such as we find in Catullus, and
the authors of Hendeca-syllabi after him, where they are used to express the
utmost love and tenderness for their mistresses. -- If you think me right in my
notion of the last words of Adrian, be pleased to insert it in the Spectator,
if not, to suppress it. I am

Your, etc.
ADRIANI Morientis
AD ANIMAM,
Translated.
AH fleeting Spirit! wandering Fire,
That long have warmed my tender breast,
Must thou no more this Frame inspire?
No more a pleasing, cheerful Guest?
Whither, ah whither art thou flying!
To what dark, undiscovered Shore?
Thou seem all trembling, shivering, dying,
And Wit and Humor are no more!


Mr. STEEL to Mr. POPE.
Nov. 12, 1712.
I HAVE read over your Temple of Fame twice, and cannot find any thing amiss of
weight enough to call a fault, but see in it a thousand thousand beauties. Mr.
Addison shall see it to morrow: After his perusal of it, I will let you know
his thoughts. I desire you would let me know whether you are at leisure or not?
I have a design which I shall open a month or two hence, with the assistance of
the few like yourself. If your thoughts are unengaged, I shall explain myself
further. I am

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. STEEL.
Nov. 16, 1712.
YOU oblige me by the indulgence you have shown the Poem I sent you, but will
oblige me much more by the kind severity I hope for from you. No errors are so
trivial, but they deserve to be mended; but since you say you see nothing that
may be called a fault, can you but think it so, that I have confined the
attendance of This is not now to be found in the Temple of Fame, of which Poem
he speaks here.
Guardian spirits to Heaven's favorites only? I could point you to several, but
it is my business to be informed of those faults I do not know, and as for those
I do, not to talk of 'em, but to correct 'em. You speak of that Poem in a style
I neither merit, nor expect; but I assure you, if you freely mark or dash out,
I shall look upon your blots to be its greatest beauties. I mean, if Mr.
Addison and yourself should like it in the whole; otherwise the trouble of
correction is what I would not take, for I was really so diffident of it, as to
let it lie by me these Hence it appears this Poem was wait before the Author
was 22 Years old.
two years, just as you now see it. I am afraid of nothing so much as to impose
any thing on the world which is unworthy of its acceptance.

As to the last period of your letter, I shall be very ready and glad to
contribute to any design that tends to the advantage of mankind, which I am
sure all yours do. I wish I had but as much capacity as leisure, for I am
perfectly idle: (a sign I have not much capacity.)

If you will entertain the best opinion of me, be pleased to think me your
friend. Assure Mr. Addison of my most faithful service, of every one's esteem
he must be assured already. I am

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. STEEL.
Nov. 29, 1712.
I AM sorry you published that notion about Adrian's Verses as mine; shad I
imagined you would use my name, I should have expressed my sentiments with more
modesty and diffidence. I only sent it to have your opinion, and not to publish
my own, which I distrusted. But I think the supposition you draw from the
notion of Adrian's being addicted to Magic, is a little uncharitable, ("that
he might fear no sort of Deity, good or bad") since in the third verse he
plainly testifies his apprehension of a future state, by being sollicitous
whither his soul was going? As to what you mention of his using gay and
ludicrous expressions, I have owned my opinion to be that the expressions are
not so, but that diminutives are often in the Latin tongue used as marks of
tenderness and concern.

Anima is no more than my soul, Animula has the force of my dear soul. To say
Virgo Bella is not half so endearing as Virguncula Bellula, and had Augustus
only called Horace Lepidum Hominem, it had amounted to no more than that he
thought him a pleasant fellow: 'Twas the Homunciolum that expressed the love and
tenderness that great Emperor had for him. And perhaps I should myself be much
better pleased, if I were told you called me your little friend, than if you
complimented me with the Title of a great Genius, or an Eminent hand (as Jacob
does all his authors.) I am

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to........
December. 5, 1712.
YOU have at length complied with the request I have often made you, for you
have shown me, I must confess, several of my faults in the sight of those
letters. Upon a review of them, I find many things that would give me shame, if
I were not more desirous to be thought honest than prudent: so many things
freely thrown out, such lengths of unreserv'd friendship, thoughts just warm
from the brain, without any polishing or dress, the very dishabille of the
understanding. You have proved yourself more tender of another's embryo's than
the fondest mothers are of their own, for you have preserved every thing that I
miscarried of. Since I know this, I shall in one respect be more afraid of
writing to you than ever, at this careless rate, because I see my evil works
may again rise in judgment against me: Yet in another respect I shall be less
afraid, since this has given me such a proof of the extreme indulgence you
afford to my slightest thoughts. The revisal of these letters has been a kind
of examination of conscience to me; so fairly and faithfully have I set down in
'em from time to time the true and undistinguished state of my mind. But I find
that these, which were intended as sketches of my friendship, give as imperfect
images of it, as the little landscapes we commonly see in black and white, do
of a beautiful country; they can represent but a very small part of it, and
that deprived of the life and luster of nature. I perceive that the more I
endeavored to render manifest the real affection and value I ever had for you,
I did but injure it by representing less and less of it: as glasses which are
designed to make an object very clear, generally contract it. Yet as when
people have a full idea of a thing, first, upon their own knowledge, the least
traces of it serve to refresh the remembrance, and are not displeasing on that
score: So I hope the foreknowledge you had of my esteem for you, is the reason
that you do not dislike my letters.

They will not be of any great service (I find) in the design I mentioned to
you: I believe I had better steal from a richer man, and plunder your letters,
(which I have kept as carefully as I would Letters Patents, since they entitle
me to what I more value than titles of honor.) You have some cause to
apprehend this usage from me, if what some say be true, that I am a great
Borrower; however I have hitherto had the luck that none of my creditors have
challenged me for it: and those who say it are such, whose writings no man ever
borrowed from, so have the least reason to complain: Their works are granted on
all hands to be but too much their own. -- Another has been pleased to declare,
that my Verses are corrected by other men: I verily believe theirs were never
corrected by any man: But indeed, if mine have not, 'twas not my fault, I have
endeavored my utmost that they should. But these things are only whispher'd,
and I will not encroach upon Bays's province and pen Whispers, so hasten to
conclude

Your, etc.

Sir WILLIAM TRUMBULL to Mr. POPE.
March 6, 1713.
I Think a hasty scribble shows more what flows from the heart, than a letter
after Balzac's manner in studied phrases; therefore I will tell you as fast as
I can, that I have received your favor of the 26th past, with your kind
present of The Rape of the Lock. You have given me the truest satisfaction
imaginable, not only in making good the just opinion I have ever had of your
reach of thought, and my Idea of your comprehensive genius; but likewise in
that pleasure I take as an Engglish Man to see the French, even Boileau himself
in his Lutrin, outdone in your Poem: For you descend, leviore plectro, to all
the nicer touches, that your own observation and wit furnish, on such a subject
as requires the finest strokes, and the liveliest imagination. But I must say
no more (though I could a great deal) on what pleases me so much: and henceforth
I hope you will never condemn me of partiality, since I only swim with the
stream, and approve what all men of good taste (notwithstanding the jarring of
Parties) must and do universally applaud. I now come to what is of vast moment,
I mean the preservation of your health, and beg of you earnestly to get out of
all Tavern-company, and fly away tanquam ex incendio. What a misery it is for
you to be destroyed by the foolish kindness ('it is all one whether real or
pretended) of those who are able to bear the Poison of bad Wine, and to engage
you in so unequal a combat? As to Homer, by all I can learn your business is
done; therefore come away and take a little time to breathe in the country. I
beg now for my own sake, but much more for yours; methinks Mr. (...) has said
to you more than once, Heu fuge, nate dea, teque his, ait, eripe flammis!


I am, Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Sir WILLIAM TRUMBULL.
March 12, 1713.
THough any thing you write is sure to be a pleasure to me, yet I must own your
last letter made me uneasy: You really use a style of compliment, which I
expect as little as I deserve it. I know it is a common opinion that a young
scribler is as ill pleased to hear truth of a young Lady. From the moment one
sets up for an author, one must be treated as ceremoniously, that it is, as
unfaithfully, As a King's Favorite, or as a King.
This proceeding, joined to that natural vanity which first makes a man an
author, is certainly enough to render him a coxcomb for life. But I must grant
it is but a just judgment upon Poets, that they whose chief pretense is Wit,
should be treated just as they themselves treat Fools, that is, be cajoled with
praises. And I believe, Poets are the only poor fellows in the world whom any
body will flatter.

I would not be thought to say this, as if the obliging letter you sent me
deserved this imputation, only it put me in mind of it; and I fancy one may
apply to one's friend what Caesar said of his Wife. It was not sufficient that
he knew her to be chaste, himself, but she should not be so much as suspected by
others.

As to the wonderful discoveries, and all the good news you are pleased to tell
me of myself; I treat it as you who are in the Secret treat common news,
groundless reports of things at a distance, which I who look into the true
springs of the affair at home, in my own breast, know to have no foundation at
all. For Fame though it be as Milton finely calls it, The last Infirmity of noble
Minds, is scarce so strong a temptation as to warrant our loss of time here: It
can never make us lie down contentedly on a deathbed (as some of the ancients
are said to have done with that thought.) You, Sir, have yourself taught me,
that an easy situation at that hour, can proceed from no ambition less noble
than that of an eternal felicity, which is unattainable by the strongest
endeavors of the Wit, but may be gained by the sincere intentions of the Heart
only. As in the next world, so in this, the only solid blessings are owing to
the goodness of the mind, not the extent of the capacity: Friendship here is an
emanation from the same source as Beatitude there: the same benevolence and
grateful disposition that qualifies us for the one, if extended farther, makes
us partakers of the other. The utmost point of my desires in my present state
terminates in the society and good will of worthy men, which I look upon as no
ill earnest and fore-taste of the society and alliance of happy souls hereafter.

The continuance of your favors to me is what not only makes me happy; but
causes me to set some value upon myself as a part of your care. The instances I
daily meet with of these agreeable awakenings of friendship, are of too
pleasing a nature not to be acknowledged whenever I think of you. I am,

Your, etc.

To the same.
April 30, 1713.
I Have been almost every day employed in following your advice, and amusing
myself in Painting, in which I am most particularly obliged to Mr. Jervas, who
gives me daily instructions and examples. As to poetical affairs, I am content
at present to be a bare looker-on, and from a practitioner turn an admirer,
which is (as the world goes) not very usual. Cato was not so much the wonder of
Rome in his days, as he is of Britain in ours; and though all the foolish
industry possible has been used to make it thought a Party-play, yet what the
author once said of another may the most properly in the world be applied to
him, on this occasion.: Envy itself is dumb, in wonder lost,
And Factions strive, who shall applaud him most.


The numerous and violent claps of the Whig-party on the one side of the
theater, were echoed back by the Tories on the other; while the Author sweated
behind the scenes with concern, to find their applause proceeding more from the
hand than the head. This was the case too of the Prologue-writer, who was
clapped into a stanch Whig, at almost every two lines. I believe you have
heard, that after all the applauses of the opposite Faction, my Lord
Bolingbroke sent for Booth who played Cato, into the box, between one of the
acts, and presented him with fifty guineas; in acknowledgment (as he expressed
it) for defending the cause of Liberty so well against a Perpetual Dictator.
The Whigs are unwilling to be distanc'd this way, (as it is said) and therefore
design a present to the same Cato very speedily; in the mean time they are
getting ready as good a Sentence as the former on their side: So betwixt them,
it is probable that Cato (as Dr. Garth expressed it) may have something to live
upon, after he dies. I am

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. ADDISON.
July 30, 1713.
I AM more joy'd at your return than I should be at that of the Sun, so much as
I wish for him this melancholy wet season; but it is his fate too, like yours,
to be displeasing to Owls and obscene animals, who cannot bear his luster. What
put me in mind of these night-birds was John Dennis, whom I think you are best
revenged upon, as the Sun was in the fable upon those batts and beastly birds
abovementioned, only by Shining on. I am so far from esteeming it any
misfortune, that I congratulate you upon having your share in that, which all
the great men and all the good men that ever lived have had their part of, Envy
and Calumny. To be uncensur'd, and to be obscure, is the same thing. You may
conclude from what I here say, that 'twas never in my thoughts to have offered
you my pen in any direct reply to such a Critic, but only in some little
raillery; not in defense of you, but in contempt of him. This relates to the
Paper occasioned by Dennis's Remarks upon Cato, called, Dr. Norris's Narrative
of the Frenzy of John Den...
But indeed your opinion, that it is entirely to be neglected, would have been
my own, had it been my own case: but I felt more warmth here than I did when
first I saw his book against myself, (though indeed in two minutes it made me
heartily merry.) He has written against every thing the world has approved
these many years: I apprehend but one danger from Dennis's disliking our sense,
that it may make us think so very well of it, as to become proud and conceited,
upon his disapprobation.

I must not here omit to do justice to Mr. (...), whose zeal in your concern is
worthy a friend, and honourer of you. He writ to me in the most pressing terms
about it, though with that just contempt of the Critic that he deserves. I think
in these days one honest man is obliged to acquaint another who are his
friends; when so many mischievous insects are daily at work to make people of
merit suspicious of each other; that they may have the satisfaction of seeing
them looked upon no better than themselves. I am

Your, etc.

Mr. ADDISON to Mr. POPE.
October 26, 1713.
I Was extremely glad to receive a letter from you, but more so upon reading
the contents of it. The The Translation of the Iliad.
Work you mention will I dare say very sufficiently recommend itself, when your
name appears with the Proposals: And if you think I can any way contribute to
the forwarding of them, you cannot lay a greater obligation upon me, than by
employing me in such an office. As I have an ambition of having it known that
you are my Friend, I shall be very proud of showing it by this, or any other
instance. I question not but your Translation will enrich our Tongue and do
Honor to our Country: for I conclude of it already from those performances
with which you have obliged the public. I would only have you consider how it
may most turn to your advantage. Excuse my impertinence in this particular,
which proceeds from my zeal for your ease and happiness. The work would cost
you a great deal of time, and unless you undertake it will I am afraid never be
executed by any other, at least I know none of this age that is equal to it
besides yourself.

I am at present wholly immersed in country business, and begin to take delight
in it. I wish I might hope to see you here sometime, and will not despair of
it, when you engage in a work that will require solitude and retirement. I am

Your, etc.

Mr. ADDISON to Mr. POPE.
Nov. 2, 1713.
I Have received your letter, and am glad to find that you have laid so good a
scheme for your great undertaking. I question not but the Prose will require as
much care as the Poetry, but the variety will give your self some relief, and
more pleasure to your readers.

You gave me leave once to take the liberty of a friend, in advising you not to
content your self with one half of the Nation for your Admirers, when you might
command them all: If I might take the freedom to repeat it, I would on this
occasion. I think you are very happy that you are out of the Fray, and I hope
all your undertakings will turn to the better account for it.

You see how I presume on your friendship in taking all this freedom with you,
but I already fancy that we have lived many years together, in an unreserved
conversation, and that we may do many more, is the sincere wish of

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. ADDISON.
YOUR last is the more obliging, as it hints at some little niceties in my
conduct, which your candor and affection prompt you to recommend to me, and
which (so trivial as things of this nature seem) are yet of no slight
consequence, to people whom every body talks of, and every body as he pleases.
It Is a sort of Tax that attends an estate in Parnassus, which is often rated
much higher than in proportion to the small possession an author holds. For
indeed an author who is once come upon the town, is enjoyed without being
thanked for the pleasure, and sometimes ill-treated by those very persons that
first debauched him. Yet to tell you the bottom of my heart, I am no way
displeased that I have offended the violent of all Parties already; and at the
same time I assure you conscientiously, I feel not the least malevolence or
resentment against any of those who misrepresent me, or are dissatisfied with
me. This frame of mind is so easy, that I am perfectly content with my
condition.

As I hope and would flatter myself, that you know me and my thoughts so
entirely as never to be mistaken in either, so it is a pleasure to me that you
guessed so right in regard to the Author of that Guardian you mentioned. But I
am sorry to find it has taken air that I have some hand in those Papers,
because I write so very few as neither to deserve the credit of such a report
with some people, nor the disrepute of it with others. An honest Jacobite spoke
to me the sense or nonsense of the weak part of his Party very fairly, that the
good people took it ill of me, that I writ with Steel, though upon never so
indifferent subjects -- This I know you will laugh at as well as I do: yet I
doubt not but many little calumniators and persons of sower dispositions will
take occasion hence to bespatter me. I confess I scorn narrow souls, of all
parties, and if I renounce my reason in religious matters, I Will hardly do it in
any other.

I cannot imagine whence it comes to pass that the few Guardians I have written
are so generally known for mine: that in particular which you mention I never
discovered to any man but the publisher, till very lately: yet almost every
body I met told me of it.

The true reason that Mr. Steel laid down the Paper, was a quarrel between him
and Jacob Tonson. He stood engaged to his bookseller, in articles of penalty,
for all the Guardians; and by desisting two days and altering the title of the
paper to that of the Englishman, was quit of his obligation: these papers being
printed by Buckley.

As to his taking a more Politic turn, I cannot any way enter into that
secret, nor have I been let into it, any more than into the rest of his
politics. Though it is said, he will take into these papers also several subjects
of the politic kind, as before: But I assure you as to myself, I have quite
done with 'em, for the future. The little I have done, and the great respect I
bear Mr. Steel as a Man of Wit, has rendered me a suspected Whig to some of
the Violent, but (as old Dryden said before me) It Is not the Violent I design
to please.

I generally employ the mornings in painting with Mr. Jervas See Mr. Pope's
Epistle to him in Verse, writ about this time.
; and the evenings in the conversation of such, as I think can most improve my
mind, of whatever Party or Denomination they are. I ever must set the highest
value upon men of truly great, that is honest Principles, with equal
capacities. The best way I know of overcoming Calumny and Misconstruction, is
by a vigorous perseverance in every thing we know to be right, and a total
neglect of all that can ensue from it. It Is partly from this maxim that I
depend upon your friendship, because I believe it will do justice to my
intention in every thing; and give me leave to tell you, that (as the world
goes) this is no small assurance I repose in you. I am

Your, etc.

To the same.
Dec. 14, 1713.
I Have been lying in wait for my own imagination, this week and more, and
watching what thoughts came up in the whirl of the fancy, that were worth
communicating to you in a letter. But I am at length convinced that my rambling
head can produce nothing of that sort; so I must even be contented with telling
you the old story, that I love you heartily. I have often found by experience,
that nature and truth, though never so low or vulgar, are yet pleasing when
openly and artlessly represented; it would be diverting to me, to read the very
letters of an infant, could it write its innocent inconsistencies and
tautologies just as it thought 'em. This makes me hope a letter from me will
not be unwelcome to you, when I am conscious I write with more unreservedness
than ever man wrote, or perhaps talked to another. I trust your good nature
with the whole range of my follies, and really love you so well, that I would
rather you should pardon me than esteem me, since one is an act of goodness and
benevolence, the other a kind of constrained deference.

You cannot wonder my thoughts are scarce consistent, when I tell you how they
are distracted. Every hour of my life, my mind is strangely divided; this
minute perhaps I am above the stars, with a thousand systems round about me,
looking forward into a vast Abyss, and losing my whole comprehension in the
boundless space of creation, in dialogues with W^ and the Astronomers; the next
moment I am below all trifles, grovelling with T^ in the very center of
nonsense. Now I am recreated with the brisk sallies and quick turns of wit,
which Mr. Steel in his liveliest and freest humors darts about him; and now
levelling my application to the insignificant observations and quirks of
Grammar of Mr. (...) and D^

Good God! What an incongruous animal is Man? how unsettled is his best part,
his Soul; and how changing and variable in his frame of Body? The constancy of
the one shook by every Notion, the temperament of the other affected by every
blast of wind! What is man altogether, but one mighty Inconsistency! Sickness
and Pain is the lot of one half of us; Doubt and Fear the portion of the other!
What a bustle we make about passing our time, when all our space is but a
point? What aims and ambitions are crowded into this little instant of our
life, which (as Shakespeare finely words it) is Rounded with a Sleep? Our whole
extent of Being no more, in the eyes of him who gave it, than a scarce
perceptible moment of duration. Those animals whose circle of living is limited
to three or four hours, as the Naturalists assure us, are yet as long-lived and
possess as wide a scene of action as man, if we consider him with an eye to all
Space, and all Eternity. Who knows what plots, what achievements a mite may
perform in his kingdom of a grain of dust, within his l^e of some minutes? and
of how much less consideration than even this, is the life of man in the sight
of that God, who is from Ever, and for Ever!

Who that thinks in this train, but must see the world and its contemptible
grandeurs lessen before him at every thought? It Is enough to make one remain
stupify'd, in a poize of inaction, void of all desires, of all designs, of all
friendships.

But we must return (through our very condition of being) to our narrow selves,
and those things that affect our selves: our passions, our interests, flow in
upon us, and unphilosophize us into mere mortals. For my part, I never return
so much into myself, as when I think of you, whose friendship is one of the
best comforts I have for the insignificancy of myself. I am

Your, etc.

To the same.
Jan. 30, 1713-4.
YOur letter found me very busy in my grand undertaking, to which I must wholly
give myself up for some time, unless when I snatch an hour to please myself
with a distant conversation with you and a few others, by writing. It Is no
comfortable prospect to be reflecting, that so long a siege as that of Troy
lies upon my hands, and the campaign above half over, before I have made any
progress. Indeed the Greek fortification upon a nearer approach does not appear
so formidable as it did, and I am almost apt to flotter myself, that Homer
secretly seems inclined to a correspondence with me, in letting me into a good
part of his intentions. There are indeed, a sort of underling auxiliars to the
difficulty of a work, called Commentators and Critics, who would frighten many
people by their number and bulk, and perplex our progress under pretense of
fortifying their author. These lie very low in the trenches and ditches they
themselves have dug, encompassed with dirt of their own heaping up, but I
think there may be found a method of coming at the main works by a more speedy
and gallant way than by mining under ground, that is, by using the Poetical
Engines, Wings, and flying over their heads.

While I am engaged in the fight, I find you are concerned how I shall be paid,
and are sollicitous that I may not have the ill fate of many discarded
Generals, to be first envied and malign'd, then perhaps praised, and lastly
neglected. The former (the constant attendant upon all great and laudable
enterprises) I have already experienced. Some have said I am not a Master in
the Greek, who either are so themselves or are not: If they are not, they cannot
tell; and if they are, they cannot without having catechized me. But if they can
read (for I know some Critics can, and others cannot) there are fairly lying
before them, some specimens of my translation from this Author in the
Miscellanies, which they are heartily welcome to. I have met with as much
malignity another way, some calling me a Tory, because the heads of that party
have been distinguishingly favorable to me; some a Whig, because I have been
favored with yours, Mr. Congreve's, and Mr. Craggs his friendship, and of late
with my Lord Hallifax's Patronage. How much more natural a conclusion might be
formed, by any good-natured man, that a person who has been well used by all
sides, has been offensive to none. This miserable age is so sunk between
animosities of Party and those of Religion, that I begin to fear, most men have
politics enough to make (through violence) the best Scheme of Government a bad
one; and faith enough to hinder their own Salvation. I hope for my own part,
never to have more of either than is consistent with common justice and
charity, and always as much as becomes a christian and honest man. Though I find
it an unfortunate thing to be bred a Papist here, where one is obnoxious to
four parts in five as being so too much, and to the fifth part as being so too
little; I shall yet be easy under both their mistakes, and be what I more than
seem to be, for I suffer for it. God is my witness, that I no more envy you
Protestants your places and possessions, than I do our Priests their charity or
learning. I am ambitious of nothing but the good opinion of good men, on both
sides; for I know that one virtue of a free spirit is more worth, than all the
virtues put together of all the narrow-soul'd people in the world. I am

Your, etc.

The Reverend Dean BERKLEY to Mr. POPE.
Leghorne, May 1, 1714.
AS I take Ingratitude to be a greater crime than Impertinence, I choose rather
to run the risque of being thought guilty of the latter, than not to return you
my thanks for a very agreeable entertainment you just now gave me. I have
accidentally met with your Rape of the Lock here, having never seen it before.
Style, Painting, Judgment, Spirit, I had already admired in others of your
Writings; but in this I am charmed with the magic of your Invention, with all
those images, allusions, and inexplicable beauties, which you raise so
surprizingly, and at the same time so naturally, out of a trifle. And yet I
cannot say that I was more pleased with the reading of it, than I am with the
pretext it gives me to renew in your thoughts the remembrance of one who values
no happiness beyond the friendship of men of wit, learning and good nature.

I remember to have heard you mention some half-formed design of coming to
Italy. What might we not expect from a Muse that sings so well in the bleak
climate of England, if she felt the same warm Sun, and breathed the same Air
with Virgil and Horace?

There are here an incredible number of Poets, that have all the inclination
but want the genius, or perhaps the art, of the Ancients. Some among them who
understand English, begin to relish our Authors; and I am informed that at
Florence they have translated Milton into Italian Verse. If one who knows so
well how to write like the old Latin Poets, came among them, it would probably
be a means to retrieve them from their cold, trivial conceits, to an imitation
of their Predecessors.

As Merchants, Antiquaries, Men of Pleasure, etc. have all different views in
traveling; I know not whether it might not be worth a Poet's while, to travel,
in order to store his mind with strong Images of Nature.

Green fields and groves, flowery meadows and purling streams, are no where in
such perfection as in England: But if you would know lightsome days, warm suns,
and blue skies, you must come to Italy; and to enable a man to describe rocks
and precipices, it is absolutely necessary that he pass the Alps.

You will easily perceive that it is self-interest makes me so fond of giving
advice to one who has no need of it. If you came into these parts, I should fly
to see you. I am here (by the favor of my good friend the Dean of St.
Patrick's) in quality of Chaplain to the Earl of Peterborough; who about three
months since left the greatest part of his family in this town. God knows how
long we shall stay here. I am

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to the Honorable........
June 8, 1714.
THE Question you ask in relation to Mr. Ad^ and Philips, I shall answer in a
few words. Mr. Philips did express himself with much indignation against me one
evening at Button's Coffee-house (as I was told) saying, That I was entered
into a Cabal with Dean Swift and others to write against the Whig-Interest, and
in particular to undermine his own reputation, and that of his friends Steel
and Addison. But Mr. Philips never opened his lips to my face, on this or any
like occasion, though I was almost every night in the same room with him, nor
ever offered me any indecorum. Mr. Addison came to me a night or two after
Philips had talked in this idle manner, and assured me of his disbelief of what
had been said, of the friendship we should always maintain, and desired I would
say nothing further of it. My Lord Hallifax did me the honor to stir in this
matter, by speaking to several people to obviate a false aspersion, which might
have done me no small prejudice with one Party. However Philips did all he
could, secretly to continue the report with the Hanover Club, and kept in his
hands the Subscriptions paid for me to him, as Secretary to that Club. The
heads of it have since given him to understand, that they take it ill; but
(upon the terms I ought to be with a man whom I think a scoundrel) I would not
even ask him for this money, but commissioned one of the Players, his equals,
to receive it. This is the whole matter; but as to the secret grounds of
Philips's malignity, they will make a very pleasant History when we meet. Mr.
Congreve and some others have been much diverted with it, and most of the
Gentlemen of the Hanover Club have made it the subject of their ridicule on
their Secretary. It is to this management of Philips, that the world owes Mr.
Gay's Pastorals. The ingenious Author is extremely your servant, and would have
complied with your kind invitation, but that he is just now appointed Secretary
to my Lord Clarendon, in his Embassy to Hanover.

I am sensible of the zeal and friendship with which I am sure you will always
defend your friend in his absence, from all those little tales and calumnies,
which a Man of any genius or merit is born to. I shall never complain while I
am happy in such noble defenders, and in such contemptible opponents. May their
envy and ill nature ever increase, to the glory and pleasure of those they
would injure; may they represent me what they will, as long as you think me
what I am,

Your, etc.

To the same.
July 13, 1714.
YOU mention the account I gave you some time ago of the things which Philips
said in his foolishness; but I cannot tell from any thing in your Letter,
whether you received a long one from me about a fortnight since. It was
principally intended to thank you for the last obliging favor you did me; and
perhaps for that reason you pass it in silence. I there launched into some
account of my temporal affairs, and intend now to give you some hints of my
spiritual. The conclusion of your Letter draws this upon you, where you tell
me, you prayed for me: Your proceeding, Sir, is contrary to that of most other
Friends, who never talk of praying for a Man after they have done him a
service, but only when they will do him none. Nothing can be more kind than the
hint you give me of the vanity of human Sciences, which I assure you I am daily
more and more convine'd of; and indeed I have for some years past, looked upon
all of 'em no better than amusements. To make them the ultimate end of our
pursuit, is a miserable and short ambition, which will drop from us at every
little disappointments here, and even in case of no disappointmentr here, will
infallibly desert us hereafter. The utmost fame they are capable of bestowing,
is never worth the pains they cost us, and the time they lose us. If you attain
the top of your desires that way, all those who envy you will do you harm; and
of those who admire you, few will do you good. The unsuccessful writers are
your declared enemies, and probably the successful your secret ones: For those
hate not more to be excelled, than these to be rivalled. And at the upshot,
after a life of perpetual application, to reflect that you have been doing
nothing for yourself, and that the same or less Industry might have gained you
a Friendship that can never deceive or end, a satisfaction which praise cannot
bestow, nor vanity feel, and a glory which (though in one respect like same, not
to be had 'till after death,) yet shall be felt and enjoyed to eternity. These,
dear Sir, are unfeignedly my sentiments, whenever I think at all; for half the
things that employ our heads deserve not the name of thoughts they are only
stronger dreams or impressions upon the imagination: Our schemes of government,
our systems of philosophy, our golden worlds of poetry, are all but so many
shadowy images, and airy prospects, which arise to us but so much the livelier
and more frequent, as we are more overcast with the darkness, and disturbed
with the fumes of human vanity.

The same thing that makes old men willing to leave this world, makes me
willing to leave poetry, long habit, and weariness of the same track. Homer
will work a cure upon me; fifteen thousand verses are equivalent to fourscore
years, to make one old in Rhyme: And I should be sorry and ashamed, to go on
jingling to the last step, like a waggoner's horse, in the same road, and so
leave my Bells to the next silly animal that will be proud of 'em. That man
makes a mean figure in the eyes of reason, who is measuring syllables and
coupling rhimes, when he should be mending his own Soul, and securing his own
immortality. If I had not this opinion, I should be unworthy even of those
small and limited parts which God has given me; and unworthy of the friendship
of such a man as you. I am

Your, etc.

To the same.
July 25, 1714.
I Have no better excuse to offer you, that I have omitted a task naturally so
pleasing to me as conversing upon paper with you; but that my time and eyes
have been wholly employed upon Homer, whom I almost fear I shall find but one
way of imitating, which is, in his blindness. I am perpetually afflicted with
headach's, that very much affect my sight; and indeed since my coming hither I
have scarce passed an hour agreeably, except that in which I read your letter.
I would seriously have you think, you have no man who more truly knows to place
a right value on your friendship, than he who least deserves it on all other
accounts than his due sense of it. But let me tell you, you can hardly guess
what a task you undertake, when you profess your self my friend; there are some
Tories who will take you for a Whig, some Whigs who will take you for a Tory,
some Protestants who will esteem you a rank Papist, and some Papists who will
account you a Heretic.

I find by dear experience, we live in an age, where it is criminal to be
moderate; and where no one man can be allowed to be just to all men. The
notions of right and wrong are so far strained, that perhaps to be in the right
so very violently, may be of worse consequence than to be easily and quietly in
the wrong. I really wish all men so well, that I am satisfied but few can wish
me so; but if those few are such as tell me they do, I am content, for they are
the best people I know: While you believe me what I profess as to Religion, I
can bear any thing the Bigoted may say; while Mr. Congreve likes my poetry, I
can endure Dennis and a thousand more like him; while the most honest and moral
of each party think me no ill man, I can easily support it, though the most
violent and mad of all parties rose up to throw dirt at me.

I must expect an hundred attacks upon the publication of my Homer. Whoever in
our times would be a professor of learning above his fellows, ought at the very
first to enter the world with the constancy and resolution of a primitive
Christian, and be prepared to suffer all sorts of public Persecution. It is
certainly to be lamented, that if any man does but endeavor to distinguish
himself, or gratify others by his studies, he is immediately treated as a
common enemy, instead of being looked upon as a common friend; and assaulted as
generally, as if his whole design were to prejudice the State, and ruin the
public. I will venture to say, no man ever rose to any degree of perfection in
writing, but through obstinacy and an inveterate resolution against the stream of
mankind: So that if the world has received any benefit from the labors of the
Learned, it was in its own despite. For when first they essay their parts, all
people in general are prejudiced against new beginners; and when they have got
a little above contempt, then some particular persons who were before
unfortunate in their own attempts, are sworn foes to them, only because they
succeed. -- Upon the whole, one may say of the best writers, that they pay a
severe fine for their fame, which it is always in the power of the most
worthless part of mankind to levy upon them when they please.

I am, etc.

To Mr. JERVAS.
July 28, 1714.
I Am just entered upon the old way of life again, sleep and musing. It is my
employment to revive the old of past ages to the present, as it is yours to
transmit the young of the present, to the future. I am copying the great Master
in one art, with the same love and diligence with which the Painter hereafter
will copy you in another.

Thus I should begin my Epistle to you, if it were a Dedicatory one. But as it
is a friendly letter, you are to find nothing mentioned in your own praise but
what only one in the world is witness to, your particular good-natured offices
to me. Whatever mankind in general would allow you, that I am not to give you
to your face; and if I were to do it in your absence, the world would tell me I
am too partial to be permitted to pass any judgment of you.

So you see me cut out from any thing but common acknowledgments, or common
discourse. The first you would take ill, though I told you but half what I ought;
so in short the last only remains.

And as for the last, what can you expect from a man who has not talked these
five days? who is withdrawing his thoughts as far as he can, from all the
present world, its customs and its manners, to be fully possessed and absorpt in
the past? When people talk of going to Church, I think of Sacrifices and
Libations; when I see the parson, I address him as Chryses priest of Apollo;
and instead of the Lord's Prayer, I begin -- God of the Silver Bow, etc.
While you in the world are concerned about the Protestant Succession, I
consider only how Menelaus may recover Helen, and the Trojan war be put to a
speedy conclusion. I never inquire if the Queen be well or not, but heartily
wish to be at Hector's funeral. The only things I regard in this life, are,
whether my friends are well? whether my Translation go well on? whether Dennis
be writing criticisms? whether any body will answer him, since I don't? and
whether Lintott be not yet broke?

I am, etc.

To the same.
August 16, 1714.
I Thank you for your good offices which are numberless. Homer advances so
fast, that he begins to look about for the ornaments he is to appear in, like a
modish modern author, -- -- Picture in the Front,
With bays and wicked ryme upon it.


I have the greatest proof in nature at present of the amusing power of Poetry;
for it takes me up so entirely, that I scarce see what passes under my nose,
and hear nothing that is said about me. To follow Poetry as one ought, one must
forget father and mother, and cleave to it alone. My Reverie has been so deep,
that I have scarce had an interval to think myself uneasy in the want of your
company. I now and then just miss you as I step into bed; this minute indeed I
want extremely to see you, the next I shall dream of nothing but the taking of
Troy, or the recovery of Briseis.

I fancy no friendship is so likely to prove lasting as ours, because I am
pretty sure there never was a friendship of so easy a nature. We neither of us
demand any mighty things from each other; what Vanity we have, expects its
gratification from other people. It is not I, that am to tell you what an
Artist you are, nor is it you that are to tell me what a Poet I am; but it is
from the world abroad we hope (piously hope) to hear these things. At home we
follow our business, when we have any; and think and talk most of each other
when we have none. It Is not unlike the happy friendship of a stayed man and his
wife, who are seldom so fond as to hinder the business of the house from going
on all day, or so indolent as not to find consolation in each other every
evening. Thus well-meaning couples hold in amity to the last, by not expecting
too much from human nature; while romantic friendships, like violent loves,
begin with disquiets, proceed to jealousies, and conclude in animosities. I
have lived to see the fierce advancement, the sudden turn, and the abrupt
period, of three or four of these enormous friendships, and am perfectly
convinced of the truth of a Maxim we once agreed in, That nothing hinders the
constant agreement of people who live together, but mere vanity; a secret
insisting upon what they think their dignity or merit, and an inward
expectation of such an Over-measure of deference and regard, as answers to
their own extravagant false scale; and which no body can pay, because none but
themselves can tell, exactly, to what pitch it amounts.

I am, etc.

Mr. POPE to EDWARD BLOUNT, Esquire
Aug. 27, 1714.
WHatever studies on the one hand, or amusements on the other, it shall be my
fortune to fall into, I shall be equally incapable of forgetting you in any of
'em. The Task I undertook The Translation of Homer's Iliad.
, though of weight enough in itself, has had a voluntary increase, by the
enlarging my design of the Notes; and the necessity of consulting a number of
books has carried me to Oxford: But I fear, through my Lord Harcourt's and Dr.
Clark's means, I shall be more conversant with the pleasures and company of the
place, than with the Books and Manuscripts of it.

I find still more reason to complain of the negligence of the Geographers in
their Maps of old Greece, since I looked upon two or three more noted names in
the public libraries here. But with all the care I am capable of, I have some
cause to fear the Engraver will prejudice me in a few situations. I have been
forced to write to him in so high a style, that were my epistle intercepted, it
would raise no small admiration in an ordinary man. There is scarce an order in
it of less importance, than to remove such and such mountains, alter the course
of such and such rivers, place a large city on such a coast, and raze another
in another country. I have set bounds to the sea, and said to the land, thus
far shall thou advance, and no further This relates to the Map of ancient
Greece, laid down by our Author in his observations on the second Iliad.
. In the mean time, I who talk and command at this rate, am in danger of
loosing my horse, and stand in some fear of a country justice. To disarm me
indeed, may be but prudential, considering what armies I have at present on
foot, and in my service: A hundred thousand Grecians are no contemptible body;
for all that I can tell, they may be as formidable as four thousand Priests;
and they seem proper forces to send against those in Barcelona. That siege
deserves as fine a poem as the Iliad, and the machining part of poetry would be
the juster in it, as they say the inhabitants expect Angels from heaven to
their assistance. May I venture to say, who am a Papist, and to say to you who
are a Papist, that nothing is more astonishing to me, than that people so
greatly warmed with a sense of Liberty, should be capable of harboring such
weak Superstition, and that so much bravery and so much folly can inhabit the
same breasts?

I could not but take a trip to London, on the death of the Queen, moved by the
common curiosity of mankind, who leave their own business to be looking upon
other men's. I thank God, that as for myself, I am below all the accidents of
State-changes by my circumstances, and above them by my philosophy. Common
charity of man to man, and universal good will to all, are the points I have
most at heart; and I am sure those are not to be broken for the sake of any
governors, or government. I am willing to hope the best, and what I more wish
than my own or any particular man's advancement, is, that this turn may put an
end entirely to the divisions of Whig and Tory; that the parties may love each
other as well as I love them both; or at least hurt each other as little as I
would either; and that our own people may live as quietly as we shall certainly
let theirs; that is to say, that want of power itself in us may not be a surer
prevention of harm, than want of will in them. I am sure, if all Whigs and all
Tories had the spirit of one Roman Catholic that I know, it would be well for
all Roman Catholics; and if all Roman Catholics had always had that spirit,
it had been well for all others, and we had never been charged with so wicked a
spirit as that of Persecution.

I agree with you in my sentiment of the state of our nation since this change:
I find myself just in the same situation of mind you describe as your own,
heartily wishing the good, that is the quiet of my country, and hoping a total
end of all the unhappy divisions of mankind by party-spirit, which at best is
but the madness of many for the gain of a few.

I am, etc.

Mr. JERVAS to Mr. POPE.
Aug. 20, 1714.
I Have a particular to tell you at this time, which pleases me so much, that
you must expect a more than ordinary alacrity in every turn. You know I could
keep you in suspense for twenty lines, but I will tell you directly that Mr.
Addison and I have had a conversation, that it would have been worth your while
to have been placed behind the wainscot, or behind some half-length Picture to
have heard. He assured me that he would make use not only of his interest, but
of his art, to do you some service; he did not mean his Art of Poetry, but his
Art at Court; and he is sensible that nothing can have a better air for
himself, than moving in your favor, especially since insinuations were spread
that he did not care you should prosper too much as a Poet. He protests that it
shall not be his fault, if there is not the best intelligence in the world, and
the most hearty friendship, etc. He owns, he was afraid Dr. Swift might have
carried you too far among the enemy during the heat of the animosity, but now
all is safe, and you are escaped even in his opinion. I promised in your name,
like a good Godfather, not that you should renounce the devil and all his
works, but that you would be delighted to find him your friend merely for his
own sake; therefore prepare yourself for some civilities.

I have done Homer's head, shadowed and heightened carefully; and I enclose the
outline of the same size, that you may determine whether you would have it so
large, or reduced to make room for a feuillage or laurel round the oval, or
about the square of the Busto? perhaps there is something more solemn in the
Image itself, if I can get it well performed.

If I have been instrumenal in bringing you and Mr. Addison together with all
sincerity, I value myself upon it as an acceptable piece of service to such a
one as I know you to be.

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
Aug. 27, 1714.
I Am just arrived from Oxford, very well diverted and entertained there -- all
very honest fellows -- much concerned for the Queen's death. No panegyricks
ready yet for the King.

I admire your Whig-principles of Resistance exceedingly, in the spirit of the
Barcelonians. I join in your wish for them. Mr. Addison's verses on Liberty, in
his letter from Italy, would be a good form of prayer in my opinion, O Liberty!
thou Goddess heavenly bright! etc.

What you mentioned of the friendly office you endeavored to do betwixt Mr.
Addison and me, deserves acknowledgments on my part. You thoroughly know my
regard to his character, and my propensity to testify it by all ways in my
power. You as thoroughly know the scandalous meanness of that proceeding which
was used by Philips, to make a man I so highly value, suspect my dispositions
toward him. But as, after all, Mr. Addison must be the judge in what regards
himself, and has seemed to be no very just one to me; so I must own to you I
expect nothing but civility from him, how much soever I wish for his
friendship: And as for any offices of real kindness or service which it is in
his power to do me, I should be ashamed to receive 'em from any man who had no
better opinion of my morals, than to think me a party-man; nor of my temper,
than to believe me capable of maligning, or envying another's reputation as a
Poet. So I leave it to Time to convince him as to both, to show him the shallow
depths of those half-witted creatures who mis-inform'd him, and to prove that I
am incapable of endeavoring to lessen a person whom I would be proud to
imitate, and therefore ashamed to flatter. In a word, Mr. Addison is sure of my
respect at all times, and of my real friendship whenever he shall think fit to
know me for what I am.

For all that passed betwixt Dr. Swift and me, you know the whole (without
reserve) of our correspondence: The engagements I had to him were such as the
actual services he had done me, in relation to the subscription for Homer,
obliged me to. I must have leave to be grateful to him, and to any one who
serves me, let him be never so obnoxious to any party: nor did the Tory-party
ever put me to the hardship of asking this leave, which is the greatest
obligation I owe to it; and I expect no greater from the Whig-party than the
same liberty. -- A curse on the word Party, which I have been forced to use so
often in this period! I wish the present Reign may put an end to the
distinction, that there may be no other for the future than that of honest and
knave, fool and men of sense; these two sorts must always be enemies, but for
the rest, may all People do as you and I, believe what they please and be
friends.

I am, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. ADDISON.
October 10, 1714.
I Have been acquainted by one of my friends who omits no opportunities of
gratifying me, that you have lately been pleased to speak of me in a manner
which nothing but the real respect I have for you can deserve. May I hope that
some late malevolencies have lost their effect? Indeed it is neither for me,
nor my enemies, to pretend to tell you whether I am your friend or not; but if
you would judge by probabilities, I beg to know which of your poetical
acquaintance has so little Interest in pretending to be so? Methinks no man
should question the real friendship of one who desires no real service: I am
only to get as much from the Whigs, as I got by the Tories, that is to say,
Civility; being neither so proud as to be insensible of any good office, nor so
humble, as not to dare heartily to despise any man who does me an injustice.

I will not value myself upon having ever guarded all the degrees of respect
for you; for (to say the truth) all the world speaks well of you, and I should
be under a necessity of doing the same, whether I cared for you or not.

As to what you have said of me, I shall never believe that the Author of Cato
can speak one thing and think another. As a proof that I account you sincere, I
beg a favor of you: It is, that you would look over the two first books of my
translation of Homer, which are now in the hands of my Lord Halifax. I am
sensible how much the reputation of any poetical work will depend upon the
character you give it: it is therefore some evidence of the trust I repose in
your good will, when I give you this opportunity of speaking ill of me with
justice, and yet expect you will tell me your truest thoughts, at the same time
that you tell others your most favorable ones.

I have a farther request, which I must press with earnestness. My Bookseller
is reprinting the Essay on Criticism, to which you have done too much honor in
your Spectator of No. 253. The period in that paper, where you say, "I have
admitted some strokes of ill nature into that Essay," is the only one I could
wish omitted of all you have written: but I would not desire it should be so,
unless I had the merit of removing your objection: I beg you but to point out
those strokes to me, and you may be assured they shall be treated without mercy.

Since we are upon proofs of sincerity (which I am pretty confident will turn
to the advantage of us both in each other's opinion) give me leave to name
another passage in the same Spectator, which I wish you would alter It is where
you mention an observation upon Homer's Verses of Sysiphus's Stone, These Words
are since lest out in Mr. Tickel's Edition, but were extant in all during Mr.
Addison's Life.
never having been made before by any of the Critics: I happened to find the
same in Dyonisius of Halicarnassus's Treatise, (...), who treats very largely
upon these Verses. I know you will think fit to soften your Expression, when
you see the passage; which you must needs have read, tho it be since slipped out
of your memory. I am with the utmost esteem,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to the Earl of HALIFAX.
Dec. 1, 1714. My LORD,
I Am obliged to you both for the favors you have done me, and for those you
intend me. I distrust neither your will nor your memory, when it is to do good:
and if ever I become troublesome or sollicitous, it must not be out of
expectation, but out of gratitude. Your Lordship may either cause me to live
agreeably in the town, or contentedly in the country, which is really all the
difference I set between an easy fortune and a small one. It is indeed a high
strain of generosity in you, to think of making me easy all my life, only
because I have been so happy as to divert you some few hours: But if I may have
leave to add, it is because you think me no enemy to my native country, there
will appear a better reason; for I must of consequence be very much, (as I
sincerely am)

My Lord, etc.
portrait of William Congreve Mr William Congreve
M. Vdr. Gucht Sculp.



Mr. POPE to Mr. CONGREVE.
Jan. 16, 1714-15.
MEthinks when I write to you, I am making a confession, I have got (I cannot
tell how) such a custom of throwing myself out upon paper without reserve. You
were not mistaken in what you judged of my temper of mind when I writ last My
faults will not be hid from you, and perhaps it is no dispraise to me that they
will not. The cleanness and purity of one's mind is never better proved, than
in discovering its own faults at first view: as when a Stream shows the dirt at
its bottom, it shows also the transparency of the water.

My spleen was not occasioned, however, by any thing an Dennis, who writ an
abusive Pamphlet this Year, entitled, Remarks on Mr. Pope 's Homer.
abusive, angry Critic could write of me. I take very kindly your heroic
manner of congratulation upon this scandal; for I think nothing more
honorable, than to be involved in the same fate with all the great and the
good that ever lived; that is, to be envied and censured by bad writers.

You do no more than answer my expectations of you, in declaring how well you
take my freedom in sometimes neglecting, as I do, to reply to your Letters so
soon as I ought; those who have a right taste of the substantial part of
friendship, can wave the ceremonial. A friend is the only one that will bear
the omission; and one may find who is not so, by the very trial of it.

As to any anxiety I have concerning the fate of my Homer, the care is over
with me. The world must be the judge, and I shall be the first to consent to
the justice of its judgment, whatever it be. I am not so arrant an Author, as
even to desire, that if I am in the wrong, all mankind should be so.

I am mightily pleased with a saying of Monsieur Tourreil: "When a Man writes,
he ought to animate himself with the thoughts of pleasing all the world: but he
is to renounce that desire or hope, the very moment the Book goes out of his
hands."

I write this from Binfield, whither I came yesterday, having past a few days
in my way with my Lord Bolingbroke: I go to London in three days time, and will
not fail to pay a visit to Mr. M^, whom I saw not long since at my Lord
Halifax's. I hoped from thence he had some hopes of advantage from the present
administration: for few people (I think) but I, pay respects to great Men
without any prospects. I am in the fairest way in the world of being not worth
a groat, being born both a Papist and a Poet. This puts me in mind of
reacknowledging your continued endeavors to enrich me: But I can tell you it is
to no purpose, for without the Opes, Aequum animum mi ipse parabo.

I am your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. CONGREVE.
March 19, 1714-15.
THE Farce of the What-d'ye-call it, has occasioned many different speculations
in the town. Some looked upon it as mere jest upon the tragic poets, others as
a satire upon the late war. Mr. Cromwell hearing none of the words, and seeing
the action to be tragical, was much astonished to find the audience laugh; and
says, the Prince and Princess must doubtless be under no less amazement on the
same account. Several templers, and others of the more vociferous kind of
critics, went with a resolution to hiss, and confessed they were forced to laugh
so much, that they forgot the design they came with. The Court in general has
in a very particular manner come into the jest, and the three first Nights,
(notwithstanding two of them were court-nights) were distinguished by very full
audiences of the first quality. The common people of the pit and gallery
received it at first with great gravity and sedateness, some few with tears;
but after the third day they also took the hint, and have ever since been very
loud in their claps. There are still some sober men who cannot be of the
general opinion, but the laughers are so much the majority, that one or two
critics seem determined to undeceive the town at their proper cost, by writing
grave dissertations against it: To encourage them in which laudable design, it
is resolved a Preface shall be prefixed to the Farce, in vindication of the
nature and dignity of this new way of writing.

Yesterday Mr. Steele's affair was decided: I am sorry I can be of no other
opinion than yours, as to his whole carriage and writings of late. But
certainly he has not only been punished by others, but suffered much even from
his own party in the point of character, nor (I believe) received any amends in
that of interest, as yet; whatever may be his Prospects for the future.

This Gentleman, among a thousand others, is a great instance of the fate of
all who are carried away by party-spirit, of any side. I wish all violence may
succeed as ill; but am really amazed that so much of that sower and pernicious
quality should be joined with so much natural good humor as I think Mr. Steel
is possessed of.

I am, etc.

To Mr. CONGREVE.
April 7, 1715.
MR. Pope is going to Mr. Jervas's, where Mr. Addison is sitting for his
picture; in the mean time amidst clouds of tobacco at a coffee-house I write
this letter. There is a grand revolution at Will's, Morris has quitted for a
coffee-house in the city, and Titcomb is restored to the great joy of Cromwell,
who was at a great loss for a person to converse with upon the fathers and
church history; the knowledge I gain from him, is entirely in painting and
poetry; and Mr. Pope owes all his skill in astronomy to him and Mr. Whiston, so
celebrated of late for his discovery of the longitude in an extraordinary copy
of Verses. Called, An Ode on the Longitude, in Swift 's and Pope 's
Miscellanies.
Mr. Rowe's Jane Gray is to be played in Easter-Week, when Mrs. Oldfield is to
personate a character directly opposite to female nature; for what woman ever
despised Sovereignty? You know Chaucer has a tale where a knight saves his
head, by discovering it was the thing which all women most covered. Mr. Pope's
Homer is retarded by the great rains that have fallen of late, which causes the
sheets to be long a drying; this gives Mr. Lintot great uneasiness, who is now
endeavoring to corrupt the Curate of his parish to pray for fair weather, that
his work may go on. There is a six-penny Criticism lately published upon the
Tragedy of the What-d'ye-call-it, wherein he with much judgment and learning
calls me a blockhead, and Mr. Pope a knave. His grand charge is against the
Pilgrims Progress being read, which he says is directly levelled at Cato's
reading Plato; to back his censure, he goes on to tell you, that the Pilgrims
Progress being mentioned to be the eighth edition, makes the reflection
evident, the Tragedy of Cato having just eight times (as he quaintly expresses
it) visited the Press. He has also endeavored to show, that every particular
passage of the play alludes to some fine part of Tragedy, which he says I have
injudiciously and profanely abused. This curious Piece was entitled, A complete
Key to the what-d'ye-call-it. It was written by one Griffin a Player, assisted
by Lewis Theobald.
Sir Samuel Garth's Poem upon my Lord Clare's house, I believe, will be
published in the Easter-week.

Thus far Mr. Gay -- who has in his letter forestalled all the subjects of
diversion; unless it should be one to you to say, that I sit up till two
a-clock over Burgundy and Champagne; and am become so much a rake, that I shall
be ashamed in a short time to be thought to do any sort of business. I fear I
must get the gout by drinking, purely for a fashionable pretense to sit still
long enough to translate four books of Homer. I hope you will by that time be up
again, and I may succeed to the bed and couch of my predecessor: Pray cause the
stuffing to be repaired, and the crutches shortened for me. The calamity of
your gout is what all your friends, that is to say all that know you, must
share in; we desire you in your turn to condole with us, who are under a
persecution, and much afflicted with a distemper which proves grievous to many
poets, a Criticism. We have indeed some relieving intervals of laughter, (as
you know there are in some diseases;) and it is the opinion of diverse good
guessers, that the last fit will not be more violent than advantageous; for
poets assailed by critics, are like men bitten by Tarantula's, they dance on so
much the faster.

Mr. Thomas Burnet has played the precursor to the coming of Homer, in a
treatise called Homerides. He has since risen very much in his criticisms, and
after assaulting Homer, made a daring attack upon the In one of his Papers
called The Grumbler, long since dead.
What-d'ye-call-it, Yet is there not a proclamation issued for the burning of
Homer and the Pope by the common hangman; nor is the What do you call-it yet
silenced by the Lord Chamberlain. They shall survive the conflagration of his
father's works, and live after they and he are damned; (for that the B^p of S.
already is so, is the opinion of Dr. Sacheverel and the Church of Rome.)

I am, etc.

Mr. POPE to the Earl of B -- --.
My LORD,
IF your Mare could speak, she would give you an account of the extraordinary
company she had on the road; which since she cannot do, I will.

It was the enterprizing Mr. Lintott, the redoubtable rival of Mr. Tonson, who
mounted on a stonehorse, (no disagreeable companion to your Lordship's mare)
overtook me in Windsor-forest. He said, he heard I designed for Oxford, the
seat of the muses, and would, as my bookseller, by all means, accompany me
thither.

I asked him where he got his horse? He answered, he got it of his publisher:
"For that rogue my printer, (said he) disappointed me: I hoped to put him in
good humor by a treat at the tavern, of a brown fricassee of rabbits which
cost two shillings, with two quarts of wine, besides my conversation. I thought
myself cocksure of his horse, which he readily promised me, but said, that Mr.
Tonson had just such another design of going to Cambridge, expecting there the
copy of a Comment upon the Revelations; and if Mr. Tonson went, he was
preingaged to attend him, being to have the printing of the said copy."

So in short, I borrowed this stonehorse of my publisher, which he had of Mr.
Oldmixon for a debt; he lent me too the pretty boy you see after me; he was a
smutty dog yesterday, and cost me near two hours to wash the ink off his face:
but the Devil is a fair-condition'd Devil, and very forward in his catechize:
if you have any more bags, he shall carry them.

I thought Mr. Lintott's civility not to be neglected, so gave the boy a small
bagg, containing three shirts and an Elvezir Virgil; and mounting in an instant
proceeded on the road, with my man before, my courteous stationer beside, and
the aforesaid Devil behind.

Mr. Lintott began in this manner. "Now damn them! what if they should put it
into the news-paper, how you and I went together to Oxford? why what would I
care? If I should go down into Sussex, they would say I was gone to the
speaker. But what of that? if my son were but big enough to go on with the
business, by G^d I would keep as good company as old Jacob."

Hereupon I inquired of his son. "The lad (says he) has fine parts, but is
somewhat sickly, much as you are -- I spare for nothing in his education at
Westminster. Pray don't you think Westminster to be the best school in England?
most of the late Ministry came out of it, so did many of this Ministry; I hope
the boy will make his fortune."

Don't you design to let him pass a year at Oxford? "To what purpose? (said he)
the Universities do but make Pedants, and I intend to breed him a man of
Business."

As Mr. Lintott was talking, I observed he sat uneasy on his saddle, for which
I expressed some solicitude: Nothing, says he, I can bear it well enough; but
since we have the day before us, methinks it would be very pleasant for you to
rest a while under the Woods. When we were alighted, "See here, what a mighty
pretty Horace I have in my pocket: what if you amused yourself in turning an
Ode, till we mount again? Lord! if you pleased, what a clever Miscellany might
you make at leisure hours." Perhaps I may, said I, if we ride on; the motion is
an aid to my fancy; a round trot very much awakens my spirits. Then jog on
apace, and I Will think as hard as I can.

Silence ensued for a full hour; after which Mr. Lintott lugg'd the reins,
stepped short, and broke out, "Well, Sir, how far have you gone?" I answered
seven miles. "Z^ds, Sir, said Lintott, I thought you had done seven stanza's.
Oldsworth in a ramble round Wimbleton-hill, would translate a whole Ode in half
this time. I Will say that for Oldsworth, (though I lost by his Timothy's) he
translates an Ode of Horace the quickest of any man in England. I remember Dr.
King would write verses in a tavern three hours after he could n't speak; and
there is Sir Richard in that rumbling old Chariot of his, between Fleet-ditch
and St. Giles's pound shall make you half a Job."

Pray Mr. Lintott (said I) now you talk of Translators, what is your method of
managing them? "Sir (replied he) those are the saddest pack of rogues in the
world: In a hungry fit, they will swear they understand all the languages in the
universe: I have known one of them take down a Greek book upon my counter and
cry, Ay this is Hebrew, I must read it from the latter end. By G^d I can never
be sure in these fellows, for I neither understand Greek, Latin, French nor
Italian myself. But this is my way: I agree with them for ten shillings per
sheet, with a proviso, that I will have their doings corrected by whom I
please; so by one or other they are led at last to the true sense of an author;
my judgment giving the negative to all my Translators." But how are you secure
that those correctors may not impose upon you? "Why I get any civil gentleman,
(especially any Scotchman) that comes into my shop, to read the original to me
in English; by this I know whether my first Translator be deficient, and
whether my Corrector merits his money or no."

"I Will tell you what happened to me last month: I bargained with S^ for a new
version of Lucretius to publish against Tonson's; agreeing to pay the author so
many shillings at his producing so many lines. He made a great progress in a
very short time, and I gave it to the corrector to compare with the Latin; but
he went directly to Creech's translation, and found it the same word for word,
all but the first page. Now, what do you think I did? I arrested the Translator
for a cheat; nay, and I stopped the Corrector's pay too, upon this proof that he
had made use of Creech instead of the original."

Pray tell me next how you deal with the Critics. "Sir (said he) nothing more
easy. I can silence the most formidable of them; the rich ones for a sheet a
piece of the blotted manuscript, which costs me nothing. They Will go about with
it to their acquaintance, and pretend they had it from the author, who
submitted to their correction: this has given some of them such an air, that in
time they come to be consulted with, and dedicated too, as the top critics of
the town -- As for the poor Critics, I Will give you one instance of my
management, by which you may guess at the rest. A lean man that looked like a
good scholar, came to me the other day; he turned over Homer, shook his head,
shrugg'd up his shoulders, and pish'd at every line of it; One would wonder
(says he) at the strange presumption of men; Homer is no such easy task, that
every Stripling, every Versisier -- he was going on when my Wife called to
dinner: Sir, said I, will you please to eat a piece of beef with me? Mr.
Lintott, said he, I am sorry you should be at the expense of this great book, I
am really concerned on your account -- Sir, I am much obliged to you: if you
can dine upon a piece of beef, together with a slice of pudding -- Mr. Lintott,
I do not say but Mr. Pope, if he would condescend to advise with men of
learning -- Sir the pudding is upon the table, if you please to go in -- My
critic complies, he comes to a taste of your poetry, and tells me in the same
breath, that the Book is commendable, and the Pudding excellent."

Now Sir (concluded Mr. Lintott) in return to the frankness I have shown, pray
tell me, "Is it the opinion of your friends at Court, that my Lord L^ will be
brought to the Bar or not?" I told him I heard not, and I hoped it, my Lord
being one I had particular obligations to. "That may be (replied Mr. Lintott)
but by G^d if he is not, I shall lose the printing of a very good Trial."

These my Lord are a few traits by which you may discern the genius of my
friend Mr. Lintott, which I have chosen for the subject of a letter. I dropped
him as soon as I got to Oxford, and paid a visit to my Lord Carlton at
Middleton.

The conversations I enjoy here are not to be prejudiced by my pen, and the
pleasures from them only to be equaled when I meet your Lordship. I hope in a
few days to cast myself from your horse at your feet.

I am, etc.

Dr. PARNELLE to Mr. POPE.
Jun. 27, 1715.
I Am writing you a long letter, but all the tediousness I feel in it is, that
it makes me during the time think more intently of my being far from you. I
fancy if I were with you, I could remove some of the uneasiness which you may
have felt from the opposition of the world, and which you should be ashamed to
feel, since it is but the testimony which one part of it gives you that your
merit is unquestionable: What would you have otherwise from ignorance, envy, or
those tempers which vie with you in your own way? I know this in mankind, that
when our ambition is unable to attain its end, it is not only wearied, but
exasperated too at the vanity of its labors; then we speak ill of happier
studies, and sighing condemn the excellence which we find above our reach. --

My Printed for B. Lintott 1715, 8o under this Title.
Zoilus which you used to write about, I finished last spring, and left in
town; I waited till I came up to send it you, but not arriving here before your
book was out, imagined it a lost piece of labor. If you will still have it,
you need only write me word.

I have here seen the First Book of Homer, which came out at a time when it
could not but appear as a kind of setting up against you. My opinion is, that
you may, if you please, give them thanks who writ it. Neither the numbers nor
the spirit have an equal mastery with yours; but what surprises me more is,
that, a scholar being concerned, there should happen to be some mistakes in the
author's sense; such as putting the light of Pallas's eyes into the eyes of
Achilles; making the taunt of Achilles to Agamemnon, (that he should have
spoils when Troy should be taken) to be a cool and serious proposal: the
translating what you call ablution by the word Offals, and so leaving Water out
of the rite of Lustration, etc. but you must have taken notice of all this
before. I write not to inform you, but to show I always have you at heart.

I am, etc.

From a Letter of the Reverend Doctor BERKLEY, Dean of Londonderry.
July 7, 1715.
-- Some days ago, three or four Gentlemen and myself exerting that right which
all readers pretend to over Authors, sat in judgment upon the two new
Translations of the first Iliad. Without partiality to my countrymen, I assure
you they all gave the preference where it was due; being unanimously of
opinion, that yours was equally just to the sense with Mr. (...)'s, and without
comparison more easy, more poetical, and more sublime. But I will say no more
on such a threadbare subject, as your late performance is at this time.

I am, etc.

Extract from a Letter from Mr. GAY to Mr. POPE.
July 8, 1715.
-- I have just set down Sir Samuel Garth at the Opera. He bid me tell you,
that every body is pleased with your Translation, but a few at Button's; and
that Sir Richard Steel told him, that Mr. Addison said Tickel's translation
was the best that ever was in any language Sir Richard Steel afterward, in
his Preface to an Edition of the Drummer, a Comedy by Mr. Addison, shows it to
be his opinion, that " not Mr. Tickel but Mr. Addison himself was the Person
that translated this book."
. He treated me with extreme civility, and out of kindness gave me a squeeze by
the Sore finger. -- I am informed that at Button's your character is made very
free with as to morals, etc. and Mr. A^ says, that your translation and
Tickel's are both very well done, but that the latter has more of Homer.

I am, etc.

Extract from a Letter of Dr. ARBUTHNOT to Mr. POPE.
July 9, 1715.
-- I congratulate you upon Mr. Tickel's first Book. It does not indeed want
its merit; but I was strangely disappointed in my expectation of a Translation
nicely true to the original; whereas in those parts where the greatest
exactness seems to be demanded, he has been the least careful, I mean the
History of ancient Ceremonies and Rites, etc. in which you have with great
judgment been exact.

I am, etc.

Mr. POPE to the Honorable JAMES CRAGGS, Esquire
July 15, 1715.
I Lay hold of the opportunity given me by my Lord Duke of Shrewsbury, to
assure you of the continuance of that esteem and affection I have long borne
you, and the memory of so many agreeable conversations as we have passed
together. I wish it were a compliment to say such conversations as are not to
be found on this side of the Water: for the spirit of Dissension is gone forth
among us nor is it a wonder that Button's is no longer Button's when Old
England is no longer Old England, that region of hospitality, society, and good
humor. Party affects us all, even the wits, though they gain as little by
politics as they do by their wit. We talk much of fine sense, refined sense,
and exalted sense; but for use and happiness give me a little common sense. I
say this in regard to some gentlemen, professed wits of our acquaintance, who
fancy they can make Poetry of consequence at this time of day, in the midst of
this raging fit of Politics. For they tell me, the busy part of the nation are
not more divided about Whig and Tory, than these idle fellows of the Feather
about Mr. Tickel's and my Translation. I (like the Tories) have the town in
general, that is the mob, on my side; but it is usual with the smaller Party to
make up in industry what they want in number, and that is the case with the
little Senate of Cato. However, if our principles be well considered, I must
appear a brave Whig, and Mr. Tickel a rank Tory; I translated Homer for the
public in general, he to gratify the inordinate desires of One man only. We
have, it seems, a great Turk in Poetry, who can never bear a Brother on the
throne; and has his Mutes too, a set of Nodders, Winkers, and Whisperers,
whose business is to strangle all other offsprings of wit in their birth. The
new Translator of Homer is the humblest slave he has, that is to say, his first
Minister; let him receive the honors he gives him, but receive them with fear
and trembling: let him be proud of the approbation of his absolute Lord; I
appeal to the People, as my rightful judges and masters; and if they are not
inclined to condemn me, I fear no arbitrary highflying proceedings from the
small Courtfaction at Button's. But after all I have said of this great Man,
there is no rupture between us: We are each of us so civil and obliging, that
neither thinks he is obliged. And I for my part treat with him, as we do with
the Grand Monarch; who has too many great qualities not to be respected, though
we know he watches any occasion to oppress us.

When I talk of Homer, I must not forget the early present you made me of
Monsieur de la Motte's Book. And I cannot conclude this letter without telling
you a melancholy piece of news which affects our very Entrails, -- is dead, and
Soupes are no more! You see I write in the old familiar way. "This is not to
the Minister, but to the Friend." -- However, it is some mark of uncommon
regard to the Minister, that I steal an expression from a Secretary of State.

I am, etc.

Mr. POPE to Sir WILLIAM TRUMBULL.
Dec. 16, 1715.
IT was one of the Enigma's of Pythagoras, When the Winds rise, worship the
Echo. A modern Writer explains this to signify, " When popular Tumults begin,
retire to Solitudes, or such places where Echo's are commonly found; Rocks,
Woods, etc." I am rather of opinion it should be interpreted, "When Rumors
increase, and when there is abundance of Noise and Clamor, believe the second
Report." This I think agrees more exactly with the Echo, and is the more
natural application of the Symbol. However it be, either of these precepts is
extremely proper to be followed at this season; and I cannot but applaud your
resolution of continuing in what you call your Cave in the forest, this winter;
and preferring the noise of breaking Ice to that of breaking Statesmen, the
rage of Storms to that of Parties, and fury and ravage of Floods and Tempests
to the precipitancy of some, and the ruins of others, which I fear will be our
daily prospect in London.

I sincerely wish myself with you, to contemplate the wonders of God in the
firmament, rather than the madness of men on the earth. But I never had so much
cause as now to complain of my poetical star, that fixes me at this tumultuous
time to attend the gingling of rhymes, and the measuring of syllables: To be
almost the only trifler in the nation; and as ridiculous as the Poet in
Petronius, who while all the rest in the ship were either laboring or praying
for life, was scratching his head in a little room, to write a fine description
of the tempest.

You tell me you like the sound of no arms but those of Achilles: for my part I
like them as little as the others. I listed myself in the battles of Homer, and
I am no sooner in war, but like most other folks, I wish myself out again.

I heartily join with you in wishing Quiet to our native country; Quiet in the
state, which like charity in religion, is too much the perfection and happiness
of either, to be broken or violated on any pretense or prospect whatsoever:
Fire and sword, and fire and faggot are equally my aversion. I can pray for
opposite parties, and for opposite religions, with great sincerity. I think to
be a lover of one's Country is a glorious Elogy, but I do not think it so great
an one, as to be a lover of Mankind.

Mr. J^ and I sometimes celebrate you under these denominations, and join your
health with that of the whole world; a truly Catholic health; which far excels
the poor narrow-spirited, ridiculous healths now in fashion, to this Church, or
that Church: Whatever our teachers may say, they must give us leave at least to
wish generously. These, dear Sir, are my general dispositions, but whenever I
pray or wish for particulars, you are one of the first in the thoughts and
affections of

Your, etc.

Sir W. TRUMBULL's Answer.
Jan. 19, 1715-16.
I Should be ashamed of my long idleness, in not acknowledging your kind advice
about Echo, and your most ingenious explanation of it, relating to Popular
tumults; which I own to be very useful: and yet give me leave to tell you, that
I keep myself to a shorter receipt of the same Pythagoras, which is Silence;
and this I shall observe, if not the whole time of his discipline, yet at least
till Your return into this country. I am obliged further to this method, by the
most severe weather I ever felt; when though I keep as near by the fire as may
be, yet gelidus concrevit frigore Sanguis: and often I apprehend the
circulation of the blood begins to be stopped. I have further great losses (to a
poor farmer) of my poor Oxen -- Intereunt pecudes, slant circumfusa pruinis
Corpora Magna Boum, etc.

Pray comfort me if you can, by telling me that your second Volume of Homer is
not frozen; for it must be expressed very poetically to say now, that the
Presses sweat.

I cannot forbear to add a piece of artifice I have been guilty of, on occasion
of my being obliged to congratulate the birthday of a friend of mine: When
finding I had no materials of my own, I very frankly sent him your imitation of
Martial's Epigram on Antonius Primus Jam numerat placido felix Antonius aevo,
etc. Sir William Trumbull was born at Easthamsted in Berkshire: He was Fellow
of All Souls College in Oxford, followed the Study of the Civil Law, and was
sent by King Charles the Second Judge-Advocate to Tangier, thence Envoy to
Florence, Turin, etc. and in his way back, Envoy Extraordinary to France: from
thence, sent by King James the Second Ambassador to the Ottoman Port.
Afterward he was made Lord of the Treasury, then Secretary of State with the
Duke of Shrewsbury, which Office he resigned in 1697. He retired to
Easthamsted, in Windsor Forest, and died in the Place of his Nativity in
December 1716, aged 77 Bears. Our Author celebrated that Retirement in his Poem
on the Forest, and addressed to him his first Pastoral at 16 Years of Age.
. This has been applauded so much, that I am in danger of commencing Poet,
perhaps Laureat, (pray desire my good friend Mr. Row to enter a Caveat)
provided you will further increase my stock in this bank. In which proceeding I
have laid the foundation of my estate, and as honestly as many others have
begun theirs. But now being a little tender, as young beginners often are, I
offer to you (for I have concealed the true author) whether you will give me
orders to declare who is the Father of this fine child, or not? Whatever you
determine, my fingers, pen, and ink are so frozen, that I cannot thank you more
at large. You will forgive this and all other faults of, Dear Sir,

Your, etc.

To Mr. JERVAS in Ireland.
July 9, 1716.
THOUGH, as you rightly remark, I pay my Tax but once in half a Year, yet you
shall see by this Letter upon the neck of my last, that I pay a double Tax, as
we Non-Jurors ought to do. Your Acquaintance on this side the Sea are under
terrible Apprehensions, from your long stay in Ireland, that you may grow too
Polite for them; for we think (since the great success of so damned a Play as
the Non-Juror) that Politeness is gone over the Water. But others are of
opinion it has been longer among you, and was introduced much about the same
time with Frogs, and with equal Success Poor Poetry! the little that is left of
it here longs to cross the Seas, and leave Eusden in full and peaceable
Possession of the British Laurel: And we begin to wish you had the singing of
our Poets, as well as the croaking of our Frogs, to yourselves in Saecula
Saeculorum. It would be well in exchange, if Parnelle, and two or three more of
your Swans, would come hither, especially that Swan, who like a true modern
one, does not sing at all, Dr. Swift. I am (like the rest of the World) a
Sufferer by his Idleness. Indeed I hate that any Man should be idle, while I
must translate and comment: And I may the more sincerely wish for good Poetry
from others, because I am become a person out of the question; for a Translator
is no more a Poet, than a Tailor is a Man.

You are doubtless persuaded of the Validity of that famous Verse, It Is
Expectation makes a Blessing dear.
but why would you make your Friends fonder of you than they are? There Is no
manner of need of it -- We begin to expect you no more than Antichrist. A Man
that has absented himself so long from his Friends, ought to be put into the
Gazette.

Every Body here has great need of you. Many Faces have died for ever for want
of your Pencil, and blooming Ladies have withered in expecting your return.
Even Frank and Betty (that constant Pair) cannot console themselves for your
Absence; I fancy they will be forced to make their own Picture in a pretty
Babe, before you come home: 'Twill be a noble Subject for a Family Piece. Come
then, and having peopled Ireland with a World of beautiful Shadows, come to us,
and see with that Eye (which, like the Eye of the World, creates Beauties by
looking on them) see, I say, how England has altered the Airs of all its heads
in your Absence; and with what sneaking City Artitudes our most celebrated
Personages appear inthe mere mortal Works of our Painters.

Mr. Fortescue is much yours; Gay commemorates you; and lastly (to climb by
just steps and degrees) my Lord Burlington desires you may be put in mind of
him. His Gardens flourish, his Structures rise, his Pictures arrive, and (what
is far nobler and more valuable than all) his own good Qualities daily extend
themselves to all about him: Whereof, I the meanest (next to some Italian
Chemists, Fiddlers, Bricklayers, and Opera-makers) am a living Instance.

To the same.
Nov. 14, 1716.
IF I had not done my utmost to lead my Life so pleasantly as to forget all
Misfortunes, I should tell you I reckoned your Absence no small one; but I hope
you have also had many good and pleasant Reasons to forget your Friends on this
side the World. If a wish could transport me to you, and your present
Companions, I could do the same. Dr. Swift, I believe, is a very good Landlord,
and a cheerful Host at his own Table; I suppose he has perfectly learnt
himself, what he has taught so many others, Rupta non insanire lagena. Else he
would not make a proper Host for your humble Servant, who (you know) though he
drinks a Glass as seldom as any Man, contrives to break one as often. But it is
a Consolation to me, that I can do this, and many other Enormities, under my
own Roof.

But that you and I are upon equal terms of all friendly Laziness, and haven
take an inviolable Oath to each other, always to do what we will; I should
reproach you for so long a silence. The best amends you can make for saying
nothing to me, is by saying all the good you can of me, which is, that I
heartily love and esteem the Dean, and Dr. Parnelle.

Gay is yours and theirs. His Spirit is awakened very much in the Cause of the
Dean, which has broke forth in a courageous Couplet or two upon Sir Richard Bl^
He has printed it with his name to it, and bravely assigns no other Reason,
than that the said Sir Richard has abused Dr. Swift. I have also suffered in
the like Cause, and shall suffer more; unless Parnelle sends me his Zoilus and
Bookworm (which the bishop of Clogher, I hear, greatly extols) it will be
shortly, Concurrere Bellum atque Virum. -- I love you all as much as I despise
most Wits in this dull Country. Ireland has turned the Tables upon England; and
if I have no Poetical Friend in my own Nation, I Will be as proud as Scipio, and
say, (since I am reduced to Skin and Bone) Ingrata patria, ne ossa quidem
habeas.

To the same.
Nov. 29, 1716.
THAT you have not heard from me of late, ascribe not to the usual laziness of
your Correspondent, but to a ramble to Oxford, where your name is mentioned
with honor, even in a land flowing with Tories. I had the good fortune there
to be often in the conversation of Doctor Clarke: He entertained me with
several Drawings, and particularly with the original designs of Inigo Jones's
Whitehall. I there saw and reverenced some of your first Pieces; which future
Painters are to look upon as we Poets do on the Culex of Virgil, and Batrachom
of Homer.

Having named this latter piece, give me leave to ask what is become of Dr.
Parnelle and his Frogs? Oblitusque meorum, obliviscendus and illis, might be
Horace's wish, but will never be mine, while I have such meorums as Dr.
Parnelle and Dr. Swift. I hope the spring will restore you to us, and with you
all the beauties and colors of nature. Not but I congratulate you on the
pleasure you must take in being admired in your own Country, which so seldom
happens to Prophets and Poets. But in this you have the Advantage of Poets; you
are Master of an Art that must prosper and grow rich, as long as people love,
or are proud of themselves, or their own persons. However, you have stayed long
enough, methinks, to have painted all the numberless Histories of old Ogygiae.
If you have begun to be Historical, I recommend to your hand the story which
every pious Irishman ought to begin with, that of St. Patrick: To the end you
may be obliged (as Dr. P. was, when he translated the Batrachomuomachia) to
come into England to copy the Frogs, and such other Vermin as were never seen
in that land since the time of that Confessor.

I long to see you a History Painter. You have already done enough for the
Private, do something for the Public; and be not confined, like the rest, to
draw only such silly stories as our own faces tell of us. The Ancients too
expect you should do them right; those Statues from which you learned your
beautiful and noble Ideas, demand it as a piece of Gratitude from you, to make
them truly known to all nations, in the account you intend to write of their
Characters. I hope you think more warmly than ever of that noble design.

As to your enquiry about your House, when I come within the walls, they put me
in mind of those of Carthage where your Friend, like the wandering Trojan,
Animum Pictura pascit inani.
For the spacious Mansion, like a Turkish Caravanserah, entertains the Vagabond
with only bare Lodging. I rule the Family very ill, keep bad Hours, and lend
out your Pictures about the Town. See what it is to have a Poet in your House!
Frank indeed does all he can in such a Circumstance, for considering he has a
wild Beast in it, he constantly keeps the Door chained. Every time it is
opened, the Links rattle, the rusty Hinges roar, the House seems so sensible
that you are its support, that it is ready to drop in your Absence; but I still
trust my self under its Roof, as depending that Providence will preserve so
many Raphaels, Titian and Guido's, as are lodged in your Cabinet. Surely the
Sins of one Poet can hardly be so heavy, as to bring an old House over the
Heads of so many Painters. In a word, your House is falling, but what of that?
I am only a Lodger.

Mr. Secretary Craggs, to Mr. Pope.
Paris, Sept. 2, 1716.
LAST post brought me the favor of your letter of the 10th Aug. O. S. It would
be taking too much upon me to decide, that 'twas a Witty one; I never pretend
to more judgment than to know what pleases me, and can assure you, it was a
very Agreeable one. The proof I can give you of my sincerity in this Opinion,
is, that I hope and desire you would not stop at this, but continue more of
them.

I am in a place where Pleasure is continually flowing. The Princes set the
Example, and the Subjects follow at a distance. The Ladies are of all parties,
by which means the conversation of the Men is very much softened and fashioned
from those blunt disputes on Politics, and rough Jests, we are so guilty of,
while the Freedom of the Women takes away all Formality and Constraint. I must
own, at the same time, these Beauties are a little too artificial for my Taste;
you have seen a French Picture, the Original is more painted, and such a crust
of Powder and essence in their Hair, that you can see no difference between
black and red. By disusing Stays, and indulging themselves at a Table, they are
run out of all Shape; but as to that, they may give a good reason, they prefer
Convenience to Parade, and are by this means as ready, as they are generally
willing to be Charitable.

I am surpised to find I have wrote so much Scandal; I fancy I am either
setting up for a Wit, or imagine I must write in this Style to a Wit; I hope
you will prove a good natured one, and not only let me hear from you sometimes,
but forgive the small Encouragement you meet with. If you will complete your
favors, pray give my humble Services to Lords W^ck, St^, and H^y. I have had
my hopes and fears they would have abused me before this Time; I am sure it is
not my business to meddle with a nest of Bees (I speak only of the Honey.) I
will not trouble my self to finish finely, a true Compliment is better than a good
one, and I can assure you without any, that I am very sincerely,

SIR, Yours, etc.

The Revd Dean Afterward Bishop of Cloyne in Ireland, a celebrated
Metaphysician, Author of the Dialogues of Hylas and Philonnses, the Minute
Philosopher, etc.
BERKLEY, to Mr. POPE.
Naples, Oct. 22, N. S. 1717.
I Have long had it in my thoughts to trouble you with a Letter, but was
discouraged for want of something that I could think worth sending fifteen
hundred Miles. Italy is such an exhausted Subject, that, I dare say, you would
easily forgive my saying nothing of it; and the imagination of a Poet is a
thing so nice and delicate, that it is no easy matter to find out Images
capable of giving Pleasure to one of the few, who (in any Age) have come up to
that Character. I am nevertheless lately returned from an Island, where I
passed three or four Months, which, were it set out in its true Colors, might
methinks amuse you agreeably enough for a minute or two. The Island Inarime is
an Epitome of the whole Earth, containing within the compass of eighteen Miles,
a wonderful variety of Hills, Vales, ragged Rocks, fruitful Plains, and barren
Mountains, all thrown together in a most romantic Confusion. The Air is in the
hottest Season constantly refreshed by cool breezes from the Sea. The Vales
produce excellent Wheat and Indian Corn, but are mostly covered with Vineyards,
intermixed with Fruit Trees. Besides the common kinds, as Cherries, Apricots,
Peaches, etc. they produce Oranges, Limes, Almonds, Pomegranates, Figs, Water
Melons, and many other Fruits unknown to our Climates, which lie every where
open to the Passenger. The Hills are the greater part covered to the top with
Vines, some with Chestnut Groves, and others with thickets of Myrtle and
Lentiscus. The Fields on the Northern side are divided by hedge-rows of Myrtle.
Several Fountains and Rivulets add to the Beauty of this Landscape, which is
likewise set off by the variety of some barren Spots, and naked Rocks. But that
which crowns the Scene, is a large Mountain, rising out of the middle of the
Island (once a terrible Volcano, by the Ancients called Mons Epomeus) its lower
parts are adorned with Vines and other Fruits, the middle affords Pasture to
flocks of Goats and Sheep, and the top is a sandy pointed Rock, from which you
have the finest Prospect in the World, surveying at one view, besides several
pleasant Islands lying at your Feet, a tract of Italy about three hundred Miles
in length, from the Promontory of Antium, to he Cape of Palinurus. The greater
part of which has been sung by Homer and Virgil, as making a considerable part
of the Travels and Adventures of their two Heroes. The Islands Caprea,
Prochyta, and Parthenope, together with Cajeta, Cumae, Monte, Miseno, the
Habitations of Circe, the Sirens, and the Lestrigones, the Bay of Naples, the
Promontory of Minerva, and the whole Campagnia felice, make but a part of this
noble Landscape; which would demand an Imagination as warm, and numbers as
flowing as your own, to describe it. The Inhabitants of this delicious Isle, as
they are without Riches and Honors, so are they without the Vices and Follies
that attend them; and were they but as much strangers to Revenge, as they are
to Avarice or Ambition, they might in fact answer the poetical Notions of the
Golden Age. But they have got, as an alloy to their Happiness, an ill habit of
murdering one another on flight Offenses. We had an Instance of this the second
Night after our Arrival; a Youth of eighteen, being shot dead by our Door: And
yet by the sole secret of minding our own business, we found a means of living
securely among these dangerous People. Would you know how we pass the time at
Naples? Our chief Entertainment is the Devotion of our Neighbors. Besides the
gayety of their Churches (where Folks go to see what they call una Bella
Devotione (i. e.) a sort of Religious Opera) they make Fireworks almost every
Week out of Devotion; the Streets are often hung with Arras out of Devotion;
and (what is still more strange) the Ladies invite Gentlemen to their Houses,
and treat them with Music and Sweetmeats, out of Devotion; in a word, were it
not for this Devotion of its inhabitants, Naples would have little else to
recommend it, beside the Air and Situation. Learning is in no very thriving
state here, as indeed no where else in Italy. However, among many pretenders,
some Men of taste are to be met with. A Friend of mine told me not long since,
that being to visit Salvini at Florence, he found him reading your Homer. He
liked the Notes extremely, and could find no other fault with the Version, but
that he thought it approached too near a Paraphrase; which shows him not to be
sufficiently acquainted with our Language. I wish you Health to go on with that
noble Work, and when you have that, I need not wish you Success. You will do me
the Justice to believe, that whatever relates to your Welfare, is sincerely
wished, by

Yours, etc.

portrait of Jonathan Swift IONAT. SWIFT (...) and Dean St. Pat. in Hib.
Non Pareil



Mr. Pope to...
Dec. 12, 1718.
THE old project of a Window in the bosom, to render the Soul of Man visible,
is what every honest friend has manifold reason to wish for; yet even that
would not do in our case, while you are so far separated from me, and so long.
I begin to fear you will die in Ireland, and that the Denunciation will be
fulfilled upon you, Hibernus es, and in Hiberniam reverteris -- I should be apt
to think you in Sancho's case; some Duke has made you Governor of an Island, or
wet place, and you are administering Laws to the wild Irish. But I must own,
when you talk of Building and Planting, you touch my String; and I am as apt to
pardon you, as the Fellow that thought himself Jupiter would have pardoned the
other Madman who called himself his Brother Neptune. Alas Sir, do you know whom
you talk to? One that had been a Poet, was degraded to a Translator, and at
last through mere dullness is turned an Architect. You know Martial's Censure --
Praeconem facito, vel Architectum. However I have one way left, to plan, to
elevate, and to surprise (as Bays says.) The next you may expect to hear, is
that I am in Debt.

The History of my Transplantation and Settlement which you desire, would
require a Volume, were I to enumerate the many projects, difficulties,
vicissitudes, and various fates attending that important part of my Life: Much
more should I describe the many Draughts, Elevations, Profiles, Perspectives,
etc. of every Palace and Garden proposed, intended, and happily raised, by the
strength of that Faculty wherein all great Genius's excel, Imagination. At
last, the Gods and Fate have fixed me on the borders of the Thames, in the
Districts of Richmond and Twickenham. It is here I have passed an entire Year
of my life, without any fixed abode in London, or more than casting a
transitory glance (for a day or two at most in a Month) on the pomps of the
Town. It is here I hope to receive you, Sir, returned in triumph from
Eternizing the Ireland of this Age. For you my Structures rise; for you my
Colonades extend their Wings; for you my Groves aspire, and Roses bloom. And to
say truth, I hope Posterity (which no doubt will be made acquainted with all
these things) will look upon it as one of the principal Motives of my
Architecture, that it was a Mansion prepared to receive you, against your own
should fall to dust, which is destined to be the Tomb of poor (...) and (...)
and the immortal Monument of the Fidelity of two such Servants, who have
excelled in Constancy the very Rats of your Family.

What more can I tell you of my self? so much, and yet all put together so
little, that I scarce care, or know, how to do it. But the very reasons that
are against putting it upon Paper, are as strong for telling it you in Person;
and I am uneasy to be so long denied the satisfaction of it.

At present I consider you bound in by the Irish Sea, like the Ghosts in
Virgil, -- Tristi palus inamabilis unda
Alligat, and novies Styx circumfusa coercet!
and I cannot express how I long to renew our old intercourse and conversation,
our morning Conferences in bed in the same Room, our evening Walks in the Park,
our amusing Voyages on the Water, our philosophical Suppers, our Lectures, our
Dissertations, our Gravities, our Reveries, our Fooleries, our what not? --
This awakens the memory of some of those who have made a part in all these.
Poor Parnelle, Garth, Row! You justly reprove me for not speaking of the Death
of the last: Parnelle was too much in my mind, to whose Memory I am erecting
the best Monument I can. What he gave me to publish, was but a small part of
what he left behind him, but it was the best, and I will not make it worse by
enlarging it. I Would fain know if he be buried at Chester, or Dublin; and what
care has been, or is to be taken for his Monument, etc. Yet I have not
neglected my Devoirs to Mr. Row; I am writing this very day his Epitaph for
Westminster-Abbey -- After these; the best natured of Men, Sir Samuel Garth,
has left me in the truest concern for his loss. His Death was very Heroical,
and yet unaffected enough to have made a Saint, or a Philosopher famous: But
ill Tongues, and worse Hearts have branded even his last Moments, as wrongfully
as they did his Life, with Irreligion. You must have heard many Tales on this
Subject; but if ever there was a good Christian, without knowing himself to be
so, it was Dr. Garth.

I am, etc.

LETTERS OF Mr. Wycherley and Mr. Pope, From the Year 1704 to 1710.
The Author's Age then Sixteen.
Mr. POPE to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
December. 26. 1704.
IT was certainly a great Satisfaction to me to see and converse with a Man,
whom in his Writings I had so long known with Pleasure: But it was a high
addition to it, to hear you, at our very first meeting, doing justice to your
dead friend Mr. Dryden. I was not so happy as to know him; Virgilium tantum
vidi -- Had I been born early enough, I must have known and loved him: For I
have been assured, not only by your self, but by Mr. Congreve and Sir William
Trumbul, that his personal Qualities were as amiable as his Poetical,
notwithstanding the many libellous Misrepresentations of them, (against which
the former of these Gentlemen has told me he will one day vindicate him He
since did so, in his Dedication to the Duke of Newcastle, prefixed to Tonson's
Duodecimo Edition of Dryden's Plays, 1717.
.) I suppose those Injuries were begun by the Violence of Party, but it is no
doubt they were continued by Envy at his success and fame: And those Scriblers
who attacked him in his latter times, were only like Gnats in a Summer's
Evening, which are never very troublesome but in the finest and most glorious
Season; (for his Fire, like the Sun's, shined clearest toward its setting.)

You must not therefore imagine, that when you told me of my own Performances
that they were above those Critics, I was so vain as to believe it; and yet I
may not be so humble as to think my self quite below their Notice. For Critics,
as they are Birds of Prey, have ever a natural Inclination to Carrion: And
though such poor Writers as I, are but Beggars, however no Beggar is so poor
but he can keep a Cur, and no Author is so beggarly but he can keep a Critic.
So I Am sar from thinking the Attacks of such people either any honor or
dishonor, even to me, much less to Mr. Dryden. I think with you, that whatever
lesser Wits have risen since his Death, are but like Stars appearing when the
Sun is set, that twinkle only in his Absence, and with the Rays they have
borrowed from him. Our Wit (as you call it)is but Reflection or Imitation,
therefore scarce to be called ours. True Wit, I believe, may be defined
Justness of Thought, and a Facility of Expression; or (in the Midwives Phrase)
a perfect Conception, with an easy Delivery. However this is far from a
complete Definition; pray help me to a better, as I doubt not you can.

I am, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Jan. 25, 1704-5.
I HAVE been so busy of late in correcting and transcribing some of my
Madrigals, for a great Man or two who desired to see them, that I have (with
your Pardon) omitted to return you an Answer to your most ingenious Letter: So
Scriblers to the Public, like Bankers to the Public, are profuse in their
voluntary Loans to it, whilst they forget to pay their more private and
particular, as more just Debts, to their best and nearest Friends. However, I
hope, you who have as much Goodnature as Good Sense, (since they generally are
Companions) will have Patience with a Debtor, who you think has an Inclination
to pay you his Obligations, if he had wherewithal ready about him; and in the
mean time should consider when you have obliged me beyond my present Power of
returning the Favor, that a Debtor may be an honest Man, if he but intends to
be just when he is able, though late. But I should be less just to you, the more
I thought I could make a Return to so much Profuseness of Wit and Humanity
together; which though they seldom accompany each other, in other Men, are in
you so equally met, I know not in which you most abound. But so much for my
Opinion of you, which is, that your Wit and Ingenuity is equaled by nothing
but your Judgment, or Modesty; which (though it be to please my self) I must no
more offend, than I can do either right.

Therefore I will say no more now of them, than that your good Wit never
forfeited your good Judgment, but in your Partiality to me and mine; so that if
it were possible for a hardened Scribler to be vainer than he is, what you
write of me would make me more conceited, than what I scribble my self; yet I
must confess I ought to be more humbled by your Praise than exalted; which
commends my little Sense with so much more of yours, that I am disparaged and
disheartened by your Commendations; who give me an Example of your Wit in the
first Part of your Letter, and a Definition of it in the last: to make writing
well (that is, like you) more difficult to me than ever it was before. Thus the
more great and just your Example and Definition of Wit are, the less I am
capable to follow them. Then the best way of showing my Judgment, after having
seen how you write, is to leave off writing; and the best way to show my
Friendship to you, is to put an end to your Trouble, and to conclude

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
March 25, 1705.
WHEN I write to you, I foresee a long Letter, and ought to beg your Patience
beforehand; for if it proves the longest, it will be of course the worst I have
troubled you with. Yet to express my Gratitude at large for your obliging
Letter, is not more my Duty than my Interest; as some People will abundantly
thank you for one Piece of Kindness, to put you in mind of bestowing another.
The more favorable you are to me, the more distinctly I see my Faults; Spots
and Blemishes, you know, are never so plainly discovered as in the brightest
Sunshine. Thus I am mortified by those Commendations which were designed to
encourage me: for Praise to a young Wit, is like Rain to a tender Flower; if it
be moderately bestowed, it chears and revives; but if too lavishly, overcharges
and depresses him. Most Men in years, as they are generally discouragers of
Youth, are like old Trees, that being past Bearing themselves, will suffer no
young Plants to flourish beneath them: But as if it were not enough to have
outdone all your Coaevals in Wit, you will excel them in Goodnature too. As
for my His Pastorals, written at 16 Years of Age.
green Essays, if you find any pleasure in 'em, it must be such as a Man
naturally takes in observing the first Shoots and Buddings of a Tree which he
has raised himself: and it is impossible they should be esteemed any otherwise,
than as we value Fruits for being early, which nevertheless are the most
insipid, and the worst of the Year. In a word, I must blame you for treating me
with so much Compliment, which is at best but the Smoke of Friendship. I
neither write, nor converse with you, to gain your Praise, but your Affection.
Be so much my Friend as to appear my Enemy, and tell me my Faults, if not as a
young Man, at least as an unexperienced Writer.

I am, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
March 29, 1705.
YOUR Letter of the Twenty-fifth of March I have received, which was more
welcome to me than any thing could be out of the Country, though it were one's
Rent due that Day: and I can find no fault with it, but that it charges me with
Want of Sincerity, or Justice, for giving you your Due; who should not let your
Modesty be so unjust to your Merit, as to reject what is due to it, and call
that Compliment which is so short of your desert, that it is rather degrading
than exalting you. But if Compliment be the Smoke only of Friendship, (as you
say) however you must allow there is no Smoke but there is some Fire; and as
the Sacrifice of Incense offered to the Gods would not have been half so sweet
to others, if it had not been for its Smoke; so Friendship, like Love, cannot
be without some Incense, to perfume the Name it would praise and immortalize.
But since you say you do not write to me to gain my Praise, but my Affection,
pray how is it possible to have the one without the other? We must admire
besore we love. You affirm, you would have me so much your Friend as to appear
your Enemy, and find out your Faults rather than your Perfections: But (my
Friend) that would be so hard to do, that I who love no Difficulties, cannot be
persuaded to it. Besides, the Vanity of a Scribler is such, that he will never
part with his own Judgment to gratify another's; especially when he must take
pains to do it: And though I am proud to be of your Opinion, when you talk of any
Thing, or Man but your self, I cannot suffer you to murder your Fame, with
your own hand, without opposing you; especially when you say your last Letter
is the worst (since the longest) you have favored me with; which I therefore
think the best, as the longest Life (if a good one) is the best, as it yields
the more Variety and is more Exemplary; as a cheerful Summer's Day, though longer
than a dull one in the Winter, is less tedious and more entertaining: Therefore
let but your Friendship be like your Letter, as lasting as it is agreeable, and
it can never be tedious, but more acceptable and obliging to

Your, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
April 7, 1705.
I HAVE received yours of the Fifth, wherein your Modesty refuses the just
Praises I give you, by which you lay claim to more, as a Bishop gains his
Bishopric, by saying he will not Episcopate: But I must confess, whilst I
displease you by commending you, I please my self; just as Incense is sweeter
to the Offerer than the Deity to whom it is offered, by his being so much above
it: For indeed, every Man partakes of the Praise he gives, when it is so justly
given.

As to my enquiry after your Intrigues with the Muses, you may allow me to make
it, since no old Man can give so young, so great, and able a Favorite of
theirs, Jealousy. I am, in my Enquiry, like old Sir Bernard Gascoign, who used
to say, That when he was grown too old to have his Visits admitted alone by the
Ladies, he always took along with him a young Man, to ensure his Welcome to
them; who, had he come alone had been rejected, only because his Visits were
not scandalous to them. So I am (like an old Rook, who is ruined by Gaming)
forced to live on the good Fortune of the pushing young Men, whose Fancies are
so vigorous, that they ensure their Success in their Adventures with the Muses,
by their Strength of Imagination.

-- Your Papers are safe in my Custody (you may be sure) from any one's Theft
but my own; for it is as dangerous to trust a Scribler with your Wit, as a
Gamester with the Custody of your Money. -- If you happen to come to Town, you
will make it more difficult for me to leave it, who am, dear Mr. Pope,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
April 30, 1705.
I Cannot contend with you. You must give me leave at once to wave all your
Compliments, and to collect only this in general from 'em, that your Design is
to encourage me. But I separate from all the rest that Paragraph or two, in
which you make me so warm an Offer of your Friendship. Were I possessed of
That, it would put an end to all those Speeches with which you now make me
blush; and change them to wholesome Advices, and free Sentiments, which might
make me wiser and happier. I know it is the general Opinion, that Friendship is
best contracted betwixt Persons of equal Age: but I have so much Interest to be
of another Mind, that you must pardon me if I cannot forbear telling you a few
Notions of mine, in opposition to that Opinion.

In the first place it is observable, that the Love we bear to our Friends is
generally caused by our finding the same Dispositions in them, which we feel in
our selves. This is but Self-love at the bottom: Whereas the Affection betwixt
People of different Ages cannot well be such, the Inclinations of such being
commonly various. The Friendship of two young Men is often occasioned by Love
of Pleasure or Voluptuousness, each being desirous, for his own sake, of one to
assist or encourage him in the Courses he pursues; as that of two old Men is
frequently on the score of some Profit, Lucre, or Design upon others. Now, as a
young Man who is less acquainted with the Ways of the World, has in all
probability less of Interest; and an old Man who may be weary of himself, less
of Self-love; so the Friendship between them is the more likely to be true, and
unmixed with too much Selfregard. One may add to this, that such a Friendship
is of greater Use and Advantage to both; for the old Man will grow more gay and
agreeable to please the young one; and the young Man more discreet and prudent
by the help of the old one: so it may prove a Cure of those epidemical Diseases
of Age and Youth, Sourness and Madness. I hope you will not need many Arguments
to convince you of the Possibility of this; One alone abundantly satisfies me,
and convinces to the very Heart; which is, that I am, etc. Mr. Wycherley was at
this time about Seventy Years old, Mr. Pope under Seventeen.


Mr. POPE to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
June 23, 1705.
I Should believe my self happy in your good Opinion, but that you treat me so
much in a Style of Compliment. It has been observed of Women, that they are
more subject in their youth to be touched with Vanity than Men, on account of
their being generally treated this way; but the weakest Women are not more so
than that weak Class of Men, who are thought to pique themselves upon their
Wit. The World is never wanting, when a Coxcomb is accomplishing himself, to
help to give him the finishing Stroke.

Every Man is apt to think his Neighbor overstock'd with Vanity, yet I cannot
but fancy, there are certain Times, when most people are in a disposition of
being informed; and it is incredible what a vast Good a little Truth might do,
spoken in such seasons. A very small Alms will do a great kindness, to people
in extreme necessity.

I could name an acquaintance of yours, who would at this time think himself
more obliged to you for the Information of his Faults, than the Confirmation of
his Follies. If you would make those the Subject of a Letter, it might be as
long as I could wish your Letters always were.

I do not wonder you have hitherto found some difficulty (as you are pleased to
say) in writing to me, since you have always chosen the Task of commending me:
Take but the other way, and I dare engage you will find none at all.

As for my Verses which you praise so much, I may truly say they had never been
the cause of any Vanity in me, except what they gave me when they first
occasioned my acquaintance with you. But I have several times since been in
danger of this Vice, as often I mean as I received any Letters from you.

It Is certain, the greatest magnifying Glasses in the World are a Man's own
Eyes, when they look upon his own Person; yet even in those, I cannot fancy my
self so extremely like Alexander the Great, as you would persuade me: If I must
be like him, it is you will make me so, by complimenting me into a better
opinion of my self than I deserve: They made him think he was the Son of
Jupiter, and you assure me I am a Man of Parts. But is this all you can say to
my honor? You said ten times as much before, when you called me your Friend.
After having made me believe I possessed a share in your Affection, to treat me
with Compliments and sweet Sayings, is like the proceeding with poor Sancho
'Panca: They had persuaded him that he enjoyed a great Dominion, and then gave
him nothing to subsist upon but Wafers and Marmalade. In our Days, the greatest
obligation you can lay upon a Wit, is to make a Fool of him. For as when Madmen
are found incurable, wise Men give them their Way, and please them as well as
they can; so when those incorrigible things, Poets, are once irrecoverably
Be-Mus'd, the best way both to quiet them, and secure your selves from the
effects of their Frenzy, is to feed their Vanity; (which indeed for the most
part is all that is fed in a Poet.)

You may believe me, I could be heartily glad that all you say were as true,
applied to me, as it would be to your self, for several weighty Reasons; but
for none so much, as that I might be to you what you deserve; whereas I can now
be no more, than is consistent with the small, though utmost Capacity of,

Dear Sir, Your ever affectionate Servant.

Mr. POPE to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
Oct. 26. 1705.
I HAVE now changed the Scene from the Town to the Country; from Will's
Coffee-House to Windsor Forest. I find no other difference than this, betwixt
the common Town-Wits, and the downright Country Fools; that the first are
pertly in the Wrong, with a little more Flourish and Gaiety, and the last
neither in the Right nor the Wrong, but confirmed in a stupid, settled Medium
betwixt both. However, methinks these are most in the Right, who quietly and
easily resign themselves over to the gentle Reign of Dullness, which the Wits
must do at last, though after a great deal of Noise, Pother, and Resistance. Ours
are a sort of modest, inoffensive People, who neither have Sense, nor pretend
to any, but enjoy a jovial Sort of Dullness. They are commonly known in the
World by the Name of honest, civil Gentlemen. They live much as they ride, at
random; a kind of hunting Life, pursuing with earnestness and hazard, something
not worth the catching; never in the way, nor out of it. I cannot but preser
Solitude to the Company of all these; for though a Man's self may possibly be the
worst Fellow to converse with in the world, yet one would think the Company of
a Person whom we have the greatest regard to, and affection for, could not be
very unpleasant: As a Man in love with a Mistress, desires no conversation but
hers, so a Man in love with himself, (as most Men are) may be best pleased with
his own. Besides, if the truest and most useful Knowledge, be the Knowledge of
our selves, Solitude conducing most to make us look into our selves, should be
the most instructive State of Life. We see nothing more commonly, than Men, who
for the sake of the circumstantial Part, and mere outside of Life, have been
half their Days rambling out of their Nature, and ought to be sent into
Solitude to study themselves over again. People are usually spoiled instead of
being taught, at their coming into the World; whereas by being more conversant
with Obseurity, without any Pains, they would naturally follow what they were
meant for. In a word, if a Man be a Coxcomb, Solitude is his best School; and
if he be a Fool, it is his best Sanctuary.

These are good Reasons for my own Stay here, but I wish I could give you any
for your coming hither, except that I earnestly invite you. And yet I cannot
help saying, I have suffered a great deal of discontent that you do not, though I
so little merit that you should.

I must complain of the shortness of your last: Those who have most Wit, like
those who have most Money, are generally most sparing of either.

Mr. WYCHERLEY's Answer.
Nov. 5. 1705.
YOURS of the 26th of October I have received, as I have always done yours,
with no little Satisfaction, and am proud to discover by it, that you find
fault with the shortness of mine, which I think the best Excuse for it: And
though they (as you say) who have most Wit or Money, are most sparing of either;
there are some who appear Poor to be thought Rich, and are Poor, which is my
Case: I cannot but rejoice, that you have undergone so much discontent for want
of my company; but if you have a mind to punish me for my fault, (which I could
not help) defer your coming to Town, and you will do it effectually. But I know
your Charity always exceeds your Revenge, so that I will not despair of seeing
you, who, in return to your inviting me to your Forest, invite you to my
Forest, the Town; where the Beasts that inhabit, tame or wild, of long Ears or
Horns, pursue one another either out of Love or Hatred. You may have the
Pleasure to see one Pack of Bloodhounds pursue another Herd of Brutes, to bring
each other to their Fall, which is their whole Sport: Or, if you affect a less
bloody Chase, you may see a Pack of Spaniels, called Lovers, in a hot pursuit
of a two legged Vixen, who only flies the whole lowed Pack to be singled out by
one Dog, who runs mute to catch her up the sooner from the rest, as they are
making a Noise, to the Loss of their Game. In fine, this is the Time for all
sorts of Sport in the Town, when those of the Country cease; therefore leave
your Forest of Beasts, for ours of Brutes, called Men, who now in full Cry,
(packed by the Court or Country) run down in the House of Commons, a deserted
horned Beast of the Court, to the satisfaction of their Spectators: Besides,
(more for your Diversion) you may see not only the two great Play Houses of the
Nation, those of the Lords and Commons, in Dispute with one another; but the
two other Play Houses in high Contest, because the Members of one House are
removed up to the other, (as it is often done by the Court for Reasons of State.)
Insomuch that the lower Houses, I mean the Play Houses, are going to act
Tragedies on one another without Doors, and the Sovereign is put to it (as it
often happens in the other two Houses) to silence one or both, to keep Peace
between them. Now I have told you all the News of the Town.

I am, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Feb. 5. 1705/6.
I HAVE received your kind Letter, with my Paper The same which was printed in
the Year 1717, in a Miscellany of Bern. Lintot's, and in the present Edition of
the Posthumous Works of Mr. Wycherley.
to Mr. Dryden corrected. I own you have made more of it by making it less, as
the Dutch are said to burn half the Spices they bring home to inhance the Price
of the remainder, so to be greater Gainers by their Loss, (which is indeed my
Case now.) Well; you have pruned my sading Laurels of some superfluous,
sapless, and dead Branches, to make the remainder live the longer; thus like
your Master Apollo, you are at once a Poet and a Physician.

Now, Sir, as to my impudent invitation of you to the Town, your Goodnature
was the first Cause of my confident request; but excuse me, I must I see say no
more upon this Subject, since I find you a little too nice to be dealt freely
with: though you have given me some Encouragement to hope, our Friendship though
young might be without Shyness, or criminal Modesty; for a Friend, like a
Mistress, though he is not to be mercenary to be true, yet ought not to refuse a
Friend's kindness because it is small or trivial: I have told you (I think)
that a Spanish Lady said to her poor, poetical Gallant, that a Queen if she lay
with a Groom, would expect a mark of his kindness from him, though it were but
his Curry-comb. But you and I will dispute this Matter when I am so happy as to
see you here; and perhaps it is the only Dispute in which I might hope to have
the better of you.

Now, Sir, to make you another excuse for my boldness in inviting you to Town,
I designed to leave with you some more of my Papers, (since these return so
much better out of your Hands than they went from mine) for I intended (as I
told you formerly) to spend a Month, or six Weeks this Summer, near you in the
Country; for you may be assured there is nothing I desire so much, as an
Improvement of your Friendship --

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
March 22, 1705-6.
I MUST lay a penance upon you, which is to desire you to look over that damned
Miscellany of Madrigals of mine, to pick out (if possible) some that may be so
altered that they may yet appear in Print again; I hope with better success
than they hitherto have done. I will give you my Reason for this Request of
mine, when I see you; which I am resolved shall be when I have done here, and
at the Bath, where I design to go, and afterward to spend two Months (God
willing) with you at Binfield, or near it --

Mr. POPE's Answer.
April 10. 1716.
BY yours of the last Month, you desire me to select, if possible, some Things
from the Printed in Folio, in the Year 1704.
first Volume of your Miscellanies, which may be altered so as to appear again.
I doubted your meaning in this; whether it was to pick out the best of those
Verses, (as that on the Idleness of Business; on Ignorance; on Laziness, etc.)
to make the Method and Numbers exact, and avoid Repetitions? For though (upon
reading 'em on this occasion) I believe they might receive such an Alteration
with advantage; yet they would not be changed so much, but any one would know
'em for the same at first sight. Or if you mean to improve the worst Pieces,
which are such as to render them very good, would require a great addition, and
almost the entire new writing of them? Or, lastly, if you mean the middle sort,
as the Songs and Love-Verses? For these will need only to be shortened, to omit
repetition; the Words remaining very little different from what they were
before. Pray let me know your mind in this, for I am utterly at a loss. Yet I
have tried what I could do to some of the Songs, Vid. Letter of Nov. 20, 1707.
a.
and the Poems on Laziness and Ignorance, but cannot (even in my own partial
Judgment) think my alterations much to the purpose. So that I must needs desire
you would apply your Gare wholly at present, to those which are yet
unpublished, of which there are more than enough to make a consierable Volume,
of full as good ones, nay, I verily believe, of better than any in Vol. I.
which I could wish you would defer, at least 'till you have finished these that
are yet unprinted.

I send you a Sample of some few of these; namely; the Verses to Mr. Waller in
his old Age; your new ones on the Duke of Marlborough, and two others. I have
done all that I thought could be of advantage to them: Some I have contracted,
as we do Sunbeams, to improve their Energy and Force; some I have taken quite
away, as we take Branches from a Tree, to add to the Fruit; others I have
entirely new expressed, and turned more into Poetry. Done (like one of his
Successors) had infinitely more Wit than he wanted Versification: for the great
dealers in Wit, like those in Trade, take least Pains to set off their Goods;
while the Haberdashers of small Wit, spare for no Decorations or Ornaments. You
have commissioned me to paint your Shop, and I have done my best to brush you
up like your Neighbors. But I can no more pretend to the Merit of the
Production, than a Midwife to the Virtues and good Qualities of the Child she
helps into the Light.

The few Things I have entirely added, you will excuse; you may take them
lawfully for your own, because they are no more than Sparks lighted up by your
Fire; and you may omit them at last, if you think them but Squibs in your
Triumphs.

I am, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Feb. 19. 1706/7.
I HAVE received yours of the 26th, as kind as it is ingenious, for which
therefore I most heartily thank you: It would have been much more welcome to
me, had it not informed me of your want of Health: But you who have a Mind so
vigorous, may well be contented with its crazy Habitation; since (you know) the
old Similitude says, The Keenness of the Mind soonest wears out the Body; as
the sharpest Sword soonest destroys the Scabbard: So that (as I say) you must
be satisfied with your apprehension of an uneasy Life, (though I hope not a short
one;) notwithstanding that generally you sound Wits (though weak Bodies) are
immortal hereafter, by that Genius which shortens your present Life to prolong
that of the future. But I yet hope, your great, vigorous, and active Mind, will
not be able to destroy your little, tender, and crazy Carcass.

Now to say something to what you write, concerning the present epidemick
Distemper of the Mind and Age, Calumny; I know it is no more to be avoided (at
one time or another of our Lives) than a Fever, or an Ague; and as often those
Distempers attend, or threaten the best Constitutions, from the worst Air; so
does that malignant Air of Calumny, soonest attack the sound and elevated in
Mind, as Storms of Wind the tallest and most fruitful Trees; whilst the low and
weak, for bowing and moving to and fro, are, by their Weakness, secure from the
danger and violence of the Tempest. But so much for stinking Rumor, which
weakest Minds are most afraid of; as Irish-Men, though the nastiest of Mankind,
are most offended at a Fart.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Nov. 11. 1707.
I Received yours of the 9th yesterday, which has (like the rest of your
Letters) at once pleased and instructed me; so that I assure you, you can no
more write too much to your absent Friends, than speak too much to the present.
This is a Truth that all Men own, who have either seen your Writings, or heard
your Discourse; enough to make others show their Judgment, in ceasing to write
or talk, especially to you, or in your company. However, I speak or write to
you, not to please you, but my self; since I provoke your Answers; which,
whilst they humble me, give me vanity; though I am lessened by you even when you
commend me; since you commend my little Sense with so much more of yours, that
you put me out of Countenance, whilst you would keep me in it. So that you have
found a way (against the Custom of great Wits) to show even a great deal of
Goodnature with a great deal of good Sense.

I thank you for the Book you promised me, by which I find you would not only
correct my Lines, but my Life.

As to the damned Verses I entrusted you with, I hope you will let them undergo
your Purgatory, to save them from other People's damning them; since the
Critics, who are generally the first damned in this Life, like the Damned
below, never leave to bring those above them under their own Circumstances. I
beg you to peruse my Papers, and select what you think best, or most tolerable,
and look over them again; for I resolve suddenly to print some of them, as a
hardened old Gamester will (in spite of all former ill usage by Fortune) push
on an ill Hand, in expectation of recovering himself; especially, since I have
such a Croupier or Second to stand by me as Mr. Pope.

Mr. POPE to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
Nov. 20. 1707.
MR. Englefyld being upon his Journey to London, tells me I must write to you
by him, which I do, not more to comply with his desire, than to gratify my own;
though I did it so lately by the Messenger you sent hither: I take it too as an
opportunity of sending you the fair Copy of the Poem The Original of it in
Blots, and with Figures of the References from Copy to Copy, in Mr. Pope's
Hand, is in the Harley-Library, among other such Brouillons of Mr. Wycherley's
Poems, corrected by him. Vid. Let. Ap. 10, 1705/6. Note (a.)
on Dullness, which was not then finished, and which I should not care to hazard
by the common Post. Mr. Englefyld is ignorant of the Contents, and I hope your
prudence will let him remain so, for my sake no less than your own: Since if
you should reveal any thing of this nature, it would be no wonder Reports
should be raised, and there are those (I fear) who would be ready to improve
them to my disadvantage. I am sorry you told the great Man, whom you met in the
Court of Requests, that your Papers were in my hands: No Man alive shall ever
know any such thing from me; and I give you this warning besides, that though
your self should say I had any way assisted you, I am notwithstanding resolved
to deny it.

The method of the Copy I send you is very different from what it was, and much
more regular: For the better help of your Memory, I desire you to compare it by
the Figures in the Margin, answering to the same in this Letter. The Poem is
now divided into four Parts, marked with the literal Figures I. II. III. IV.
The first contains the Praise of Dullness, and shows how upon several
suppositions, it passes for 1. Religion. 2. Philosophy. 3. Example. 4. Wit. And
5. The cause of Wit, and the end of it. The second Part contains the Advantages
of Dullness: 1st, In Business; and 2dly, at Court; where the Similitudes of the
Bias of a Bowl, and the Weights of a Clock, are directly tending to illustrate
those advantages of Dullness, though introduced before in a place where there was
no mention made of them; (which was your only objection to my adding them.) The
third contains the Happiness of Dullness in all Stations, and shows in a great
many Particulars, that it is so fortunate, as to be esteemed some good Quality
or other in all sorts of People; that it is thought Quiet, Sense, Caution,
Policy, Prudence, Majesty, Valor, Circumspection, Honesty, etc. The fourth
Part I have wholly added, as a Climax which sums up all the praise, advantage,
and happiness of Dullness in a few words, and strengthens them all by the
opposition of the disgrace, disadvantage, and unhappiness of Wit, with which it
concludes This is totally omitted in the present Edition: Some of the Lines in
the H. M. are these. Thus Dullness, the safe Opiate of the Mind,
The last kind refuge weary Wit can find,
Fit for all stations, and in each content,
Is satisfied, secure, and innocent;
No pains it takes, and no offense it gives,
Un-fear'd, unhated, undisturbed it lives, etc.

.

Though the whole be as short again as at first, there is not one Thought
omitted, but what is a Repetition of something in your first Volume, or in this
very Paper: Some Thoughts are contracted, where they seemed encompassed with
too many words; and some new expressed, or added, where I thought there wanted
heightning, (as you will see particularly in the Simile of the Clock-Weights; It
was originally thus expressed: As Clocks run fastest when most Lead is on.
We find it so in a Letter of Mr. Pope to Mr. Wycherley, dated April 3, 1705.
and in a paper of Verses of his, To the Author of a Poem called Successio,
which got out in a Miscellany in 1712, three Years before Mr. Wycherley died,
and two after he had laid aside the whole design of publishing any Poems.
and the Versification throughout, is, I believe such, as no body can be
shocked at. The repeated Permissions you give me of dealing freely with you,
will (I hope) excuse what I have done; for if I have not spared you when I
thought Severity would do you a kindness, I have not mangled you where I
thought there was no absolute need of Amputation. As to Particulars, I can
satisfy you better when we meet; in the mean time, pray write to me when you
can, you cannot too often.

Mr. WYCHERLEY's Answer.
Nov. 22, 1707.
YOU may see by my Style, I had the happiness and satisfaction to receive
yesterday (by the hands of that Wagg, Mr. Englefyld) your extreme kind and
obliging Letter of the 20th of this Month; which, like all the rest of yours,
did at once mortify me, and make me vain; since it tells me with so much more
Wit, Sense and Kindness than mine can express, that my Letters are always
welcome to you. So that even whilst your Kindness invites me to write to you,
your Wit and Judgment forbids me; since I may return you a Letter, but never an
Answer.

Now, as for my owning your assistance to me, in over-looking my unmusical
Numbers, and harsher Sense, and correcting them both, with your Genius, or
Judgment; I must tell you I always own it, (in spite of your unpoetick Modesty)
who would do with your Friendship as your Charity; conceal your Bounty to
magnify the Obligation; and even whilst you lay on your Friend the Favor,
acquit him of the Debt: But that shall not serve your turn; I will always own,
it is my infallible Pope has, or would redeem me from a poetical Damning, the
second time; and save my Rhimes from being condemned to the Critics Flames to
all Eternity: But (by the Faith you prosess) you know your Works of
Supererrogation, transferred upon an humble, acknowledging Sinner, may save even
Him; having good Works enough of your own besides, to ensure yours, and their
Immortality.

And now for the pains you have taken to recommend my Dullness, by making it
more methodical, I give you a thousand thanks; since true and natural Dullness
is shown more by its pretense to form and method, as the Sprightliness of Wit
by its despising both. I thank you a thousand times for your repeated
Invitations to come to Binfield: -- You will find, it will be as hard for you
to get quit of my mercenary kindness to you, as it would for me to deserve, or
return yours; however, it shall be the Endeavor of my future Life, as it will
be to demonstrate my self,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Reply.
Nov. 29, 1707.
THE Compliments you make me, in regard of any inconsiderable Service I could
do you, are very unkind, and do but tell me in other words, that my Friend has
so mean an opinion of me, as to think I expect acknowledgments for trifles;
which upon my faith I shall equally take amiss, whether made to my self, or to
any others. For God's sake, (my dear Friend Wycherley) think better of me, and
believe I desire no sort of Favor so much, as that of serving you, more
considerably than I have yet been able to do.

I shall proceed in this manner, with some others of your Pieces; but since you
desire I would not deface your Copy for the future, and only mark the
Repetitions; I must, as soon as I Have marked these, transcribe what is left on
another Paper; and in that, blot, alter, and add all I can devise, for their
Improvement. For you are sensible, the Omission of Repetitions is but one, and
the easiest Part, of yours and my Design; there remaining besides to rectify
the Method, to connect the Matter, and to mend the Expression and
Versification. I will go next upon the Some Brouillons of these, transcribed
and very much blotted by Mr. Pope, are extant in the Harley Library.
Poems of Solitude, on the Public, and on the mixed Life: the Bill of Fare; the
Praises of Avarice, and some others.

I must take some Notice of what you say, of "My pains to make your Dullness
methodical;" and of your hint, that "The sprightliness of Wit despises method."
This is true enough, if by Wit you mean no more than Fancy or Conceit; but in
the better notion of Wit, considered as propriety, surely Method is not only
necessary for Perspicuity and Harmony of parts, but gives beauty even to the
minute and particular thoughts, which receive an additional advantage from
those which precede or follow in their due place: According to a Simile Mr.
Dryden used in conversation, of Feathers in the Crowns of the wild Indians,
which they not only choose for the beauty of their Colors, but place them in
such a manner as to reflect a Luster on each other. I will not disguise any of
my Sentiments from you: To methodize in your Case, is full as necessary as to
strike out; otherwise you had better destroy the whole Frame, and reduce them
into single Thoughts in Prose, like Rochfoucault, as I have more than once
hinted to you.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Feb. 28, 1707-8.
I HAVE had yours of the 23d of this Instant, for which I give you many thanks,
since I find by it, that even Absence (the usual bane of Love, or Friendship)
cannot lessen yours to more than mine. Mr. Pope had this from Mr. Cromwell,
after his Enquiry in these Words: "I returned to Town last Saturday, and
inquiring (as you desired) about Mr. Wycherley, was told, in two several
Places, that he had been very ill, and that he was even gone off our Stage: But
I could not imagine this report to be true, or that so great a Man could leave
the World without its being instructed to lament so considerable a Loss."
As to your hearing of my being ill; I am glad and sorry for the report: In the
first place, glad that it was not true; and in the next sorry that it should
give you any disturbance, or concern more than ordinary for me; for which, as
well as your concern for my future well-being or life, I think my self most
eternally obliged to you; assuring, your concern for either will make me more
careful of both. Yet for your sake I love this Life so well, that I shall the
less think of the other; but it is in your power to ensure my Happiness in one
and the other, both by your society and good Example, so not only contribute to
my felicity here, but hereaster.

Now as to your Excuse for the plainness of your Style, or Letter, I must needs
tell you, that Friendship is much more acceptable to a true Friend than Wit,
which is generally salse Reasoning; and a Friend's reprimand often shows more
Friendship than his compliment: Nay Love, which is more than Friendship, is
often seen, by our Friend's correction of our Follies or Crimes. Upon this Test
of your Friendship I intend to put you when I return to London, and thence to
you at Binfield, which I hope will be within a Month.

Next to the News of your good Health, I am pleased with the good News of your
going to print some of your Poems, and proud to be known by them to the Public
for your Friend; who intend (perhaps the same way) to be revenged of you for
your kindness; by taking your Name in vain in some of my future Madrigals: yet
so as to let the World know, my love or esteem for you are no more Poetic than
my Talent in scribbling. But of all the Arts of Fiction, I desire you to
believe I want that of feigning Friendship, and that I am sincerely,

Your, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
May 13, 1708.
I HAVE received yours of the first of May. Your Pastoral Muse outshines, in
her modest and natural dress, all Apollo's Court-Ladies, in their more artful,
labored, and costly Finery; therefore I am glad to find by your Letter, you
design your Country-beauty of a Muse shall appear at Court and in Public; to
outshine all the farded, lewd, confident, affected, Town-dowdies, who aim at
being honored only to their Shame: But her artful Innocence (on the contrary)
will gain more Honor as she becomes more public; and in spite of Custom will
bring Modesty again into Fashion, or at least make her Sister-rivals of this
Age, blush for Spite, if not for Shame. As for my stale, antiquated, poetical
Puss, whom you would keep in countenance, by saying she has once been
tolerable, and would yet pass Muster by a little licking over; it is true that
(like most vain antiquated Jades which have once been passable) yet she affects
Youthfulness, in her Age, and would still gain a few Admirers, (who the more
she seeks, or labors for their liking, are but more her contemners.)
Nevertheless, she is resolved henceforth to be so cautious as to appear very
little more in the World, except it be as an attendant on your Muse, or as a
Foil, not a Rival to her Wit, or Fame: So that let your Countrygentlewoman
appear when she will in the World This and the following Extract, are a full
Confutation of the Lying Spirit of John Dennis and others, who impudently
asserted that Mr. Pope wrote these Verses on himself, (though published by Mr.
Wycherley six Years before his Death) We find here it was a voluntary Act of
his, promised beforehand, and written while Mr. Pope was absent. The first
Brouillon of those Verses, and the second Copy with Corrections, are both yet
extant in the Harley Library, in Mr. Wycherley's own hand; from which will
appear, that if they received any alteration from Mr. Pope, it was in the
Omission of some of his own Praises.
, my old worn-out Jade of a lost Reputation, shall be her attendant into it, to
procure her Admirers; as an old Whore who can get no more Friends of her own,
bawds for others, to make Sport or Pleasure yet, one way or other, for Mankind.
I approve of your making Tonson your Muse's Introductor into the World, or
Master of the Ceremonies, who has been so long a Pimp, or Gentleman Usher to
the Muses.

I wish you good Fortune; since a Man with store of Wit, as store of Money,
without the help of good Fortune, will never be popular; but I wish you a great
many Admirers, which will be some Credit to my Judgment as well as your Wit,
who always thought you had a great deal, and am

Your, etc.

Extract from two Letters of Mr. WYCHERLEY of May 18, and of July 28, 1708.
I HAVE made a damned Compliment in Verse, upon the printing your Pastorals,
which you shall see when you see me. -- If you suffer my old Dowdy of a Muse to
wait upon your sprightly Lass of the Plains, into the Company of the Town,
'twill be but like an old City-bawd's attending a young Country beauty to Town,
to gain her Admirers, when past the Hopes of pleasing the World herself.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
May 17, 1709.
I MUST thank you for a Book of your Miscellanies, which Tonson sent me, I
suppose by your Order; and all I can tell you of it is, that nothing has lately
been better received by the Public, than your part of it; you have only
displeased the Critics by pleasing them too well; having not left them a Word
to say for themselves, against you and your performances; so that now your hand
is in, you must persevere, 'till my Prophesies of you be fulfilled. In earnest,
all the best Judges of good Sense, or Poetry, are Admirers of yours; and like
your Part of the Book so well, that the rest is liked the worse. This is true
upon my word, without Compliment; so that your first Success will make you for
all your Life a Poet, in spite of your Wit; for a Poet's Success at first, like
a Gamester's Fortune at first, is like to make him a loser at last, and to be
undone by his good fortune and merit.

But hitherto your Miscellanies have safely run the Gantlet, through all the
Coffeehouses; which are now entertained with a whimsical new News-Paper,
called, The Tatler, which I suppose you have seen. This is the newest thing I
can tell you of, except it be of the Peace, which now (most People say) is
drawing to such a Conclusion, as all Europe is, or must be satisfied with; so
Poverty, you see, which makes Peace in Westminster Hall, makes it likewise in
the Camp or Field, throughout the World: Peace then be to you, and to me; who
am now grown peaceful, and will have no Contest with any Man, but him who says
he is more your Friend, or humble Servant, than

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
May 20, 1709.
I AM glad you received the Jacob Tonson's sixth Vol. of Miscellany Poems.
Miscellany, if it were only to show you that there are as bad Poets in this
Nation as your Servant. This modern Custom of appearing in Miscellanies, is
very useful to the Poets, who, like other Thieves, escape by getting into a
Crowd, and herd together like Banditti, safe only in their Multitude. Methinks
Strada has given a good Description of these kind of Collections; Nullus hodie
mortalium aut nascitur, aut moritur, aut praeliatur, aut rusticatur, aut abit
peregre; aut redit, aut nubit; aut est, aut non est, (nam etiammortuis isti
canunt) cui non illi extemplo cudant Epicaedia, Genethliaca, Protreptica,
Panegyrica, Epithalamia, Vaticinia, Propemptica, Soterica, Paraenetica,
Naenias, Nugas. As to the success which you say my part has met with, it is to
be attributed to what you were pleased to say of me to the World; which you do
well to call your Prophesy, since whatever is said in my favor, must be a
Prediction of things that are not yet; you, like a true Godfather, engage on my
part for much more than ever I can perform. My Pastoral Muse, like other
Country Girls, is but put out of Countenance, by what you Courtiers say to her;
yet I hope you would not deceive me too far, as knowing that a young Scribler's
Vanity needs no Recruits from abroad: for Nature, like an indulgent Mother,
kindly takes care to supply her Sons with as much of their own, as is necessary
for their Satisfaction. If my Verses should meet with a few flying
Commendations, Virgil has taught me that a young Author has not too much reason
to be pleased with them, when he considers, that the natural consequence of
Praise, is Envy and Calumny. -- Si ultra placitum laudarit, Baccare frontent
Cingite, ne Vati noceat mala lingua futuro:
When once a Man has appeared as a Poet, he may give up his Pretensions to all
the rich and thriving Arts: Those who have once made their court to those
Mistresses without Portions, the Muses, are never like to set up for Fortunes.
But for my part, I shall be satisfied if I can lose my Time agreeably this way,
without losing my reputation: As for gaining any, I am as indifferent in the
Matter as Falstaff was, and may say of Fame as he did of Honor, If it comes,
it comes unlooked for; and there is an end on it. I can be content with a bare
saving Game, without being thought an Eminent Hand, (with which Title Jacob has
graciously dignified his adventurers and volunteers in Poetry.) Jacob creates
Poets, as Kings sometimes do Knights, not for their honor, but for money.
Certainly he ought to be esteemed a worker of Miracles, who is grown rich by
Poetry.

What Authors lose, their Booksellers have won;
So Pimps grow rich, while Gallants are undone.
I am your, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
May 26, 1709.
THE last I received from you, was dated the 22d of May. I take your charitable
hint to me very kindly, wherein you do like a true Friend, and a true
Christian, and I shall endeavor to follow your Advice, as well as your
Example. -- As for your wishing to see your Friend an Hermit with you, I cannot
be said to leave the World, since I shall enjoy in your conversation, all that
I can desire of it; nay, can learn more from you alone, than from my long
Experience of the great, or little Vulgar in it.

As to the Success of your Poems in the late Miscellany, I told you of in my
last; (upon my word) I made you no Compliment, for you may be assured, that all
sorts of Readers like them, except they are Writers too; but for them, (I must
needs say) the more they like them, they ought to be the less pleased with 'em:
So that you do not come off with a bare Saving Game (as you call it) but have
gained so much Credit at first, that you must needs support it to the last:
Since you set up with so great a Stock of good Sense, Judgment and Wit, that
your Judgment ensures all that your Wit ventures at. The Salt of your Wit has
been enough to give a relish to the whole insipid Hotch-Potch it is mingled The
sixth Volume of Tonson's Miscellanies.
with; and you will make Jacob's Ladder raise you to Immortality, by which
others are turned off shamefully, to their Damnation (for poetic Thieves as
they are) who think to be saved by others good Works, how faulty soever their
own are: But the Coffee-house Wits, or rather Anti-Wits, the Critics, prove
their Judgments by approving your Wit; and even the News-Mongers and Poets will
own, you have more Invention than they; nay, the Detracters or the Envious, who
never speak well of any body, (not even of those they think well of in their
absence) yet will give you (even in your absence) their good Word; and the
Critics only hate you, for being forced to speak well of you whether they will
or no; and all this is true, upon the word of,

Your, etc.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
Aug. 11, 1709.
MY Letters, so much inferior to yours, can only make up their scarcity of
Sense by their number of Lines; which is like the Spaniards paying a debt of
Gold with a load of brass Money. But to be a Plain-dealer, I must tell you, I
will revenge the raillery of your Letters upon mine, by printing them, (as
Dennis did mine) without your knowledge too, which would be a revenge upon your
Judgment, for the raillery of your Wit: For some dull Rogues (that is, the most
in the World) might be such Fools as to think what you said of me, was in
earnest: It is not the first time, you great Wits have gained Reputation by
their paradoxical or ironical Praises; your Forefathers have done it, Erasmus
and others. -- For all Mankind who know me must confess, he must be no ordinary
Genius, or little Friend, who can find out any thing to commend in me
seriously; who have given no sign of my Judgment, but my Opinion of yours, nor
mark of my Wit, but my leaving off Writing, to the public, now you are
beginning, to show the World, what you can do by yours; whose Wit is as
spiritual as your Judgment infallible; in whose Judgment I have an implicit
Faith, and shall always subscribe to it to save my Works in this World, from
the Flames and Damnation. -- Pray present my most humble Service to Sir W.
Trumbull; for whom and whose Judgment I have so profound a respect, that his
Example had almost made me marry, more than my Nephew's ill Carriage to me;
having once resolved to have revenged my self upon him by my Marriage, but now
am resolved to make my revenge greater upon him by his Marriage.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
April 1, 1710.
I HAVE had yours of the 30th of the last Month, which is kinder than I desire
it should be, since it tells me you could be better pleased to be sick again in
Town in my company, than to be well in the Country without it; and that you are
more impatient to be deprived of Happiness than of Health; yet, my dear Friend,
set raillery or compliment aside, I can bear your absence (which procures your
Health and Ease) better than I can your company when you are in Pain; for I
cannot see you so without being so too. Your love to the Country I do not
doubt, nor do you (I hope) my love to it or you, since there I can enjoy your
company without seeing you in Pain to give me Satisfaction and Pleasure; there
I can have you without Rivals or Disturbers; without the C^s too civil, or the
T^s too rude; without the Noise of the Loud, and the Censure of the Silent; and
would rather have you abuse me there with the Truth, than at this distance with
your Compliment: Since now, your business of a Friend and kindness to a Friend,
is by finding fault with his Faults, and mending them by your obliging
Severity. I hope (in point of your good nature) you will have no cruel Charity
for those Papers of mine, you were so willing to be troubled with; which I take
most infinitely kind of you, and shall acknowledge with gratitude, as long as I
live. No Friend can do more for his Friend than preserving his Reputation (nay
not by preserving his Life) since by preserving his Life he can only make him
live about threescore or fourscore Years; but by preserving his Reputation, he
can make him live as long as the World lasts; so save him from damning, when he
is gone to the Devil: Therefore I pray condemn me in private, as the Thieves do
their Accomplices in Newgate, to save them from condemnation by the Public. Be
most kindly unmerciful to my poetical Faults, and do with my Papers, as you
Country-gentlemen do with your Trees, slash, cut, and lop-off the Excrescencies
and dead Parts of my withered Bays, that the little remainder may live the
longer, and increase the value of them, by diminishing the number. I have
troubled you with my Papers rather to give you Pain than Pleasure,
notwithstanding your compliment, which says, you take the trouble kindly: Such
is the generosity to your Friends, that you take it kindly to be desired by
them to do them a kindness; and you think it done to you, when they give you an
opportunity to do it to them. Wherefore you may be sure to be troubled with my
Letters out of Interest, if not Kindness; since mine to you will procure yours
to me, so that I write to you more for my own sake than yours; less to make you
think I write well, than to learn from you to write better. Thus you see
Interest in my Kindness, which is like the Friendship of the World, rather to
make a Friend than be a Friend; but I am yours, as a true Plain-dealer.

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
April 11, 1710.
IF I can but do part of my Business at Shrewsbury in a Fortnights time (which
I propose to do) I will be soon after with you, and trouble you with my
Company, for the remainder of the Summer: In the mean time I beg you to give
your self the pains of altering, or leaving out what you think superfluous in
my Papers, that I may endeavor to print such a Number of them as you and I
shall think fit, about Michaelmas next; in order to which (my dear Friend) I
beg you to be so kind to me, as to be severe to them; that the Critics may be
less so; for I had rather be condemned by my Friend in private, than exposed to
my Foes in public, the Critics, or common Judges, who are made such by having
been old Offenders themselves. Pray believe I have as much Faith in your
Friendship and Sincerity, as I have Deference to your Judgment; and as the best
Mark of a Friend, is telling his Friend his Faults in private, so the next is
concealing them from the public, 'till they are fit to appear; in the mean
time I am not a little sensible of the great kindness you do me, in the trouble
you take for me, in putting my Rhymes in Tune, since good Sounds set off often
ill Sense, as the Italian Songs, whose good Airs, with the worst Words, or
Meaning, make the best Music; so by your tuning my Welsh Harp, my rough Sense
may be the less offensive to the nicer Ears of those Critics, who deal more in
Sound than Sense. Pray then take Pity at once both of my Readers and me, in
shortning my barren Abundance, and increasing their Patience by it, as well as
the Obligations I have to you; and since no Madrigaller can entertain the Head,
unless he pleases the Ear; and since the crowded Opera's have left the best
Comedies with the least Audiences, it is a sign Sound can prevail over Sense;
therefore soften my Words, and strengthen my Sense, and

Eris mihi magnus Apollo.

Mr. WYCHERLEY

Mr. WYCHERLEY to Mr. POPE.
April 27, 1710.
YOU give me an account in your Letter, of the trouble you have undergone for
me, in comparing my Papers you took down with you, with the old printed Volume,
and with one another of that Bundle you have in your hands; amongst which (you
say) you find numerous The Truth of this may be seen in the whole printed
Volume of his Miscellanies in Folio, in 1704, in almost every Page.
repetitions, of the same Thoughts and Subjects; all which I must confess my
want of Memory has prevented me from imagining; as well as made me capable of
committing them; since, of all Figures, that of Tautology, is the last I would
use, or least forgive my self for; but seeing is believing; wherefore I will
take some pains to examine and compare those Papers in your hands, with one
another, as well as with the former printed Copies or Books, of my damned
Miscellanies; all which (as bad a Memory as I have) with a little more pains
and care, I think I can remedy; therefore I would not have you give your self
more trouble about them, which may prevent the pleasure you have, and may give
the World, in Writing upon new Subjects of your own, whereby you will much
better entertain your self and others. Now as to your Remarks upon the whole
Volume of my Papers; all that I desire of you, is to mark in the Margin
(without defacing the Copy at all) either any Repetition of Words, Matter, or
Sense, or any Thoughts, or Words too much repeated; which if you will be so
kind as to do for me; you will supply my want of Memory, with your good One,
and my Deficiencies of Sense, with the Infallibility of yours; which if you do,
you will most infinitely oblige me, who almost repent the trouble I have given
you, since so much. Now as to what you call Freedom with me, (which you desire
me to forgive) you may be assured I would not forgive you unless you did use
it; for I am so far from thinking your Plainness a Fault, or an Offense to me,
that I think it a Charity and an Obligation; which I shall always acknowledge,
with all sort of Gratitude to you for it, who am therefore

(Dear Mr. Pope) Your most obliged humble Servant W. WYCHERLEY.
All the News I have to send you, is, that poor Mr. Betterton is going to make
his Exit from the Stage of this World, the Gout being gotten up into his Head,
and (as the Physicians say) will certainly carry him off suddenly.



Mr. POPE's Answer.
May 2, 1710.
I AM sorry you persist to take ill my not accepting your Invitation, and to
find (if I mistake not) your Exception not unmixt with some Suspicion. Be
certain I shall most carefully observe your Request, not to cross over, or
deface the Copy of your Papers for the future, and only to mark in the Margin
the Repetitions: But as this can serve no further than to get rid of those
Repetitions, and no way rectify the Method, nor connect the Matter, nor improve
the Poetry in Expression or Numbers, without further blotting, adding, and
altering; so it really is my opinion, and desire, that you should take your
Papers out of my hands into your own; and that no Alterations may be made but
when both of us are present; when you may be satisfied with every Blot, as well
as every Addition, and nothing be put upon the Papers, but what you shall give
your own sanction and assent to, at the same time.

Do not be so unjust, as to imagine from hence that I would decline any part of
this Task: On the contrary you know, I have been at the pains of transcribing
some Pieces, at once to comply with your desire of not defacing the Copy, and
yet to lose no Time in proceeding upon the Correction. I will go on the same
way if you please; though truly it is (as I have often told you) my sincere
opinion, that the greater part would make a much better Figure as Single Maxims
and Reflections in Prose, after the manner of your Favorite Rochefoucant, than
in Verse: But little Progress was made in this Design, by Mr. Wycherley, through
his old Age, and the increase of his Infirmities. He died 1715, and was buried
in the Vault of St. Paul's, Church Covent Garden.
And this, when nothing more is done but marking the Repetitions in the Margin,
will be an easy Task for your self to proceed upon, notwithstanding the bad
Memory you complain of.

I am unfeignedly, dear Sir, Your, etc.

LETTERS OF Of Abberley in Worcestershire, Gentleman of the Horse in Queen
Anne's reign, Author of several beautiful pieces in Prose and Verse, and in the
Opinion of Mr. Dryden, (in his Postscript to Virgil,) the Best Critic of our
Nation in his Time.
Mr. Walsh and Mr. Pope. From 1705, to 1707.
Mr. WALSH to Mr. WYCHERLEY.
Ap. 20. 1705.
I Return you the Mr. Pope's Pastorals.
Papers you favored me with, and had sent them to you yesterday morning, but
that I thought to have brought them to you last night my self. I have read them
over several times with great satisfaction. The Preface is very judicious and
very learned; and the Verses very tender and easy. The Author seems to have a
particular Genius for that kind of Poetry, and a Judgment that much exceeds the
years you told me he was of. He has taken very freely from the Ancients, but
what he has mixed of his own with theirs, is no way inferior to what he has
taken from them. It Is no flattery at all to say, that Virgil had written
nothing so good at his Age Sixteen.
. I shall take it as a favor if you will bring me acquainted with him; and if
he will give himself the trouble any morning to call at my House, I shall be
very glad to read the Verses over with him, and give him my opinion of the
particulars more largely than I can well do in this Letter. I am, Sir,

Your most faithful and most humble Servant, W. WALSH.

Mr. WALSH to Mr. POPE.
June 24, 1706.
I Received the favor of your Letter, and shall be very glad of the
continuance of a correspondence by which I am like to be so great a gainer. I
hope when I have the happiness of seeing you again in London, not only to read
over the Verses I have now of yours, but more that you have written since; for
I make no doubt but any one who writes so well, must write more. Not that I
think the most voluminous Poets always the best, I believe the contrary is
rather true. I mentioned somewhat to you in London of a Pastoral Comedy, which
I should be glad to hear you had thought upon since. I find Menage in his
observations upon Tasso's Aminta, reckons up fourscore Pastoral Plays in
Italian: And in looking over my old Italian Books, I find a great many
Pastorals and Piscatory Plays, which I suppose Menage reckons together. I find
also by Menage, that Tasso is not the first that writ in that kind, he
mentioning another before him, which he himself had never seen, nor indeed have
I. But as the Aminta, Pastor Fido, and Filli di Sciro of Bonarelli are the
three best, so I think there is no dispute but Aminta is the best of the three:
Not but that the Discourses in Pastor Fido are more entertaining and copious in
several peoples opinion, though not so proper for Pastoral; and the Fable of
Bonarelli more surprising. I do not remember many in other Languages, that have
written in this kind with success. Racan's Bergeries are much inferior to his
Lyrick Poems; and the Spaniards are all too full of Conceits. Rapin will have
the design of Pastoral Plays to be taken from the Cyclops of Euripides. I am
sure there is nothing of this kind in English worth mentioning, and therefore
you have that Field open to your self. You see I write to you without any sort
of constraint or method, as things come into my head, and therefore pray use
the same freedom with me, who am, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. WALSH.
July 2, 1706.
I Cannot omit the first opportunity of making you my acknowledgments for
reviewing those Papers of mine. You have no less right to correct me, than the
same hand that raised a Tree has to prune it. I am convinced as well as you,
that one may correct too much; for in Poetry as in Painting, a Man may lay
Colors one upon another, till they stiffen and deaden the Piece. Besides to
bestow heightning on every part is monstrous: Some parts ought to be lower than
the rest; and nothing looks more ridiculous, than a Work, where the Thoughts,
however different in their own nature, seem all on a level: It Is like a Meadow
newly mown, where Weeds, Grass, and Flowers are all laid even, and appear
undistinguished. I believe too that sometimes our first Thoughts are the best,
as the first squeezing of the Grapes makes the finest and richest Wine.

I have not attempted any thing of Pastoral Comedy, because I think the Taste
of our Age will not relish a Poem of that sort. People seek for what they call
Wit, on all subjects, and in all places; not considering that Nature loves
Truth so well, that it hardly ever admits of flourishing: Conceit is to Nature
what Paint is to Beauty; it is not only needless, but impairs what it would
improve. There is a certain Majesty in Simplicity which is far above all the
Quaintness of Wit: insomuch that the Critics have excluded it from the loftiest
Poetry, as well as the lowest, and forbid it to the Epic no less than the
Pastoral. I should certainly displease all those who are charmed with Guarini
and Bonarelli, and imitate Tasso not only in the Simplicity of his Thoughts,
but in that of the Fable too. If surprising should have place in the story of a
Pastoral Comedy, I believe it would be more agreeable to Probability to make
them the effects of Chance than of Design; Intrigue not being very consistent
with that Innocence, which ought to constitute a Shepherd's Character. There is
nothing in all the Aminta (as I remember) but happens by mere accident; unless
it be the meeting of Aminta with Sylvia at the Fountain, which is the
contrivance of Daphne, and even that is the most simple in the world: The
contrary is observable in Pastor Fido, where Corisca is so perfect a Mistress
of Intrigue, that the Plot could not have been brought to pass without her. I
am inclined to think the Pastoral Comedy has another disadvantage, as to the
Manners: Its general design is to make us in love with the Innocence of a rural
Life, so that to introduce Shepherds of a vicious Character must in some
measure debase it; and hence it may come to pass, that even the virtuous
Characters will not shine so much, for want of being opposed to their
contraries. -- These Thoughts are purely my own, and therefore I have reason to
doubt them: but I hope your Judgment will set me right.

I would beg your opinion too as to another point: It is how far the liberty of
Borrowing may extend? I have defended it sometimes by saying, that it seems not
so much the Perfection of Sense, to say things that have never been said
before, as to express those best that have been said oftenest; and that Writers
in the case of borrowing from others, are like Trees which of themselves would
produce only one sort of Fruit, but by being grafted upon others, may yield
variety. A mutual commerce makes Poetry flourish; but then Poets like
Merchants, should repay with something of their own what they take from others;
not like Pirates, make prize of all they meet. I desire you to tell me
sincerely, if I have not stretched this License too far in these Pastorals? I
hope to become a Critic by your Preceps, and a Poet by your Example. Since I
have seen your Eclogues, I cannot be much pleased with my own; however you have
not taken away all my Vanity, so long as you give me leave to profess my self

Yours, etc.

Mr. WALSH to Mr. POPE.
July 20, 1706.
I Had sooner returned you thanks for the favor of your Letter, but that I was
in hopes of giving you an account at the same time of my Journey to Windsor;
but I am now forced to put that quite off, being engaged to go to my
Corporation of Richmond in Yorkshire. I think you are perfectly in the right in
your Notions of Pastoral, but I am of opinion, that the redundancy of Wit you
mention, though it is what pleases the common people, is not what ever pleases the
best judges. Pastor Fido indeed has had more admirers than Aminta; but I will
venture to say, there is a great deal of difference between the admirers of one
and the other. Corisca, which is a Character generally admired by the ordinary
judges, is intolerable in a Pastorl; and Bonarelli's fancy of making his
Shepherdess in love with two men equally, is not to be defended, whatever pains
he has taken to do it. As for what you ask of the Liberty of Borrowing; it is
very evident the best Latin Poets have extended this very far; and none so far
as Virgil, who is the best of them. As for the Greek Poets, if we cannot trace
them so plainly, it is perhaps because we have none before them; it is evident
that most of them borrowed from Homer, and Homer has been accused of burning
those that wrote before him, that his Thefts might not be discovered. The best
of the modern Poets in all Languages, are those that have the nearest copied
the Ancients. Indeed in all the common Subjects of Poetry, the Thoughts are so
obvious (at least if they are natural) that whoever writes last, must write
things like what have been said before: But they may as well applaud the
Ancients for the Arts of eating and drinking, and accuse the Moderns of having
stolen those Inventions from them; it being evident in all such cases, that
whoever live first, must first find them out. It Is true, indeed, when -- unus
and alter Assuitur pannus,
when there is one or two bright Thoughts stolen, and all the rest is quite
different from it, a Poem makes a very foolish figure: But when it is all melted
down together, and the Gold of the Ancients so mixed with that of the Moderns,
that none can distinguish the one from the other, I can never find fault with
it. I cannot however but own to you, that there are others of a different
opinion, and that I have shown your Verses to some who have made that objection
to them. I have so much Company round me while I write this, and such a noise
in my ears, that it is impossible I should write any thing but Nonsense, so must
break off abruptly. I am, Sir,

Your most affectionate and most humble Servant.

Mr. WALSH to Mr. POPE.
Sept. 9, 1706.
AT my return from the North I received the favor of your Letter, which had
lain there till then. Having been absent about six weeks, I read over your
Pastorals again, with a great deal of pleasure, and to judge the better read
Virgil's Eclogues, and Spenser's Calendar, at the same time; and I assure you I
continue the same opinion I had always of them. By the little hints you take
upon all occasions to improve them, it is probable you will make them yet better
against Winter; though there is a mean to be kept even in that too, and a Man may
correct his Verses till he takes away the true Spirit of them; especially if he
submits to the correction of some who pass for great Critics, by mechanical
Rules, and never enter into the true Design and Genius of an Author. I have
seen some of these that would hardly allow any one good Ode in Horace, who cry
Virgil wants fancy, and that Homer is very incorrect. While they talk at this
rate, one would think them above the common rate of mortals; but generally they
are great admirers of Ovid and Lucan; and when they write themselves, we find
out all the Mystery. They scan their Verses upon their Fingers; run after
Conceits and glaring Thoughts; their Poems are all made up of Couplets, of
which the first may be last, or the last first, without any sort of prejudice
to their Works; in which there is no Design, or Method, or any thing Natural or
Just. For you are certainly in the right, that in all Writings whatsoever (not
Poetry only) Nature is to be followed; and we should be jealous of our selves
for being sond of Similes, Conceits, and what they call saying Fine Things.
When we werein the North, my Lord Wharton showed me a Letter he had received
from a certain great The Earl of P
General in Spain; I told him I would by all means have that General recalled,
and set to writing here at home, for it was impossible that a Man with so much
Wit as he showed, could be fit to command an Army, or do any other Business. As
for what you say of Expression: it is indeed the same thing to Wit, as Dress is
to Beauty; I have seen many Women over-drest, and several look better in a
careless Nightgown, with their hair about their ears, than Mademoiselle
Spanheim dressed for a Ball. I do not design to be in London till toward the
Parliament: then I shall certainly be there; and hope by that time you will
have finished your Pastorals as you would have them appear in the world, and
particularly the third of Autumn which I have not yet seen. Your last Eclogue
being upon the same Subject as that of mine on Mrs. Tempest's Death, I should
take it very kindly in you to give it a little turn, as if it were to the
Memory of the same Lady, if they were not written for some particular Woman
whom you would make immortal. You may take occasion to show the difference
between Poets Mistresses, and other Men's. I only hint this, which you may
either do, or let alone just as you think fit. I shall be very much pleased to
see you again in Town, and to hear from you in the mean time. I am with very
much esteem,

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. WALSH.
Oct. 22, 1706.
AFter the Thoughts I have already sent you on the subject of English
Versification, you desire my opinion as to some farther particulars. There are
indeed certain Niceties, which though not much observed even by correct
Versifiers, I cannot but think deserve to be better regarded.

1. It is not enough that nothing offends the Ear, but a good Poet will adapt
the very Sounds, as well as Words, to the things he treats of. So that there is
(if one may express it so) a Style of Sound. As in describing a gliding Stream,
the Numbers should run easy and slowing: in describing a rough Torrent or
Deluge, sonorous and swelling, and so of the rest. This is evident every where
in Homer and Virgil, and no where else that I know of to any observable degree.
The following Examples will make this plain, which I have taken from Vida.
Molle viam tacito lapsu per levia radit.
Incedit tardo molimine subsidendo.
Luctantes ventos, tempestatesque sonoras.
Immenso cum praecipitans ruit Oceano Nox.
Telum imbelle sine ictu, Conjecit.
Toll moras, cape saxa manu, cape robora Pastor,
Ferte citi flammas data tela, repellite pestem.


This, I think, is what very few observe in practice, and is undoubtedly of
wonderful force in imprinting the image on the reader: We have one excellent
Example of it in our Language, Mr. Dryden's Ode on St. Caecilia's Day,
entitled, Alexander's Feast.

2. Every nice Ear, must (I believe) have observed, that in any smooth English
Verse of ten syllables, there is naturally a Pause at the fourth, fifth, or
sixth syllable. It is upon these the Ear rests, and upon the judicious Change
and Management of which depends the Variety of Versification. For example,

At the fifth. Wherever thy Navy spreads her canvas Wings.

At the fourth. Homage to thee and Peace to all she brings.

At the sixth. Like Tracts of Leverets in Morning Snow.

Now I fancy, that to preserve an exact Harmony and Variety, the Pauses of the
4th or 6th should not be continued above three lines together, without the
Interposition of another; else it will be apt to weary the Ear with one
continued Tone, at least it does mine: That at the 5th runs quicker, and
carries not quite so dead a weight, so tires not so much though it be continued
longer.

3. Another nicety is in relation to Expletives, whether Words or Syllables,
which are made use of purely to supply a vacancy: Do before Verbs plural is
absolutely such; and it is not improbable but future Refiners may explode did
and does in the same manner, which are almost always used for the sake of
Rhyme. The same Cause has occasioned the promiscuous use of You and Thou to the
same Person, which can never sound so graceful as either one or the other.

4. I would also object to the Irruption of Alexandrine Verses of twelve
syllables, which I think should never be allowed but when some remarkable
Beauty or Propriety in them attones for the Liberty: Mr. Dryden has been too
free of these, especially in his latter Works. I am of the same opinion as to
Triple Rhimes.

5. I could equally object to the Repetition of the same Rhimes within four or
six lines of each other, as tiresome to the Ear through their Monotony.

6. Monosyllable-Lines, unless very artfully managed, are stiff, or
languishing: but may be beautiful to express Melancholy, Slowness, or labor.

7. To come to the Hiatus, or Gap between two words which is caused by two
Vowels opening on each other (upon which you desire me to be particular) I
think the rule in this case is either to use the Caesura, or admit the Hiatus,
just as the Ear is least shocked by either: For the Caesura sometimes offends
the Ear more than the Hiatus itself, and our language is naturally overcharged
with Consonants: As for example; If in this Verse, The Old have Interest ever
in their Eye,
we should say, to avoid the Hiatus, But the Old have Interest --


The Hiatus which has the worst effect, is when one word ends with the same
Vowel that begins the following; and next to this, those Vowels whose sounds
come nearest to each other are most to be avoided. O, A, or U, will bear a more
full and graceful Sound than E, I, or Y. I know some people will think these
Observations trivial, and therefore I am glad to corroborate them by some great
Authorities, which I have met with in Tully and Quintilian. In the fourth Book
of Rhetoric to Herennius, are these words: Fugiemus crebras Vocalium
concursiones, quae vastam atque hiantem reddunt orationem; ut hoc est, Baccae
aeueae amaenissimae impendebant. And Quintilian l. 9. cap. 4. Vocalium
concursus cum accidit, hiat and intersistit, at quasi laborat oration. Pessimi
long quae easdem inter se literas committunt, sonabunt: Praecipuus tamen erit
hiatus earum quae cavo aut patulo ore efseruntur. Eplenior litera est, I
anguslior. But he goes on to reprove the excess on the other hand of being too
sollicitous in this matter, and says admirably, Ne^^io an negligentia in hoc,
aut solicitudo sit pejor. So likewise Tully (Orator ad Brut.) Theopompum
reprehendunt, quod eas literas tanto opere fugerit, etsi idem magister ejus
Isocrates: which last Author, as Turnebus on Quintilian observe, has hardly one
Hiatus in all his Works. Quintilian tells us that Tully and Demosthenes did not
much observe this Nicety, though Tully himself says in his Orator, Crebra ista
Vocum concursio, quam magna ex part vitiosam, fugit Demosthenes. If I am not
mistaken, Malherbe of all the Moderns has been the most scrupulous in this
point; and I think Menage in his Observations upon him says, he has not one in
his Poems. To conclude, I believe the Hiatus should be avoided with more care
in Poetry than in Oratory; and I would constantly try to prevent it, unless
where the cutting it off is more prejudicial to the Sound than the Hiatus
itself. I am, etc. Mr. Walsh died at 49 Years old, in the Year 1708. The Year
after, Mr. Pope writ the Essay on Criticism, which he concludes with this
Gentleman's Elogie.


LETTERS TO Several LADIES.
LETTER I.
Madam,
I Send you the book of Rudiments of Drawing, which you were pleased to
command, and think my self obliged to inform you at the same time of one of the
many excellencies you possess without knowing of 'em. You are but too good a
Painter already; and no Picture of Raphael's was ever so beautiful, as that
which you have formed in a certain heart of my acquaintance. Indeed it was but
just that the finest lines in nature should be drawn upon the most durable
ground, and none could ever be met with that would so readily receive, or so
faithfully retain them, as this Heart. I may boldly say of it that you will not
find its fellow in all the Parts of the Body in this book. But I must complain
to you of my hand, which is an arrant traitor to my heart; for having been
copying your picture from thence and from Kneller these three days, it has done
all possible injury to the finest Face that ever was made, and to the liveliest
Image that ever was drawn. I have imagination enough in your absence, to trace
some resemblance of you; but I have been so long used to lose my judgment at
the sight of you, that it is past my power to correct it by the life. Your
Picture seems least like when placed before your eyes, and contrary to all
other pictures receives a manifest disadvantage by being set in the fairest
Light in the world. The Painters are a very vain generation, and have a long
time pretended to rival Nature; but to own the truth to you, she made such a
finished piece about three and twenty years ago, (I beg your pardon Madam, I
protest I meant but two and twenty) that it is in vain for them any longer to
contend with her. I know You indeed made one something like it, betwixt five
and six years past: 'Twas a little girl, done with abundance of spirit and
life; and wants nothing but time to be an admirable piece: But not to flatter
your work, I don't think 'twill ever come up to what your Father made. However
I would not discourage you; it is certain you have a strange happiness, in
making fine things of a sudden and at a stroke, with incredible ease and
pleasure.

Madam, I am, etc.

LETTER II.
IT is too much a rule in this town, that when a Lady has once done a man a
favor, he is to be rude to her ever after. It becomes our Sex to take upon us
twice as much as yours allow us: By this method I may write to you most
impudently, because you once answered me modestly; and if you should never do
me that honor for the future, I am to think (like a true Coxcomb) that your
silence gives consent. Perhaps you wonder why this is addressed to you rather
than to Mrs. M^ with whom I have the right of an old acquaintance, whereas you
are a fine Lady, have bright eyes, etc. First Madam, I make choice of you
rather than of your Mother, because you are younger than your Mother. Secondly,
because I fancy you spell better, as having been at school later. Thirdly,
because you have nothing to do but to write if you please, and possibly it may
keep you from employing your self worse: it may save some honest neighboring
Gentleman from three or four of your pestilent glances. Cast your eyes upon
Paper, Madam, there you may look innocently: Men are seducing, books are
dangerous, the amorous one's soften you, and the godly one's give you the
spleen: If you look upon trees, they clasp in embraces; birds and beasts make
love; the Sun is too warm for your blood, the Moon melts you into yielding and
melancholy. Therefore I say once more, cast your eyes upon Paper, and read only
such Letters as I write, which convey no darts, no flames, but proceed from
Innocence of soul, and simplicity of heart. However, I can allow you a Bonnet
lined with green for your eyes, but take care you don't tarnish it with ogling
too fiercely: I am told, that hand you shade your self with this shining
weather, is tanned pretty much, only with being carried over those Eyes --
thank God I am an hundred miles off from them -- Upon the whole I would sooner
trust your hand than your Eyes for doing me mischief; and though I doubt not some
part of the rancour and iniquity of your heart will drop into your pen, yet
since it will not attack me on a sudden and unprepared, since I may have time
while I break open your letter to cross my self and say a Paternoster, I hope
Providence will protect me from all you can attempt at this distance. Mr. B^
tells me you are at this hour as handsome as an Angel, for my part I have
forgot your face since two winters, I don't know whether you are tall or short,
nor call tell in any respect what sort of creature you are, only that you are a
very mischievous one whom I shall ever pray to be defended from. But when Mr.
B^ sends me word you have the smallpox, a good many freckles, or are very
pale, I will desire him to give thanks for it in your Parish Church, which as
soon as he shall inform me he has done I will make you a visit at -- without
Armor: I will eat any thing you give me without suspicion of poison, take you
by the hand without gloves, nay venture to follow you into an arbor without
calling the company. This Madam is the top of my wishes, but how differently
are our desires inclined! You sigh out, in the ardour of your heart, Oh
Play Houses, Parks, Opera's, Assemblies, London! I cry with rapture, Oh Woods,
Gardens, Rookeries, Fishponds, Arbours! Mrs. Betty M^

LETTER III.
To a Lady, written on the opposite pages of a Letter to her Husband from Lady
M.
THE Wits would say, that this must needs be a dull Letter, because it is a
married one. I am afraid indeed you will find what Spirit there is must be on
the side of the Wife, and the Husband's part as usual will prove the dullest.
What an unequal Pair are put together in this sheet? in which though we sin, it
is you must do penance. When you look on both sides of this paper, you may
fancy that our words (according to a Scripture expression) are as a Two-edged
Sword, whereof Lady M. is the shining blade and I only the Handle. But I cannot
proceed without so far mortifying Sir Robert as to tell him, that she writes
this purely in obedience to me, and that it is but one of those honors a
Husband receives for the sake of his Wife.

It is making court ill to one fine Woman to show her the regard we have for
another; and yet I must own there is not a period of this Epistle but squints
toward another overagainst it. It will be in vain to dissemble: Your
penetrating Eyes cannot but discover how all the letters that compose these
words lean forward after Lady M's letters, which seem to bend as much from
mine, and fly from them as fast as they are able. Ungrateful letters that they
are! which give themselves to another man in the very presence of him who will
yield to no mortal in knowing how to value them.

You will think I forget my self, and am not writing to you; but let me tell
you, it is you forget your self in that thought, for you are almost the only
Woman to whom one can safely address the praises of another. Besides can you
imagine a Man of my importance so stupid, as to say fine things to you before
your Husband? Let us see how far Lady M. her self dares do any thing like it,
with all the wit and address she is mistress of. If Sir Robert can be so
ignorant (now he is left to himself in the country) to imagine any such matter,
let him know from me, that here in town every thing that Lady says, is taken
for Satire. For my part, every body knows it is my constant practice to speak
Truth; and I never do it more than when I call my self.

Your, etc.

LETTER IV.
To a Lady in the Name of her Brother.
IF you have not a chaste ear and a pure heart do not peruse this Letter, for
as Jeremy Tailor says in his holy living and dying, the first thing a Virgin
ought to endeavor, is to be ignorant of the distinction of Sexes.

It is in the confidence I have that you are thus innocent, that I endeavor to
gratify your curiosity in a point in which I am sensible none but a Brother
could do it with decency.

I shall entertain you with the most reigning Curiosity in the town, I mean a
Person who is equally the toast of gentlemen and ladies, and is at present more
universally admired than any of either Sex: You know few proficients have a
greater genius for Monsters than my self; but I never tasted a monster to that
degree I have done this creature: It was not, like other monsters, produced in
the Deserts of Arabia, nor came from the country of the Great Mogul, but is the
production of the joint-endeavours of a Kentish Parson and his Spouse, who
intended in the singleness of heart to have begot a christian but of one sex,
and providence has sent them one of two.

There are various opinions concerning this Creature about town, Mr. Cromwell
observes that the Age is very licentious, and the present Reign very lewd and
corrupt, in permitting a Lady by Authoriy (as appears by the printed bills) to
expose her personal curiosities for a shilling.

Mr. P. looks upon it as a Prodigy portending some great Revolution in the
State: to strengthen which opinion he produces the following Prophecy of
Nostradamus, which he explains politically. When as two Sexes joined in One,
Shall in the Realm of Brute be shown;
Then Factions shall unite, if I know,
To choose a Prince Jure Divino.
This prodigy of common Gender
Is neither Sex but a Pretender,
So the Lord shield the Faith's Defender.


Mrs. N^ admires what people wonder at so much? and says she is just so her
self: The Duchess of S^ is of the same opinion.

Among these various conjectures, that I might be informed of the truth, I took
along with me a Physician and a Divine, the one to inspect the state of its
Body, the other to examine that of its Mind: The persons I made choice of were
the ingenious Dr. P^ and the reverend Mr. (...) We were no sooner in the room
but the Party came to us dressed in that habit in which the Ladies affect an
Hermophroditical imitation of Men -- your sharp wit, my dear Sister, will
immediately conclude that I mean a Riding-habit.

I think it not material to inform you, whether the Doctor, the Divine, or my
self looked first. The Priest you will maliciously fancy was in his nature most
an Infidel, and doubted most of this Miracle: we therefore proposed to him to
take the surest method of believing, seeing and feeling: He complied with both
admonitions, and having taken a large pinch of snuff upon it, advised us with a
nod, that we should by no means regard it as a Female but as a Male, for by so
doing we should be guilty of less sinfulness.

The Doctor upon inspection differed from this opinion, he would by no means
allow it a miracle, or at most a natural one: He said upon the whole it was a
woman; that whatever might give a handle to think otherwise, was a trifle,
nothing being more common than for a child to be marked with that thing which
the mother longed for.

As for this Party's temper of mind, it appears to be a most even disposition,
partaking of the good qualities of both sexes: for she is neither so
inaccessible as other Ladies, nor is he so impudent as other Gentlemen. Of how
obliging and complaisant a turn appears by this, that he tells the Ladies he
has the Inclinations of a Gentleman, and that she tells the Gentlemen she has
the Tender of a Lady. As a further proof of this affable disposition, he
formerly received visits of the fair sex in their masks, till an impertinent
fellow in a female disguise mingled with a party of ladies, and impudently
overheard their improving Speculations.

Notwithstanding this, she civilly promised at my request, that my two sisters
should be admitted privately whenever you would do her the honor of your
consideration.

How agreeable soever this sight has been to me, I assure you it cannot be so
pleasing as the sight of you in town, and whatever you may see in the country,
I dare affirm no man or woman can show you the like.

I therefore earnestly desire you to make haste to this place; for though indeed
like most other brothers, I should be sorry you were married at my expense, yet
I would by no means, like them, detain you in the country from your admirers,
for you may believe me, no brother in the world ever loved a sister as I do you.

I am, etc.

LETTER V.
Bath, 1714.
YOU are to understand, Madam, that my passion for your fair self and your
sister, has been divided with the most wonderful regularity in the world. Even
from my infancy I have been in love with one after the other of you, week by
week, and my journey to Bath fell out in the three hundred seventy sixth week
of the Reign of my Sovereign Lady Sylvia. At the present writing hereof it is
the three hundred eighty ninth week of the Reign of your most Serene Majesty,
in whose service I was listed some weeks before I beheld your Sister. This
information will account for my writing to either of you hereafter, as either
shall happen to be Queen-Regent at that time.

Pray tell your sister, all the good qualities and virtuous inclinations she
has, never gave me so much pleasure in her conversation, as that one vice of
her obstinacy will give me mortification this month. Ratcliff commands her to
the Bath, and she refuses! indeed if I were in Berkshire I should honor her
for this obstinacy, and magnisy her no less for disobedience than we do the
Barcelonians. But people change with the change of places (as we see of late)
and virtues become vices when they cease to be for one's interest, with me, as
with others.

Yet let me tell her, she will never look so finely while she is upon earth, as
she would here in the water. It is not here as in most other instances, for
those Ladies that would please extremely, must go out of their own element. She
does not make half so good a figure on horseback as Christina Queen of Sweden;
but were she once seen in the Bath, no man would part with her for the best
Mermaid in christendom. You know I have seen you often, I perfectly know how
you look in black and in white; I have experienced the utmost you can do in
colors; but all your movements, all your graceful steps, deserve not half the
glory you might here attain, of a moving and easy behavior in Buckram:
Something between swimming and walking, free enough, and more
modestly-half-naked, than you can appear any where else. You have conquered
enough already by land; show your ambition, and vanquish also by water. We have
no pretty Admirals on these Seas, but must strike sails to your white Flags,
were they once hoisted up. The Buckram I mention is a dress particularly useful
at this time, when we are told the Princess is bringing over the fashion of
German Ruffs: You ought to use your selves to some degrees of stiffness
beforehand. And when our Ladies chins have been tickled awhile with starched
muslin and wire, they may possibly bear the brush of a German beard and whisker.

I could tell you a delightful story of Dr. P. but want room to display it in
all its shining circumstances. He had heard it was an excellent cure for Love,
to kiss the Aunt of the person beloved, who is generally of years and
experience enough to damp the fiercest flame: he tried this course in his
passion, and kissed Mrs. E^ at Mr. D^'s, but he says it will not do, and that
he loves you as much as ever.

Yours, etc.

LETTER VI.
To the same.
IF you ask how the waters agree with me, I must tell you, so very well, that I
question how you and I should agree if we were in a room by our selves? Mrs. T.
has honestly assured me, that but for some whims which she cannot entirely
conquer, she would go and see the world with me in man's clothes. Even you,
Madam, I fancy (if you would not partake in our adventures) would wait our
coming in at the evening with some impatience, and be well enough pleased to
hear 'em by the fireside. That would be better than reading Romances, unless
Lady M. would be our Historian; for as she is married, she has probably leisure
hours in the nightime, to write or do what she will in. What raises these
desires in me, is an acquaintance I am beginning with my Lady Sandwich, who has
all the spirit of the last age, and all the gay experience of a pleasurable
life. It were as scandalous an omission to come to the Bath and not to see my
Lady Sandwich, as it had formerly been to have traveled to Rome without
visiting the Queen of Sweeden. She is, in a word, the best thing this Country
has to boast of; and as she has been all that a woman of spirit could be, so
she still continues that easy and independent creature that a sensible woman
always will be.

I must tell you a truth, which is not however much to my credit. I never
thought so must of your self and your sister, as since I have been fourscore
miles distance from you. In the Forest I looked upon you as good neighbors, at
London as pretty kind of women, but here as divinities, angels, goddesses, or
what you will. In the same manner I never knew at what a rate I valued your
life, till you were upon the point of dying. If Mrs. T. and you will but fall
very sick every season, I shall certainly die for you. Seriously I value you
both so much that I esteem others much the less for your sakes; you have robbed
me of the pleasure of esteeming a thousand pretty qualities in them, by showing
me so many finer in your selves. There are but two things in the world which
could make you indifferent to me, which I believe you are not capable of, I
mean Ill Nature and malice. I have seen enough of you not to overlook any
Frailty you could have, and nothing less than a Vice can make me like you less.
I expect you should discover by my conduct toward you both, that this is true,
and that therefore you should pardon a thousand things in me for that one
disposition. Expect nothing from me but truths and freedom, and I shall always
be thought by you what I always am,

Yours, etc.

LETTER VII.
To the same.
I Returned home as slow and as contemplative after I had parted from you, as
my Lord -- retired from the Court and Glory to his Country seat and Wife, a
week ago. I found here a dismal desponding letter from the son of another great
Courtier who expects the same fate, and who tells me the great one's of the
earth will now take it very kindly of the mean one's, if they will favor them
with a visit by Daylight. With what Joy would they lay down all their schemes
of glory, did they but know you have the generosity to drink their healths once
a day, as soon as they are fallen? Thus the unhappy by the sole merit of their
misfortunes, become the care of heaven and you. I intended to have put this
last into Verse, but in this age of Ingratitude my best friends forsake me, I
mean my rhymes.

I desire Mrs. P^ to stay her stomach with these half hundred Plays, till I can
procure her a Romance big enough to satisfy her great Soul with Adventures. As
for Novels, I fear she can depend upon none from me but That of my Life, which
I am still, as I have been, contriving all possible methods to shorten, for the
greater ease both of my Historian and the Reader. May she believe all the
passion and tenderness expressed in these Romances to be but a faint image of
what I bear her, and may you (who read nothing) take the same truth upon
hearing it from me; you will both injure me very much, if you don't think me a
truer friend than ever any romantic lover, or any imitator of their style
could be.

The days of Beauty are as the days of Greatness, and as long as your Eyes make
their sunshine, all the world are your adorers: I am one of those unambitious
people, who will love you forty years hence, when your eyes begin to twinkle in
a retirement, for your own sakes, and without the vanity which every one now
will take to be thought

Your, etc.

LETTER VIII.
YOU have asked me News a hundred times at the first word you spoke to me,
which some would interpret as if you expected nothing better from my lips: And
truly it is not a sign two Lovers are together, when they can be so impertinent
as to enquire what the world does? All I mean by this is, that either you or I
are not in love with the other: I leave you to guess which of the two is that
stupid and insensible creature, so blind to the other's excellencies and charms?

This then shall be a letter of News; and sure if you did not think me the
humblest creature in the world, you could never imagine a Poet could dwindle to
a brother of Dawks and Dyer, from a rival of Tate and Brady.

The Earl of Oxford has behaved so bravely, that in this act at least he might
seem above Man, if he had not just now voided a Stone to prove him subject to
human infirmities. The utmost weight of affliction from princely power and
popular hatred, were almost worth bearing, for the glory of such a dauntless
conduct as he has shown under it.

You may soon have your wish, to enjoy the gallant sights of armies,
incampments, standards waving over your brother's cornfields, and the pretty
windings of the Thames about M^ stained with the blood of men. Your barbarity,
which I have heard so long exclaimed against in town and country, may have its
fill of destruction. I would not add one circumstance usual in all descriptions
of calamity, that of the many Rapes committed or to be committed, upon those
unfortunate women that delight in war. But God forgive me -- in this martial
age, if I could, I would buy a regiment for your sake and Mrs. P^'s and some
others, whom I have cause to fear no fair means will prevail upon.

Those eyes that care not how much mischief is done, or how great slaughter
committed, so they have but a fine Show; those very-female eyes will be
infinitely delighted with the camp which is speedily to be formed in Hyde-Park.
The tents are carried thither this morning, new regiments, with new cloths and
furniture (far exceeding the late cloth and linen designed by his Grace for
the soldiery) The sight of so many gallant fellows, with all the pomp and glare
of War yet undeform'd by Battle, those Scenes which England has for many years
only beheld on Stages, may possibly invite your curiosity to this place.

Mrs. (...) expects the Pretender at her lodgings by Saturday se'nnight. She
has bought a picture of Madam Maintenon to set her features by against that
time. Three Priests of your acquaintance are very positive, by her interest to
be his Father Confessor.

By our latest accounts from Dukestreet, Westminster, the conversion of T. G.
Esquire is reported in a manner somewhat more particular: That upon the seizure of
his Flanders-Mares, he seemed more than ordinarily disturbed for some hours,
sent for his ghostly father, and resolved to bear his loss like a Christian;
till about the hours of seven or eight the coaches and horses of several of the
Nobility passing by the window toward Hyde-Park, he could no longer endure the
disapointment, but instantly went out, took the Oath of Abjuration, and
recovered his dear Horses which carried him in triumph to the Ring. The poor
distressed Roman Catholics, now unhors'd and un-charioted, cry out with the
Psalmist, some in Chariots and some in Horses, but we will invocate the name of
the Lord.

I am, etc.

LETTER IX.
I Will not describe Bl^ in particular, not to forestall your expectations
before you see it: Only take a short account, which I will hazard my little
credit is no unjust one. I never saw so great a thing with so much littleness
in it: I think the Architect built it entirely in compliance to the taste of
its Owners: For it is the most inhospitable thing imaginable, and the most
selfish: it has, like their own hearts, no room for strangers, and no reception
for any person of superior quality to themselves. There are but two Apartments,
for the Master and Mistress, below; and but two apartments above (very much
inferior to them) in the whole House. When you look upon the outside, you would
think it large enough for a Prince; when you see the inside, it is too little
for a Subject; and has not convenience to lodge a common family. It is a house
of Entries and Passages; among which there are three Vista's through the whole,
very uselessly handsome. There is what might have been a fine Gallery, but
spoiled by two Arches toward the End of it, which take away the sight of
several of the windows. There are two ordinary stair-cases instead of one great
one. The best things within the house, are the Hall, which is indeed noble and
well-proportion'd; and the cellars and offices underground, which are the most
commodious, and the best contrived of the whole. At the top of the Building are
several Cupola's and little Turrets that have but an ill effect, and make the
building look at once finical and heavy. What seems of the best taste, is that
Front toward the gardens, which is not yet loaded with these turrets. The two
Sides of the building are entirely spoiled by two monstrous bow-windows which
stand just in the middle, instead of doors: And as if it were fatal that some
trifling littleness should every where destroy the grandeur, there are in the
chief front two semicircles of a lower structure than the rest, that cut off
the arges, and look as it they were purposely designed to hide a lostier and
nobler piece of building, the top of which appears above them. In a word, the
whole is a most expensive absurdity; and the Duke of S^ gave a true character
of it, when he said, it was a great Quarry of Stones above ground.

We paid a visit to the spring where Rosamond bathed her self, on a hill where
remains only a piece of a wall of the old Palace of Henry the Second. We
toasted her shade in the cold water, not without a thought or two, scarce so
cold as the liquor we drank it in. I dare not tell you what they were, and so
hasten to conclude,

Your, etc.

LETTER X.
YOU cannot be surprised to find him a dull correspondent whom you have known so
long for a dull companion. And though I am pretty sensible, that it I have any
wit, I may as well write to show it, as not; (because any Lady that has once
seen me, will naturally ask, what I can show that is better?) yet I Will content
my self with giving you as plain a history of my pilgrimage, as Purchase
himself, or as John Bunyan could do of his walking through the wilderness of
this world, etc.

First then I went by water to Hampton Court, unattended by all but my own
virtues; which were not of so modest a nature as to keep themselves, or me,
concealed: For I met the Prince with all his Ladies on horseback, coming from
hunting. Mrs. B^ and Mrs. L^ took me into protection (contrary to the laws
against harboring Papists) and gave me a dinner, with something I liked
better, an opportunity of conversation with Mrs. H^. We all agreed that the
life of a Maid of Honor, was of all things the most miserable; and wished that
every woman who envied it had a specimen of it. To eat Westphalia-Ham in a
morning, ride over hedges and ditches on borrowed Hacks, come home in the heat
of the day with a fever, and (what is worse a hundred times) with a red mark in
the forehead from an uneasy hat; all this may qualify them to make excellent
wives for Fox-hunters, and bear abundance of ruddycomplexion'd children. As
soon as they can wipe off the sweat of the day, they must simper an hour and
catch cold, in the Princess's apartment; from thence (as Shakespeare has it) To
dinner, with what appetite they may -- and, after that, 'till midnight, walk,
work, or think, which they please? I can easily believe, no lonehouse in Wales,
with a Mountain and a Rookery, is more contemplative than this Court; and as a
proof of it I need only tell you, Mrs. L^ walked all alone with me three or
four Hours by moonlight, and we met no creature of any Quality but the King,
who gave audience to the Vice-Chamberlain, all alone, under the garden wall.

In short, I heard of no Ball, Assembly, Basset-Table, or any place where two
or three were gathered together, except Madam Kilmansegg's, to which I had the
honor to be invited, and the grace to stay away.

I was heartily tired, and posted to B^ Park; there we had an excellent
Discourse of Quackery: Dr. Shadwell was mentioned with honor. Lady A walked a
whole hour abroad without dying after it, at least in the time I stayed, though
she seemed to be fainting, and had convulsive motions several times in her head.

This day I received a Letter with certain advices were women were to be met
with at Oxford. I defy them and all their works: I love no meat but Ortolans,
and no women but you: though indeed that is no proper comparison, but for fat
Duchess's; for to love You, is as if one should wish to eat Angels, or to drink
Cherubimbroth.

I arrived in the forest by Tuesday noon, having fled from the face (I wish I
could say the horned face) of Moles B^, who dined in the midway thither. I
past the rest of the day in those Woods where I have so often enjoyed a Book
and a Friend. I made a Hymn as I passed through, which ended with a sigh that I
will not tell you the meaning of.

Your Doctor is gone the way of all his patients, and was hard put to it how to
dispose of an estate miserably unweildy, and splendidly unuseful to him. Sir
Samuel Garth says, that for Ratcliffe to leave a Library, was as if a Eunuch
should found a Seraglio. Dr. She lately told a Lady he wondered she could be
alive after him: she made answer; She wondered at it for two reasons, because
Dr. Ratcliffe was dead, and because Dr. She was living. I am

Your, etc.

LETTER XI.
To the Same.
NOthing could have more of that melancholy which once used to please me, than
my last days journey; for after having passed through my favorite Woods in the
forest, with a thousand Reveries of past pleasures: I rid over hanging hills,
whose tops were edged with groves, and whose feet watered with winding rivers,
listening to the falls of cataracts below, and the murmuring of the winds above:
The gloomy verdure of Stonor succeeded to these; and then the shades of the
evening overtook me. The Moon rose in the clearest sky I ever saw, by whose
solemn light I paced on slowly, without company, or any interruption to the
range of my thoughts. About a mile before I reached Oxford, all the bells
tolled in different notes; the clocks of every college answered one another;
and sounded forth (some in a deeper, some in a softer tone) that it was eleven
at night. All this was no ill preparation to the life I have led since, among
those old walls, venerable galleries, stone portico's, studious walks, and
solitary scenes of the University. I wanted nothing but a black gown and a
salary, to be as mere a bookworm as any there. I conformed myself to the
College hours, was rolled up in books, lay in one of the most ancient, dusky
parts of the University, and was as dead to the world as any Hermit of the
desert. If any thing was alive or a wake in me, it was a little vanity; such as
even those good men used to entertain, when the Monks of their own Order
extolled their piety and abstraction. For I found my self received with a sort
of respect, which this idle part of mankind, the learned, pay to their own
species; who are as considerable here, as the busy, the gay, and the ambitious
are in your world.

Indeed I was treated in such a manner, that I could not but sometimes ask my
self in my mind, what College I was founder of, or what Library I had built?
Methinks I do very ill to return to the world again, to leave the only place
where I make a figure, and from seeing my self seated with dignity in the most
conspicuous shelves of a library: put myself into the abject posture of lying
at a Lady's feet in St. James's square.

I will not deny, but that like Alexander, in the midst of my glory I am
wounded, and find myself a mere man. To tell you from whence the dart comes, is
to no purpose, since neither of you will take the tender care to draw it out of
my heart, and suck the poison with your lips.

Here, at my Lord H^'s, I see a creature nearer an angel than a woman, (though a
woman be very near as good as an angel;) I think you have formerly heard me
mention Mrs. T^ as a credit to the Maker of Angels; she is a relation of his
Lordship's, and he gravely proposed her to me for a Wife; being tender of her
Interests, and knowing (what is a shame to Providence) that she is less
indebted to Fortune than I. I told him 'twas what he could never have thought
of, if it had not been his misfortune to be blind, and what I never could think
of, while I had eyes to see both her and myself.

I must not conclude without telling you, that I will do the utmost in the
affair you desire. It would be an inexpressible joy to me if I could serve you,
and I will always do all I can to give my self pleasure. I wish as well for you
as for my self; I am in love with you both as much as I am with my self, for I
find my self most so with all three, when I least suspect it.

I am, etc.

LETTER XII.
To Mrs. Arabella Fermor on her Marriage.
YOU are by this time satisfied how much the tenderness of one man of merit is
to be preferred to the addresses of a thousand. And, by this time, the Gentleman
you have made choice of is sensible, how great is the joy of having all those
charms and good qualities which have pleased so many, now applied to please one
only. It was but just, that the same Virtues which gave you reputation, should
give you happiness; and I can wish you no greater, than that you may receive it
in as high a degree your self, as so much good humor must infallibly give it
to your husband.

It may be expected perhaps, that one who has the title of Poet, should say
something more polite on this occasion: But I am really more a well-wisher to
your felicity, than a celebrater of your beauty. Besides, you are now a married
woman, and in a way to be a great many better things than a fine Lady; such as
an excellent wife, a faithful friend, a tender parent, and at last, as the
consequence of them all, a saint in heaven. You ought now to hear nothing but
that, which was all you ever desired to hear (whatever others may have spoken
to you) I mean Truth: And it is with the utmost that I assure you, no friend
you have can more rejoice in any good that befalls you, is more sincerely
delighted with the prospect of your future happiness, or more unfeignedly
desires a long continuance of it. I beg you will think it but just, that a man
who will certainly be spoken of as your admirer, after he is dead, may have the
happiness to be esteemed while he is living

Your, etc.

LETTER XIII.
THE chief cause I have to repent my leaving the town, is the uncertainty I am
in every day of your Sister's state of health I really expected by every post
to have heard of her recovery, but on the contrary each letter has been a new
awakening to my apprehensions, and I have ever since suffered allarms upon
allarms on her account. No one can be more sensibly touched at this than I; nor
any danger of any I love could affect me with more uneasiness (though as I never
had a sister I cannot be quite so good a judge as you, how far humanity would
carry me) I have felt some weaknesses of a tender kind, which I would not be
free from, and I am glad to find my value for people so rightly placed, as to
perceive them on this occasion.

I cannot be so good a Christian as to be willing (though no less than God should
order it) to resign my own happiness here for here is in another life. I do more
than wish for her safety, for every wish I make I find immediately changed into
a prayer, and a more fervent one than I had learned to make till now.

May her Life be longer and happier than perhaps her self may desire, that is,
as long and as happy as your self can wish: May her Beauty be as great as
possible, that is, as it always was, or as yours is: but whatever ravages a
merciless distemper may commit, I dare promise her boldly, what few (if any) of
her makers of visits and complements dare to do; she shall have one man as much
her admirer as ever. As for your part, Madam, you have me so more than ever,
since I have been a witness to the generous tenderness you have shown upon this
occasion.

Your, etc.

LETTER XIV.
IT is with infinite satisfaction I am made acquainted that your brother will
at last prove your relation, and has entertained such sentiments as become him
in your concern. I have been prepared for this by degrees, having several times
received from Mrs. (...) that which is one of the greatest pleasures, the
knowledge that others entered into my own sentiments concerning you. I ever was
of opinion that you wanted no more to be vindicated than to be known; and like
Truth, could appear no where but you must conquer. As I have often condol'd
with you in your adversities, so I have a right which but few can pretend to,
of congratulating on the prospect of your better fortunes; and I hope for the
future to have the concern I have felt for you overpaid in your felicities.
Though you modestly say the world has left you, yet I verily believe it is coming
to you again as fast as it can: For to give the world its due, it is always
very fond of Merit when it is past its power to oppose it. Therefore if you
should take it into favor again upon its repentance, and continue in it, you
would be so far from leading what is commonly called an unsettled life (and
what you with too much unjust severity call a vagabond Life) that the wise
could only look upon you as a Prince in a progress, who travels to gain the
affections he has not, or to fix those he already has; which he effectually
does wherever he shows himself. But if you are resolved in revenge to rob the
world of so much example as you may afford it, I believe your design will be
vain; for even in a Monastery your devotions cannot carry you so far toward
the next world as to make This lose the sight of you, but you will be like a
Star, that while it is fixed to Heaven shines over all the Earth.

Wheresoever Providence shall dispose of the most valuable thing I know, I
shall ever follow you with my sincerest wishes, and my best thoughts will be
perpetually waiting upon you, when you never hear of me or them. Your own
guardian Angels cannot be more constant, nor more silent. I beg you will never
cease to think me your friend, that you may not be guilty of that which you
never yet knew to commit, an Injustice. As I have hitherto been so in spite of
the world, so hereafter, if it be possible you should ever be more opposed, and
more deserted, I should only be so much the more

Your faithful, etc.

LETTER XV.
I Can say little to recommend the Letters I shall write to you, but that they
will be the most impartial representations of a free heart, and the truest
copies you ever saw, though of a very mean original. Not a feature will be
softened, or any advantageous light employed to make the ugly thing a little
less hideous: but you shall find it in all respects, most horribly like. You
will do me an injustice if you look upon any thing I shall say from this
instant, as a compliment, either to you or my self: Whatever I write will be
the real thought of that hour; and I know you will no more expect it of me to
persevere till death in every sentiment or notion I now set down, than you
would imagine a man's face should never change when once his picture was drawn.

The freedom I shall use in this manner of thinking aloud, may indeed prove me
a fool; but it will prove me one of the best sort of fools, the honest ones.
And since what folly we have, will infallibly buoy up at one time or other in
spite of all our art to keep it down; methinks it is almost foolish to take any
pains to conceal it at all, and almost knavish to do it from those that are our
friends. If Momus's project had taken, of having windows in our breasts, I
should be for carrying it further, and making those windows; casements; that
while a man showed his heart to all the world, he might do something more for
his friends, even give it them, and trust it to their handling. I think I love
you as well as King Herod did Herodias (though I never had so much as one dance
with you) and would as freely give you my heart in a dish, as he did another's
head. But since Jupiter will not have it so, I must be content to show my taste
in life, as I do my taste in painting, by loving to have as little drapery as
possible. Not that I think every body naked altogether so fine a sight as your
self and a few more would be; but because it is good to use people to what they
must be acquainted with; and there will certainly come some day of judgment or
other, to uncover every soul of us. We shall then see that the Prues of this
world owed all their fine figure only to their being strater-lac'd than the
rest; and that they are naturally as arrant Squabs as those that never girded
their loins at all. -- But a particular reason that may engage you to write
your thoughts the more freely to me, is, that I am confident no one knows you
better: for I find, when others express their thoughts of you, they fall very
short of mine, and I know at the same time theirs are such as you would think
sufficient in your favor.

You may easily imagine how desirous I must be of a correspondence with a
person, who had taught me long ago that it was as possible to esteem at first
sight, as to love: and who has since ruined me for all the conversation of one
sex, and almost all the friendship of the other. I am but too sensible, through
your means, that the company of men wants a certain softness to recommend it,
and that of women wants every thing else. How often have I been quietly going
to take possession of that tranquillity and indolence I had so long found in
the country; when one evening of your conversation has spoiled me for a
Solitaire! Books have lost their effect upon me, and I was convinced, since I
saw you, that there is one alive wiser than all the Sages: a plague of female
wisdom! it makes a man ten times more uneasy than his own. What is very
strange, Virtue herself (when you have the dressing her) is too amiable for
one's repose. You might have done a world of good in your time, if you had
allowed half the fine gentlemen who have seen you to have conversed with you;
they would have been strangely bit, while they thought only to fall in love
with a fair Lady, and you had bewitched them with Reason and Virtue (two
Beauties that the very Fops pretend to have no acquaintance with.)

The unhappy distance at which we correspond, removes a great many of those
restrictions and punctilious decorums, that oftentimes in nearer conversation
prejudice truth, to save good breeding. I may now hear of my faults, and you of
your good qualities, without a blush; we converse upon such unfortunate
generous terms, as exclude the regards of fear, shame, or design, in either of
us. And methinks it would be as paltry a part, to impose (even in a single
thought) upon each other in this state of separation, as for Spirits of a
different sphere who have so little intercourse with us, to employ that little
(as some would make us think they do) in putting tricks and delusions upon poor
mortals.

Let me begin then, Madam, by asking you a question, that may enable me to
judge better of my own conduct than most instances of my Life. In what manner
did I behave the last hour I saw you? What degree of concern did I discover
when I felt a misfortune which I hope you will never feel, that of parting from
what one most esteems? for if my parting looked but like that of your common
acquaintance, I am the greatest of all the hypocrites that ever decency made.

I never since pass by your house but with the same sort of melancholy that we
feel upon seeing the Tomb of a friend, which only serves to put us in mind of
what we have lost. I reflect upon the circumstances of your departure, which I
was there a witness of (your behavior in what I may call your last moments)
and I indulge a gloomy kind of pleasure in thinking that those last moments
were given to me. I would fain imagine this was not accidental, but proceeded
from a penetration which I know you have, in finding out the truth of people's
sentiments; and that you were willing, the last man that would have parted from
you, should be that last that did. I really looked upon you just as the friends
of Curtius might have done upon that Hero, at the instant when he was devoting
himself to Glory, and running to be lost out of generosity. I was obliged to
admire your resolution, in as great a degree as I deplored it; and had only to
wish, that Heaven would reward so much Virtue as was to be taken from us, with
all the felicities it could enjoy elsewhere!

I am, etc.

LETTER XVI.
YOU will find me more troublesome than ever Brutus did his Evil Genius; I
shall meet you in more places than one, and often refresh your memory before
you arrive at your Philippi. These shadows of me (my letters) will be haunting
you from time to time, and putting you in mind of the man who has really
suffered very much from you, and whom you have robbed of the most valuable of
his enjoyments, your conversation. The advantage of hearing your sentiments by
discovering mine, was what I always thought a great one, and even worth the
risque I generally run of manifesting my own indiscretion. You then rewarded my
trust in you the moment it was given, for you pleased or informed me the minute
you answered. I must now be contented with more slow returns. However it is some
pleasure, that your thoughts upon Paper will be a more lasting possession to
me, and that I shall no longer have cause to complain of a loss I have so often
regretted, that of any thing you said, which I happened to forget. In earnest,
Madam, if I were to write to you as often as I think of you, it must be every
day of my life. I attend you in spirit through all your ways, I follow you
through every stage in books of travels, and fear for you through whole folio's;
you make me shrink at the past dangers of dead travelers; and if I read of a
delightful prospect, or agreeable place, I hope it yet subsists to please you.
I enquire the roads, the amusements, the company, of every town and country
through which you pass, with as much diligence, as if I were to set out next week
to overtake you. In a word, no one can have you more constantly in mind, not
even your guardian Angel (if you have one) and I am willing to indulge so much
Popery, as to fancy some Being takes care of you who knows your value better
than you do your self: I am willing to think that Heaven never gave so much
self-neglect and resolution to a woman, to occasion her calamity, but am pious
enough to believe those qualities must be intended to conduce to her benefit
and her glory.

Your first short letter only serves to show me you are alive: it puts me in
mind of the first Dove that returned to Noah, and just made him know it had
found no rest abroad.

There is nothing in it that pleases me, but when you tell me you had no
Sea-sickness. I beg your next may give me all the pleasure it can, that is,
tell me any that you receive. You can make no discoveries that will be half so
valuable to me as those of your own mind; Nothing that regards the States or
Kingdoms you pass through, will engage so much of my curiosity or concern, as
what relates to yourself: Your welfare, to say truth, is more at my heart than
that of Christendom.

I am sure I may defend the truth, though perhaps not the virtue, of this
declaration. One is ignorant, or doubtful at best, of the merits of differing
religions and governments: but private virtues one can be sure of. I therefore
know what particular person has desert enough to merit being happier than
others, but not what nation deserves to conquer or oppress another. You will
say, I am not Publick-spirited; let it be so, I may have too many tendernesses,
particularly regards, or narrow views; but at the same time I am certain that
whoever wants these, can never have a Publick-spirit; for (as a friend of mine
says) how is it possible for that man to love twenty thousand people, who never
loved one?

I communicated your letter to Mr. C^ he thinks of you and talks of you as he
ought, I mean as I do, and one always thinks that to be just as it ought. His
health and mine are now so good, that we wish, with all our souls, you were a
witness of it. We never meet but we lament over you: we pay a kind of weekly
rites to your memory, where we strew flowers of rhetoric, and offer such
libations to your name as it would be profane to call Toasting. The Duke of
B^m is sometimes the High Priest of your praises; and upon the whole, I believe
there are as few Men that are not sorry at your departure, as Women that are;
for you know most of your Sex want good sense, and therefore must want
generosity: You have so much of both, that I am sure you pardon them; for one
cannot but forgive whatever one despises For my part I hate a great many women
for your sake; and undervalue all the rest. It Is you are to blame, and may God
revenge it upon you, with all those blessings and earthly prosperities which
the Divines tell us are the cause of our Perdition; for if he makes you happy
in this world, I dare trust your own virtue to do it in the other. I am,

Your, etc.

LETTERS To the Honorable ROBERT DIGBY, From Mr. POPE.
To the Honorable Robert Digby.
Chiswick, Jan. 2, 1717. Dear Sir,
I Had pleased myself sooner in writing to you, but that I have been your
Successor in a Fit of Sickness, and am not yet so much recovered, but that I
have thoughts of using your Asses.
Physicians. They are as grave Persons as any of the Faculty, and (like the
Ancients) carry their own Medicaments about with them. But indeed the Moderns
are such Lovers of Raillery, that nothing is grave enough to escape them. Let
'em laugh, but People will still have their Opinions: As they think our Doctors
Asses to them, we'll think them Asses to our Doctors.

I am glad you are so much in a better State of Health, as to follow me to jest
about it. My Concern, when I heard of your Danger, was so very serious, that I
almost take it ill Dr. Evans should tell you of it, or you mention it. I tell
you fairly, if you and a few more such people were to leave the World, I would
not give Sixpence to stay in it.

I am not so much concerned as to the point, whether you are to live fat or
lean: Most Men of Wit or Honesty are usually decreed to live very lean; so I am
inclined to the opinion that it is decreed you shall: However be comforted, and
reflect that you will make the better Busto for it.

It Is something particular in you, not to be satisfied with sending me your own
Books, but to make your Acquaintance continue the Frolic. Mr. Wharton forced
me to take Gorboduc, which has since done me great Credit with several People,
as it has done Dryden and Oldham some Diskindness, in showing there is as much
difference between their Gorboduc, and this, as between Queen Anne, and King
George. It is truly a Scandal, that Men should write with Contempt of a Piece
which they never once saw, as those two Poets did, who were ignorant even of
the Sex, as well as Sense, of Gorboduc.

Adieu! I am going to forget you: This minute you took up all my mind, the next
I shall think of nothing but the Terms of Agamemnon, and the Recovery of
Briseis. I shall be Achilles's humble Servant these two Months (with the good
Leave of all my Friends.) I have no Ambition so strong at present, as that
noble One of Sir Salathiel Lovel, Recorder of London, to furnish out a decent
and plentiful Execution, of Greeks and Trojans -- It is not to be expressed how
heartily I wish the Death of all Homer's Heroes, one after another. The Lord
preserve me in the Day of Battle, which is just approaching! Dear Sir, join in
your prayers for me, and know me to be always (whether I live, die, or am
damned as a Poet.)

Yours most faithfully.

To the same.
London March 31, 1718. Dear Sir,
TO convince you how little pain I give myself, in corresponding with Men of
good Nature, and good Understanding, you see I omit to answer your Letters till
a time, when another Man would be ashamed to own he had received them. If
therefore you are ever moved on my Account by that Spirit, which I take to be
as familiar to you as a Quotidian Ague, I mean the Spirit of Goodness, pray
never stint it, in any fear of obliging me to a Civility beyond my natural
Inclination: I dare trust you, Sir, not only with my Folly when I write, but
with my Negligence when I do not; and expect equally your Pardon for either.

If I knew how to entertain you through the rest of this Paper, it should be
spotted and diversified with Conceits all over; you should be put out of Breath
with Laughter at each Sentence, and pause at each Period, to look back over how
much Wit you had passed. But I have found by Experience, that People now adays
regard Writing as little as they do Preaching: The most we can hope is to be
heard, just with Decency and Patience, once a Week, by Folks in the Country:
Here in Town we hum over a Piece of fine Writing, and we whistle at a Sermon.
The Stage is the only Place we seem alive at; there indeed we stare, and roar,
and clap Hands for K. George and the Government. As for all other Virtues but
this Loyalty, they are an obsolete Train, so ill-dress'd, that Men, Women, and
Children, hiss 'em out of all good Company. Humility knocks so sneakingly at
the Door, that every Footman out-raps it, and makes it give way to the free
Entrance of Pride, Prodigality, and Vainglory.

My Lady Scudamore, from having rusticated in your Company too long, really
behaves herself scandalously among us: She pretends to open her Eyes for the
Sake of seeing the Sun, and to sleep because it is Night; drinks Tea at nine in
the Morning, and is thought to have said her Prayers before; talks without any
manner of Shame of good Books, and has not seen Cibber's Play of the Non-juror.
I rejoiced the other Day to see a Libel on her Toilette, which gives me some
Hope that you have at least a Taste of Scandal left you, in Defect of all other
Vices.

Upon the whole Matter, I heartily wish you well; but as I cannot entirely
desire the Ruin of all the Joys of this City, so all that remains is to wish
you would keep your Happiness to your selves, that the happiest here may not
die with Envy at a Bliss which they cannot attain to.

I am, etc.

To the same.
May 1, 1720. Dear Sir,
YOU WILL think me very full of my self, when after a long Silence (which however
to say Truth has rather been employed to contemplate of you, than to forget
you) I begin to talk of my own Works. I find it is in the finishing a Book, as
in concluding a Session of Parliament, one always thinks it will be very soon,
and finds it very late. There are many unlooked for Incidents to retard the
clearing any public Account, and so I see it is in mine. I have plagued
myself, like great Ministers, with undertaking too much for one Man, and with a
Desire of doing more than was expected from me, have done less than I ought.

For having designed four very laborious and uncommon sorts of Indexes to
Homer, I Am forced, for want of Time, to publish two only; the Design of which
you will own to be pretty, though far from being fully executed. I Have also been
obliged to leave unfinished in my Desk the Heads of two Essays, one on the
Theology and Morality of Homer, and another on the Oratory of Homer and Virgil.
So they must wait for future Editions, or perish; and (one Way or other, no
great Matter which) dabit Deus his quoque finem.

I think of you every Day, I assure you, even without such good Memorials of
you as your Sisters, with whom I sometimes talk of you, and find it one of the
most agreeable of all Subjects to them. My Lord Digby must be perpetually
remembered by all who ever knew him, or knew his Children. There needs no more
than an Acquaintance with your Family, to make all Elder Sons wish they had
Fathers to their Lives-end.

I cannot touch upon the Subject of filial Love, without putting you in mind of
an old Woman, who has a sincere, hearty, old-fashioned Respect for you, and
constantly blames her Son for not having writ to you oftener, to tell you so.

I very much wish (but what signifies my wishing? my Lady Scudamore wishes,
your Sister's wish) that you were with us, to compare the beautiful Contrast
this Season affords us, of the Town and the Country. No Ideas you could form in
the Winter can make you imagine what Twickenham is (and what your Friend Mr.
Johnson of Twickenham is) in this warmer Season. Our River glitters beneath an
unclouded Sun, at the same time that its Banks retain the Verdure of Showers:
Our Gardens are offering their first Nosegays; our Trees, like new Acquaintance
brought happily together, are stretching their Arms to meet each other, and
growing nearer and nearer every Hour: The Birds are paying their thanksgiving
Songs for the new Habitations I have made 'em: My Building rites high enough to
attract the Eye and Curiosity of the Passenger from the River, where, upon
beholding a Mixture of Beauty and Ruin, he enquires what House is falling, or
what Church is rising? So little taste have our common Tritons of Vitruvius;
whatever Delight the true, unseen, poetical Gods of the River may take, in
reflecting on their Streams my Tuscan Porticos, or Ionic Pilasters.

But (to descend from all this Pomp of Style) the best Account I can give of
what I am building, is, that it will afford me a few pleasant Rooms for such a
Friend as yourself, or a cool Situation for an Hour or two for Lady Scudamore,
when she will do me the Honor (at this Public House on the Road) to drink her
own Cider.

The Moment I am writing this, I am surprised with the account of the Death of
a Friend of mine; which makes all I have here been talking of, a mere Jest!
Buildings, Gardens, Writings, Pleasures, Works, of whatever stuff Man can
raise! none of them (God knows) capable of advantaging a Creature that is
mortal, or of satisfying a Soul that is immortal! Dear Sir, I am

Your most faithful Servant.

To the same
July 20, 1720.
YOUR kind Desire to know the State of my Health had not been unsatisfied of so
long, had not that ill State been the Impediment. Nor should I have seemed an
unconcerned Party in the Joys of your Family, which I heard of from Lady
Scudamore, whose short Eschantillon of a Letter (of a quarter of a Page) I
value as the short Glimpse of a Vision afforded to some devout Hermit; for it
includes (as those Revelations do) a Promise of a better Life in the Elysian
Groves of Cirencester, whither, I could almost say in the Style of a Sermon,
the Lord bring us all, etc. Thither may we tend, by various ways to one
blissful Bower: Thither may Health, Peace, and good Humor, wait upon us as
Associates: Thither may whole Cargoes of Nectar (Liquor of Life and
Longaevity!) by Mortals called Sp^^g-water, be conveyed, and there (as Milton
has it) may we, like the Deities, On Flowers reposed, and with fresh Gerlands
crowned,
Quaff Immortality and Joy --


When I speak of Garlands, I should not forget the green Vestments and Scarfs
which your Sisters promised to make for this Purpose: I expect you too in Green
with a Hunting-horn by your Side and a green Hat, the Model of which you may
take from Osborne's Description of King James the First.

What Words, what Numbers, what Oratory or what Poetry, can suffice, to express
how infinitely I esteem, value, love and desire you all, above all the great
ones, the rich ones, and the vain ones of this Part of the World! above all the
Jews, Jobbers, Bubblers, Subscribers, Projectors, Directors, Governors,
Treasurers, etc. etc. etc. etc. in saecula soeculorum!

Turn your Eyes and Attention from this miserable mercenary Period; and turn
yourself, in a just Contempt of these Sons of Mammon, to the Contemplation of
Books, Gardens, and Marriage. In which I now leave you, and return (Wretch that
I am!) to Water Gruel and Palladio.

I am, etc.

To the same.
Twickenham, Sept. 1. Dear Sir,
YOUR Doctor is going to the Bath, and stays a Fortnight or more: Perhaps you
would be comforted to have a Sight of him, whether you need him or not. I think
him as good a Doctor as any for one that is ill, and a better Doctor than any
for one that is well. He would do admirably for Mrs. Mary Digby: She needed
only to follow his Hints, to be in eternal Business and Amusement of Mind, and
even as active as she could desire. But indeed I fear she would out-walk him:
For (as Dean Swift observed to me the very first time I saw the Doctor) He is a
Man that can do every thing but walk. His Brother, who is lately come into
England, goes also to the Bath; and is a more extraordinary Man than he, worth
your going thither on purpose to know him. The Spirit of Philanthropy, so long
dead to our World, is revived in him: He is a Philosopher all of Fire; so
warmly, nay so wildly in the Right, that he sorces all others about him to be
so too, and draws them into his own Vortex. He is a Star that looks as if it
were all Fire, but is all Banignity, all gentle and beneficial Influence. If
there be other Men in the World that would serve a Friend, yet he is the only
one I believe that could make even an Enemy serve a Friend.

As all human Life is checkered and mixed with Acquisitions and Losses (though
the latter are more certain and irremediable, than the former lasting or
satisfactory) so at the time I have gained the Acquaintance of one worthy Man I
have lost another, a very easy, human, and gentlemanly Neighbor, Mr. Stonor.
It Is certain the Loss of one of this Character puts us naturally upon setting a
greater Value on the sew that are left, though the Degree of our Esteem may be
different. Nothing, says Seneca, is so melancholy a Circumstance in human Life,
or so soon reconciles us to to the Thought of our own Death, as the Reflection
and Prospect of one Friend after another dropping round us! Who would stand
alone, the sole remaining Ruin, the last tottering Column of all the Fabric of
Friendship; once so large, seemingly so strong, and yet so suddenly sunk and
buried?

I am, etc.

To the same.
Saturday Night. Dear Sir,
I Have belief enough in the goodness of your whole family, to think you will
all be pleased that I am arrived in saftey at Twickenham; though it is a sort of
Earnest, that you will be troubled again with me at Sherborne, or Coleshill;
for however I may like One of your places, it may be in that as in liking One
of your family; when one secs the rest, one likes them all. Pray make my
services acceptable to them; I wish them all the happiness they may want, and
the continuance of all the happiness they have; and I take the latter to
comprize a great deal more than the former. I must separate Lady Scudamore from
you, as I fear she will do herself, before this letter reaches you: So I wish
her a good journey, and I hope one day to try if she lives as well as you do;
though I much question if she can live as quietly: I suspect the Bells will be
ringing at her arrival, and on her own and Miss Scudamore's birthdays, and that
all the Clergy in the County come to pay respects; both the Clergy and their
Bells expecting from her. and from the young Lady, further business, and
further employment. Besides all this, there dwells on the one side of her the
Lord Coningsby, and on the other Mr. W^ Yet I shall, when the Days and the
Years come about, adventure upon all this for her sake.

I beg my Lord Digby to think me a better Man than to content myself with
thanking him in the common way. I am in as sincere a sense of the word, His
Servant, as you are his Son, or he your Father.

I must in my turn insist upon hearing how my last fellow-travellers got home
from Clarendon, and desire Mr. Philips to remember me in his Cider, and to tell
Mr. W^ that I am dead and buried.

I wish the young Ladies, whom I almost robbed of their good Name, a better
Name in return (even that very name to each of them, which they like best for
the sake of the Man that bears it.)

Your ever faithful and affectionate Servant.

To the same.
1722.
YOUR making a sort of Apology for your not writing, is a very genteel reproof
to me. I know I was to blame, but I know I did not intend to be so, and (what
is the happiest Knowledge in the World) I know you will forgive me: For sure
nothing is more satisfactory than to be certain of such a Friend as will
overlook one's Failings, since every such instance is a Conviction of his
Kindness.

If I am all my life to dwell in Intentions, and never to rise to Actions, I
have but too much need of that gentle disposition which I experience in you.
But I hope better things of myself, and fully purpose to make you a visit this
summer at Sherbourn. I Am told you are all upon removal very speedily, and that
Mrs. Mary Digly talks in a Letter to Lady Scudamore, of seeing my Lord
Bathurst's Wood in her way. How much I wish to be her Guide through that
enchanted Forest, is not to be expressed: I look upon myself as the Magician
appropriated to the place, without whom no mortal can penetrate into the
Recesses of those sacred Shades. I could pass whole Days, in only describing to
her the future, and as yet visionary Beauties, that are to rise in those
Scenes: The Palace that is to be built, the Pavillions that are to glitter, the
Colonnades that are to adorn them: Nay more, the meeting of the Thames and the
Severn, which (when the noble Owner has finer Dreams than ordinary) are to be
led into each other's Embraces through secret Caverns of not above twelve or
fifteen Miles, till they rise and openly celebrate their Marriage in the midst
of an immense Amphitheatre, which is to be the Admiration of Posterity a
hundred Years hence. But till the destined time shall arrive that is to
manifest these Wonders, Mrs. Digly must content herself with seeing what is at
present no more than the finest Wood in England.

The Objects that attract this part of the world, are of a quite different
Nature. Women of Quality are all turned Followers of the Camp in Hyde-Park this
Year, whither all the Town resort to magnificent Entertainments given by the
Officers, etc. The Seythian Ladies that dwelt in the Wagons of War, were not
more closely attached to the Luggage. The Matrons, like those of Sparta, attend
their Sons to the Field, to be the Witnesses of their glorious Deeds; and the
Maidens with all their Charms displayed, provoke the Spirit of the Soldiers:
Tea and Coffee supply the place of Lacedemonian black Broth. This camp seems
crowded with perpetual Victory, for every Sun that rises in the Thunder of
Cannon, sets in the Music of Violins. Nothing is yet wanting but the constant
presence of the Princess, to represent the Matter Exercitus.

At Twickenham the World goes otherwise. There are certain old People who take
up all my time, and will hardly allow me to keep any other Company. They were
introduced here by a Man of their own sort, who has made me perfectly rude to
all my Contemporaries, and will not so much as suffer me to look upon 'em. The
Person I complain of is the Bishop of Rochester. Yet he allows me (form
something he has heard of your Character and that of your Family, as if you
were of the old Sect of Moralists) to write three or four sides of Paper to
you, and to tell you (what these sort of People never tell but with Truth, and
religious Sincerity) that I am, and ever will be,

Dear SIR, Yours, etc.

To the same.
THE same reason that hindered your writing, hindered mine, the pleasing
Expectation to see you in Town. Indeed since the willing Confinement I have
lain under here with my Mother, (whom it is natural and reasonable I should
rejoice with as well as grieve) I could the better bear your Absense from
London, for I could hardly have seen you there; and it would not have been
quite reasonable to have drawn you to a sick Room hither from the first
Embraces of your Friends. My Mother is now (I thank God) wondersully recovered,
though not so much as yet to venture out of her Chamber, yet enough to enjoy a
few particular Friends, when they have the good Nature to look upon her. I may
recommend to you the Room we sit in, upon one (and that a favorite) Account,
that it is the very warmest in the House: We and our Fires will equally smile
upon your Face, There is a Persian Proverb that says, I think very prettily,
The Conversation of a Friend brightens the Eyes. This I take to be a Splendour
still more agreeable than the Fires you so delightfully describe.

That you may long enjoy your own Fireside, in the metaphorical Sense, that
is, all those of your Family who make it pleasing to sit and spend whole wintry
Months together, (a far more rational Delight, and better selt by an honest
Heart than all the glaring Entertainments, numerous Lights and false Splendors,
of an Assembly of empty Heads, aching Hearts, and false Faces) This is my
sincere Wish to you and yours.

You say you propose much Pleasure in seeing some few Faces about Town of my
Acquaintance, I guess you mean Mrs. Howara's and Mrs. Blount's. And I assure
you, you ought to take as much Pleasure in their Hearts, if they are what they
sometimes express with regard to you.

Believe me, dear Sir, to you all, a very faithful Servant.

To the same.
October. 10. Dear Sir,
I Was upon the point of taking a much greater Journey than to Bermudas, even
to That undiscovered Country, from whose Bourn no Traveller returns!

A Fever carried me on the high Gallop toward it for six or seven days -- But
here you have me now, and that is all I shall say of it: Since which time an
impertinent Lameness kept me at home twice as long; as if Fate should say
(after the other dangerons Illness) "You shall neither go into the other World,
nor any where you like in this." Else who knows but I had been at Hom-lacy?

I conspire in your Sentiments, emulate your Pleasures, wish for your Company.
You are all of one Heart and one Soul, as was said of the Primitive Christians:
It Is like the Kingdom of the Just upon Earth; not a wicked Wretch to interrupt
you; but a Set of trv'd, experienced Friends, and fellow Comforters, who have
seen Evil Men and Evil Days, and have by a superior Rectitude of Heart set
yourselves above them, and reap your Reward. Why will you ever, of your own
accord, end such a Millenary Year in London? transmigrate (if I may so call it)
into other Creatures, in that Scene of folly Militant, when you may reign for
ever at Hom-lacy in Sense and Reason Triumphant? I appeal to a Third Lady in
your Family, whom I take to be the most Innocent, and the least warped by idle
Fashion and Custom, of you all; I appeal to Her, if you are not every Soul of
you better People, better Companions, and happier, where you are? I desire her
Opinion under her Hand in your next Letter, I mean Miss Scudamore's Afterward
Duchess of Beaufort. at this time about (...) Years old.
-- I Am confident if she would, or durst speak her Sense, and employ that
Reasoning which God has given her, to infuse more thoughtfulness into you all;
those Arguments could not fail to put you to the blush, and keep you out of
Town, like People sensible of your own Felicities. I am not without hopes, if
She can detain a Parliament Man and a Lady of Quality from the World one
Winter, that I may come upon you with such irresistible Arguments another Year,
as may carry you all with me to Bermudas, About this time the Rev. Dean Berkly
conceived his Project of erecting a Settlement in Bermuda for the Propagation
of the Christian Faith, and of Sciences in America.
the Seat of all Earthly Happiness, and the new Jerusalem of the Righteous.

Don't talk of the decay of the Year, the Season is good where the People are
so: It Is the best Time of the Year for a Painter; there is more Variety of
Colors in the Leaves, the Prospects begin to open, through the thinner Woods,
over the Valleys; and through the high Canopies of Trees to the higher Arch of
Heaven: The Dews of the Morning impearl every Thorn, and scatter Diamonds on
the verdant Mantle of the Earth. The Frosts are fresh and wholesome: What would
ye have? The Moon shines too, though not for Lovers these cold Nights, but for
Astronomers.

Have ye not Reflecting Telescopes These Instruments were just then brought to
perfection.
whereby ye may innocently magnify her Spots and Blemishes? Content yourselves
with them, and do not come to a Place where your own Eyes become Reflecting
Telescopes, and where those of all others are equally such upon their
Neighbors. Stay You at least (for what I Have said before relates only to the
Ladies, don't imagine I Will write about any Eyes but theirs) Stay, I say, from
that idle, busy-looking Sanhedrin, where Wisdom or No Wisdom is the Eternal
Debate, not (as it lately was in Ireland) an Accidental one.

If after all, you will despise good Advice, and resolve to come to London;
here you will find me, doing just the things I should not, living where I
should not, and as worldly, as idle, in a Word as much an Anti-Bermudanist as
any body. Dear Sir, make the Ladies know I am their Servant, You know I am

Yours, etc.

To the Same.
Aug. 12.
I Have been above a month strolling about in Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire,
from Garden to Garden, but still returning to Lord Cobham's with fresh
Satisfaction. I should be sorry to see my Lady Scudamore's, till it has had the
full Advantage of Lord Bathurst's Improvements; and then I will expect
something like the waters of Riskins, and the woods of Oakley together, which
(without flattery) would be at least as good as any thing in our World: For as
to the hanging Gardens of Babylon, the Paradise of Cyrus, and the Sharawaggis
of of China, I have little or no Ideas of 'em, but I dare say Lord B^t has,
because they were certainly both very Great, and very Wild. I hope Mrs. Mary
Digby is quite tired of his Lordship's Extravagante Bergerie; and that she is
just now sitting, or rather inclining, on a Bank, fatigued with over much
Dancing and Singing at his unwearied Request and Instigation. I know your love
of Ease so well, that you might be in danger of being too Quiet to enjoy Quiet,
and too Philosophical to be a Philosopher; were it not for the Ferment Lord B.
will put you into. One of his Lordship's Maxims is, that a total Abstinence
from Intemperance or Business, is no more Philosophy, than a total Composition
of the Senses is Repose; one must Feel enough of its Contrary to have a Relish
of either. But after all, let your Temper work, and be as sedate and
contemplative as you will, I Will engage you shall be fit for his Lordship when
you come to Town in the Winter. Folly will laugh you into all the Customs of
the Company, here; nothing will be able to prevent your Conversion to her, but
Indisposition, which I hope will be far from you. I am telling the worst that
can come of you; for as to Vice, you are safe, but Folly is many an honest
Man's, nay every good-humored Man's Lot: Nay, it is the Seasoning of Life; and
Fools (in one Sense) are the Salt of the Earth; a little is excellent, though
indeed a whole Mouthful is justly called the Devil.

So much for your Diversions next Winter, and for mine. I envy you much more at
present, than I shall then; for if there be on Earth an Image of Paradise, it
is in such perfect Union and Society as you all possess. I would have my
innocent Envies and Wishes of your State known you all, which is far better
than making you Compliments, for it is inward Approbation and Esteem. My Lord
Digby has in me a sincere Servant, or would have, were there any occasion for
me to manifest it.

To the same.
Sept. 10, 1724. Dear Sir,
I AM glad your Travels delighted you, improve you I am sure they could not;
you are not so much a Youth as that, though you run about with a King of sixteen,
and (what makes him still more a Child) a King of Frenchmen. My own time has
been more melancholy, spent in an Attendance upon Death, which has seized one
of our Family, my poor old Nurse. My Mother is something better, though at her
advanced Age every Day is a Climacteric. There was joined to this an
Indisposition of my own, which I ought to look upon as a slight one, compared
with my Mother's (because my Life is not of half the Consequence to any Body,
that here is is to me). All these Incidents have hindered my more speedy Reply to
your obliging Letter.

The Article you enquire of, is of as little Concern to me as you desire it
should; namely the Railing Papers about the Odyssey. If the Book has Merit,
(and since you like it, it must) it will extinguish all such nasty Scandal, as
the Sun puts an end to stinks, merely by coming out.

I wish I had nothing to trouble me more; an honest Mind is not in the power of
any dishonest one: To break it is Peace, there must be some Guilt or
Consciousness, which is inconsistent with it is own Principles. Not but Malice
and Injustice have their Day, like some poor short-lived Vermin, that die of
shooting their own Stings. Falsehood is Folly (says Homer), and Liars and
Calumniators at last hurt none but themselves, even in this World: In the next,
it is Charity to say, God have Mercy on them! They were the Devil's Vicegerents
upon Earth, who is the Father of Lies, and I fear has a Right to dispose of his
Children.

I Have had an Occasion to make these Reflections of late, more justly than from
any thing that concerns my Writings, for it is one that concerns my Morals, and
(which I ought to be as tender of as my own) the good Character of another very
innocent Person, who I Am sure shares your Friendship no less than I do. *****
No Creature has better natural Dispositions, or would act more rightly, or
reasonably, in every Duty, did she act by herself, or from herself: But you
know it is the Misfortune of that Family to be governed like a Ship, I mean the
Head guided by the Tail, and that by every Wind that blows in it.

To the same.
December. 28, 1724. Dear Sir,
IT is now the Season to wish you a good End of one Year, and a happy Beginning
of another: but both these you know how to make yourself, by only continuing
such a Life as you have been long accustomed to lead. As for Good Works, they
are things I dare not name, either to those that do them, or to those that do
them not; the first are too modest, and the latter too selfish, to bear the
mention of what are become either too old fashioned or too private, to
constitute any Part of the Vanity or Reputation of the present Age. However, it
were to be wished People would now and then look upon Good Works as they do
upon old Wardrobes, merely in case any of 'em should by chance come into
Fashion again; as ancient Fardingales revive in modern Hoop'd Petticoats (which
may be properly compared to Charities, as they cover a Multitude of Sins).

They tell me that at (...) certain antiquated Charities, and obsolete
Devotions are yet subsisting: That a thing called Christian Cheerfulness (not
incompatible with Christmas Pyes and Plumb-broth) whereof frequent is the
mention in old Sermons and Almanacks, is really kept alive and in Practice:
That feeding the Hungry, and giving Alms to the Poor, do yet make a Part of
good Housekeeping, in a Latitude not more remote from London than fourscore
Miles: And lastly, that Prayers and Roast-beef actually make some People as
happy, as a Whore and a Bottle. But here in Town I assure you, Men, Women, and
Children, I have done with these things. Charity not only begins, but ends, at
home. Instead of the four Cardinal Virtues, now reign four Princely ones: We
have Cunning for Prudence, Rapine for Justice, Time-serving for Fortitude, and
Luxury for Temperance. Whatever you may fancy where you live in a State of
Ignorance, and see nothing but Quiet, Religion, and Good Humor, the Case is
just as I tell you where People understand the World, and know how to live with
Credit and Glory.

I wish that Heaven would open the Eyes of Men, and make 'em sensible which of
these is right: Whether upon a due Conviction, we are to quit Faction, and
Gaming, and High-feeding and Whoring, and take to your Country Way? or you to
leave Prayers, and Almsgiving, and Reading and Exercise, and come into our
Measures? I wish (I say) that this Matter were as clear to all Men, as it is to

Your Affectionate, etc.

LETTERS TO EDWARD BLOUNT, Esquire From 1715 to 1725.
To EDWARD BLOUNT, Esquire
Jan. 21, 1715/16. Dear Sir,
I Know of nothing that will be so Interessing to you at present, as some
circumstances of the last Act of that eminent Comic Poet, and our Friend,
Wycherley. He had often told me, as I doubt not he did all his Acquaintance,
that he would marry as soon as his life was despaired of. Accordingly a few
days before his Death he underwent the Ceremony; and joined together those two
Sacraments which wise Men say should be the last we receive; for if you
observe, Matrimony is placed after Extreme Unction in our Catechism, as a kind
of Hint of the Order of Time in which they are to be taken. The old Man then
lay down, satisfied in the Conscience of having, by this one Act paid his just
Debts, obliged a Woman who (he was told) had Merit, and shown a heroic
resentment of the ill usage of his next Heir. Some hundred pounds which he had
with the Lady, discharged those Debts; a Jointure of four hundred a year made
her a Recompense; and the Nephew he left to comfort himself as well as he
could, with the miserable Remains of a mortgaged Estate. I saw our Friend twice
after this was done, less peevish in his Sickness than he used to be in his
Health; neither much afraid of dying, nor (which in him had been more likely)
much ashamed of marrying. The Evening before he expired, he called his young
Wife to the bedside, and earnestly entreated her not to deny him one request,
the last he should make. Upon her Assurances of consenting to it, he told her,
My Dear, it is only this; that you will never marry an old Man again. I cannot
help remarking, that Sickness which often destroys both Wit and Wisdom, yet
seldom has power to remove that Talent which we call Humor: Mr Wycherley
showed his, even in this last Compliment; though I think his request a little
hard; for why should he bar her from doubling her Jointure on the same easy
Terms?

So trivial as these Circumstances are, I should not be displeased myself to
know such Trifles, when they concern or characterise any eminent Person. The
wisest and wittiest of Men are seldom wiser or wittier than others in these
sober Moments. At least, our Friend ended much in the Character he had lived
in: And Horace's Rule for a Play, may as well be applied to him as a
Playwright. -- servetur ad imum
Qualis ab inceptu processerit, and sibi constet.


I am, etc.

To the same.
Feb. 10, 1715/16. Dear Sir,
I AM just returned from the Country, whither Mr Row accompanied me, and
passed a Week in the Forest. I need not tell you how much a Man of his Turn
entertained me; but I must acquaint you there is a Vivacity and Gaiety of
Disposition almost peculiar to him, which make it impossible to part from him
without that uneasiness which generally succeeds all our pleasures. I have been
just taking a solitary walk by moonshine, full of reflections on the transitory
nature of all human delights; and giving my Thoughts a loose in the
contemplation of those Satisfactions which probably we may hereafter taste in
the Company of separate Spirits, when we shall range the walks above, and
perhaps gaze on this World at as vast a distance as we now do on those Worlds.
The pleasures we are to enjoy in that Conversation must undoubtedly be of a
nobler kind, and (not unlikely) may proceed from the Discoveries each shall
communicate to another, of God and of Nature; for the Happiness of Minds can
surely be nothing but Knowledge.

The highest Gratification we receive from Company is Mirth, which at the best
is but a fluttering unquiet Motion, that beats about the breast for a few
moments, and after leaves it void and empty.

Keeping good Company, even the best, is but a less shameful Art of losing Time

What we here call Science and Study, are little better: The greater number of
Arts to which we apply ourselves are mere groping in the Dark; and even the
search of our most important Concerns in a future being, is but a needless,
anxious, and uncertain haste to be knowing, sooner than we can, what without
all this solicitude we shall know a little later. We are but Curious
Impertinents in the case of Futurity. It Is not our business to be guessing what
the State of Souls shall be, but to be doing what may make our own State happy;
We cannot be Knowing, but we can be Virtuous.

If this be my Notion of a great part of that high Science, Divinity; you will
be so civil as to imagine I lay no mighty Stress upon the rest. Even of my
darling Poetry I really make no other use, than Horses of the Bells that gingle
about their ears (though now and then they toss their Heads as if they were proud
of 'em) only to jogg on a little more merrily.

Your Observations on the narrow conceptions of Mankind in the point of
Friendship, confirm me in what I was so fortunate as at my first knowledge of
you to hope, and since so amply to experience. Let me take so much decent Pride
and Dignity upon me, as to tell you, that but for Opinions like these, which I
discovered in your Mind, I had never made the Trial I have done; which has
succeeded so much to mine, and I believe not less to your Satisfaction: For if
I know you right, your Pleasure is greater in obliging me, than I can feel on
my part, till it falls in my power to oblige you.

Your Remark, that the Variety of opinion in Politics or Religion is often
rather a Gratification than Objection, to people who have Sense enough to
consider the beautiful order of Nature in her Variations; makes me think you
have not construed Joannes Secundus wrong, in the Verse which precedes that
which you quote; Been nota Fides, as I take it, does no way signify the Roman
Catholic Religion, though Secundus was of it. I think it was generous thought,
and one that flowed from an exalted mind, that it was not improbable but God
might be delighted with the various methods of worshipping him, which divided
the whole World. I am pretty sure You and I should no more make good
Inquisitors to the modern Tyrants in Faith, than we could have been qualified
for Lictors to Procrustes, when he converted refractory Members with the Rack.
In a word, I can only repeat to you what I think I have formerly said; that I
as little fear God will damn a Man who has Charity, as I hope that any Priest
can save him without it.

I am, etc.

To the same.
March 20, 1715-16. Dear Sir,
I Find that a real Concern is not only a Hindrance to Speaking, but to Writing
too: The more time we give our selves to think over one's own, or a Friend's
unhappiness, the more unable we grow to express the grief that proceeds from
it. It is as natural to delay a Letter, at such a Season as this, as to retard
a melancholy Visit to a Person one cannot relieve. One is ashamed in that
Circumstance, to pretend to entertain people with trifling, insignificant
affectations of Sorrow on the one hand, or unseasonable and forced Gayeties on
the other. It Is a kind of profanation of things sacred; to treat so solemn a
matter as a generous voluntary Suffering, with Compliments or Heroic
Gallantries. Such a Mind as yours has no need of being spirited up into
Honor, or like a weak Woman, praised into an opinion of its own Virtue. It Is
enough to do and suffer what we ought; and Men should know, that the noble
power of Suffering bravely is as far above that of Enterprizing greatly, as an
unblemished Conscience and inflexible Resolution are above an accidental Flow
of Spirits, or a sudden Tide of Blood. If the whole Religious Business of
Mankind be included in Resignation to our Maker, and Charity to our
Fellow Creatures; there are now some People who give us the Opportunity of
affording as bright an Example in practicing the one, as themselves have given
an infamous Instance of the Violation of the other. Whoever is really brave,
has always this Comfort when he is oppressed, that he knows himself to be
superior to those who injure him: For the greatest Power on Earth can no sooner
do him that Injury, but the brave Man can make himself greater by forgiving it.

If it were generous to seek for alleviating Consolations in a Calamity of so
much Glory, one might say that to be ruined thus in the Gross, with a whole
People, is but like perishing in the General Conflagration, where nothing we
can value is left behind us.

Methinks in our present Condition, the most heroic thing we are left capable
of doing, is to endeavor to lighten each other's Load, and (oppressed as we are)
to succor such as are yet more oppressed. If there are too many who cannot be
assisted but by what we cannot give, our Money; there are yet others who may be
relieved by our Counsel, by our Countenance, and even by our Cheerfulness. The
Misfortunes of private Families, the Misunderstandings of People whom
Distresses make suspicious, the Coldnesses of Relations whom Change of Religion
may dis unite, or the Necessities of halfruin'd Estates render unkind to each
other; these at least may be softened in some degrees, by a general
well-manag'd Humanity among ourselves, if all those who have your Principles of
Belief, had also your Sense and Conduct. But indeed most of 'em have given
lamentable This was written in the Year of the Affair of Preston.
proofs of the contrary; and it is to be apprehended that they who want Sense,
are only religious through Weakness, and good-natured through Shame: These are
narrow-minded Creatures that never deal in Essentials; their Faith never looks
beyond Ceremonials, nor their Charity beyond Relations. As poor as I am, I
would gladly relieve any distressed, conscientious French Refugee at this
instant: what must my Concern then be, when I perceive so many Anxieties now
tearing those Hearts which I have desired a place in, and Clouds of Melancholy
rising on those Faces which I have long looked upon with Affection? I begin
already to feel both what some apprehend, and what others are yet too stupid to
apprehend. I grieve with the Old, for so many additional Inconveniences, and
Chagrins, more than their small Remain of Life seemed destined to undergo; and
with the Young, for so many of those Gayeties and Pleasures (the Portion of
Youth) which they will by this means be deprived of. This brings into my mind
one or other of those I love best, and among them the Widow and Fatherless,
late of (...) As I am certain no People living had an earlier and truer Sense
of others Misfortunes, or a more generous Resignation as to what might be their
own; so I earnestly wish, that whatever part they must bear may be rendered as
supportable to them, as it is in the power of any Friend to make it.

But I know you have prevented me in this Thought, as you always will in any
thing that is good, or generous: I find by a Letter of your Lady's (which I have
seen) that their Ease and Tranquillity is part of your Care. I believe there is
some Fatality in it, that you should always, from time to time, be doing those
particular things that make me enamored of you.

I write this from Windsor Forest, of which I am come to take my last look. We
here bid our Neighbors adieu, much as those who go to be hanged do their
Fellow Prisoners, who are condemned to follow them a few weeks after. I parted
from honest Mr. D^ with tenderness; and from old Sir William Trumball as from a
venerable Prophet, foretelling with lifted hands the Miseries to come, from
which he is just going to be removed himself.

Perhaps, now I have learnt so far as -- Nos Dulcia linquimus arva,
My next Lesson may be Nos Patriam fugimus --


Let that, and all else be as Heaven pleases! I have provided just enough to
keep me a Man of Honor. I believe you and I shall never be ashamed of each
other. I know I wish my Country well; and if it undoes me, it shall not make me
wish it otherwise.

To the same.
June 22. 1716. Dear Sir,
IF a Regard both to Public and Private Affairs may plead a lawful Excuse in
behalf of a negligent Correspondent, I have really a very good Title to it: I
cannot say whether it is a Felicity or Unhappiness, that I am obliged at this
time to give up my whole Application to Homer; when without that Employment, my
Thoughts must turn upon what is less agreeable, the Violence, Madness and
Resentment of modern War-makers, which are likely to prove (to some People at
least) more fatal, than the same Qualities in Achilles did to his unfortunate
Countrymen.

Though the change of my Scene of Life, from Windsor Forest to the Side of the
Thames, be one of the grand Aera's of my days, and may be called a notable
Period in so inconsiderable a History; yet you can scarce imagine any Hero
passing from one Stage of Life to another, with so much Tranquillity, so easy a
Transition, and so laudable a Behavior. I am become so truly a Citizen of the
World (according to Plato's Expression) that I look with equal Indifference on
what I have lost, and on what I have gained. The Times and Amusements past are
not more like a Dream to me, than those which are present: I lie in a
refreshing kind of Inaction, and have one Comfort at least from Obscurity, that
the Darkness helps me to sleep the better. I now and then reflect upon the
Enjoyment of my Friends, whom I fancy I remember much as separate Spirits do
us, at tender Intervals, neither interrupting their own Employments, nor
altogether careless of ours: but in general constantly wishing us well, and
hoping to have us one day in their Company.

To grow indifferent to the World is to grow Philosophical, or Religious;
(whichsoever of those Turns we chance to take) and indeed the World is such a
thing as one that thinks pretty much, must either laugh at, or be angry with:
But if we laugh at it, they say we are proud; and if we are angry with it, they
say we are ill-natured. So the most politic Way is to seem always better
pleased than one can be, greater Admirers, greater Lovers, and in short greater
Fools, than we really are: So shall we live comfortably with our Families,
quietly with our Neighbors, favored by our Masters, and happy with our
Mistresses. I have filled my Paper, and so adieu.

To the same.
Sept. 8. 1717. Dear Sir,
I Think your leaving England was like a good Man's leaving the World, with the
blessed Conscience of having acted well in it: And I hope you have received
your Reward, in being happy where you are. I believe, in the Religious Country
you now inhabit, you will be better pleased to find I consider you in this light,
than if I compared you to those Greeks and Romans, whose Constancy in suffering
Pain, and whose Resolution in pursuit of a generous End, you would rather
imitate than boast of.

But I had a melancholy hint the other day, as if you were yet a Martyr to the
fatigue your Virtue made you undergo on this side the Water. I beg if your
health be restored to you, not to deny me the Joy of knowing it: Your
endeavors of Service and good Advices to the poor Papists, put me in mind of
Noah's preaching forty years to those folks that were to be drowned at last. At
the worst I heartily wish your Ark may find an Ararat, and the Wife and Family,
(the hopes of the good Patriarch) land safely after the Deluge upon the Shore
of Totness.

If I durst mix profane with sacred History, I would cheer you with the old
Tale of Brutus the wandering Trojan, who found on that very Coast the happy End
of his Peregrinations and Adventures.

I have very lately read Jeffery of Monmouth (to whom your Cornwall is not a
little beholden) in the Translation of a Clergyman in my neighborhood. The
poor Man is highly concerned to vindicate Jeffery's veracity as an Historian;
and tole me he was perfectly astonished, we of the Roman Communion could doubt
of the Legends of his Giants, while we believed those of our Saints? I am
forced to make a fair Composition with him; and, by crediting some of the
Wonders of Corinaeus and Gogmagog, have brought him so far already, that he
speaks respectfully of St. Christopher's carrying Christ, and the Resuscitation
of St. Nicholas Tolentine's Chickens. Thus we proceed apace in converting each
other from all manner of Infidelity.

Ajax and Hector are no more, compared to Corinaeus and Arthur, than the
Guelphs and Ghibellines were to the Mohocks of everdreadful memory. This
amazing Writer has made me lay aside Homer for a Week, and when I take him up
again, I shall be very well prepared to translate with belief and reverence the
Speech of Achilles's Horse.

You Will excuse all this trifling, or any thing else which prevents a Sheet full
of Compliment: And believe there is nothing more true (even more true than any
thing in Jeffery is false) than that I have a constant Affection for you, and
am, etc.

P. S. I know you will take part in rejoicing for the Victory of Prince Eugene
over the Turks, in the Zeal you bear to the Christian Interest, though your
Cousin of Oxford (with whom I dined yesterday) says, there is no other
difference in the Christians beating the Turks, or the Turks beating the
Christians, than whether the Emperor shall first declare War against Spain, or
Spain declare it against the Emperor. I must add another Apothegm of the same
noble Earl; it was the Saying of a Politic Prince, "Time and he would get the
better of any two others". To which Lord Oxford made this Answer, Time and I
against any two?
Chance and I against Time and you.


To the same.
Nov. 27. 1717. Dear Sir,
THE Question you proposed to me is what at present I am the most unfit Man in
the world to answer, by my Loss of one of the best of Fathers.

He had lived in such a Course of Temperance as was enough to make the longest
Life agreeable to him, and in such a Course of Piety as sufficed to make the
most sudden Death so also. Sudden indeed it was: However, I heartily beg of God
to give me such an one, provided I can lead such a Life. I leave him to the
Mercy of God, and to the Piety of a Religion that extends beyond the Grave: Si
qua est ea cura, etc.

He has left me to the ticklish Management of a narrow Fortune, where every
false Step is dangerous. My Mother is in that dispirited State of Resignation,
which is the effect of long Life, and the Loss of what is dear to us. We are
really each of us in want of a Friend, of such an humane Turn as yourself, to
make almost any thing desirable to us. I feel your Absence more than ever, at
the same time I can less express my Regards to you than ever; and shall make
this, which is the most sincere Letter I ever writ to you, the shortest and
faintest perhaps of any you have received. It Is enough if you reflect, that
barely to remember any Person, when one's Mind is taken up with a sensible
Sorrow, is a great degree of Friendship. I can say no more but that I love you,
and all that are yours; and that I wish it may be very long before any of yours
shall feel for you what I now feel for my Father. Adieu.

To the same.
Rentcomb in Gloucestershire, Oct. 3. 1721. Dear Sir,
YOUR kind Letter has overtaken me here, for I have been in and about this
Country ever since your departure. I am pleased to date this from a place so
well known to Mrs. Blount, where I write as if I were dictated by her
Ancestors, whose faces are all upon me. I fear none so much as Sir Christopher
Guise, who being in his Shirt, seems as ready to combat me, as her own Sir
John was to demolish Duke Lancastere. I dare say your Lady will recollect his
Figure. I looked upon the Mansion, Walls, and Terraces; the Plantations, and
Slopes, which Nature has made to command a variety of Valleys and rising Woods;
with a Veneration mixed with a Pleasure, that represented her to me in those
puerile Amusements, which engaged her so many Years ago in this place: I
fancied I saw her sober over a Sampler, or gay over a jointed Baby. I dare say
she did one thing more, even in those early times; remembered her Creator in
the Days of her Youth.

You describe so well your Heremitical state of Life, that none of the ancient
Anchorites could go beyond you, for a Cave in a Rock, with a fine Spring, or
any of the Accommodations that befit a Solitary. Only I don't remember to have
read, that any of those venerable and holy Personages took with them a Lady,
and begat Sons and Daughters. You must modestly be content to be accounted a
Patriarch. But were you a little younger, I should rather rank you with Sir
Amadis, and his fellows. If Piety be so Romantic, I shall turn Hermit in good
earnest; for I see one may go so far as to be Poetical, and hope to save one's
Soul at the same time. I really wish myself something more, that is, a Prophet;
for I wish I were as Habakkuk, to be taken by the Hair of the Head, and visit
Daniel in his Den. You are very obliging in saying, I have now a whole Family
upon my hands, to whom to discharge the part of a Friend: I assure you I like
'em all so well, that I will never quit my Hereditary Right to them; you have
made me yours, and consequently them mine. I still see them walking on my Green
at Twickenham, and gratefully remember (not only their green Gowns) but the
Instructions they gave me how to slide down, and trip up the steepest Slopes of
my Mount.

Pray think of me sometimes, as I shall often of you; and know me for what I
am, that is,

Yours.

To the same.
Twickenham, Oct. 21. 1721. Dear Sir,
YOUR very kind and obliging manner of enquiring after me, among the first
Concerns of Life, at your Resuscitation, should have been sooner answered and
acknowledged. I sincerely rejoice at your recovery from an Illness which gave
me less pain than it did you, only from my Ignorance of it. I should have else
been seriously and deeply affected, in the thought of your danger by a Fever. I
think it a fine and a natural thought, which I lately read in a private Letter
of Montaigne, giving an account of the last words of an intimate Friend of his:
'Adieu my Friend! the pain I feel will soon be over, but I grieve for that you
are to feel, which is to last you for life.'

I join with your Family in giving God thanks for lending us a worthy Man
somewhat longer. The Comforts you receive from their Attendance put me in mind
of what old Fletcher of Saltoune said one day to me: 'Alas, I have nothing to
do but to die; I am a poor Individual; no Creature to wish, or to fear, for my
life or death: It Is the only reason I have to repent being a single Man; now I
grow old, I am like a Tree without a Prop, and without young Trees of my own
shedding, to grow round me, for Company and Defense.'

I hope the Gout will soon go after the Fever, and all evil things remove far
from you. But pray tell me, when will you move toward us? If you had an
Interval to get hither, I care not what fixes you afterward, except the Gout.
Pray come, and never stir from us again. Do away your dirty Acres, cast 'em to
dirty People, such as in the Scripture Phrase possess the Land. Shake off your
Earth like the noble Animal in Milton. The tawny Lion, pawing to get free
His hinder Parts, he springs as broke from Bonds,
And rampant shakes his brinded Main: the Ounce,
The Lizard, and the Tiger, as the Mole
Rising, the crumbled Earth above them throw
In Hillocks!


But I believe Milton never thought, these fine Verses of his should be applied
to a Man selling a parcel of dirty Acres; though in the main I think it may have
some resemblance; for God knows this little space of Ground nourishes, buries,
and confines us, as that of Eden did those Creatures, till we can shake it
loose, at least in our Affections and Desires.

Believe, dear Sir, I truly love and value you; let Mrs. Blount know that she
is in the list of my Memento Domine's Famulorum Famularumque's, etc. My poor
Mother is far from well, declining; and I am watching over her, as we watch an
expiring Taper, that even when it looks brightest, wastes fastest. I am (as you
will see from the whole Air of this Letter) not in the gayest nor easiest
Humor, but always with Sincerity,

Dear Sir, Yours.

To the same.
June 27, 1723. Dear Sir,
YOU may truly do me the Justice to think no Man is more your sincere
Well-wisher than myself, or more the sincere well-wisher of your whole Family;
with all which, I cannot deny but I have a mixture of Envy to you all, for
loving one another so well; and for enjoying the sweets of that life, which can
only be tasted by people of good will.

They from all Shades the Darkness can exclude,
And from a Desert banish Solitude.
Torbay is a Paradise, and a Storm is but an Amusement to such people. If you
drink Tea upon a Promontory that overhangs the Sea, it is preferable to an
Assembly; and the whistling of the Wind better Music to contented and loving
Minds, than the Opera to the Spleenful, Ambitious, Diseased, Distasted, and
Distracted Souls, which this World affords; nay, this World affords no other.
Happy they! who are banished from us: but happier they, who can banish
themselves; or more properly, banish the World from them!

Alas! I live at Twickenham!
I take that Period to be very sublime, and to include more than a hundred
Sentences that might be writ to express Distraction, Hurry, Multiplication of
Nothings, and all the fatiguing perpetual Business of having no Business to do.
You Will wonder I reckon translating the Odyssey as nothing? But whenever I think
seriously (and of late I have met with so many Occasions of thinking seriously,
that I begin never to think otherwise) I cannot but think these things very
idle; as idle, as if a Beast of Burden should go on jingling his Bells, without
bearing any thing valuable about him, or ever serving his Master.

Life's vain Amusements, amidst which we dwell;
Not weighed, or understood by the grim God of Hell!
Said a Heathen Poet; as he is translated by a Christian Bishop, who has, first
by his Exhortations, and since by his Example, taught me to think as becomes a
Reasonable Creature. -- But he is gone! He carried away more Learning than is
left in this Nation behind him: but he left us more in the noble Example of
bearing Calamity well. It Is true, we want Literature very much; but pray God we
don't want Patience more! if these Precedents are to prevail.

I remember I promised to write to you, as soon as I should hear you were got
home. You must look on this as the first Day I Have been myself, and pass over
the Mad Interval un-imputed to me. How punctual a Correspondent I shall
hence-forward be able, or not able, to be, God knows: but he knows I shall ever
be a punctual and grateful Friend, and all the good Wishes of such an one will
ever attend you.

To the same.
June 2, 1725. Dear Sir,
YOU show your self a just Man and a Friend in those Guesses and Suppositions
you make at the possible reasons of my Silence; every one of which is a true
one. As to forgetfulness of you or yours, I assure you, the promiscuous
Conversations of the Town serve only to put me in mind of better, and more
quiet, to be had in a Corner of the World (undisturbed, innocent, serene, and
sensible) with such as you. Let no Access of any Distrust make you think of me
differently in a cloudy day from what you do in the most sunshiny Weather. Let
the young Ladies be assured I make nothing new in my Gardens without wishing to
see the print of their Fairy Steps in every part of 'em. I have put the last
Hand to my works of this kind, in happily finishing the subterraneous Way and
Grotto; I there found a Spring of the clearest Water, which falls in a
perpetual Rill, that echoes through the Cavern day and night. From the River
Thames, you see through my Arch up a Walk of the Wilderness to a kind of open
Temple, wholly composed of Shells in the Rustic Manner; and from that distance
under the Temple you look down through a sloping Arcade of Trees, and see the
Sails on the River passing suddenly and vanishing, as through a Perspective
Glass. When you shut the Doors of this Grotto, it becomes on the instant, from
a luminous Room, a Camera obscura; on the Walls of which all the Objects of the
River, Hills, Woods, and Boats, are forming a moving Picture in their visible
Radiations: And when you have a mind to light it up, it affords you a very
different Scene: it is finished with Shells interpersed with Pieces of
Looking-glass in angular forms; and in the Ceiling is a Star of the same
Material, at which when a Lamp (of an orbicular Figure of thin Alabaster) is
hung in the Middle, a thousand pointed Rays glitter and are reflected over the
Place. There are connected to this Grotto by a narrower Passage two Porches,
with Niches and Seats; one toward the River, of smooth Stones, full of light
and open; the other toward the Arch of Trees, rough with Shells, Flints, and
Iron Ore. The Bottom is paved with simple Pebble, as the adjoining Walk up the
Wilderness to the Temple, is to be Cockle-shells, in the natural Taste,
agreeing not ill with the little dripping Murmur, and the Aquatic Idea of the
whole Place. It wants nothing to complete it but a good Statue with an
Inscription, like that beautiful antique one which you know I am so fond of,
Hujus Nympha loci, sacri custodia fontis
Dormio, dum blandae sentio murmur aquae.
Parce meum, quisquis tangis cava marmora somnum
Rumpere, seu bibas, sive lavere, tace.
Nymph of the Grot, these sacred Springs I keep,
And to the Murmur of these Waters sleep;
Whoever thou art, ah gently tread the Cave,
Ah bathe in silence, or in silence lave.


You Will think I have been very Poetical in this Description, but it is pretty
near the Truth. I wish you were here to bear Testimony how little it owes to
Art, either the Place itself, or the Image I give of it.

I am, etc.

To the same.
Sept. 13, 1725. Dear Sir,
I Should be ashamed to own the receipt of a very kind Letter from you, two
whole Months from the date of this; if I were not more ashamed to tell a Lie,
or to make an Excuse, which is worse than a Lie (for being built upon some
probable Circumstance, it makes use of a degree of Truth to falsity with: It is
a Lie Guarded). Your Letter has been in my Pocket in constant wearing, till
that, and the Pocket, and the Suit, are worn out; by which means, I have read
it forty times, and I find by so doing, that I have not enough considered, and
reflected upon many others you have obliged me with; for true Friendship, as
they say of good Writing, will bear reviewing a thousand times, and still
discover new beauties.

I have had a Fever, a short one, but a violent: I am now well. So it shall
take up no more of this Paper.

I begin now to expect you in Town, to make the Winter to come more tolerable
to us both. The Summer is a kind of Heaven, when we wander in a Paradisaical
Scene of Nature among Groves and Gardens; but at this Season, we are like our
poor first Parents turned out of that agreeable though solitary life, and forced
to look about for more people to help to bear our labors, to get into warmer
Houses, and hive together in Cities.

I hope you are long since perfectly restored, and risen from your Gout, happy
in the delights of a contented Family, smiling at Storms, laughing at
Greatness, and merry over a Christmas-fire, exercising all the Functions of an
old Patriarch in Charity and Hospitality. I will not tell Mrs B. what I think
she is doing; for I conclude it is her opinion, that he only ought to know it
for whom it is done: and she will allow herself to be far enough advanced above
a fine Lady, not to desire to shine before Men.

Your Daughters perhaps may have some other thoughts, which even their Mother
must excuse them for, because she is a Mother. I will not however suppose those
thoughts get the better of their Devotions, but rather excite 'em, and assist
the warmth of them; while their Prayer may be, that they may raise up and breed
as irreproachable a young Family as their Parents have done. In a Word, I fancy
you all well, easy, and happy, just as I wish you; and next to that I wish you
all with me.

Next to God, is a good Man: Next in dignity, and next in value. Minuisti eum
paullo minus ab Angelis. If therefore I wish well to the good and the
deserving, and desire They only should be my Companions and Correspondents; I
must very soon, and very much think of you. I want your Company, and your
Example. Pray make haste to Town, so as not again to leave us: Discharge the
Load of Earth that lies on you, like one of the Mountains under which the Poets
say the Giants (that is, the Men of the Earth) are whelmed: Leave Earth to the
Sons of Earth; your Conversation is in Heaven. Which that it may be
accomplished in us all, is the Prayer of him who makes this short Sermon.
Value (to you) Three Pence. Adieu.

LETTERS OF Mr. POPE to Mr. GAY. From 1712 to 1730.
Nov. 13, 1712. SIR,
YOU writ me a very kind Letter some months ago, and told me you were then upon
the point of taking a journey into Devonshire. That hindered my answering you,
and I have since several times inquired of you, without any Satisfaction; for
so I call the knowledge of your welfare, or of any thing that concerns you. I
past two months in Sussex, and since my Return have been again very ill. I writ
to Lintot in hopes of hearing of you, but had no answer to that point. Our
Friend Mr. Cromwell too has been silent all this year; I believe he has been
displeased at some or other of my Freedoms; which I very innocently take, and
most with those I think most my friends. But this I know nothing of; perhaps he
may have opened to you: And, if I know you right, you are of a Temper to cement
Friendships, and not to divide them. I really much love Mr. Cromwell, and have
a true affection for your self, which if I had any Interest in the world, or
Power with those who have, I should not be long without manifesting to you. I
desire you will not, either out of Modesty, or a vicious Distrust of another's
value for you, (those two Eternal Foes to Merit) imagine that your Letters and
Conversation are not always welcome to me. There Is no man more entirely fond of
goodnature or ingenuity than my self, and I have seen too much of those
qualities in Mr. Gay to be any thing less than his

most affectionate Friend, and real Servant, A. POPE,
Binfield, No. 13, 1712.
Dec. 24, 1712. Dear Sir,
IT has been my good fortune within this month past, to hear more things that
have pleased me than (I think) almost in all my time beside. But nothing upon
my word has been so Home-felt a satisfaction as the News you tell me of your
self: and you are not in the least mistaken, when you congratulate me upon your
own good Success; for I have more People to be happy out of, than any
ill-natured man can boast I may with honesty affirm to you, that
notwithstanding the many Inconveniences and Disadvantages they commonly talk
of in the Res angusti domi, I have never found any other, than the inability of
giving people of Merit the only certain proof of our value for them, in doing
'em some real service. For, after all, if we could but Think a little, Selflove
might make us Philosophers, and convince us, Quantuli indiget Natura! Ourselves
are easily provided for; it is nothing but the Circumstantials, and the
Apparatus or Equipage of human life that costs so much the furnishing. Only
what a luxurious Man wants for horses and footmen; a good-natured Man wants
for his friends, or the indigent.

I shall see you this Winter with much greater pleasure than I could the last;
and I hope as much of your Time as your Attendance on the Duchess will allow
you to spare to any friend, will not be thought lost upon one who is as much so
as any man. I must also put you in mind, though you are now Secretary to this
Lady, that you are likewise Secretary to Nine other Ladies, and are to write
sometimes for them too. He who is forced to live wholly upon those Ladies
favors, is indeed in as precarious a condition as any He who does what Chaucer
says -- for Sustenance; but they are very agreeable Companions, like other
Ladies, when a Man only passes a Night or so with them at his leisure, and
away. I am

Your, etc.

Aug. 23, 1713. Dear Sir,
JUST as I received yours, I was set down to write to you with some shame that
I had so long deferred it. But I can hardly repent my neglect, when it gives me
the knowledge how little you insist upon Ceremony, and how much a greater share
in your memory I have than I deserve. I have been near a week in London, where
I am like to remain, till I become, by Mr. J^s's help, Elegans Formarum
Spectator. I begin to discover Beauties that were till now imperceptible to me.
Every Corner of an Eye, or Turn of a Nose or Ear, the smallest degree of Light
or Shade on a Cheek, or in a dimple, have charms to distract me. I no longer
look upon Lord Plausible as ridiculous, for admiring a Lady's fine Tip of an
Ear and pretty Elbow (as the Plain-dealer has it) but am in some danger even
from the Ugly and Disagreeable, since they may have their retired beauties, in
one Trait or other about 'em. You may guess in how uneasy a state I am, when
every day the performances of others appear more beautiful and excellent, and
my own more despicable. I have thrown away three Dr. Swift's, each of which was
once my vanity, two Lady Bridgewaters, a Duchess of Montague, besides half a
dozen Earls, and one Knight of the Garter. I have crucified Christ over again
in effigy, and made a Madona as old as her Mother St. Anne. Nay, what is yet
more miraculous, I have rivaled St. Luke himself in Painting, and as it is said
an Angel came and finished his Piece, so you would swear a Devil put the last
hand to mine, it is so begrim'd and smutted. However, I comfort my self with a
Christian Reflection, that I have not broken the Commandment, for my Pictures
are not the likeness of any thing in heaven above, or in earth below, or in the
waters under the earth. Neither will any body adore or worship them, except the
Indians should have a sight of 'em, who, they tell us, worship certain Pagods
or Idols purely for their Ugliness.

I am very much recreated and refreshed with the News of the Advancement of the
Fan, which I doubt not will delight the Eye and Sense of the Fair, as long as
that agreeable Machine shall play in the Hands of Posterity. I am glad your Fan
is mounted so soon, but I would have you varnish and glaze it at your leisure,
and polish the Sticks as much as you can. You may then cause it to be born in
the Lands of both Sexes, no less in Britain, than it is in China; where it is
ordinary for a Mandarine to fan himself cool after a Debate, and a Statesman to
hide his face with it when he tells a grave Lie.

I am, etc.

Binfield, May 4, 1714. Dear Gay,
SINCE by your letter we find you can be content to breath in smoke, to walk in
crowds, and divert your self with noise, nay, and to make fine Pictures of this
way of life, we should give you up as one abandoned to a wrong choice of
pleasures. We have however so much compassion on you, as to think of inviting
you to us, where your taste for books, friendship, and ease, may be indulged.
But if you do not come, pray leave to tempt us with your description of the
Court; for indeed humanity is frail, and we cannot but remember some particular
honors which we have enjoyed in conversation; bate us this one point, and we
stand you, still untir'd with one another, and fresh to the pleasures of the
country. If you would have any news from us, know that we are well at present:
This I am sure would have been allowed by you as news from either of us a
fortnight ago. In return to this, send us every thing you imagine diverting,
and pray forget not my commissions. Give my respects to the Dean, Dr.
Arbuthnot, Mr. Ford, and the Provost. Dear Gay, adieu.

Your affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, THO. PARNELLE.

Dear Mr. Gay,
ABOVE all other News, send us the best, that of your good Health, if you enjoy
it; which Mr. Harcourt made us very much fear. If you have any design either to
amend your health, or your life, I know no better Expedient than to come
hither, where you should not want room, though I lay my self in a Trucklebed
under the Doctor. You might here converse with the old Greeks, be initiated
into all their Customs, and learn their Prayers by heart as we have done: The
Doctor last Sunday, intending to say an Our Father, was got half way in
Chryses' Prayer to Apollo. The ill effects of Contention and Squabling, so
lively described in the first Iliad, make Dr. Parnelle and my self continue in
the most exemplary Union in every thing. We deserve to be worshipped by all the
poor, divided, factious, interested Poets of this world.

As we rise in our speculations daily, we are grown so grave, that we have not
condescended to laugh at any of the idle things about us this week: I have
contracted a severity of aspect from deep meditation on high subjects, equal to
the formidable Front of black-brow'd Jupiter, and become an awful Nod as well,
when I assent to some grave and weighty Proposition of the Doctor, or enforce a
Criticism of my own. In a word, Y^g himself has not acquired more Tragic
Majesty in his aspect by reading his own Verses, than I by Homer's.

In this state, I cannot consent to your publication of that ludicrous trifling
Burlesque you write about. Dr. Parnelle also joins in my opinion, that it will
by no means be well to print it.

Pray give (with the utmost fidelity and esteem) my hearty service to the Dean,
Dr. Arbuthnot, Mr. Ford, and to Mr. Fortescue. Let them also know at Button's
that I am mindful of them. I am, divine Bucoliast!

Thy loving Countryman.

Oct. 23. Dear Sir,
I HAVE been perpetually troubled with sickness of late, which has made me so
melancholy, that the Immortality of the Soul has been my constant Speculation,
as the Mortality of my Body my constant Plague. In good earnest, Seneca is
nothing to a fit of illness.

Dr. Parnelle will honor Tonson's Miscellany with some very beautiful Copies,
at my request. He enters heartily into our design; I only fear his stay in town
may chance to be but short. Dr. Swift much approves what I proposed, even to
the very title, which I design shall be, The Works of the Unlearned, published
monthly, in which whatever Book appears that deserves praise, shall be
depreciated Ironically, and in the same manner that modern Critics take to
undervalue Works of Value, and to commend the high Productions of Grubstreet.

I shall go into the Country about a month hence, and shall then desire to take
along with me your Poem of the Fan, to consider it at full leisure. I am deeply
engaged in Poetry, the particulars whereof shall be deferred till we meet.

I am very desirous of seeing Mr. Fortescue when he comes to Town before his
journey; if you can any way acquaint him of my desire, I believe his good
nature will contrive a way for our meeting. I am ever, with all sincerity, dear
Sir,

Your, etc.

Sept. 23, 1714. Dear Mr. Gay,
WElcome to your native Soil! welcome to your Friends! thrice welcome to me!
whether returned in glory, blessed with Court-interest, the love and familiarity
of the Great, and filled with agreeable Hopes; or melancholy with Dejection,
contemplative of the changes of Fortune, and doubtful for the future: Whether
returned a triumphant Whig, or a desponding Tory, equally All Hail! equally
beloved and welcome to me! If happy, I am to share in your elevation; if
unhappy, you have still a warm corner in my heart, and a retreat at Binfield in
the worst of times at your service. If you are a Tory, or thought so by any
man, I know it can proceed from nothing but your Gratitude to a few People, who
endeavored to serve you, and whose Politics were never your Concern. If you
are a Whig, as I rather hope, and as I think your Principles and mine (as
Brother Poets) had ever a Bias to the Side of Liberty, I know you will be an
honest man and an inoffensive one. Upon the whole, I know you are incapable of
being so much of either Party as to be good for nothing. Therefore once more,
whatever you are, or in whatever state you are, All Hail!

One or two of your old Friends complained they had heard nothing from you
since the Queen's Death; I told 'em, no man living loved Mr. Gay better than I,
yet I had not once written to him in all his Voyage. This I thought a
convincing proof, how truly one may be a friend to another without telling him
so every month. But they had reasons too themselves to allege in your excuse,
as men who really value one another will never want such as make their friends
and themselves easy. The late universal Concern in public affairs, threw us
all into a hurry of Spirits; even I, who am more a Philosopher than to expect
any thing from any Reign, was born away with the current, and full of the
expectation of the Successor: During your Journeys I knew not whither to aim a
letter after you, that was a sort of shooting flying: add to this the demand
Homer had upon me, to write fifty Verses a day, besides learned Notes, all
which are at a conclusion for this year. Rejoice with me, O my Friend, that my
Labor is over; come and make merry with me in much Feasting, for I to thee,
and thou to me. We will feed among the Lilies. By the Lilies, I mean the
Ladies, with whom I hope you have fed to Satiety: Have thou passed through many
Countries, and not tasted the delights thereof? Have thou not left to thy Issue
in diverse Lands, that German Gays and Dutch Gays may arise, to write Pastorals,
and sing their Songs in strange Countries? Are not the Blouzelinda's of the
Hague as charming as the Rosalinda's of Britain? or have the two great Pastoral
Poets of our Nation renounced Love at the same time? for Philips, immortal
Philips, Hanover Philips, has deserted, yea and in a rustic manner kicked his
Rosalind. -- Dr. Parnelle and I have been inseparable ever since you went. We
are now at the Bath, where (if you are not, as I heartily hope, better engaged)
your coming would be the greatest pleasure to us in the world. Talk not of
Expenses: Homer shall support his Children. I beg a line from you directed to
the Posthouse in Bath. Poor Parnelle is in an ill state of health.

Pardon me if I add a word of advice in the Poetical way. Write something on
the King, or Prince, or Princess. On whatsoever foot you may be with the Court,
this can do no harm -- I shall never know where to end, and am confounded in
the many things I have to say to you, though they all amount but to this, that I
am entirely, as ever,

Your, etc.

London, Nov. 8. 1718. Dear Sir,
I AM extremely glad to find by a Letter of yours to Mr. Fortescue, that you
have received one from me; and I beg you to keep, as the greatest of
Curiosities, that Letter of mine which you received and I never writ.

But the Truth is, that we were made here to expect you in a short time, that I
was upon the Ramble most part of the Summer, and have concluded the Season in
Grief, for the death of my poor father.

I shall not enter into a detail of my Concerns and Troubles, for two reasons;
because I am really afflicted and need no Airs of grief, and because they are
not the concerns and troubles of any but my self. But I think you (without too
great a compliment) enough my friend, to be pleased to know he died easily,
without a groan, or the sickness of two minutes; in a word, as silently and
peacefully as he lived.

Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori!
I am not in the humor to say gay things, nor in the affectation of avoiding
them. I cannot pretend to entertain either Mr. Pulteney or you, as you have done
both my Lord Burlington and me, by your letter to Mr. Lowndes. I am only sorry
you have no greater quarrel to Mr. Lowndes, and wish you paid some hundreds a
year to the Landtax. That Gentleman is lately become an inoffensive person to
me too; so that we may join heartily in our Addresses to him, and (like true
Patriots) rejoice in all that Good done to the Nation and Government, to which
we contribute nothing our selves.

I should not forget to acknowledge your letter sent from Aix; you told me
then, that writing was not good with the Waters, and I find since you are of my
opinion, that it is as bad without the Waters. But I fancy, it is not writing
but thinking, that is so bad with the Waters; and then you might write without
any manner of prejudice, if you writ like our Brother-poets of these days.

I have no story to tell that is worth your hearing: you know I am no man of
Intrigue; but the Duchess of Hamilton has one which she says is worth my
hearing, that relates to Mr. Pulteney and your self; and which she promises, if
you will not tell me, she will. Her Grace has won in a Raffle a very fine
Tweezercase; at the sight of which, my Tweezercase, and all other Tweezercases
on the globe, Hide their diminished Heads.

That Duchess, Lord Warwick, Lord Stanhope, Mrs. Bellenden, Mrs. Lepell, and I
cannot tell who else, had your letters: Dr. Arbuthnot and I expect to be treated
like Friends. I would send my services to Mr. Pulteney, but that he is out of
favor at Court; and make some compliment to Mrs. Pulteney, if she were not a
Wig. My Lord Burlington tells me she has as much outshin'd all the French
Ladies, as she did the English before: I am sorry for it, because it will be
detrimental to our holy Religion, if heretical Women should eclypse those Nuns
and orthodox Beauties, in whose eyes alone lie all the hopes we can have, of
gaining such fine Gentlemen as you to our Church.

Your, etc.
I wish you joy of the birth of the young Prince, because he is the only Prince
we have, from whom you have had no Expectations and no Disappointments.



Dear Sir,
I Think it obliging in you to desire an account of my health. The truth is, I
have never been in a worse state in my life, and find whatever I have tried as
a remedy, so ineffectual, that I give myself entirely over. I wish your health
may be set perfectly right by the Waters, and be assured I not only wish that,
and every thing else for you, as common friends wish, but with a Zeal not usual
among those we call so. I am always glad to hear often from you; always glad to
see you, whatever accidents amusements have intervened to make me do either
less than usual. I not only frequently think of you, but constantly do my best
to make others do it, by mentioning you to all your acquaintance. I desire you
to do the same for me to those you are now with: do me what you think Justice
in regard to those who are my friends; and if there are any, whom I have
unwillingly deserved so little of, as to be my Enemies, I don't desire you to
forfeit their opinion or your own judgment in any case. Let Time convince those
who know me not, that I am an inoffensive person; though (to say truth) I don't
care how little I am indebted to Time, for the World is hardly worth living in,
at least to one that is never to have health a week together. I have been made
to expect Dr. Arbuthnot in town this fortnight, or else I had written to him.
If he, by never writing to me, seems to forget me, I consider I do the same
seemingly to him, and yet I don't believe he has a more sincere friend in the
world than I am; therefore I will think him mine. I am His, Mr. Congreve's, and

Your, etc.

London, Sept. 11, 1722. Dear Gay,
I Thank you for remembering me. I would do my best to forget my self, but that
I find your Idea is so closely connected to me that I must forget both
together, or neither. I Am sorry, I could not have a glympse either of you, or
of the Sun, (your Father) before you went for Bath. But now it pleases me to
see him, and hear of you. Pray put Mr. Congreve in mind that he has one on this
side of the World who loves him; and that there are more Men and Women in the
Universe, than Mr. Gay and my Lady Duchess of M. There are Ladies in and about
Richmond that pretend to value him and your self; and one of 'em at least may
be thought to do it without Affectation, namely Mrs. Howard. As for Mrs.
Blounts (whom you mercifully make mention of) they are gone, or going to
Sussex. I hope Mrs. Pulteney is the better for the Bath, though I have little
Charity and few good Wishes for the Ladies, the Destroyers of their best
friends the Men. Pray tell her she has forgot the first Commissson I ever
troubled her with, and therefore it shall be the last (the very thing I fear
the desires). Dr. Arbuthnot is a strange creature; he goes out of town, and
leaves his Bastards at other folks doors. I have long been so far mistaken in
him as to think him a Man of Morals as well as of Politics. Pray let him know
I made a very unfashionable enquiry the other day of the welfare of his Wife and
family: Things that (I presume) are below the consideration of a Wit and an
Omore-player. They are in perfect health. Though Mrs. A^'s Navel has been burnt,
I hope the Doctor's own Belly is in absolute ease and contentment. Now I speak
of those Regions about the Abdomen, pray, dear Gay, consult with him and Dr.
Che e to what exact pitch yours may be suffered to swell, not to outgrow
theirs, who are, yet, your Betters. Pray tell Dr. Arbuthnot that even
Pigeon-pyes, and Hogspuddings are thought dangerous by our Governors; for those
that have been sent to the Bishop of Rochester, are opened and profanely pried
into at the Tower: It Is the first time dead Pigeons have been suspected of
carrying Intelligence. To be serious, you, and Mr. Congreve (nay and the Doctor
if he has not dined) will be sensible of my concern and surprise at the
commitment of that Gentleman, whose welfare is as much my concern as any
friend's I have. I think my self a most unfortunate wretch; I no sooner love,
and, upon knowledge, fix my esteem to any man; but he either dies like Mr.
Craggs, or is s nt to Imprisonment like the Bishop. God send him as well as I
wish him, manifest him to be as innocent as I believe him, and make all his
Enemies know him as well as I do, that they may love him and think of him as
well!

If you apprehend this Period to be of any danger in being addressed to you;
tell Mr. Congreve or the Doctor, it is writ to them. I am

Your, etc.

July 13, 1723. Dear Sir,
I WAS very much pleased, not to say obliged, by your kind letter, which
sufficiently warmed my heart to have answered it sooner, had I not been
deceived (a way one often is deceived) by hearkening to Women; who told me that
both Lady Burlington and yourself were immediately to return from Tunbridge,
and that my Lord was gone to bring you back. The world furnishes us with too
many examples of what you complain of in yours, and I assure you, none of them
touch and grieve me so much as what relates to you. I think your Sentiments
upon it are the very same I should entertain: I wish those we call Great Men
had the same Notions, but they are really the most Little Creatures in the
world; and the most interested, in all but one Point; which is, that they want
Judgment to know their greatest Interest, to encourage and choose Honest men for
their Friends.

I have not once seen the Person you complain of, whom I have of late thought
to be, as the Apostle admonishes, one Flesh with his Wife.

Pray make my sincere compliments to Lord Burlington, whom I have long known to
have more Mind to be a Good and honorable man, than almost any one of his rank.

I have not forgot yours to Lord Bolingbroke, (though I hope to have speedily a
fuller opportunity) he returns for Flanders and France, next Month.

Mrs. Howard has writ you something or other in a letter which she says she
repents. She has as much Goodnature as if she had never seen any Ill Nature,
and had been bred among Lambs and Turtle-doves, instead of Princes and
Court-Ladies.

By the end of this week, Fortescue will pass a few days with me. We shall
remember you in our Potations, and wish you a Fisher with us, on my Grass-plat.
In the mean time we wish you Success as a Fisher of Women, at the Wells, a
Rejoycer of the Comfortless and Widow, an Impregnator of the Barren, and a
Playfellow of the Maiden. I am

Your, etc.

Dear Sir,
I Faithfully assure you, in the midst of that melancholy with which I have
been so long encompassed, in an hourly Expectation almost of my Mother's death;
there was no circumstance that rendered it more insupportable to me, than that
I could not leave her to see you. Your own present Escape from so imminent
danger, I pray God may prove less precarious than my poor Mother's can be;
whose Life at her age can at best be but a short Reprieve, or a longer Dying.
But I fear, even that is more than God will please to grant me; for, these two
days past, her most dangerous Symptoms are returned upon her; and unless there
be a sudden change, I must in a few days, if not in a few Hours, be deprived of
her. In the afflicting Prospect before me, I know nothing that can so much
alleviate it as the View now given me (Heaven grant it may increase!) of your
recovery. In the sincerity of my heart, I am excessively concerned, not to be
able to pay you, dear Gay, any part of the debt I very gratefully remember I
owe you, on a like sad occasion, when you was here comforting me in her last
great Illness. May your health augment as fast as I fear it pleases God hers
must decline: I believe that would be very fast -- may the Life that is added
to you be past in good fortune and tranquillity, rather of your own giving to
your self, than from any Expectations or Trust in others. -- May you and I live
together, without wishing more felicity or acquisitions than Friendship can
give and receive without obligations to Greatness -- God keep you, and three or
four more of those I have known as long, that I may have something worth the
surviving my Mother. Adieu, dear Gay, and believe me (while you live, and while
I live)

Your, etc.
As I told you in my last letter, I repeat it in this: Do not think of writing
to me. The Doctor, Mrs. Howard, and Mrs. Blount give me daily accounts of you.



Sunday Night. Dear Sir,
I Truly rejoiced to see your handwriting, though I feared the trouble it might
give you. I wish I had not known that you are still so excessively weak. Every
day for a week past I had hopes of being able in a day or two more to see you.
But my poor Mother advances not at all, gains no strength, and seems but upon
the whole to wait for the next cold Day to throw her into a Diarrhoea that
must, if it return, carry her off. This being daily to be feared, makes me not
dare to go a day from her, lest that should prove to be her Last. God send you
a speedy recovery, and such a total one as at your time of Life may be
expected. You need not call the few Words I writ to you either kind, or good;
That was, and is, nothing. But whatever I have in my Nature of Kindness, I
really have for you, and whatever Good I could do, I would among the very first
be glad to do to you. In your circumstance the old Roman farewell is proper.
Vive! memor nostri.

Your, etc.
I send you a very kind letter of Mr. Digby, between whom and me two letters
have passed concerning you.



Dear Gay,
NO words can tell you the great concern I feel for you; I assure you it was
not, and is not lessened, by the immediate apprehension I have now every day
Jain under of losing my Mother. Be assured, no Duty less than that, should have
kept me one day from attending your condition: I would come and take a Room by
you at Hampstead, to be with you daily, were she not still in danger of death.
I have constantly had particular accounts of you from the Doctor, which have
not ceased to alarm me yet. God preserve your life, and restore your health. I
really beg it for my own sake, for I feel I love you more than I thought, in
health, though I always loved you a great deal. If I am so unfortunate as to bury
my poor Mother, and yet have the good fortune to have my prayers heard for you,
I hope we may live most of our remaining days together. If, as I believe, the
air of a better clime as the Southern Part of France, may be thought useful for
your recovery, thither I would go with you infallibly; and it is very probable
we might get the Dean with us, who is in that abandoned state already in which
I shall shortly be, as to other Cares and Duties. Dear Gay, be as cheerful as
your Sufferings will permit: God is a better friend than a Court: Even any
honest man is a better. I promise you my entire friendship in all events,
heartily praying for your recovery.

Your, etc.
Do not write, if you are ever so able: The Doctor tells me all.



Dear Sir,
I AM glad to hear of the progress of your recovery, and the oftener I hear it
the better, when it becomes easy to you to give it me. I so well remember the
Consolation you were to me in my Mother's former Illness, that it doubles my
Concern at this time not to be able to be with you, or you able to be with me.
Had I lost her, I would have been no where else but with you during your
confinement. I have now past five weeks without once going from home, and
without any company but for three or four of the days. Friends rarely stretch
their kindness so far as ten miles. My Lord Bolingbroke and Mr. Bethel have not
forgotten to visit me: the rest (except Mrs. Blount once) were contented to
send messages. I never passed so melancholy a time, and now Mr. Congreve's
death touches me nearly. It is twenty years that I have known him. Every year
carries away something dear with it, till we outlive all tendernesses, and
become wretched Individuals again as we begun. Adieu! This is my Birthday, and
this is my Reflection upon it: With added Days if life give nothing new,
But, like a Sieve, let every Pleasure through;
Some Joy still lost, as each vain Year runs over,
And all we gain, some sad Reflection more!
Is this a Birthday? -- It Is, alas! too clear,
It Is but the Funeral of the former Year.


I am Yours, etc.

Twick'nam, July 21. Dear Gay,
YOU have the same share in my memory that good things generally have; I always
know (whenever I reflect) that you should be in my mind; only I reflect too
seldom. However, you ought to allow me the Indulgence I allow all my Friends,
(and if I did not, They would take it) in consideration that they have other
avocations; which may prevent the Proofs of their remembering me, though they
preserve for me all the friendship, and good will which I deserve from them. In
like manner I expect from you, that my past life of twenty years may be set
against the omission of (perhaps) one month: And if you complain of this to any
other, it is you are in the spleen, and not I in the wrong. If you think this
letter splenatick, consider I have just received the News of the death of a
Friend, whom I esteemed almost as many years as you; poor Fenton: He died at
Easthamstead, of Indolence and Inactivity; let it not be your fate, but use
Exercise. I hope the Duchess will take care of you in this respect, and either
make you gallop after her, or teize you enough at home to serve instead of
Exercise abroad. Mrs. Howard is so concerned about you, and so angry at me for
not writing to you, and at Mrs. Blount for not doing the same, that I am piqu'd
with Jealousy and Envy at you, and hate you as much as if you had a great Place
at Court; which you will confess a proper cause of Envy and Hatred, in any
Poet-militant, or unpension'd. But to set matters even, I own I love you; and
own, I am as I ever was, and just as I ever shall be,

Yours, etc.

Twickenham, Oct. 16, 1727. Dear Sir,
I HAVE many years ago magnified in my own mind, and repeated to you, a ninth
Beatitude, added to the eight in the Scripture; Blessed is he who expects
nothing, for he shall never be disappointed. I could find in my heart to
congratulate you on this happy dismission from all Court-Dependance; I dare say
I shall find you the Better and the Honester Man for it, many years hence; very
probably the healthfuller, and the chearfuller into the bargain. You are
happily rid of many cursed ceremonies, as well as of many ill and vicious
habits, of which few or no men escape the Infection, who are hackney'dand
tramelled in the ways of a court. Princes indeed, and Peers (the Lackies of
Princes) and Ladies (the Fools of Peers) will smile on you the less; but Men of
Worth, and real Friends, will look on you the better. There is a thing the only
thing which Kings and Queens cannot give you, (for they have it not to give)
Liberty, which is worth all they have; and which, as yet, I hope Englishmen
need not ask from their hands. You will enjoy That, and your own Integrity, and
the satisfactory Consciousness of having not merited such Graces from them, as
they bestow only on the mean, servile, flattering, interested, and undeserving.
The only Steps to their favor are such complacencies, such compliances, such
distant decorums, as delude them in their Vanities, or engage them in their
Passions. He is their Greatest favorite, who is their Falsest: and when a man,
by such vile Gradations, arrives at the height of Grandeur and Power, he is
then at best but in a circumstance to be hated, and in a condition to be
hanged, for serving their Ends: So many a Minister has found it!

I believe you did not want Advice, in the letter you sent by my Lord Grantham.
I presume you writ it not, without: And you could not have better, if I guess
right at the person who agreed to your doing it, in respect to any Decency you
ought to observe: for I take that person to be a perfect Judge of Decencies and
Forms. I am not without fears even on that person's account: I think it a bad
Omen: but what have I to do with Court-Omens? -- Dear Gay, adieu. I can only
add a plain, uncourtly Speech: While you are no body's Servant, you may be any
one's Friend; and as such I embrace you, in all conditions of life. While I
have a shilling, you shall have sixpence, nay eight pence, if I can contrive
to live upon a groat. I am faithfully

Your, etc.

Aug. 18. Dear Gay,
IF my friendship were as effectual as it is sincere, you would be one of those
people who would be vastly advantaged and enriched by it. I ever honored those
Popes who were most famous for Nepotism; it is a sign that the old fellows loved
Somebody, which is not usual in such advanced years. And I now honor Sir
Robert Walpole, for his extensive Bounty and Goodness to his private Friends
and Relations. But it vexes me to the heart when I reflect, that my friendship
is so much less effectual than theirs; nay so utterly useless that it cannot
give you any thing, not even a Dinner, at this distance, nor help the General,
whom I greatly love, to catch one fish. My only consolation is to think you
happier than myself, and to begin to envy you, which is next to hating (an
excellent Remedy for Love.) How comes it that Providence has been so unkind to
me, (who am a greater object of compassion than any fat man alive) that I am
forced to drink wine, while you riot in water, prepared with oranges by the
hand of the Duchess of Queensberry? that I am condemned to live on a Highway
side, like an old Patriarch, receiving all Guests, where my Portico (as Virgil
has it) Mane salutantum totis vomit aedibus undam,
while you are rapt into the Idalian Groves, sprinkled with Rose Water, and
live in Burrage, Balm and Burnet up to the chin, with the Duchess of
Queensberry? that I am doomed to the drudgery of dining at Court with the
Ladies in waiting at Windsor, while you are happily banished with the Duchess
of Queensberry? So partial is Fortune in her dispensations! for I deserved ten
times more to be banished than you, and I know some Ladies, who merit it better
than even her Grace. After this I must not name any, who dare do so much for
you, as to send you their Services: But one there is, who exhorts me often to
write to you, I suppose to prevent or excuse her not doing it herself; she
seems (for that is all I Will say for a Courtier) to wish you mighty well.
Another who is no Courtier frequently mentions you, and does certainly wish you
well -- I fancy, after all, they both do so.

I writ to Mr. Fortescue and told him the pains you took to see him. Dr. A. for
all that I know, may yet remember you and me, but I never hear of it. The Dean
is well; I have had many accounts of him from Irish Evidence, but only two
Letters these four months, in both which you are mentioned kindly: He is in the
North of Ireland, doing I know not what with I know not whom. Cleland always
speaks of you: he is at Tunbridge, wondering at the superior Carnivoracity of
the Dr. He plays now with the old Duchess of M^, nay dines with her, after she
has won all his money. Other News know I not, but that Counselor Bickford has
hurt himself, and has the strangest walking-staff I ever saw. He intends
speedily to make you a visit at Amesbury. I am my Lord Duke's, my Lady
Duchess's, Mr. Dormer's, General Dormer's, and

Your, etc.

Sept. 11, 1730. Dear Sir,
I May with great Truth return your Speech, that I think of you daily; oftener
indeed than is consistent with the character of a reasonable man; who is rather
to make himself easy with the things and men that are about him, than uneasy
with those which are not. And you, whose Absence is in a manner perpetual to
me, ought rather to be remembered as a good man gone, than breathed after as one
living. You are taken from us here, to be laid up in a more blessed state with
Spirits of a higher kind: such I reckon his Grace and her Grace, since their
Banishment from an earthly Court to an heavenly one, in each other and their
friends; for I conclude none but true friends will consort or associate with
them afterward. I cannot but look upon myself (so unworthy as a man of Twitnam
seems to be ranked with such rectified and sublimated Beings as you as a
separated Spirit too from Courts and Courtly Fopperies. But I own, not
altogether so divested of terrene Matter, nor altogether so spiritualized, as
to be worthy admission to your Depths of Retirement and Contentment. I am
tugged back to the world and its regards too often; and no wonder, when my
retreat is but ten miles from the Capital. I am within Ear-shot of Reports,
within the Vortex of Lies and Censures. I hear sometimes of the Lampooners of
Beauty, the Calumniators of Virtue, the Jokers at Reason and Religion. I
presume these are creatures and things as unknown to you, as we of this dirty
Orb are to the Inhabitants of the Planet Jupiter: Except a few fervent prayers
reach you on the wings of the post, from two or three of your zealous Votaries
at this distance; as one Mrs. Howard, who lists up her heart now and then to
you, from the midst of the Colluvies and Sink of Human Greatness at W^r: One
Mrs. B. that fancies you may remember her while you lived in your mortal and
too transitory State at Petersham: One Lord B. who admired the Duchess before
she grew quite a Goddess; and a few others.

To descend now to tell you what are our Wants, our Complaints, and our
Miseries here; I must seriously say, the Loss of any one Good woman is too
great to be born easily: and poor Mrs. Rollinson, though a private woman, was
such. Her Husband is gone into Oxfordshire very melancholy, and thence to the
Bath, to live on, for such is our Fate, and Duty. Adeiu. Write to me as often
as you will, and (to encourage you) I will write as seldom as if you did not.
Believe me

Your, etc.

Oct. 1, 1730. Dear Sir,
I AM something like the Sun at this Season, withdrawing from the World, but
meaning it mighty well, and resolving to shine whenever I can again. But I fear
the Clouds of a long Winter will overcome me to such a degree, that any body
will take a farthing-candle for a better Guide, and more serviceable companion.
My Friends may remember my brighter days, but will think (like the Irishman)
that the Moon is a better thing when once I am gone. I don't say this with any
allusion to my Poetical capacity as a Son of Apolio, but in my Companionable
one, (if you will suffer me to use a phrase of the Earl of Clarendon's) For I
shall see or be seen of few of you, this Winter. I am grown too faint to do any
good, or to give any pleasure. I not only, as Dryden fairly says, Feel my Notes
decay as a Poet; but feel my Spirits flag as a Companion, and shall return
again to where I first began, my Books. I have been putting my Library in
order, and enlarging the Chimney in it, with equal intention to warm my Mind
and Body (if I can) to some Life. A Friend, (a Woman-friend, God help me!) with
whom I have spent three or four hours a day these fifteen years, advised me to
pass more time in my studies: I reflected, she must have found some Reason for
this admonition, and concluded she would complete all her kindnesses to me by
returning me to the Employment I am fittest for; Conversation with the dead,
the old, and the worm-eaten.

Judge therefore if I might not treat you as a Beatify'd Spirit, comparing your
life with my stupid state. For as to my living at Windsor with Ladies, etc. it
is all a dream; I was there but two nights and all the day out of that company.
I shall certainly make as little Court to others, as they do to me; and that
will be none at all. My Fair-Weather-Friends of the Summer are going away for
London, and I shall see Them and the Butterflies together, if I live till next
Year; which I would not desire to do, if it were only for their sakes. But we
that are writers, ought to love Posterity, that Posterity may love us; and I
would willingly live to see the Children of the present Race, merely in hope
they may be a little wiser than their Parents.

I am, etc.

To J. GAY, Esquire
Dec. 16, 1731.
I Am astonished at the Complaints occasioned by a late Epistle to the Earl of
Burlington; and I should be afflicted were there the least just Ground for 'em.
Had the Writer attacked Vice, at a Time when it is not only tolerated but
triumphant, and so far from being concealed as a Defect, that it is proclaimed
with Ostentation as a Merit; I should have been apprehensive of the
Consequence: Had he satirized Gamesters of a hundred thousand pounds Fortune,
acquired by such Methods as are in daily practice, and almost universally
encouraged: Had he overwarmly desended the Religion of his Country, against
such Books as come from every Press, are publicly vended in every Shop, and
greedily bought by almost every Rank of Men; or had he called our excellent
Weekly Writers by the same Names which they openly bestow on the greatest Men
in the Ministry, and out of the Ministry, for which they are all unpunished,
and most rewarded: In any of these Cases, indeed, I might have judged him too
presumptuous, and perhaps have trembled for his Rashness.

I could not but hope better for this small and modest Epistle, which attacks
no one Vice whatsoever; which deals only in Folly, and not Folly in general,
but a single Species of it; that only Branch, for the opposite Excellency to
which, the Noble Lord to whom it is written must necessarily be celebrated. I
fancied it might escape Censure, especially seeing how tenderly these Follies
are treated, and really less accused, than Apologized for. Yet hence the Poor
are clothed, the Hungry fed,
Health to himself, and to his Infants Bread
The Lab'rer bears.
Is this such a Crime, that to impute it to a Man must be a grievous Offense?
It Is an Innocent Folly, and much more Beneficent than the Want of it; for Ill
Taste employs more hands, and diffuses Expense more than a Good one. Is it a
Moral Defect? No, it is but a Natural one; a Want of Taste. It is what the best
good Man living may be liable to: The worthiest Peer may live exemplarily in an
ill-favored House, and the best reputed Citizen be pleased with a vile Garden.
I thought (I say) the Author had the common Liberty to observe a Defect, and to
compliment a Friend for a Quality that distinguishes him: which I know not how
any Quality should do, if we were not to remark that it was wanting in others.

But, they say, the Satire is Personal. I thought it could not be so, because
all its Reflections are on Things. His Reflections are not on the Man, but his
House, Garden, etc. Nay, he respects (as one may say) the Persons of the
Gladiator, Amphitheatre, the Nile and the Triton: He is only sorry to see them
(as he might be to see any of his Friends) ridiculous, by being in the wrong
Place, and in bad Company. Some fancy, that to say a Thing is Personal, is the
same as to say it is Unjust, not considering, that nothing can be Just that, is
not Personal. I am afraid that "all such Writings and Discourses as touch no
Man, will mend no Man." The Good-Natured, indeed, are apt to be alarmed at any
thing like Satire; and the Guilty readily concur with the Weak for a plain
Reason, because the Vicious look upon Folly as their Frontier: -- Jam proximus
ardet
Ucalegon --
No wonder those who know Ridicule belongs to them, find an inward Consolation
in removing it from themselves as far as they can; and it is never so far, as
when they can get it fixed on the best Characters. No wonder those who are Food
for Satirists, should rail at them as Creatures of (...) every Beast born for
our Use would be ready to call a Man so.

I know no Remedy, unless people in our Age would as little frequent the
Theaters, as they begin to do the Churches; unless Comedy were forsaken, Satire
silent, and every man left to do what seems good in his own Eyes, as if there
were no King, no Priest, no Poet in Israel.

But I find myself obliged to touch a Point, on which I must be more serious;
it well deserves I should: I mean the malicious Application of the Character of
Timon, which I will boldly say, they would impute to the Person the most
different in the World from a Man-hater, and the Person whose Taste and
Encouragement of Wit have often been shown in the rightest Place. The Author of
that Epistle must certainly think so, if he has the same Opinion of his own
Merit as Authors generally have; for he has been favored by this very Person.

Why, in God's Name, must a Portrait, apparently collected from twenty
different Men, be applied to one only? Has it his Eye? No, it is very unlike.
Has it his Nose or Mouth? No, they are totally differing. What then, I beseech
you? Why, it has the Mole on his Chin. Very well; but must the Picture
therefore be his, and has no other man that Blemish?

Could there be a more melancholy Instance how much the Taste of the Public is
vitiated, and turns the most salutary and seasonable Physic into Poison, than
if amidst the Blaze of a thousand bright Qualities in a Great Man, they should
only remark there is a Shadow about him, as what Eminence is without? I am
confident the Author was incapable of imputing any such to One, whose whole
Life (to use his own Expression in Print of him) is a continued Series of good
and generous Actions.

I know no man who would be more concerned, if he gave the least Pain or
Offense to any innocent Person; and none who would be less concerned, if the
Satire were challenged by any one at whom he would really aim it, If ever that
happens, I dare engage he will own it, with all the Freedom of one whose
Censures are just, and who sets his Name to them.

To the Earl of Burlington.
March 7, 1731. My LORD,
THE Clamor raised about my Epistle to you, could not give me so much pain, as
I received pleasure in seeing the general Zeal of the world in the cause of a
great Man who is Beneficent, and the particular Warmth of your Lordship in that
of a private Man who is innocent.

It was not the Poem that deserved this from you; for as I had the Honor to be
your Friend, I could not treat you quite like a Poet: but sure the Writer
deserved more Candor, even from those who knew him not, than to promote a
Report, which in regard to that Noble Person was Impertinent; in regard to me,
Villainous. Yet I had no great cause to wonder, that a Character belonging to
twenty should be applied to one; since, by that means, nineteen would escape
the Ridicule.

I was too well content with my Knowledge of that Noble Person's Opinion in
this Affair, to trouble the public about it. But since Malice and Mistake are
so long a dying, I have taken the opportunity of a third Edition to declare His
Belief, not only of My Innocence, but of Their Malignity, of the former of
which my own heart is as conscious, as I fear some of theirs must be of the
latter. His Humanity feels a Concern for the Injury done to Me, while his
Greatness of Mind can bear with Indifference the Insult offered to Himself.
Alludes to the Letter the Duke of Ch^ wrote to Mr. Pope on this occasion, a
Copy of which, together with Mr. Pope's to his Grace, we hope to procure for
the next Volume.


However, my Lord, I own, that Critics of this Sort can intimidate me, nay half
incline me to write no more: That would be making the Town a Compliment which I
think it deserves; and which some, I am sure, would take very kindly. This way
of Satire is dangerous, as long as Slander raised by Fools of the lowest Rank
can find any countenance from those of a Higher. Even from the Conduct shown on
this occasion, I have learnt there are some who would rather be wicked than
ridiculous; and therefore it may be safer to attack Vices than Follies. I will
therefore leave my Betters in the quiet Possession of their Idols, their
Groves, and their High Places; and change my Subject from their Pride to their
Meanness, from their Vanities to their Miseries: And as the only certain way to
avoid Misconstructions, to lessen Offense, and not to multiply ill-natured
Applications, I may probably, in my next, make use of Real Names and not of
Fictitious Ones. The he did in his next Piece, which was the Epistle to the
Lord Bathurst of the use of Riches,


I am, my Lord, Your Faithful, Affectionate Servant, A. POPE.

Dr. ARBUTHNOT to Mr. POPE.
Hampstead, July 17, 1734. Dear Sir,
I Little doubt of your kind Concern for me, nor of that of the Lady you
mention. I have nothing to repay my Friends with at present, but prayers and
good wishes. I have the satisfaction to find that I am as officiously served by
my Friends, as he that has thousands to leave in Legacies; besides the
Assurance of their Sincerity, God Almighty has made my bodily distress as easy
as a thing of that nature can be: I have found some relief, at least sometimes,
from the Air of this Place. My Nights are bad, but many poor Creatures have
worse.

As for you, my good Friend, I think since our first acquaintance there has not
been any of those little Suspicions or Jealousies that often affect the
sincerest Friendships; I am sure not on my side. I must be so sincere as to
own, that though I could not help valuing you for those Talents which the World
prizes, yet they were not the Foundation of my Friendship: They were quite of
another sort; nor shall I at present offend you by enumerating them: And I make
it my Last Request, that you continue that noble Disdain and Abhorrence of
Vice, which you seem naturally endu'd with, but still with a due regard to your
own Safety; and study more to reform than chastise, though the one often cannot
be effected without the other.

Lord Bathurst I have always honored for every good Quality, that a Person of
his Rank ought to have: Pray give my Respects and kindest Wishes to the Family.
My Venison Stomach is gone, but I have those about me, and often with me, who
will be very glad of his Present. If it is left at my house it will be
transmitted safe to me.

A Recovery in my Case, and at my Age, is impossible; the kindest Wish of my
Friends is Euthanasia. Living or dying, I shall always be

Your most faithful Friend, And humble Servant, JO. ARBUTHNOT.

LETTERS OF Mr. POPE to H. C. Esquire From 1708, to 1711.
March 18, 1708.
I Believe it was with me when I left the Town, as it is with a great many Men
when they leave the World, whose loss itself they do not so much regret, as
that of their Friends whom they leave behind in it. For I do not know one thing
for which I can envy London, but for your continuing there. Yet I guess you
will expect I should recant this Expression, when I tell you, that Sapho (by
which heathenish Name you have christened a very orthodox Lady) did not
accompany me into the Country. However, I will confess myself the less
concerned on that account, because I have no very violent Inclination to lose
my Heart, especially in so wild and savage a place as this Forest is: In the
Town, it is ten to one but a young Fellow may find his strayed Heart again, with
some Wildstreet or Drury Lane Damfel; but here, where I could have met with no
redress from an unmerciful, virtuous Dame, I must for ever have lost my little
Traveller in a Hole, where I could never rummage to find him again. -- Well,
Sir, you have your Lady in the Town still, and I have my Heart in the Country
still, which being wholly unemploy'd as yet, has the more room in it for my
Friends, and does not want a Corner at your Service. -- To be serious, you have
extremely obliged me by your Frankness and Kindness to me: And if I have abused
it by too much Freedom on my part, I hope you will attribute it to the natural
Openness of my Temper, which hardly knows how to show Respect, where I feel
Affection. I would love my Friend, as my Mistress, without Ceremony; and hope a
little rough Usage sometimes may not be more displeasing to the one, than it is
to the other.

If you have any Curiosity to know in what manner I live, or rather lose a
Life, Martial will inform you in one Line: (the Translation of which cost a
Friend of ours three in English, (One short, one long,
One soft, one strong,
One right, one wrong.)
Prandeo, poto, cano, ludo, lego, caeno, quiesco.


Every Day with me is literally another yesterday; for it is exactly the same;
It has the same Business, which is Poetry; and the same Pleasure, whieh is
Idleness. A man might indeed pass his Time much better, but I question if any
Man could pass it much easier. If you will visit our Shades this Spring, which
I very much desire, you may perhaps instruct me to manage my Game more wisely;
but at present I am satisfied to trifle away my Time any Way, rather than let
it stick by me; as Shopkeepers are glad to be rid of those Goods at any rate,
which would otherwise always be lying upon their hands.

Sir, if you will favor me sometimes with your Letters, it will be a great
Satisfaction to me on several accounts; and on this in particular, That it will
show me (to my Comfort) that even a wise Man is sometimes very idle; for so you
must needs be when you can find leisure to write to

Your, etc.

April 27, 1708.
I Have nothing to say to you in this Letter; but I was resolved to write to
tell you so. Why should not I content myself with so many great Examples, of
deep Divines, profound Casuists, grave Philosophers, who have written, not
Letters only, but whole Tomes and voluminous Treatises about Nothing? Why
should a Fellow like me, who all his life does nothing, be ashamed to write
nothing? and that to one who has nothing to do but to read it? But perhaps
you will say, the whole World has something to do, something to talk of,
something to wish for, something to be employed about: But pray, Sir, cast up
the Account, put all these Somethings together, and what is the Sum Total but
just Nothing? I have no more to say, but to desire to give you my Service (that
is nothing) to your Friends, and to believe that I am nothing more than

Your, etc.

Ex nihilo nil fit. LUCR.
May 10, 1708.
YOU talk of Fame and Glory, and of the great Men of Antiquity: Pray tell me,
what are all your great dead Men, but so many little living Letters? What a
vast Reward is here for all the Ink wasted by Writers, and all the Blood spilt
by Princes? There was in old time one Severus a Roman Emperor. I dare say you
never called him by any other Name in your Life: and yet in his days he was
styled Lucius, Septimius, Severus, Pius, Pertinax, Augustus, Parthicus,
Adiabenicus, Arabicus, Maximus, -- and what not? What a prodigious waste of
Letters has Time made! what a Number have here dropped off, and lest the poor
surviving Seven unattended! For my own part, Four are all I have to take care
for; and I Will be judged by you if any man could live in less compass? except it
were one Monsieur D. and one Romulus * But these, contrary to the common
Calamity, came, in process of time, to be called Monsieur Boileau Despreaux,
and Romulus Threepoints. -- Well, Sir, for the future I Will drown all high
Thoughts in the Lethe of Cowslip-Wine; as for Fame, Renown, Reputation, take
'em, Critics! Tradam protervis in mare Criticum
Ventis --


If ever I seek for Immortality here, may I be d^d! for there is not so much
danger in a Poet's being damned: Damnation follows Death in other Men,
But your damned Poet lives and writes again.


November 1, 1708.
I Have been so well satisfied with the Country ever since I saw you, that I
have not so much as once thought of the Town, or inquired of any one in it
besides Mr. Wycherley and yourself. And from him I understand of your Journey
this Summer into Leicestershire; from whence I guess you are returned by this
time, to your old Apartment in the Widow's Corner, to your old Business of
comparing Critics, and reconciling reconciling commentators; and to the old
diversions of a losing game at Picquet with the ladies, and half a play, or a
quarter of a play, at the theater; where you are none of the malicious
Audience, but the chief of amorous Spectators; and for the infirmity of one His
Hearing.
Sense which there for the most part could only serve to disgust you, enjoy the
vigor of another which ravishes you. You know when one Sense is suppressed,
It but retires into the rest.


(According to the poetical, not the learned, Dodwell; who has done one thing
worthy of eternal memory; wrote two lines in his life that are not nonsense!)
So you have the advantage of being entertained with all the beauty of the
Boxes, without being troubled with any of the dullness of the Stage. You are so
good a critic, that it is the greatest happiness of the modern Poets that you do
not hear their works; and next, that you are not so arrant a critic, as to damn
them (like the rest) without hearing. But now I talk of those critics, I have
good news to tell you concerning myself, for which I expect you should
congratulate with me: It is, that beyond all my expectations, and far above my
demerits, I have been most mercifully reprieved by the sovereign power of Jacob
Tonson, from being brought forth to public punishment; and respited from time
to time from the hands of those barbarous executioners of the Muses, whom I was
just now speaking of. It often happens, that guilty Poets, like other guilty
criminals, when once they are known and proclaimed, deliver themselves into the
hands of Justice, only to prevent others from doing it more to their
disadvantage; and not out of any Ambition to spread their fame, by being
executed in the face of the world, which is a fame but of short continuance.
That Poet were a happy man who could but obtain a grant to preserve his for
ninety-nine years; for those names very rarely last so many days, which are
planted either in Jacob Tonson's, or the Ordinary of Newgate's Miscellanies.

I have an hundred things to say to you, which shall be deferred till I have
the happiness of seeing you in town; for the season now draws on, that invites
every body thither. Some of them I had communicated to you by Letters before
this, if I had not been uncertain were you passed your time the last season: so
much fine weather, I doubt not, has given you all the pleasure you could desire
from the country, and your own thoughts the best company in it. But nothing
could allure Mr. Wycherley to our Forest; he continued (as you told me long
since he would) an obstinate lover of the town, in spite of friendship and fair
weather. Therefore henceforward, to all those considerable qualities I know you
possessed of, I shall add that of Prophecy. But I still believe Mr. Wycherley's
intentions were good, and am satisfied that he promises nothing but with a real
design to perform it: how much soever his other excellent qualities are above
my imitation, his sincerity, I hope, is not; and it is with the utmost that I
am,

Sir, etc.
Jan. 22, 1708-9.
I Had sent you the enclosed This was a Translation of the first Book of
Statius, done when the Author was but 14 Years old, as appears by an
Advertisement before the first Edition of it in a Miscellany publish^d by B.
Lintot, 8o 171^.
Papers before this time, but that I intended to have brought them myself, and
afterward could find no opportunity of sending them without suspicion of their
miscarrying; not that they are of the least value, but for fear somebody might
be foolish enough to imagine them so, and inquisitive enough to discover those
faults which I (by your help) would correct. I therefore beg the favor of you
to let them go no farther than your chamber, and to be very free of your
remarks in the margins, not only in regard to the accuracy, but to the fidelity
of the translation; which I have not had time of late to compare with its
original. And I desire you to be the more severe, as it is much more criminal
for me to make another speak nonsense, than to do it in my own proper person.
For your better help in comparing, it may be fit to tell you, that this is not
an entire version of the first book. There is an omission from the 168th line
-- Jam murmura serpunt plebis agenoreae -- to the 312th -- Interea patriis olim
vagus exul ab oris -- (between these These he since translated, and they are
extant in the printed Version.
two Statius has a description of the council of the Gods, and a speech of
Jupiter; which contain a peculiar beauty and majesty, and were left out for no
other reason, but because the consequence of this machine appears not till the
second book.) The translation goes on from thence to the words Hic vero ambobus
rabiem fortuna cruentam, where there is an odd account of a battle at
fifty-cuffs between the two Princes on a very slight occasion, and at a time
when one would think the fatigue of their Journey in so tempestuous a night,
might have rendered them very unfit for such a scuffle. This I had actually
translated, but was very ill satisfied with it, even in my own words, to which
an author cannot but be partial enough of conscience; it was therefore omitted
in this copy, which goes on above eighty lines farther, at the words -- Hic
primum lustrare oculis, etc. -- to the end of the book.

You will find, I doubt not, that Statius was none of the discreetest Poets,
though he was the best versifier next Virgil: In the very beginning he unluckily
betrays his ignorance in the rules of Poetry, (which Horace had already taught
the Romans) when he asks his Muse, where to begin his Thebaid, and seems to
doubt whether it should not be ab ovo Ledaeo? When he comes to the scene of his
Poem, and the prize in dispute between the Brothers, he gives us a very mean
opinion of it -- Pugna est de paupere regno. -- Very different from the conduct
of his master Virgil, who at the entrance of his Poem informs his reader of the
greatness of its subject, -- Tantae molis erat Romanam condere Gentem. [Bossu
on Epic Poetry.] There are innumerable little faults in him, among which I
cannot but take notice of one in this book, where speaking of the implacable
hatred of the brothers, he says, The whole world would be too small a prize to
repay so much impiety. Quid si peteretur crimine tanto
Limes uterque Poli, quem Sol emissus Eoo
Cardine, aut portu vergens prospectat Ibero?


This was pretty well, one would think already, but he goes on.

Quasque procul terras obliquo sydere tangit
Avius, aut Boreae gelidas, madidive tepentes
Igne Noti?
After all this, what could a Poet think of but Heaven itself for the Prize?
but what follows is astonishing. -- Quid si Tyriae Phrygiaeve sub unum
Convectentur Opes?


I do not remember to have met with so great a fall in any ancient author
whatsoever. I should not have insisted so much on the faults of this Poet, if I
did not hope you would take the same freedom with, and revenge it upon, his
Translator. I shall be extremely glad if the reading this can be any amusement
to you, the rather because I had the dissatisfaction to hear you have been
confined to your chamber by an illness, which I fear was as troublesome a
companion as I have sometimes been to you in the same place; where if ever you
found any pleasure in my company, it must surely have been that which most men
take in observing the faults and follies of another; a pleasure which you see I
take care to give you even in my absence.

If you will oblige me at your leisure with the confirmation of your recovery,
under your own hand, it will be extreme grateful to me; for next to the
pleasure of seeing my friends, is that I take in hearing from them; and in this
particular, I am beyond all acknowledgments obliged to our friend Mr.
Wycherley, who, as if it were not enough to have excelled all men in wit, is
resolved to excel them in goodnature too. I know I need no apology to you for
speaking of Mr. Wycherley, whose example as I am proud of following in all
things, so in nothing more than in professing myself, like him,

Your, etc.

May 7, 1709.
YOU had long before this time been troubled with a Letter from me, but that I
deferred it till I could send you either the Jacob Tonson's sixth Volume of
Poetical Miscellanies, in which Mr. Pope's Pastorals and some Versions of Homer
and Chaucer were first printed.
Miscellany, or my continuation of the Version of Statius. The first I imagined
you might have had before now; but since the contrary has happened, you may
draw this Moral from it, That Authors in general are more ready to write
nonsense, than Booksellers are to publish it. I had I know not what
extraordinary flux of rhyme upon me for three days together, in which time all
the Verses you see added, have been written; which I tell you that you may more
freely be severe upon them. It Is a mercy I do not assault you with a number of
original Sonnets and Epigrams, which our modrn Bards put forth in the
springtime, in as great abundance, as Trees do Blossoms, a very few whereof
ever come to be Fruit, and please no longer than just in their birth. So that
they make no less haste to bring their flowers of wit to the press, than
gardeners to bring their other flowers to the market, which if they cannot get
off their hands in the morning, are sure to die before night. Thus the same
reason that furnishes Covent Garden with those nosegays you so delight in,
supplies the Muses Mercury, and British Apollo (not to say Jacob's
Miscellanies) with Verses. And it is the happiness of this age, that the modern
invention of printing Poems for pence apiece, has brought the Nosegays of
Parnassus to bear the same price; whereby the publick-spirited Mr. Henry Hills
of Black-fryars has been the cause of great ease and singular comfort to all
the Learned, who never over-abounding in transitory coin, should not be
discontented (methinks) even though Poems were distributed gratis about the
streets, like Bunyan's Sermons and other pious treatises, usually published in
a like Volume and Character.

The time now drawing nigh, when you use with Sapho to cross the Water in an
Evening to Spring-Garden, I hope you will have a fair opportunity of ravishing
her: -- I mean only (as Oldfox in the Plain-dealer says) through the ear, with
your well-penn'd Verses. I have been told of a very lucky Compliment of an
Officer to his Mistress in the very same place, which I cannot but set down
(and desire you at present to take it in good part instead of a Latin
Quotation) that it may some time or other be improved by your pronunciation,
while you walk Solus cum Sola in those amorous shades. When at Spring-garden
Sapho deigns t'appear,
The flowers march in hervan, musk in her rear.


I wish you all the pleasures which the Season and the Nymph can afford; the
best Company, the best Coffee, and the best News you can desire. And what more
to wish you than this, I do not know; unless it be a great deal of patience to
read and examine the Verses I send you; and I promise you in return a great
deal of deference to your judgment, and an extraordinary obedience to your
sentiments for the future, (to which you know I have been sometimes a little
refractory.) If you will please to begin where you left off last, and mark the
margins, as you have done in the pages immediately before, (which you will find
corrected to your sense since your last perusal) you will extremely oblige me,
and improve my Translation. Besides those places which may deviate from the
sense of the Author, it would be very kind in you to observe any deficiencies
in the Diction or Numbers. The Hiatus in particular I would avoid as much as
possible, to which you are certainly in the right to be a professed enemy; though
I confess I could not think it possible at all times to be avoided by any
writer, till I found by reading Malherbe lately, that there is scarce any
throughout his Poems. I thought your observation true enough to be passed into
a Rule, but not a rule without exceptions, nor that ever it had been reduced to
practice: But this example of one of the most correct and best of their Poets
has undeceived me, and confirms your opinion very strongly, and much more than
Mr. Dryden's Authority, who though he made it a rule, seldom observed it.

Your, etc.

June 10, 1709.
I Have received part of the Version of Statius, and return you my thanks for
your remarks which I think to be just, except where you cry out (like one in
Horace's Art of Poetry) Pulchre, been, recte! There I have some fears, you are
often, if not always, in the wrong.

One of your objections, namely on that passage, The rest, revolving years
shall ripen into Fate,
may be well grounded, in relation to its not being the exact sense of the
words -- See the first book of Statius, Verse 302.
Caetera reliquo ordine ducam. But the duration of the Action of Statius's poem
may as well be excepted against, as many things besides in him: (which I wonder
Bossu has not observed) For instead of confining his narration to one year, it
is manifestly exceeded in the very first two books: The Narration begins with
Oedipus's prayer to the Fury to promote discord betwixt his Sons; afterward the
Poet expressly describes their entrlng into the agreement of reigning a year by
turns; and Polynices takes his flight for Thebes on his brother's refusal to
resign the throne. All this is in the first book; in next, Tydeus is sent
Ambassador to Etheocles, and demands his resignation in these terms, --
Astriferum velox jam circulus orbem
Torsit, and amissae redierunt montibus umbrae,
Ex quo frater inops, ignota per oppida tristes
Exul agit casus --


But Bossu himself is mistaken in one particular, relating to the commencement
of the Action; saying in Book 2. Cap. 8. that Statius opens it with Europa's
Rape, whereas the Poet at most only deliberates whether he should or not: --
Unde jubetis
Ire, Deae? Gentisne canam primordia, dirae,
Sidonios raptus? etc.
but then expressly passes all this with a Longa retro series -- and says, --
Limes mihi carminis esto
Oedipodae confusa domus --
Indeed there are numberless particulars blameworthy in our Author, which I
have tried to soften in the version: -- Dubiamque jugo fragor impulit Oeten
In latus, and geminis vix fluctibus obstitit Isthmus,
is most extravagantly hyperbolical: Nor did I ever read a greater piece of
Tautology than -- Vacua cum solus in Aula
Respiceres jus omne tuum, cunctosque Minores,
Et nusquam par stare caput.


In the Journey of Polynices is some geographical error, -- In mediis audit duo
litora campis
could hardly be; for the Isthmus of Corinth is full five miles over: And
Caligantes abrupto sole Mycaenas, is not consistent with what he tells us, in
Lib. 4. lin. 305: "that those of Mycaenae came not to the war at this time,
because they were then in confusion by the divisions of the Brothers, Atreus
and Thyestes:" Now from the raising the Greek army against The'es, back to the
time of this journey of Polynices, is (according to Statius's own account)
three years.

Yours, etc.

July 17, 1709.
THE Morning after I parted from you, I found myself (as I had prophesied) all
alone in an uneasy Stage-Coach; a doleful change from that agreeable company I
enjoyed the night before! without the least hope of entertainment but from my
last recourse in such cases, a Book. I then began to enter into acquaintance
with the Moralists, and had just received from them some cold consolation for
the inconveniences of this life, and the incertainty of human affairs; when I
perceived my Vehicle to stop, and heard from the side of it the dreadful news
of a sick Woman preparing to enter it. It Is not easy to guess at my
mortification, but being so well fortified with Philosophy I stood resigned
with a Stoical constancy to endure the worst of evils, a sick Woman. I was
indeed a little comforted to find, by her voice and dress, that she was Young
and a Gentlewoman; but no sooner was her hood removed, but I saw one of the
finest faces I ever beheld, and to increase my surprise, heard her salute me by
my name. I never had more reason to accuse Nature for making me short-sighted
than now, when I could not recollect I had ever seen those fair eyes which knew
me so well, and was utterly at a loss how to address myself; till with a great
deal of simplicity and innocence she let me know (even before I discovered my
ignorance) that she was the daughter of one in our Neighborhood, lately
married, who having been consulting her Physicians in Town, was returning into
the Country, to try what good Air and a new Husband could do to recover her. My
Father, you must know, has sometimes recommended the Study of Physic to me,
but I never had any ambition to be a Doctor till this instant. I ventured to
prescribe some Fruit (which I happened to have in the Coach) which being
forbidden her by her Doctors, she had the more inclination to. In short, I
tempted, and she eat; nor was I more like the Devil than she like Eve. Having
the good success of the 'foresaid Gentleman before my eyes, I put on the
Gallantry of the old Serpent, and in spite of my evil Form accosted her with
all the Gaiety I was master of; which had so good effect, that in less than an
hour she grew pleasant, her color returned, and she was pleased to say my
prescription had wrought an immediate cure: In a word, I had the pleasantest
journey imaginable.

Thus far (methinks) my Letter has something of the air of a Romance, though it
be true. But I hope you will look on what follows as the greatest of truths,
That I think myself extremely obliged by you in all points, especially for your
kind and honorable Information and Advice in a matter of the utmost concern to
me, which I shall ever acknowledge as the highest proof at once of your
friendship, justice, and sincerity. At the same time be assured, that Gentleman
we spoke of, shall never by any alteration in me discover my knowledge of his
Mistake: the hearty forgiving of which is the only kind of Return I can
possibly make him for so many favors. And I may derive this pleasure at least
from it, that whereas I must otherwise have been a little uneasy to know my
incapacity of returning to his Obligations; I may now, by bearing his Frailty,
exercise my Gratitude and Friendship more than Himself either is, or perhaps
ever will be sensible of. Ille meos, primus qui me sibi junxit, Amores
Abstulit; ille habeat secum, servetque Sepulchro!


But in one thing, I must confess you have yourself obliged me more than any
man, which is, that you have showed me many of my Faults, to which as you are
the more an implacable Enemy, by so much the more you are a kind Friend to me.
I could be proud, in revenge, to find a few slips in your Verses, which I read
in London, and since in the Country with more application and pleasure: the
thoughts are very just, and you are sure not to let them suffer by the
Versification. If you would oblige me with the trust of any thing of yours, I
should be glad to execute any commissions you would give me concerning them. I
am here so perfectly at leisure, that nothing would be so agreeable an
entertainment to me; but if you will not afford me that, do not deny me at
least the satisfaction of your Letters as long as we are absent, if you would
not have him very unhappy who is very sincerely

Your, etc.
Having a vacant space here, I will fill it with a short Ode on Solitude, which
I found yesterday by great accident, and which I find by the date was written
when I was not twelve years old; that you may perceive how long I have
continued in my passion for a rural life, and in the same employments of it.
Happy the man, whose wish and care,
A few paternal Acres bound,
Content to breathe his native air,
In his own ground.
Whose herds with milk, whose fields with bread,
Whose flocks supply him with attire,
Whose Trees in summer yield him shade,
In winter, fire.
Blessed, who can unconcern'dly find
Hours, days, and years slide soft away,
In Health of body, Peace of mind,
Quiet by day,
Sound sleep by night; Study and Ease,
Together mixed; sweet Recreation,
And Innocence which most does please,
With Meditation.
Thus, let me live unseen, unknown,
Thus, unlamented let me die,
Steal from the world, and not a stone
Tell where I lie.




August 19, 1709.
IF I were to write to you as often as I think of you, my Letters would be as
bad as a Rentcharge; but though the one be but too little for your Goodnature,
the other would be too much for your Quiet, which is one blessing Goodnature
should indispensably receive from mankind, in return for those many it gives. I
have been informed of late, how much I am indebted to that quality of yours, in
speaking well of me in my absence; the only thing by which you prove yourself
no Wit or Critic: Though indeed I have often thought, that a friend will show
just as much indulgence (and no more) to my faults when I am absent, as he does
severity to 'em when I am present. To be very frank with you, Sir, I must own,
that where I received so much Civility at first, I could hardly have expected
so much Sincerity afterward. But now I have only to wish, that the last were
but equal to the first, and that as you have omitted nothing to oblige me, so
you would omit nothing to improve me.

I caused an acquaintance of mine to enquire twice of your welfare, by whom I
have been informed, that you have left your speculative Angle in the Widow's
Coffee-house, and bidding adieu for some time to all the Rehearsals, Reviews,
Gazettes, etc. have marched off into Lincolnshire. Thus I find you vary your
life in the scene at least, though not in the Action; for though life for the most
part, like an old Play, be still the same, yet no w and then a new Scene may
make it more entertaining. As for myself, I would not have my life a very
regular Play, let it be a good merry Farce, a G-d's name, and a fig for the
critical Unities! Yet (on the other side) I would as soon write like Durfey, as
live like The; whose beastly, yet merry life, is (if you will excuse such a
similitude) not unlike a F -- t, at once nasty and laughable. For the
generality of men, a true modern life is like a true modern play, neither
Tragedy, Comedy, nor Farce, nor one, nor all of these: every Actor is much
better known by his having the same Face, than by keeping the same Character:
for we change our minds as often as they can their parts, and he who was
yesterday Caesar, is to day Sir John Daw. So that one might ask the same
question of a modern life, that Rich did of a modern play; " Pray do me the
favor, Sir, to inform me;
" Is this your Tragedy or your Comedy?


I have dwelt the longer upon this, because I persuade myself it might be
useful, at a time when we have no other Theater, to divert ourselves at this
great one. Here is a glorious standing Comedy of Fools, at which every man is
heartily merry, and thinks himself an unconcerned Spectator. This (to our
singular comfort) neither my Lord Chamberlain, nor the Queen herself can ever
shut up, or silence. While that of Drury (alas!) lies desolate, in the
profoundest peace: and the melancholy prospect of the Nymphys yet lingering
about its beloved avenues, appears no less moving than that of the Trojan Dames
lamenting over their ruined Ilium! What now can they hope, disposiess'd of
their ancient seats, but to serve as Captives to the insulting Victors of the
Hay-market? The afflicted subjects of France do not, in our Post-man, so
gnievously deplore the obstinacy of their arbitrary Monarch, as these perishing
people of Drury the obdurate heart of that Pharaoh, Rich, who like him,
disdains all Proposals of peace and accommodation. Several Libels have been
secretly affixed to the great gates of his imperial palace in Bridges-street;
and a Memorial representing the distresses of these persons, has been
accidentally dropped (as we are credibly informed by a person of quality) out of
his first Minister the chief Box-keeper's pocket, at a late Conference of the
said Person of quality and others, on the part of the Confederates, and his
Theatrical Majesty on his own part. Of this you may expect a copy as soon as it
shall be transmitted to us from a good hand. As for the late Congress, it is
here reported, that it has not been wholly ineffectual; but this wants
confirmation; yet we cannot but hope the concurring prayers and tears of so
many wretched Ladies may induce this haughty Prince to reason.

I am, etc.

October 19, 1709.
I MAY truly say I am more obliged to you this summer than to any of my
Acquaintance, for had it not been for the two kind letters you sent me, I had
been perfectly, oblitusque meorum, obliviscendus and illis. The only companions
I had were those Muses of whom Tully says, Adolescentiam alunt, Senectutem
oblectant, secundas res ornant, adversis perfugium ac solatium praebent,
delectant domi, non impediunt foris, pernoctant nobiscum, peregrinantur,
rusticantur. Which indeed is as much as ever I expected from them; for the
Muses, if you take them as Companions, are very pleasant and agreeable; but
whoever should be forced to live or depend upon 'em, would find himself in a
very bad condition. That Quiet, which Cowley calls the Companion of Obscurity,
was not wanting to me, unless it was interrupted by those fears you so justly
guess I had for our Friend's welfare. It Is extremely kind in you to tell me the
news you heard of him, and you have delivered me from more anxiety than he
imagines me capable of on his account, as I am convinced by his long silence.
However the love of some things rewards itself, as of Virtue, and of Mr.
Wycherley. I am surpised at the danger you tell me he has been in, and must
agree with you, that our nation would have lost in him alone, more wit and
probity, than would have remained (for ought I know) in all the rest of it. My
concern for his friendship will excuse me, (since I know you honor him so
much, and since you know I love him above all men) if I vent a part of my
uneasiness to you, and tell you, that there has not been wanting one to
insinuate malicious untruths of me to Mr. Wycherley, which I fear may have had
some effect upon him. If so, he will have a greater punishment for his
credulity than I could wish him, in that fellow's acquaintance. The loss of a
faithful creature is something, though of ever so contemptible an one; and if I
were to change my Dog for such a Man as the aforesaid, I should think my Dog
undervalu'd: (who follows me about as constantly here in the country, as I was
used to do Mr. Wycherley in the Town.)

Now I talk of my Dog, that I may not treat of a worse subject which my spleen
tempts me to, I will give you some account of him; a thing not wholly
unprecedented, since Montaigne (to whom I am but a Dog in comparison) has done
the very same thing of his Cat. Dic mihi quid melius desidiosus agam? You are
to know then, that as it is Likeness begets affection, so my favorite dog is a
little one, a lean one, and none of the finest shaped. He is not much a Spaniel
in his fawning, but has (what might be worth any man's while to imitate from
him) a dumb surly sort of kindness, that rather shows itself when he thinks me
illus'd by others, than when we walk quietly and peaceably by ourselves. If it
be the chief point of Friendship to comply with a friend's Motions and
Inclinations, he possesses this in an eminent degree; he lies down when I sit,
and walks when I walk, which is more than many good friends can pretend to,
witness our walk a year ago in St. James's Park. -- Histories are more full of
examples of the Fidelity of Dogs than of Friends, but I will not insist upon
many of 'em, because it is possible some may be almost as fabulous as those of
Pylades and Orestes, etc. I will only say for the honor of Dogs, that the two
most ancient and esteemable books sacred and profane extant, ( viz. the
Scripture and Homer) have shown a particular regard to these animals. That of
Toby is the more remarkable, because there was no manner of reason to take
notice of the Dog, besides the great humanity of the Author. Homer's account of
Ulysses's Dog Argus is the most pathetick imaginable, all the Circumstances
considered, and an excellent proof of the old Bard's Goodnature. Ulysses had
left him at Ithaca when he embarked for Troy, and found him at his return after
twenty years, (which by the way is not unnatural as some Critics have said,
since I remember the dam of my dog was twenty-two years old when she died: May
the omen of longaevity prove fortunate to her successor!) You shall have it in
verse.

ARGUS.
When wise Ulysses from his native coast
Long kept by wars, and long by tempests tossed,
Arrived at last, poor, old, disguised, alone,
To all his friends, and even his Queen, unknown,
Changed as he was, with age, and toils, and cares,
Furrowed his reverend face, and white his hairs,
In his own Palace forced to ask his bread,
Scorned by those slaves his former bounty fed,
Forgot of all his own domestic crew;
The faithful Dog alone his rightful Master knew!
Unfed, unhous'd, neglected, on the clay,
Like an old servant now cashiered, he lay
Touched with resentment of ungrateful man,
And longing to behold his ancient Lord again.
Him when he saw -- he rose, and crawled to meet,
('It Was all he could) and fawned, and kissed his feet,
Seized with dumb joy -- then falling by his side,
Owned his returning Lord, looked up, and died!
Plutarch relating how the Athenians were obliged to abandon Athens in the time
of Themistocles, steps back again out of the way of his History, purely to
describe the lamentable cries and howlings of the poor Dogs they left behind.
He makes mention of one, that followed his Master across the Sea to Salamis,
where he died and was honored with a Tomb by the Athenians, who gave the name
of the Dog's Grave to that part of the Island where he was buried: this respect
to a dog in the most polite people of the world, is very observable. A modern
instance of gratitude to a Dog (though we have but few such) is, that the chief
Order of Denmark (now injuriously called the Order of the Elephant) was
instituted in memory of the fidelity of a dog named Wild-brat, to one of their
Kings who had been deserted by his subjects: He gave his order this motto, or
to this effect, (which still remains) Wild-brat was faithful. Sir William
Trumbull has told me a story which he heard from one that was present: King
Charles I. being with some of his Court during his troubles, a discourse arose
what sort of dogs deserved pre-eminence, and it being on all hands agreed to
belong either to the Spaniel or Greyhound, the King gave his opinion on the
part of the Greyhound, because (said he) it has all the Goodnature of the
other, without the Fawning. A good piece of satire upon his Courtiers, with
which I will conclude my Discourse of Dogs. Call me a Cynick, or what you
please, in revenge for all this impertinence, I will be contented; provided you
will but believe me when I say a bold word for a christian, that, of all dogs,
you will find none more faithful than

Your, etc.

April 10, 1710.
I Had written to you sooner, but that I made some scruple of sending profane
things to you in Holy week. Besides our Family would have been scandalized to
see me write, who take it for granted I write nothing but ungodly Verses. I
assure you I am looked upon in the Neighborhood for a very well-dispos'd
person, no great Hunter indeed, but a great Admirer of the noble sport, and
only unhappy in my want of constitution for that, and Drinking. They all say
it is pity I am so sickly, and I think it is pity they are so healthy. But I say
nothing that may destroy their good opinion of me: I have not quoted one Latin
Author since I came down, but have learned without book a Song of Mr. Thomas
Durfey's, who is your only Poet of tolerable reputation in this country. He
makes all the merriment in our Entertainments, and but for him, there would be
so miserable a dearth of Catches, that I fear they would put either the Parson
or me upon making some for 'em. Any man, of any quality, is heartily welcome to
the best Topeing-Table of our Gentry, who can roar out some Rhapsodies of his
works: so that in the same manner as it was said of Homer to his Detractors,
What? Dares any man speak against Him who has given so many men to Eat?
(Meaning the Rhapsodists who live by repeating his verses) thus may it be said
of Mr. Durfey to his Detractors; Dares any one despise Him, who has made so
many men Drink? Alas, Sir! this is a glory which neither you nor I must ever
pretend to. Neither you with your Ovid, nor I with my Statius, can amuse a
whole board of Justices and extraordinary 'Squires, or gain one hum of
approbation, or laugh of admiration! These things (they would say) are too
studious, they may do well enough with such as love Reading, but give us your
ancient Poet Mr. Durfey! It Is mortifying enough, it must be confessed; but
however, let us proceed in the way that nature has directed us -- Multi multa
sciunt, sed nemo omnia, as it is said in the Almanac. Let us communicate our
works for our mutual comfort; send me Elegies, and you shall not want Heroicks.
At present, I have only these Arguments in Prose to the Thebaid, which you
claim by promise, as I do your Translation of Pars me Sulmo tenet -- and the
Ring: the rest I hope for as soon as you can conveniently transcribe 'em, and
whatsoever orders you are pleased to give me shall be punctually obeyed by

Your, etc.

May 10, 1710.
I Had not so long omitted to express my acknowledgments to you for so much
goodnature and friendship as you lately showed me; but that I am but just
returned to my own Hermitage, from Mr. Caryl's, who has done me so many
favors, that I am almost inclined to think my Friends infect one another, and
that your conversation with him has made him as obliging to me as yourself. I
can assure you he has a sincere respect for you, and this I believe he has
partly contracted from me, who am too full of you not to overflow upon those I
converse with. But I must now be contented to converse only with the Dead of
this world, that is to say, the dull and obscure, every way obscure, in their
intellects as well as their persons: Or else have recourse to the living Dead,
the old Authors with whom you are so well acquainted, even from Virgil down to
Aulus Gellius, whom I do not think a Critic by any means to be compared to Mr.
Dennis: And I must declare positively to you, that I will persist in this
opinion, till you become a little more civil to Atticus. Who could have
imagined, that he who had escaped all the misfortunes of his Time, unhurt even
by the Proscriptions of Anthony and Augustus; should in these days find an
Enemy more severe and barbarous than those Tyrants? and that Enemy the gentlest
too, the best-natur'd of mortals, Mr. C^? Whom I must in this compare once more
to Augustus; who seemed not more unlike himself, in the Severity of one part of
his life and the Clemency of the other, than you. I leave you to reflect on
this, and hope that time (which mollifies rocks, and of stiff things makes
limber) will turn a resolute critic to a gentle reader; and instead of this
positive, tremendous, new-fashion'd Mr. C^, restore unto us our old
acquaintance, the soft, beneficent, and courteous Mr. C^.

I expect much, toward the civilizing of you in your critical capacity, from
the innocent Air and Tranquillity of our Forest, when you do me the favor to
visit it. In the mean time, it would do well by way of Preparative, if you
would duly and constantly every morning read over a Pastoral of Theccritus or
Virgil; and let the Lady Isabella put your Macrobius and Aulus Gellius
somewhere out of your way, for a month or so. Who knows, but Traveling and
long Airing in an open field, may contribute more successfully to the cooling a
Critic's severity, than it did to the asswaging of Mr. Cheek's Anger, of old?
In these fields you will be secure of finding no enemy, but the most faithful
and affectionate of your friends, etc.

May 17, 1710.
AFTER I had recovered from a dangerous Illness which was first contracted in
Town, about a fortnight after my coming hither I troubled you with a letter,
and a paper enclosed, which you had been so obliging as to desire a sight of
when last I saw you, promising me in return some translations of yours from
Ovid. Since when, I have not had a syllable from your hands, so that it is to be
feared that though I have escaped Death, I have not Oblivion. I should at least
have expected you to have finished that Elegy upon me, which you told me you
was upon the point of beginning when I was sick in London; if you will but do
so much for me first, I will give you leave to forget me afterward; and for my
own part will die at discretion, and at my leisure. But I fear I must be forced
like many learned Authors, to write my own Epitaph, if I would be remembered at
all. Monsieur de la Fontaine's would fit me to a hair, but it is a kind of
Sacrilege, (do you think it is not?) to steal Epitaphs. In my present, living
dead condition, nothing would be properer than Oblitusque meorum, obliviscendus
and illis, but that unluckily I cannot forget my friends, and the civilities I
received from yourself, and some others. They say indeed it is one quality of
generous minds to forget the obligations they have conserr'd, and perhaps too
it may be so to forget those on whom they conferred 'em? Then indeed I must be
forgotten to all intents and purposes! I am, it must be owned, dead in a
natural capacity, according to Mr. Bickerstaff; dead in a poetical capacity, as
a damned author; and dead in a civil capacity, as a useless member of the
Commonwealth. But reflect, dear Sir, what melancholy effects may ensue, if
Dead men are not civil to one another? If he who has nothing to do himself,
will not comfort and support another in his Idleness? If those who are to die
themselves, will not now and then pay the charity of visiting a Tomb and a dead
friend, and strowing a sew flowers over him? In the shades where I am, the
Inhabitants have a mutual compassion for each other: Being all alike Inanes,
and Umbratiles, we saunter to one another's habitations, and daily assist each
other in doing nothing at all; this I mention for your edification and example,
that Tout plein du vie as you are, yet you may not sometimes disdain --
desipere in loco. Though you are no Papist, and have not so much regard to the
dead as to address yourself to them, (which I plainly perceive by your silence)
yet I hope you are not one of those Heterodox, who hold them to be totally
insensible of the good offices and kind wishes of their living friends, and to
be in a dull State of Sleep, without one dream of those they left behind them?
If you are let this Letter convince you to the contrary, which assures you, I
am still, though in a State of Separation,

Your, etc.
P. S. This letter of Deaths, puts me in mind of poor Mr. Betterton's; over
whom I would have this Sentence of Tully for an Epitaph.



Vitae been actae jucundissima est Recordatio.
June 24, 1710.
IT IS very natural for a young Friend, and a young Lover, to think the persons
they love have nothing to do but to please them; when perhaps they, for their
parts, had twenty other engagements before. This was my case when I wondered I
did not hear from you; but I no sooner received your short letter, but I forgot
your long silence; and so many fine things as you said of me could not but have
wrought a cure on my own Sickness, if it had not been of the nature of that,
which is deaf to the Voice of the Charmer. 'Twas impossible you could have
better timed your compliment on my Philosophy; it was certainly properest to
commend me for it just when I most needed it, and when I could least be proud
of it; that is, when I was in pain. It Is not easy to express what an exaltation
it gave to my Spirits, above all the cordials of my Doctor; and it is no
compliment to tell you, that your Compliments were sweeter than the sweetest of
his Juleps and Syrups. But if you will not believe so much, Pour le moins,
votre Compliment
M'a soulage dans ce moment;
Et des qu' on me l'est venu fair,
J'ay chasse mon Apoticaire,
Et renvoye mon Lavement.


Nevertheless I would not have you entirely lay aside the thoughts of my
Epitaph, any more than I do those of the probability of my becoming (ere long)
the subject of one. For Death has of late been very familiar with some of my
Size; I am told my Lord Lumley and Mr. Litton are gone before me; and though I
may now without vanity esteem myself the least thing like a man in England, yet
I cannot but be sorry, two Heroes of such a make should die inglorious in their
beds; when it had been a fate more worthy our size, had they met with theirs
from an irruption of Cranes, or other warlike Animals, those ancient enemies to
our Pygmaean Ancestors! You of a superior species little regard what befalls us
Homunciolos Sesquipedales; however you have no reason to be so unconcerned,
since all Physicians agree there is no greater sign of a Plague among Men, than
a Mortality among Frogs. I was the other day in company with a Lady, who
rallied my Person so much, as to cause a total subversion of my countenance:
Some days after, to be revenged on her, I presented her among other company the
following Rondeau on that occasion, which I desire you to show Sapho. You know
where you did despise
(The Other day) my little Eyes,
Little Legs, and little Thighs,
And some things of little Size,
You know where.
You, it is true, have fine black Eyes,
Taper Legs, and tempting Thighs,
Yet what more than all we prize
Is a thing of little Size,
You know where.


This sort of writing called the Rondeau is what I never knew practiced in our
Nation, and I verily believe it was not in use with the Greeks or Romans,
neither Macrobius nor Hyginus taking the least notice of it. It Is to be
observed, that the vulgar spelling and pronouncing it Round O, is a manifest
Corruption, and by no means to be allowed of by Critics. Some may mistakenly
imagine that it was a sort of Rondeau which the Gallick Soldiers sung in
Caesar's Triumph over Gaul -- Gallias Caesar subegit, etc. as it is recorded by
Suetonius in Julio, and so derive its original from the ancient Gauls to the
modern French: but this is erroneous; the words there not being ranged
according to the Laws of the Rondeau, as laid down by Clement Marot. If you
will say, that the Song of the Soldiers might be only the rude beginning of
this kind of Poem, and so consequently imperfect, neither Heinsius nor I can be
of that opinion; and so I conclude, that we know nothing of the matter.

But, Sir, I ask your pardon for all this Buffoonry, which I could not address
to any one so well as to you, since I have found by experience, you most easily
forgive my impertinencies. It Is only to show you that I am mindful of you at
all times; that I write at all times; and as nothing I can say can be worth
your reading, so I may as well throw out what comes uppermost, as study to be
dull. I am, etc.

Mr. C..... to Mr. POPE.
July 15, 1710.
AT last I have prevailed over a lazy humor to transcribe this Elegy: I have
changed the situation of some of the Latin Verses, and made some
Interpolations, but I hope they are not absurd, and foreign to my author's
sense and manner; but they are referred to your censure, as a debt; whom I
esteem no less a Critic than a Poet: I expect to be treated with the same
rigor as I have practiced to Mr. Dryden and you, -- Hanc veniam petimusque
damusque vicessim.


I desire the favor of your opinion, why Priam, in his speech to Pyrrhus in
the second Aeneid, says this to him, At non ille satum quo te mentiris,
Achilles.


He would intimate (I fancy by Pyrrhus's answer) only his degeneracy: but then
these following lines of the Version (I suppose from Homer's History) seem
absurd in the mouth of Priam, viz. He cheered my sorrows, and for sums of gold,
The bloodless carcass of my Hector sold.


I am, Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
July 20, 1710.
I Give you thanks for the Version you sent me of Ovid's Elegy. It is very much
an image of that author's writing, who has an agreeableness that charms us
without correctness, like a mistress whose faults we see, but love her with
them all. You have very judiciously altered his method in some places, and I
can find nothing which I dare insist upon as an error: What I have written in
the margins being merely Guesses at a little improvement, rather than
Criticisms. I assure you I do not expect you should subscribe to my private
notions but when you shall judge 'em agreeable to reason and good sense. What I
have done is not as a Critic, but as a Friend; I know too well how many
qualities are requisite to make up the one, and that I want almost all I can
reckon up; but I am sure I do not want inclination, nor I hope capacity, to be
the other. Nor shall I take it at all amiss, that another dissents from my
opinion: It Is no more than I have often done from my own; and indeed, the more
a man advances in understanding, he becomes the more every day a critic upon
himself, and finds something or other still to blame in his former notions and
opinions. I could be glad to know if you have translated the 11th Elegy of Lib.
2. Ad amican navigantem, the 8th of Book 3, or the 11th of Book 3, which are
above all others my particular favorites, especially the last of these.

As to the passage of which you ask my opinion in the second Aeneid, it is
either so plain as to require no solution; or else (which is very probable) you
see farther into it than I can. Priam would say, "that Achilles (whom surely
you only feign to be your Father, since your actions are so different from his)
did not use me thus inhumanly. He blushed at his murder of Hector when he saw
my sorrows for him; and restored his dead body to me to be buried." To this the
answer of Pyrrhus seems to be agreeable enough. "Go then to the shades, and
tell Achilles how I degenerate from him:" granting the truth of what Priam had
said of the difference between them. Indeed Mr. Dryden's mentioning here what
Virgil more judiciously passes in silence, the circumstance of Achilles's
selling for money the body of Hector, seems not so proper; it in some measure
lessening the character of Achilles's generosity and piety, which is the very
point of which Priam endeavors in this place to convince his Son, and to
reproach him with the want of. But the truth of this Circumstance is no way to
be questioned being expressly taken from Homer, who represents Achilles weeping
for Priam, yet receiving the gold, Iliad 24: For when he gives the body, he
uses these words, "O my friend Patroclus! forgive me that I quit the corpse of
him who killed thee; I have great gifts in ransom for it, which I will bestow
upon thy funeral."

I am, etc.

Mr. C..... to Mr. POPE.
Aug. 3, 1710.
LOoking among some French Rhymes, I was agreeably surpised to find in the
Rondeau of In Voiture's Poems.
Pour le moins -- your Apoticaire and Lavement, which I took for your own; so
much is your Muse of Intelligence with the Wits of all languages. You have
refined upon Voiture, whose Ou Vous Scavez is much inferior to your You know
where -- You do not only pay your club with your author (as our friend says)
but the whole reckoning; who can form such pretty lines from so trivial a hint.

For Ovid's Amorum, l. 2. El. 16. Pars me Sulmo, etc.
my Elegy; it is confessed, that the Topography of Sulmo in the Latin makes but
an awkward figure in the Version. Your couplet of the Dog Star is very fine,
but may be too sublime in this place. I laughed heartily at your note upon
Paradise; for to make Ovid talk of the Garden of Eden, is certainly most
absurd: But Xenophon in his Oeconomicks, speaking of a garden finely planted
and watered (as is here described) calls it Paradisos: It Is an interpolation
indeed, and serves for a gradation to the Caelestial Orb; which expresses in
some sort the Sidus Castoris in part Caeli -- how Trees can enjoy, let the
naturalists determine; but the Poets make 'em sensitive, lovers, bachelors, and
married. Virgil in his Georgicks Lib. 2. Horace Ode 15. Lib. 2. Platanus
caelebs evincet ulmos. Epod. 2. Ergo aut adulta vitium propagine Altas maritat
populos. Your Critique is a very Dolce-piccante; for after the many faults you
justly find, you smooth your rigor: but an obliging thing is owing (you think)
to one who so much esteems and admires you, and who shall ever be

Your, etc.

August 21, 1710.
YOUR Letters are a perfect charity to a man in retirement, utterly forgotten
of all his Friends but you; for since Mr. Wycherley left London, I have not
heard a word from him; though just before, and once since, I writ to him, and
though I know myself guilty of no offense but of doing sincerely just what he
Correcting his Verses. See the Letters in 1706 and the following Years, of Mr.
Wycherley and Mr. Pope.
bid me. -- Hoc mihi libertas, hoc pia lingua dedit! But the greatest injury he
does me is the keeping me in ignorance of his welfare, which I am always very
sollicitous for, and very uneasy in the fear of any Indisposition that may
befall him. In what I sent you some time ago, you have not verse enough to be
severe upon, in revenge for my last criticism: In one point I must persist,
that is to say, my dislike of your Paradise, in which I take no pleasure; I
know very well that in Greek it is not only used by Xenophon, but is a common
word for any Garden; but in English it bears the signification and conveys the
idea of Eden, which alone is (I think) a reason against making Ovid use it; who
will be thought to talk too like a Christian in your version at least, whatever
it might have been in Latin or Greek. As for all the rest of my Remarks, since
you do not laugh at them as at this, I can be so civil as not to lay any stress
upon 'em (as I think I told you before) and in particular in the point of Trees
enjoying, you have, I must own, sully satisfied me that the Expression is not
only defensible, but beautiful. I shall be very glad to see your Translation of
the Elegy, Ad Amicam navigantem, as soon as you can; for (without a compliment
to you) every thing you write either in verse or prose, is welcome to me; and
you may be confident, (if my opinion can be of any sort of consequence in any
thing) that I will never be unsincere, though I may be often mistaken. To use
Sincerity with you is but paying you in your own coin, from whom I have
experienced so much of it; and I need not tell you how much I really esteem
you, when I esteem nothing in the world so much as that Quality. I know you
sometimes say civil things to me in your Epistolary Style, but those I am to
make allowance for, as particularly when you talk of Admiring; it is a word you
are so used to in conversation of Ladies, that it will creep in to your
discourse in spite of you, even to your Friends. But as Women when they think
themselves secure of admiration, commit a thousand Negligences, which show them
so much at disadvantage and off their guard, as to lose the little real Love
they had before: so when men imagine others entertain some esteem for their
abilities, they often expose all their Imperfections and foolish works, to the
disparagement of the little Wit they were thought masters of. I am going to
exemplify this to you, in putting into your hands (being encouraged by so much
indulgence) some verses of my Youth, or rather Childhood; which (as I was a
great admirer of Waller) were intended in imitation of his manner; and are
perhaps, such imitations, as those you see in awkward country Dames of the fine
and well-bred Ladies of the Court. If you will take 'em with you into
Lincolnshire, they may save you one hour from the conversation of the country
Gentlemen and their Tenants, (who differ but in Dress and Name) which if it be
there as bad as here, is even worse than my Poetry. I hope your stay there will
be no longer than (as Mr. Wycherley calls it) to rob the Country, and run away
to London with your money. In the mean time I beg the favor of a line from
you, and am (as I will never cease to be)

Your, etc.

October 12, 1710.
I Deferred answering your last, upon the advice I received that you were
leaving the town for some time, and expected your return with impatience,
having then a design of seeing my Friends there, among the first of which I
have reason to account yourself. But my almost continual Illnesses prevent
that, as well as most other satisfactions of my life: However I may say one
good thing of sickness, that it is the best Cure in nature for Ambition, and
designs upon the World or Fortune: It makes a man pretty indifferent for the
future, provided he can but be easy, by intervals, for the present. He will be
content to compound for his Quiet only, and leave all the circumstantial part
and pomp of life to those, who have a health vigorous enough to enjoy all the
Mistresses of their desires. I thank God, there is nothing out of myself which
I would be at the trouble of seeking, except a Friend; a happiness I once hoped
to have possessed in Mr. Wycherley; but -- Quantum mutalus ab illo! -- I have
for some years been employed much like Children that build houses with Cards,
endeavoring very busily and eagerly to raise a Friendship, which the first
breath of any ill-natured By-stander could puff away. -- But I will trouble you
no farther with writing, nor myself with thinking, of this subject.

I was mightily pleased to perceive by your quotation from Voiture, that you
had track'd me so far as France. You see it is with weak heads as with weak
stomachs, they immediately throw out what they received last: and what they
read, floats upon the surface of their mind, like Oil upon water, without
incorporating. This, I think however, cannot be said of the Loveverses I last
troubled you with, where all (I am afraid) is so puerile and so like the
Author, that no body will suspect any thing to be borrowed. Yet you, (as a
friend, entertaining a better opinion of 'em) it seems searched in Waller, but
searched in vain. Your judgment of 'em is (I think) very right, -- for it was
my own opinion before. If you think 'em not worth the trouble of correcting,
pray tell me so freely, and it will save me a labor; if you think the
contrary, you would particularly oblige me by your remarks on the several
thoughts as they occur. I long to be nibling at your verses, and have not
forgot who promised me Ovid's Elegy ad Amicam Navigantem? Had Ovid been as long
composing it, as you in sending it, the Lady might have sailed to Gades, and
received it at her return. I have really a great Itch of Criticism upon me, but
want matter here in the Country; which I desire you to furnish me with, as I do
you in the Town, Sic servat sludii Faedera quisque sui.


I am obliged to Mr. Caryl (whom you tell me you met at Epsom) for telling you
Truth, as a man is in these days to any one that will tell Truth to his
advantage, and I think none is more to mine, than what he told you and I should
be glad to tell all the world, that I have an extreme Affection and estrem for
you.

Tecum etenim longos memini consumere soles,
Et tecum primas epulis decerpere noctes,
Unum Opus and Requiem pariter disponimus ambo,
Atque verecunda laxamus seria mensa.
By these Epulae, as I take it, Persius meant the Portugal Snuff and burned
Claret, which he took with his master Cornutus; and the Verecunda Mensa was,
without dispute, some Coffee-house table of the ancients. -- I will only
observe, that these four lines are as elegant and musical as any in Persius,
not excepting those six or seven which Mr. Dryden quotes as the only such in
all that Author. -- I could be heartily glad to repeat the satisfaction
described in them, being truly

Your, etc.

October 28, 1710.
I am glad to find by your last letter that you write to me with the freedom of
a friend, setting down your thoughts as they occur, and dealing plainly with me
in the matter of my own Trifles, which I assure you I never valued half so much
as I do that Sincerity in you which they were the occasion of discovering to
me; and which while I am happy in, I may be trusted with that dangerous weapon,
Poetry; since I shall do nothing with it but after asking and following your
advice. I value Sincerity the more, as I find by sad experience, the practice
of it is more dangerous; Writers rarely pardoning the executioners of their
Verses, even though themselves pronounce sentence upon them. -- As to Mr.
Philips's Pastorals, I take the first to be infinitely the best, and the second
the worst; the third is for the greatest part a Translation from Virgil's
Daphnis. I will not forestal your judgment of the rest, only observe in that of
the Nightingale these lines, (speaking of the Musician's playing on the harp.)
Now lightly skimming over the Strings they pass,
Like Winds that gently brush the plying grass,
And melting Airs arise at their command;
And now, laborious, with a weighty hand,
He sinks into the Cords, with solemn pace,
And gives the swelling Tones a manly grace,


To which nothing can be objected, but that they are too lofty for Pastoral,
especially being put into the mouth of a Shepherd, as they are here; in the
Poet's own person they had been (I believe) more proper. These are more after
Virgil's manner than that of Theocritus, whom yet in the character of Pastoral
he rather seems to imitate. In the whole, I agree with the Tatler, that we have
no better Eclogues in our language. There is a small copy of the same Author
published in the Tatler No 12. on the Danish Winter: It Is Poetical Painting,
and I recommend it to your perusal.

Dr. Garth's Poem I have not seen, but believe I shall be of that Critic's
opinion you mention at Will's, who swore it was good: For though I am very
cautious of swearing after Critics, yet I think one may do it more safely when
they commend, than when they blame.

I agree with you in your censure of the use of Sea-terms in Mr. Dryden's
Virgil; not only because Helenus was no great Prophet in those matters, but
because no Terms of Art or Cant-Words suit with the Majesty and dignity of
Style which Epic Poetry requires. -- Cui men's divinior atque os magna
soniturum. -- The Tarpawlin Phrase can please none but such Qui aurem habent
Batavam; they must not expect Auribus Atticis probari, I find by you. (I think
I have brought in two phrases of Martial here very dexterously.)

Though you say you did not rightly take my Meaning in the verse I quoted from
Juvenal, yet I will not explain it; because though it seems you are resolved to
take me for a Critic, I would by no means be thought a Commentator. -- And for
another reason too, because I have quite forgot both the Verse and the
Application.

I hope it will be no offense to give my most hearty service to Mr. Wycherley,
though I perceive by his last to me, I am not to trouble him with my letters,
since he there told me he was going instantly out of Town, and till his return
was my Servant, etc. I guess by yours he is yet with you, and beg you to do
what you may with all truth and honor, that is, assure him I have ever borne
all the Respect and Kindness imaginable to him. I do not know to this hour what
it is that has estranged him from me; but this I know, that he may for the
future be more safely my friend, since no invitation of his shall ever more
make me so free with him. I could not have thought any man had been so very
cautious and suspicious, as not to credit his own Experience of a friend.
Indeed to believe no body, may be a Maxim of Safety, but not so much of
Honesty. There is but one way I know of conversing safely with all men, that
is, not by concealing what we say or do, but by saying or doing nothing that
deserves to be concealed, and I can truly boast this comfort in my affairs with
Mr. Wycherley. But I pardon his Jealousy, which is become his Nature, and shall
never be his enemy whatsoever he says of me.

Your, etc.

Mr. C...... to Mr. POPE.
Nov. 5, 1710.
I Find I am obliged to the sight of your Love-verses, for your opinion of my
sincerity; which had never been called in question, if you had not forced me,
upon so many other occasions to express my esteem.

I have just read and compared Pieces printed in the 6th Vol. of Tonson's
Miscellanies.
Mr. Row's Version of the 9th of Lucan, with very great pleasure, where I find
none of those absurdities so frequent in that of Virgil, except in two places,
for the sake of lashing the Priests; one where Cato says -- Sortilegis egeant
dubii -- and one in the simile of the Haemorhois -- fatidici Sabaei -- He is so
errant a Whig, that he strains even beyond his Author, in passion for Liberty,
and aversion to Tyranny; and errs only in amplification. Lucan in initio 9 ni,
describing the seat of the Semidei manes, says, Quodque patet terras inter
Lunaeque meatus,
Semidei manes habitant --
Mr. Row has this Line, Then looking down on the Sun's feeble Ray.
Pray your opinion, if there be an Error-Sphaericus in this or no?

Yours, etc.

Nov. 11, 1710.
YOU mistake me very much in thinking the freedom you kindly used with my
Love-verses, gave me the first opinion of your sincerity: I assure you it only
did what every good-natured action of yours has done since, confirmed me more
in that opinion. The Fable of the Nightingale in Philips's Pastoral, is taken
from Famianus Strada's Latin Poem on the same subject, in his Prolusiones
Academicae; only the Tomb he erects at the end, is added from Virgil's
conclusion of the Culex. I cannot forbear giving you a passage out of the Latin
Poem I mention, by which you will find the English Poet is indebted to it.
Alternat mira art sides, dum torquet acutas
Inciditque graves operoso verbere pulsat --
Jamque manu per fila volat; simul hos, simul illos
Explorat numeros, chordaque laborat in omni. --
Mox silet. Illa modis totidem respondit, and artem
Art refert; nunc ceu rudis, aut incerta canendi,
Praebet iter liquidum labenti e pectore voci,
Nunc caesim variat, modulisque canora minutis
Delibrat vocem, tremuloque reciprocat ore.


This Poem was many years since imitated by Crashaw, out of whose Verses the
following are very remarkable. From this to that, from that to this he flies,
Feels Musick's Pulse in all its Arteries;
Caught in a net which there Apollo spreads,
His fingers struggle with the vocal threads.


I have (as I think I formerly told you) a very good opinion of Mr. Row's 9th
book of Lucan: Indeed he amplifies too much, as well as Brebaeus, the famous
French imitator. If I remember right, he sometimes takes the whole Comment into
the Text of the Version, as particularly in lin. 808. Utque solet pariter totis
se essundere signis Corycii pressura croci -- And in the place you quote, he
makes of those two lines in the Latin Vidit quanta sub nocte jaceret
Nostra dies, risitque sui ludibria trunci.
no less than eight in English.

What you observe sure cannot be an Error Sphaericus, strictly speaking, either
according to their Ptolomaick, or our Copernican System; Tycho Brahe himself
will be on the Translator's side. For Mr. Row here says no more, than that he
looked down on the Rays of the Sun, which Pompey might do, even though the Body
of the Sun were above him.

You cannot but have remarked what a journey Lucan here makes Cato take for the
sake of his fine Descriptions. From Cyrene he travels by land, for no better
reason than this: Haec eadem sua debat Hyems quae clauserat aequor.
The Winter's effects on the Sea, it seems were more to be dreaded than all the
Serpents, Whirlwinds, Sands, etc. by Land, which immediately after he paints
out in his speech to the soldiers: Then he fetches a compass a vast way round
about, to the Nasamones and Jupiter Ammon's Temple, purely to ridicule the
Oracles: And Labienus must pardon me, if I do not believe him when he says --
sors obtulit, and fortuna viae -- either Labienus or the Map, is very much
mistaken here. Thence he returns back to the Syrtes (which he might have taken
first in his way to Utica) and so to Leptis Minor, where our Author leaves him;
who seems to have made Cato speak his own mind, when he tells his Army -- Ire
sat est -- no matter whither. I am,

Your, etc.

Mr. C..... to Mr. POPE.
Nov. 20, 1710.
THE System of Tycho Brahe (were it true, as it is Novel) could have no room
here: Lucan, with the rest of the Latin Poets, seems to follow Plato; whose
order of the Spheres is clear in Cicero, De Natura Deorum, De somnio Scipionis,
and in Macrobius. The Seat of the Semidei manes is Platonic too, for Apuleius
de Deo Socratis assigns the same to the Genii, viz. the Region of the Air for
their intercourse with Gods and Men; so that I fancy, Row mistook the
situation, and I cannot be reconciled to, Look down on the Sun's Rays. I am glad
you agree with me about the latitude he takes; and wish you had told me, if the
sortilegi, and fatidici, could license his invectives against Priests? But I
suppose you think them (with Helena) undeserving of your protection. I agree
with you in Lucan's Errors, and the cause of 'em, his Poetic descriptions: for
the Romans then knew the coast of Africa from Cyrene (to the South-east of
which lies Ammon toward Egypt) to Leptis and Utica: But pray remember how your
Homer nodded while Ulysses slept, and waking knew not where he was, in the
short passage from Corcyra to Ithaca. I like Trapp's Versions for their
justness; his Psalm is excellent, the Prodigies in the first Georgick judicious
(whence I conclude that it is easier to turn Virgil justly in blank verse, than
rhyme.) The Eclogue of Gallus, and Fable of Phaeton pretty well; but he is very
saulty in his Numbers; the fate of Phaeton might run thus, -- The blasted
Phaeton with blazing Hair,
Shot gliding through the vast Abyss of Air,
And tumbled headlong, like a falling Star.


I am, Your, etc.

Mr. POPE's Answer.
Nov. 24, 1710.
TO make use of that freedom and familiarity of style which we have taken up in
our Correspondence, and which is more properly Talking upon paper, than
Writing; I will tell you without any preface, that I never took Tycho Brahe for
one of the Ancients, or in the least an acquaintance of Lucan's; nay, it is a
mercy on this occasion tha^ I do not give you an account of h^^ Life and
conversation; as how he liv^^ some years like an enchanted Knight in a certain
Island, with a tale of a King of Denmark's Mistress that shall be nameless. --
But I have compassion on you, and would not for the world you should stay any
longer among the Genii, and Semidei Manes, you know where; for if once you get
so near the Moon, Sapho will want your presence in the Clouds and inferior
regions; not to mention the great loss Drury Lane will sustain, when Mr. C^ is
in the Milky way. These celestial thoughts put me in mind of the Priests you
mention, who are a sort of Sortilegi in one sense, because in their Lottery
there are more Blanks than Prizes; the Adventurers being at best in an
uncertainty, whereas the Setters-up are sure of something. Priests indeed in
their Character, as they represent God, are sacred; and so are Constables as
they represent the King, but you will own a great many of 'em are very odd
fellows, and the devil a bit of likeness in 'em. Yet I can assure you, I honor
the good as much as I detest the bad, and I think, that in condemning these, we
praise those. I am so far from esteeming even the worst unworthy of my
protection, that I have defended their Character (in Congreve's and Vanbrugh's
Plays) even against their own Brethren. And so much for Priests in general, now
for Trapp in particular whose Translations from Ovid I have not so good an
opinion of as you; not (I will assure you) from any sort of prejudice to him as
a Priest, but because I think he has little of the main Characteristick of his
Author, a graceful Easiness. For let the sense be ever so exactly rendered,
unless an author looks like himself, in his air, habit, manner, it is a Disguise
and not a Translation. But as to the Psalm, I think David is much more beholden
to him than Ovid; and as he treated the Roman like a Jew, so he has made the
Jew speak like a Roman.

Your, etc.

Mr. C..... to Mr. POPE.
December. 5, 1710.
THE same judgment we made on Row's 9th of Lucan will serve for his part of the
6th, where I find this memorable line, Parque novum Fortuna videt concurrere,
bellum
Atque virum.
For this he employs six Verses, among which is this, As if on Knightly terms
in Lists they ran.
Pray can you trace Chivalry up higher than Pharamond? will you allow it an
Anachronism? -- Tickell in his Version of the Phoenix from Claudian, When
Nature ceases, thou shall still remain,
Nor second Chaos bound thy endless reign.
Claudian thus, Et clades te nulla rapit, solusque supersles,
Edom. ta Tellure manes --
which plainly resers to the Deluge of Deucalion and the Conflagration of
Phaeton; not to the final Dissolution. You thought of the Priests Lottery is
very fine; you play the Wit, and not the Critic, upon the errors of your
brother.

Your observations are all very just: Virgil is eminent for adjusting his
diction to his sentiments; and among the moderns, I find your Practice the
Prosodia of your Rules. Your To a Lady, with the Works of Voiture.
Poem shows you to be, what you say of Voiture, with Books well-bred: The state
of the Fair, though satirical, is touched with that delicacy and gallantry, that
not the Court of Augustus, nor -- But hold, I shall lose what I lately
recovered, your opinion of my Sincerity; yet I must say, it is as faultless as
the Fair to whom it is addressed, be she never so perfect. The M. G. (who it
seems had no right notion of you, as you of him) transcribed it by lucubration:
From some discourse of yours, he thought your inclination led you to (what the
men of fashion call Learning) Pedantry; but now he says he has no less, I
assure you, than a Veneration for you.

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. C.....
December. 17, 1710.
IT seems that my late mention of Crashaw, and my quotation from him, has moved
your curiosity. I therefore send you the whole Author, who has held a place
among my other books of this nature for some years; in which time having read
him twice or thrice, I find him one of those whose works may just deserve
reading. I take this Poet to have writ like a Gentleman, that is, at leisure
hours, and more to keep out of idleness, than to establish a reputation: so
that nothing regular or just can be expected from him. All that regards Design,
Form, Fable, (which is the Soul of Poetry) all that concerns exactness, or
consent of parts, (which is the Body) will probably be wanting; only pretty
conceptions, fine metaphors, glittering expressions, and something of a neat
cast of Verse, (which are properly the dress, gems, or loose ornaments of
Poetry) may be found in these verses. This is indeed the case of most other
Poetical Writers of Miscellanies; nor can it well be otherwise, since no man
can be a true Poet, who writes for diversion only. These Authors should be
considered as Versifiers and witty Men, rather than as Poets; and under this
head will only fall the Thoughts, the Expression, and the Numbers. These are
only the pleasing parts of Poetry, which may be judged of at a view, and
comprehended all at once. And (to express myself like a Painter) their
Coloring entertains the sight, but the Lines and Life of the Picture are not
to be inspected too narrowly.

This Author formed himself upon Petrarch, or rather upon Marino. His thoughts
one may observe, in the main, are pretty; but oftentimes far fetched, and too
often strained and stiffned to make them appear the greater. For men are never
so apt to think a thing great, as when it is odd or wonderful; and
inconsiderate Authors would rather be admired than understood. This ambition of
surprising a reader, is the true natural cause of all Fustian, or Bombast in
Poetry. To confirm what I have said you need but look into his first Poem of
the Weeper, where the 2d, 4th, 6th, 14th, 21st stanza's are as sublimely dull,
as the 7th, 8th, 9th, 16th, 17th, 20th and 23d stanza's of the same copy, are
soft and pleasing: And if these last want any thing, it is an easier and more
unaffected expression. The remaining thoughts in that Poem might have been
spared, being eihter but repetitions, or very trivial and mean. And by this
example in the first one may guess at all the rest, to be like this; a mixture
of tender gentle thoughts and sutiable expressions, of sorc'd and inextricable
conceits, and of needless fillers-up to the rest. From all which it is plain,
this Author writ fast, and set down what came uppermost. A reader may skim off
the froth, and use the clear underneath; but if he goes too deep will meet with
a mouthful of dregs: either the Top or bottom of him are good for little, but
what he did in his own, natural, middle-way, is best.

To speak of his Numbers is a little difficult, they are so various and
irregular, and mostly Pindarick: it is evident his heroic Verse (the best
example of which is his Musick's Duel) is carelessly made up; but one may
imagine from what it now is, that had he taken more care, it had been musical
and pleasing enough, not extremely majestic, but sweet: And the time considered
of his writing, he was (even as uncorrect as he is) none of the worst
Versificators.

I will just observe, that the best Pieces of this Author are, a Paraphrase on
Psalm. 23. On Lessius, Epitaph on Mr. Ashton, Wishes to his supposed Mistress,
and the Dies Irae.

I am, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. C.....
December. 30, 1710.
I Resume my old liberty of throwing out myself upon paper to you, and making
what thoughts float uppermost in my head, the subject of a letter. They are at
present upon Laughter, which (for ought I know) may be the cause you might
sometimes think me too remiss a friend, when I was most entirely so: for I am
never so inclined to mirth as when I am most pleased and most easy, which is in
the company of a friend like yourself.

As the fooling and toying with a mistress is a proof of fondness, not
disrespect, so is raillery with a friend. I know there are Prudes in
friendship, who expect distance, awe and adoration, but I know you are not of
them; and I for my part am no Idolworshipper, though a Papist. If I were to
address Jupiter himself in a heathen way, I fancy I should be apt to take hold
of his knee in a familiar manner, if not of his beard like Dionysius; I was
just going to say of his buttons, but I think Jupiter wore none (however I
will not be positive to so nice a Critic as you, but his robe might be Subnected
with a Fibula.) I know some Philosophers define Laughter, A recommending
ourselves to our own favor, by comparison with the weakness of another: but I
am sure I very rarely laugh with that view, nor do I believe Children have any
such consideration in their heads, when they express their pleasure this way: I
laugh full as innocently as they, for the most part, and as sillily. There is a
difference too betwixt laughing about a thing and laughing at a thing: One may
find the inferior Man (to make a kind of casuistical distinction) provoked to
folly at the sight or observation of some circumstance of a thing, when the
thing itself appears solemn and august to the superior Man, that is, our
Judgment and Reason. Let an Ambassador speak the best Sense in the world, and
deport himself in the most graceful manner before a Prince, yet if the Tail of
his Shirt happen (as I have known it happen to a very wise man) to hang out
behind, more people shall laugh at that than attend to the other; till they
recollect themselves, and then they will not have a jot the less respect for
the Minister. I must confess the iniquity of my countenance before you; several
Muscles of my Face sometimes take an impertinent liberty with my Judgment, but
then my Judgment soon rises, and sets all right again about my mouth: And I
find I value no man so much, as he in whose sight I have been playing the fool.
I cannot be Sub-Persona before a man I love; and not to laugh with honesty,
when Nature prompts, or Folly (which is more a second Nature than any thing I
know) is but a knavish hypocritical way of making a mask of one's own Face. --
To conclude, those that are my friends I laugh with, and those that are not I
laugh at; so am merry in company, and if ever I am wise, it is all by myself.
You take just another course, and to those that are not your friends, are very
civil, and to those that are, very endearing and complaisant: Thus when you and
I meet, there will be the Risus and Blanditiae united together in conversation,
as they commonly are in a verse: But without Laughter on the one side, or
Compliment on the other, I assure you I am with real esteem

Yours, etc.

Mr. C..... to Mr. POPE.
October 26, 1711.
MR. Wycherley visited me at the Bath in my sickness, and expressed much
affection to me: hearing from me how welcome his Letters would be, he presently
writ to you; in which I inserted my Scrall, and after a second. He went to
Gloucester in his way to Salop, but was disappointed of a boat and so returned
to the Bath; then he showed me your answer to his letters in which you speak of
my good nature, but I fear you found me very froward at Reading; yet you allow
for my illness. I could not possibly be in the same house with Mr. Wycherley,
though I sought it earnestly; nor come up to town with him, he being engaged with
others; but whenever we met we talked of you. He praises your Essay on
Criticism.
Poem, and even outvies me in kind expressions of you. As if he had not wrote
two letters to you, he was for writing every Post; I put him in mind he had
already. Forgive me this wrong, I know not whither my talking so much of your
great humanity and tenderness to me, and love to him; or whether the return of
his natural disposition to you, was the cause; but certainly you are now highly
in his favor; now he will come this Winter to your house, and I must go with
him; but first he will invite you speedily to town. -- I arrived on Saturday
last much wearied, yet had wrote sooner, but was told by Mr. Gay (who has writ
a pretty Poem to Lintot, and who gives you his service) that you was gone from
home. Lewis showed me your letter, which set me right, and your next letter is
impatiently expected by me. Mr. Wycherley came to town on Sunday last, and
kindly surpised me with a visit on Monday morning. We dined and drank
together; and I saying, To our Loves, he replied, It Is Mr. Pope 's health: He
said he would go to Mr. Thorold's and leave a letter for you. Though I cannot
answer for the event of all this, in respect to him; yet I can assure you, that
when you please to come you will be most desirable to me, as always by
inclination so now by duty, who shall ever be

Your, etc.

Mr. POPE to Mr. C....
Nov. 12, 1711.
I Received the entertainment of your Letter the day after I had sent you one
of mine, and I am but this morning returned hither. The news you tell me of the
many difficulties you found in your return from Bath, gives me such a kind of
pleasure as we usually take in accompanying our Friends in their mixed
adventures; for methinks I see you laboring through all your inconveniences of
the rough roads, the hard saddle, the trotting horse, and what not? What an
agreeable surprise would it have been to me, to have met you by pure accident,
(which I was within an ace of doing) and to have carried you off triumphantly,
set you on an easier Pad, and relieved the wandering Knight with a Night's
lodging and rural Repast, at our Castle in the Forest? But these are only the
pleasing Imaginations of a disappointed Lover, who must suffer in a melancholy
absence yet these two months. In the mean time, I take up with the Muses for
want of your better company; the Muses, Quae nobiscum pernoctant,
peregrinantur, rusticantur. Those aerial Ladies just discover enough to me of
their beauties to urge my pursuit, and draw me on in a wandering Maze of
thought, still in hopes (and only in hopes) of attaining those favors from
'em, which they confer on their more happy Admirers. We grasp some more
beautiful Idea in our own brain, than our endeavors to express it can set to
the view of others; and still do but labor to fall short of our first
Imagination. The gay Coloring which Fancy gave at the first transient glance
we had of it, goes off in the Execution; like those various figures in the
gilded clouds which while we gaze long upon, to separate the parts of each
imaginary Image, the whole faints before the eye and decays into confusion.

I am highly pleased with the knowledge you give me of Mr Wycherley's present
temper, which seems so favorable to me. I shall ever have such a Fund of
Affection for him as to be agreeable to myself when I am so to him, and cannot
but be gay when he is in good humor, as the surface of the Earth (if you will
pardon a poetical similitude) is clearer or gloomier, just as the Sun is
brighter, or more overcast. -- I should be glad to see the Verses to Lintot
which you mention, for methinks something oddly agreeable may be produced from
that subject. -- For what remains, I am so well, that nothing but the assurance
of your being so can make me better; and if you would have me live with any
satisfaction these dark days in which I cannot see you, it must be by your
writing sometimes to

Your, etc.

Mr. C.... to Mr. POPE.
Dec. 7, 1711.
MR. Wycherley has, I believe sent you two or three letters of invitation; but
you, like the Fair, will be long solicited before you yield, to make the
favor the more acceptable to the Lover. He is much yours by his talk; for that
unbounded Genius which has ranged at large like a libertine, now seems confined
to you: and I should take him for your Mistress too by your simile of the Sun
and Earth: It Is very fine, but inverted by the application; for the gaiety of
your fancy, and the drooping of his by the withdrawing of your luster,
persuades me it would be juster by the reverse. Oh happy Favorite of the
Muses! how per-noctare, all night long with them? but alas! you do but toy, but
skirmish with them, and decline a close Engagement. Leave Elegy and Translation
to the inferior Class, on whom the Muses only glance now and then like our
Winter-Sun, and then leave 'em in the dark. Think on the Dignity of Tragedy,
which is of the greater Poetry, as Dennis says, and foil him at his other
weapon, as you have done in Criticism. Every one wonders that a Genius like
yours will not support the sinking Drama; and Mr Wilks (though I think his Talent
is Comedy) has expressed a furious ambition to swell in your Buskins. We have
had a poor Comedy of Johnson's (not Ben) which held seven nights, and has got
him three hundred pounds, for the Town is sharp-set on new Plays. In vain would
I fire you by Interest or Ambition, when your mind is not susceptible of
either; though your Authority (arising from the General esteem, like that of
Pompey) must infallibly assure you of success; for which in all your wishes you
will be attended with those of

Yours, etc.

Mr POPE to Mr C......
December. 21, 1711.
IF I have not writ to you so soon as I ought, let my writing now atone for
the delay; as it will infallibly do, when you know what a Sacrifice I make you
at this time, and that every moment my eyes are employed upon this paper, they
are taken off from two of the finest Faces in the universe. But indeed it is
some consolation to me to reflect, that while I but write this period. I escape
some hundred fatal Darts from those unerring Eyes, and about a thousand Deaths,
or better. Now you, that delight in dying, would not once have dreamt of an
absent Friend in these circumstances; you that are so nice an Admirer of
Beauty, or (as a Critic would say after Terence) so elegant a Spectator of
Forms: You must have a sober dish of Coffee, and a solitary candle at your
side, to write an Epistle Lucubratory to your friend; whereas I can do it as
well with two pair of radiant lights, that outshine the golden God of Day and
silver Goddess of Night with all the refulgent Eyes of the Firmament. -- You
fancy now that Sapho's eyes are two of these my Tapers, but it is no such
matter, Sir; these are eyes that have more persuasion in one glance than all
Sapho's Oratory and Gesture together, let her put her body into what moving
postures she pleases. Indeed, indeed, my friend, you could never have found so
improper a time to tempt me with Interest or Ambition: let me but have the
Reputation of these in my keeping, and as for my own, let the Devil, or let
Dennis, take it for ever. How gladly would I give all I am worth, that is to
say, my Pastorals for one of them, and my Essay for the other? I would lay out
all my Poetry in Love; an Original for a Lady, and a Translation for a waiting
Maid! alas! what have I to do with Jane Gray, as long as Miss Molly, Miss
Betty, or Miss Patty are in this world? Shall I write of Beauties murdered long
ago, when there are those at this instant that murder me? I Will even compose my
own Tragedy, and the Poet shall appear in his own person to move Compassion:
'Twill be far more effectual than Bays's entering with a rope about his neck,
and the world will own, there never was a more miserable Object brought upon
the Stage.

Now you that are a Critic, pray inform me, in what manner I may connect the
foregoing part of this Letter with that which is to follow, according to the
Rules? I would willingly return Mr Gay my thanks for the favor of his Poem,
and in particular for his kind mention of me; I hoped, when I heard a new
Comedy had met with success upon the Stage, that it had been his, to which I
really wish no less; and (had it been any way in my power) should have been
very glad to have contributed to it is Introduction into the world. His A
Receipt to make a Miscellany.
Verses to Lintot have put a whim into my head, which you are like to be
troubled with in the opposite page This Copy of Verses will be found in our
second Volume.
. Take it as you find it, the production of half an hour the other morning. I
design very soon to put a task of a more serious nature upon you, in reviewing
a piece of mine that may better deserve Criticism; and by that time you have
done with it, I hope to tell you in person with how much fidelity I am,

Your, etc. A. POPE.

The End of the First Volume.

