person breathing with a long tube

A PHYSICAL DISSERTATION ON DROWNING:

IN WHICH SUBMERSION, commonly called DROWNING, is shown to be a long Time
consistent with the Continuance of LIFE, from a Variety of unexceptionable though
surprising FACTS, related by the most eminent and judicious Authors, and
confirmed by incontestable Evidence; which FACTS are reconciled and accounted
for, from the strictest Laws of the Animal Economy.

To which is SUBJOINED, The proper Measures for RECOVERY and RELIEF; the
Obligations we lie under to practice them are clearly suggested, and strongly
enforced; intended for the Good of Mankind, by restoring Life to many Persons,
who are erroneously supposed to be irretrievably drowned. Recommended
particularly, to the Consideration of the Surgeons of the Navy and Army, who
have frequent Opportunities of practicing the Methods recommended.

With an APPENDIX, containing some METHODS for the Recovery of those who hang
themselves, and of Children supposed to be born dead.

By a PHYSICIAN.

LONDON: Printed for JACOB ROBINSON, at the Golden-Lion in Ludgate Street.

MDCCXLVI.

A DISSERTATION ON THE Recovery of PERSONS drowned.
AS Truth in general is of the last Importance, not only in affording a noble
and exalted Satisfaction to the Mind, but also in forming the Morals, and by
that Means, promoting the most valuable Interests of Society; so nothing can be
a greater Reproach to Reason, nor a more palpable Affront offered to its august
and venerable Author, than that ignoble and unmanly Turn of Mind, commonly
known by the Name of Credulity, which is no more than an implicit Contempt of
Reason, and all the mental Powers, producing a Propensity to believe certain
Tenets, Doctrines, or Facts, without that Degree of Evidence, which a Mind
studious of Truth ought to require.

But however odious Credulity may appear, when painted in her native Colors,
she is nevertheless, if we may be allowed the Expression, a Spectre, which
haunts the various Classes and Distinctions of Mankind, under a Form so
infatuating and alluring, as to seduce them from the plain and amiable Paths of
Truth, and bewilder them in the dark and gloomy Labyrinths of Ignorance, Error,
and Confusion. This deplorable Observation is in no Instance more effectually
verified, than in these very Men, who profess a sacred Veneration for Reason,
and pretend to go wherever Truth shall conduct them; for, we frequently find,
not only ancient, but also modern Philosophers and Physicians, laboring with a
pompous Show of Learning and Ratiocination, to prove that Nature, by her stated
and established Laws, was capable of producing certain Effects, which Time has
afterward discovered never to have had any Existence, except in the
Imaginations of the Credulous, or in the chimerical Works of Authors, who
forsaking Fact and Nature, have given a full Scope to their Fancy and
Invention. Thus in former Ages it was keenly disputed, how it came about, that
a small Fish, called the Remora, was capable of putting a speedy Stop to a Ship
under Full-sail; but this pretended Fact has, by later and more penetrating
Naturalists, been discovered to be absolutely false. And, no doubt, the ever
memorable Rabbit-Woman of Godalmin, would have made a considerable Figure in
the Annals of the Royal Society, and afforded Matter to the Members for copious
Dissertations on the Force of Imagination, if she had prudently ceased Breeding
a Day sooner. This bad Piece of Conduct, has, however, thrown an almost
irreparable Disgrace upon natural Knowledge, by inducing the sober and
judicious Part of Mankind to imagine, that it was totally employed in
explaining Visions and Chimeras. Therefore, if we intend to philosophise in
such a manner as not to disgrace Philosophy, we must have Facts duly
ascertained, before we attempt to explain and account for them; since,
according to Kercher, in his Mund. Subterran. Lib. 10. "'It Is as absurd in
physical Matters, to philosophise without Experience, as it is for a blind Man
to pretend to judge of Colors."

Though from what has been said, it sufficiently appears, that Credulity is fatal
to Truth, yet we observe in the Minds of some Men, an arrogant and presumptuous
Skepticism, which, admitting nothing but what is easy to the Conception of its
Possessors, is no less prejudicial to the genuine Interest of Science, and
Philosophy; for, as, by the former we are exposed to the Danger of adopting
Error as well as Truth; so by the latter our Minds are, as it were, manacled,
and hindered from giving a rational Assent to Things and Facts clothed with
the most striking and distinguished Characters of Evidence, for no other
Reason, than that we cannot comprehend them. It is, for Instance, a culpable
Diffidence, to disbelieve the Possibility of a Person's retaining a latent
Principle of Life, after he has remained some Hours, Days, and even Weeks under
Water, since numerous Facts, related by the best Authors, vouched by the most
candid Witnesses, and recorded in the public Archives of the most penetrating
and sagacious Nations, concur to remove the smallest Remains of Uncertainty in
this Point. Besides, I would have the Gentlemen of this Class remember, that
their Conduct bespeaks an insupportable Degree of Pride, and amounts to a
formal Declaration, that they themselves are blessed with Geniuses far superior
to others, since nothing can be true, but what is comprehensible by the vast
Extent of their Capacities. And though Modesty and Common-Sense, should not
direct them to this Observation, yet what the World calls moral Evidence stands
upon Foundations, too stable and sure to be shaken by their frivolous Conceits,
or illgrounded Remonstrances. In a Word, the wise and thinking Part of Mankind
will always be induced to give their Assent to Facts seen by a sufficient
Number of Witnesses, who have Sense enough to guard against Imposture
themselves, and Honesty enough to say nothing but what is Truth to their
Neighbors. All these advantageous Circumstances attend the following
Narrations, which, for the common Benefit of Mankind, have been collected from
Authors of the greatest Veracity, in order to show, that there is often a
Possibility of restoring drowned Persons to Life, after vulgar Prejudice, and a
Want of sufficiently extensive Views with Respect to the Laws of the animal
Economy, have laid a Foundation for concluding them irretrieveably dead, and
past all Hopes of Recovery.

Dr. Bruhier, an eminent Physician of Paris, well known to the learned World,
and highly esteemed for his Knowledge in his Profession, about three Years ago,
published a Treatise on the Uncertain Signs of Death, tending to prove, that
many People are interred before they are really dead; and that there are
frequent Instances of Persons who have lived many Days without Respiration, or
any other apparent Signs of Life. This Doctrine he establishes by many
incontestable Histories of People who have actually survived their Funerals,
and lived many Years after they had been buried, upon a Supposition, that they
were actually dead. Hence he very judiciously infers, that it is not imprudent
but inhuman, to suffer the Interment of our Friends and Relations, before we
are convinced from the most evident Marks, that they are certainly and
irrecoverably deceased; or till such time as the Beginning of Putrefaction
convinces us, that no Hopes remain of a Revival.

In Confirmation of what this celebrated Physician has advanced, many Examples
might be found in our own Country, which escaped his Researches; and no doubt
it happens much more frequently, than is generally imagined; especially in
hysterical Women, in those who have contracted a Habit of drinking spirituous
Liquors to Excess, but particularly in those who have been guilty (for so I
cannot forbear calling it) of taking frequent Doses of Opium, or its
Preparations, so as to render Life insupportable without them, of which there
are too many Instances.

This Doctrine, however true, is not altogether modern; for we learn from
Diogenes Laertius, that the celebrated Empedocles acquired uncommon Honor, by
restoring a Woman to Life who was thought to be dead many Days, and whose
Disorder he discovered to be only a Strangulation of the Uterus, that is, an
hysteric Fit.

We learn, farther, that Heraclides of Pontus, a noted Philosopher, wrote a
Treatise upon this very Subject, which he entitled, (...), Of the Distemper in
which the Patient is deprived of Respiration. In this he asserted, that the
Disorder might continue thirty Days, during which there was no Respiration, or
any other Signs of Life, without any Marks of Putrefaction; and that
notwithstanding, the Patient might at last recover.

In Consequence of the frequent Interments of People before they were really
dead, Dr. Bruhier, in 1745, published a small Pamphlet, containing Proposals
for the Regulation of Funerals, and the Prevention of such calamitous
Disasters; which he endeavors to have confirmed by the Legislature; for, says
he, how many Women weary of their Husbands, and Husbands equally weary of their
Wives; how many Children who have either a real or an imaginary Reason to be
dissatisfied with their Parents; and, especially, how many covetous and
necessitous Heirs, who have long waited for the happy Moment, which was to put
him in Possession of an opulent Fortune, may not abuse the Liberty the Law
affords them of burying their Friends at the End of twenty-four Hours, at which
Time they may, possibly, be really alive, and capable of a Recovery. And to
prove this Regulation the more necessary, he relates the following Histories.

A Woman about eighty Years old, being taken for dead, was about to be laid out
as such, when a Person, who had perused his Treatise, opposed the Design. Next
Morning the Woman was found recovered from her profound Syncope, which,
considering the intense Cold of the Season, had probably proved a real Cause of
her Death, had she been taken out of her Bed.

It is also sufficiently known, that Cardinal Spi^csa, first Minister to the
King of Spain, being supposed dead, and committed to a Surgeon in order to be
embalmed, thrust away the Hand which conducted the fatal Instrument, which put
a real End to his Life. But notwithstanding this Accident, the barbarous
Surgeon proceeded to finish the Operation.

But as Submersion, or Drowning, is the Subject of our present Enquiry, I shall
only farther take Notice of the Histories relating thereto.

The celebrated Kunckel, in Ephemerid. Not. Curios. informs us, that a young
Man had the Misfortune to fall from a Boat into the Water, and sunk to the very
Bottom, about fifteen hundred Paces, from the Shore, which he did not reach
till two Hours after. However, as it is natural for Persons to give an Account
of the several Circumstances attending their respective States of Calamity and
Distress, the young Man informed those who had the Curiosity to enquire into
his Condition during that Time, that whilst he was making the most strenuous
Efforts to preserve his Life, he thought of nothing but God, and the Means of
recommending himself to his Favor and Acceptance; that the Voice of his
darling Sister, who wept bitterly on the Shore, for the Fate of her Brother,
had served to conduct him to the Land; that the Disturbance of the Water by
those who sought for him, and the Lamentations of the People on the Shore, were
not only distinctly heard by him, but also proved extremely shocking and uneasy
to him; that he thought his Respiration was carried on, without his knowing in
what Manner, that the Water had not penetrated into any of the Cavities of his
Body; and that he was hot, instead of being cold.

The same judicious Author informs us, that he had an Opportunity of examining
a Fisherman, who fell from a Boat into the same Place, and was, by Means of the
Ice, kept under Water for three Days, but upon his being found, appeared full
of Vigor, said that he enjoyed good Health, and affirmed, that the most
remarkable Circumstance of which he had been conscious was, that a large
Bladder had been formed around his Head for his Preservation.

The memorable Accident which befell the Swiss Diver is so well attested, and
accompanied with such a peculiar Train of Circumstances, that it cannot fail to
make the most lively Impressions upon every Person capable of the smallest
Degree of Reflection. As Necessity lays a Foundation for Industry, which
frequently cannot be employed, but in a manner, which is either prejudicial to
Health, or fatal to Life, so this adventurous Man followed the Business of
plunging into the Water, and searching those Holes in which he imagined the
larger and better Sort of Fishes were lodged. Accordingly, being employed as
Dr. Bruhier relates the Story, to furnish a Dish of Fish for a Company, who
intended to regale themselves with a fine Dinner, he cheerfully undertook the
Task. His Employers, in the mean Time, accompanied him to the Brink of the
River, and seeing him plunge into the Water, retired, not in the least doubting
but he would keep his Word. The Swiss, however, happening not to bring the Fish
at the Hour appointed, the Company, when the Afternoon was pretty far advanced,
went to the Banks of the River, in order to know the Reason of their
Disappointment. As the Clothes of the Diver lay on the Riverside, so they soon
suspected his deplorable Fate, and accordingly ordered him to be searched for
with Hooks, in the Place into which they had seen him plunge. The Efforts for
this Purpose were not in vain, for he was at last found, and taken out of the
Water, though wounded in several Parts.

As this unfortunate Man had been under Water for nine Hours, so the Curate of
the Place, whose Profession called for some Care of a Person in such a
Situation, had a Mind that he should be forthwith interred; and he had been
infallibly committed to the Grave, had not the celebrated Mr. Egly, a Member of
the Royal Academy of Inscriptions, who observed a Kind of Ebullition in the
Water discharged from his Mouth, positively affirmed that he was not dead. For
that Gentleman justly ascribed this Ebullition to the languid and imperceptible
Remains of Respiration.

This Conduct of Mr. Egly, however uncommon, yet made so deep an Impression
upon the Spectators, that they carried the unfortunate Diver, into an adjacent
House, where having laid him out at full Length, they compressed his Abdomen,
in order to procure a Discharge of the Water he had swallowed. By this Means
having in three Quarters of an Hour evacuated a considerable Quantity of Water,
he moved one of his Legs, a Circumstance which sufficiently evinced that he
still retained some faint Remains of Life. For this Reason he was, by Mr.
Egly's Orders, wrapped up in warm Sheets, and gradually reftored to a natural
Heat. Then being laid in a warm Bed, and his Life becoming gradually more
conspicuous, a liberal Venesection was made, which was succeeded by a Sigh,
then by a slight Knowledge of what had befallen him, and soon after by a total
Restitution of Health; and though Gratitude is rarely to be met with in the
Breasts of the Vulgar, yet this important Service, ever after touched the Heart
of the Swiss, with the highest and most lively Sense of the Obligations he lay
under to Mr. Egly.

Mr. Durham, a Gentleman sufficiently celebrated for his untainted Integrity,
and extensive Learning, in his Physico-Theology, quotes the following History
from Pechlinus, an Author of no less Candor and Reputation.

About eighteen Years ago, a Gardner of Fronningholm, now sixty-five Years old,
and sufficiently vigorous and robust for a Person of that Age, made a generous
Attempt to rescue an unfortunate Neighbor who had fallen into the Water; but
being too foolhardy, he ventured upon the Ice, which broke, and let him fall
into the River, which at that Part was eighteen Else in Depth: He went
perpendicularly to be Bottom, in which his Feet stuck for sixteen Hours before
he was found. He himself says, that he was no sooner under Water, than he
became rigid, and lost not only the Power of Motion, but also all his Senses,
except that of hearing, which was affected by the Ringing of some Bells at
Stockholm. He at first, also perceived a Kind of Bladder before his Mouth,
which hindered the Ingress of the Water by that Passage though it entered freely
into his Ears, and produced a Dullness of Hearing for some Time after. This
unfortunate Man was in vain sought for during sixteen Hours, at the End of
which Time he was taken up by Means of an Hook fixed in his Head, and upon his
total Recovery said, that he was sensible of that particular Part of his Fate.
However, whether from the prevailing Custom of the Country, or the Persuasion
of particular Persons, certain Attempts were made in order to restore him to
Life: For this Purpose he was wrapped up in Blankets, lest the Air entering too
precipitately into his Lungs should prove fatal to him. In this Condition,
being gradually warmed by Means of Sheets, he was rubbed and stimulated till
the Motion of his Blood, which had been checked for so many Hours, returned. At
last he was totally restored by Means of Cordials, and antiapoplectic Liquors.
He as yet bears the Mark of the Hook, and says, that he is still subject to
violent Head-achs. This singular Accident, attested by the Oaths of Persons who
had been Eyewitnesses to it, induced the Queen to give him an annual Pension,
and he was introduced to the Prince, in order to give an Account of what had
befallen him.

The celebrated Pechlinus has wrote the History of a Woman, who remaining under
Water for three whole Days, was happily restored to Life, almost in the same
manner as the Gardner. This Fact, was so notorious, that the learned Tilasius,
Library Keeper to the King of Sweden, and in whose Time the Woman was still
alive, gave the following Certificate of it, which is still kept in the
Archives of the Acad. Nature. Curios.

There lately was in Dalia, commonly called Wormsland, a Woman of the Name of
Margaret Larsdotter, who having the Misfortune to be thrice drowned, remained
the first Time, she being then young, for three whole Days under Water, but the
two other Times had more speedy Relief afforded her. She died in 1672, in the
seventy-fifth Year of her Age. Telasius.

Though this Accident, and the Delivery from it, happening so many different
Times to the same Person, may be some be looked upon as fabulous and romantic,
yet upon the whole it appears to be clothed with the most genuine Character of
Truth and Evidence; for is it credible, that a Man of Probity, Candor, and
learning, as we may readily suppose the Librarian of a rich and powerful
Monarch to be, should in a manner so positive and circumstantial, dare to
affirm a Fact, which was only suspect, and much less one that was absolutely
false? Is it probable that a Man of Pechlinus's Character, who is no less
universally than justly applauded for his extensive Erudition and consummate
medicinal Knowledge, should compose an elaborate Treatise in order to explain
the Possibility of this Fact, without taking due Pains to have its Reality
sufficiently confirmed and ascertained? or, in a word, is it to be supposed,
that this Physician, who was looked upon as the Glory and Ornament of the
Swedish Nation, should have the Impudence, to appeal to all the Literati of
Sweden, for the Truth of a Fact, which had not the Sanction of sufficient
Evidences? Why should we be more scrupulous than Pechlinus's contemporary
Authors, who never called the Truth of this Fact in Questions? The celebrated
Bartholin, in Act. Med. Haffn. Tom. 3. Obs. 42. speaks of it in the following
manner; "I can by no Means remain diffident with respect to the Truth of a
Story confirmed by the concurring Testimonies of so many Witnesses of Candor
and Veracity; and of which Pechlinus has demonstrated the Possibility by other
Examples of a similar Nature: I am only surprised, that so singular a
Narrative, should be so long buried in Oblivion, in a Nation otherwise so
curious and fond of Discoveries."

But we shall have no manner of Reason to doubt of this Fact recorded by
Pechlinus, when we reflect, that other celebrated Physicians and Philosophers,
assure us of the Truth of other Accidents highly similar and analogous to it.
Thus Alexander Benedicius, Lib. x. Cap. 9. speaks in the following manner.
"Life has been frequently seen restored to Persons who have remained under
Water during forty-eight Hours." The same Author, for this very Reason, thinks
it highly improper, to inter drowned and hysteric Patients, till seventy-two
hours after their supposed Death. Borelli, in Cant. 2. Obs. 2. informs us,
that, "a certain Person of Distinction having remained for a long Time under
the Water, was taken for dead when he was found; but proper Efforts being made
to restore his Life, he was roused from his supposed Death, and long survived
his Misfortune." Besides, the Credibility of the Fact, told by Pechlinus, is
sufficiently confirmed by the Suffrage of the learned and judicious Zacchias,
who, in his 79th Consultation, wrote in order to determine, whether the Return
of Life to a young Man who had remained an Hour under Water, was miraculous,
and as some superstitious People would have it, to be ascribed to a Person of
superior Sanctity, speaks in the following manner. "This Event is so far from
being miraculous, that it can hardly come under the Denomination of surprising,
since vast Numbers of Persons have returned to Life, after having been drowned,
or suffocated in any other manner, not only for some Hours, but also during
one, and even three whole Days; because the Suppression of Respiration in the
Water, had occasioned an Oppression of the Spirits, and had brought on an
apoplectic Paroxysm, which rendered them apparently dead, though their Lives were
really preserved by Transpiration, which augmenting gradually, laid a
Foundation for a free Respiration."

The Possibility of retaining a Principle of Life for a long Time under Water,
is still more surprisingly confirmed by Kunckel, in Miscellan. Not. Curios.
Decad. 3. An. 5 and 6. Obs. 71. where he speaks in the following manner. "I am
sufficiently sensible, that in Sweden, no one Doubts of the Possibility of
retaining Life under Water for eight Days; and that the sollowing Accident is
by no Means called in Question by those who live near the Place where it
happened. Some Time ago, about four Leagues from the Town of Falung, a Painter
fell from a Boat into the Water in such a manner, as to remain upright with his
Feet at the Bottom. He was in vain searched for during eight Days; at the End
of which Time, he appeared alive on the Surface of the Water. The Magistrate
and Clergyman of the Place, asked him the following Questions. Whether he had
respir'd all the Time of his Submersion? To which he answered, He knew nothing
of the Matter. Whether he had thought upon God and recommended his Soul to him?
To which he replied, Very often. Whether he could see and hear? To which he
answered, Yes, and said that he would often have laid hold of the Hooks
employed in finding him, if he could have moved his Arms. He also, added, that
the Fish proved highly offensive and uneasy to him, by the Attacks they made on
his Eyes; and being asked by what Means he guarded against these Attacks, he
answered, by moving his Eyelids. As to his Sense of hearing, he affirmed, that
nothing wrs more ungrateful, and even painful, to him than striking the Surface
of the Water; and that in a particular manner, he was affected with a violent
Pain of his Ears, which was forthwith communicated to his whole Body, every
Time People came to draw Water in Buckets. When he was asked, Whehe had been
sensible of Hunger, and discharged his Excrements? He replied, that he had not.
Being interrogated, Whether he had slept? he answered, he knew nothing of it,
but believed he had, because he was some time deprived of all Sensation and
Reflection; adding, that all the Thoughts he remembered to have passed in his
Breast, had only God, and the Means of his own Deliverance, for their Objects."

The Nature and Circumstances of the Accident now related, lay a sufficient
Foundation, for our believing the following memorable Event, especially as it
happened to a Person of Distinction, and is attested as authentic by Men of
Learning and Probity.

Gocellinus, a young Man, and Nephew to one of the Archbishops of Cologne, had
the Misfortune to fall into the Rhine, and was not found for fifteen Days
after; and being laid in an adjacent Church, in order to be interred, soon
returned to Life, and survived the Accident a long Time.

As there are a great many secret Things in Nature, and probably numberless
latent Circumstances in the animal Economy, with which we are entirely
unacquainted; and as Persons of a curious and attentive Turn of Mind, daily
observe Accidents, which they before thought impossible, so we have no Reason
to doubt of surprising Facts, related by Men of Learning and Candor, nor
formally to deny the Truth of Events, which at first appear incredible. Of this
Kind, is the following Narrative.

The celebrated Mr. Burmann assures us, that in Boness of Pithovia, he heard a
funeral Sermon preached upon the Death of one Laurence Jones, a Man of seventy
Years of Age, who as the Preacher said, was drowned when sixteen Years old; and
continued seven Weeks under Water, notwithstanding which, he returned to Life,
and enjoyed good Health. However visionary and romantic this Accident may
appear, in the Eyes of those who pretend to have divested their Minds of vulgar
Errors, yet it has met with Credit from the most penetrating and sagacious
Authors who lived at the Time in which it happened. Thus the learned and
judicious Langelott, in Miscellan. Nature. Curios. Decad. 1. An. 6. Obs. 20, not
being able to conceive how a Person can preserve a Principle of Life so long,
without the Assistance of the Air, in Waters so cold and full of Nitre, as
those of Sweden, and not being satisfied with similar Accidents daily happening
to some Birds and Infects, is yet so far from doubting of the Truth of this
Accident, that he applies to the learned Members of the Acad. Nature. Curios.
for their Opinion and Explication of it; by which Means he imagined that
effectual Measures for restoring many drowned Persons might be discovered.
Besides, it is by no Means probable that a Man of Mr. Burmann's Veracity would
forge such a Story, in order to see what enormous Lengths Credulity was capable
of carrying his Fellow Creatures; nor is it possible that the Clergyman,
should, from the Pulpit, assert this Fact as true, if it had not really been
so, since Laurence Jones, was a Native of the Place, and well known to every
one of his Audience.

But upon the Whole, granting that this Narrative of Laurence Jones was false,
which however we have no Reason to believe, yet the Recital of it has a great
Tendency not only to illustrate our Subject, but also to produce happy Effects
in Life; for, 1st, It is certainly the genuine and uncontroverted Interest of
the Public, to be appriz'd of the Possibility of a Person's retaining a
Principle of Life for a long Time under Water; 2dly, The Conclusion to be drawn
from this seemingly miraculous Effect is, that if after a long Time, a Body is
taken out of the Water, without the Signs of Putrefaction, it is the Duty of
those who find such a Body, to treat it as if there were still a Possibility of
restoring it to Life; and 3dly, If it is certain from uncontroverted Facts,
that Persons have retained Life under Water for several Days, there is no
Reason, from the Laws of the animal Economy, and the hitherto known Properties
of the animal Fluids, to disbelieve that the like should happen to Persons who
have also remained under Water for several Weeks.

As our Modesty ought always to be proportioned to the difficult and intricate
natures of the Subjects we pretend to consider, so we frankly acknowledge, that
these and other similar Accidents, as it were, bewilder the Mind, and perplex
the most penetrating Capacities, when they attempt to account for them; since
we have never yet discovered wherein the constituent Principle of Life exactly
consists, and since there are various Properties both of the Solids and Fluids
of the human Body, to which we are entire Strangers. Some however, affirm, that
a Principle of Life may in the deplorable State of Submersion, be retained for
a long Time, because the Coldness of the Water renders the Circulation slower,
and suppersses the Transpiration of the vital Air contained in the Blood;
whilst at the same Time, some Portions of the Air lodged in the Water, probably
penetrate into the Bodies of such Persons. But Platerus and Bartholin seem to
account in a more rational and satisfactory manner for Phenomenon of this Kind.
The former of these Authors, in explaining how a Woman, who was drowned in the
Rhine, for murdering her own Child, returned to Life after she was found,
affirms, that this Accident was the Effect of a Syncope, in which Respiration
and the Motion of the Heart are stopped. Now it is certain from Experience and
Observation, that these two Functions may be supperess'd without the actual
Loss of Life, as is frequently obvious in violent Syncopes, and hysteric
Paroxysms, from which the Patients do not often recover in an Hour or more,
during which Time, the slightest Indications of Life by the Pulse and
Respiration, are not to be observed.

If any one should say, that it bespeaks an unpardonable Excess of Credulity,
to believe that a Syncope may last for a Week or longer, and that consequently
the Motion of the Heart and Pulse may be for that Time suspended, without
necessarily producing Death; we may justly reply, that hitherto no Person has
discovered wherein the Essence and Principle of Life consists; and that there
are in Nature various Phenomenon, which seem to prove, that the Motion of the
Heart, and the Circulation of the Humors, are rather palpable Signs of the
Existence of Life, than its proximate and immediate Causes. This Doctrine we
shall endeavor to establish, in a strictly analogical manner, by comparing
those Events which happen to Vegetables and the Brute Creation, with similar
Accidents which befall Mankind.

For this Purpose we shall first consider the State and Condition of such
Plants, as retain a Principle of Life and Vegetation during the whole Winter.
All the Difference, according to Pechlinus, between these, and the Plants of
the animal Kind is, that in the latter the Principle of Motion is weaker, and
the Texture of the Fibers less firm; whereas the former contain a much larger
Quantity of Oil, and have the Spirit subservient to their Vegetation repelled
by the Cold, to the Bulbs, Roots, and Seeds, where it circulates in a languid
manner, without having Force to propel Buds, Flowers, and Blossoms, till the
kind and genial Hears of the Spring, render it more powerful and active. Why
may we not, therefore, suppose that something analogous to this may happen in
some human Bodies, who have been under the Water for some Time.

This is not the only Instance in nature, which we can bring in Confirmation of
our Doctrine; for certain Insects pass the whole Winter in Chrysalides, or
considerably hard Pellicules, without discovering the smallest Signs of Life,
though it is certain they are not dead, since a small Degree of Heat only, is
requisite to produce their last Metamorphosis. The Reason of this apparent
Death, is the Cold of the Atmosphere, so inspissating their Fluids, as that
they can only circulate in a faint and languid manner, round an highly minute
and small Center. The Degree of Fluidity which they retain, is however, so
considerable, that a more intense Cold than we perceive on the Earth, is
incapable of totally coagulating them, as is sufficiently evinced by the
curious Experiments of Mr. Reaumur.

This Phenomenon is not only observed in the Chrysalides of Insects, but the
Seminal Principle is also preserved free from Coagulation, and without
discovering the smallest Sign of Life, in Eggs, which may be considered as the
Chrysalides, or Pellicules of Animals whose Life is perceptible. Aquatic
Insects, also, plunge themselves into the Mud, where they remain without
Motion, till the Spring; which holds equally true of Frogs and Toads, according
to Valentinus, in Dissert. Epistol. 4. The like happens to some terrestrial
Insects; for Mr. Reaumur has by Experiment and Observation sufficiently
evinced, that Ants during the whole Winter, remain apparently dead, till the
Approach of the Spring.

A third and more powerful collateral Proof of this Doctrine, is drawn from the
Consideration of some Animals, whole Blood is warm, and circulates in the same
manner with that of the Human Species; since in these also the Circulation and
Respiration are suppressed during the Winter, but return in the Spring.

Thus of Swallows it may be said, that during one Half of the Year they are
dead, and the other alive. Olaus Magnus, and Scheffer, in a Letter wrote to
Hevelius, affirm, that in some northerly Countries, it is very common for
Fishermen to find in the Water large Clusters of Swallows, which in the
Beginning of the Autumn, had thus pil'd themselves up. Those Authors also
inform us, that some Species of Swallows, spontaneously seek a Refuge in the
Waters, others take their Flight to foreign Climates, others conceal themselves
in the Holes of old and decayed Buildings, in the Sand, and in their own Nests;
and that others finding a Decay of Strength in their Passage to other
Countries, plunge themselves into the Sea, where they remain till the genial
Spring rouses their latent Principle of Life and Motion.

The celebrated Kircher, in Mund. subterran. Lib. 8. Sect. 4. informs us, that
the Inhabitants of Peloponesus, and other Territories of the Archipelago, have
told him, that every Year, they observed large Quantities of Storks and
Swallows flying through their Countries from Egypt and the Coasts of Lybia, and
that these latter when fatigued with flying, placed themselves, to the number
of five or six, on the Back of a Stork, whom they recompensed by an
uninterrupted and melodious Song. There, are, therefore, continues the Author,
some Swallows which fly from one Country to another; but it is equally certain
from Experience, that the Swallows of cold Climates make no such Voyages; but
during the Winter conceal themselves in Caves, Lakes, Rivers, Seas, and the
Cavities of Trees.

Olaus Magnus, in Lib. 15. Chap. 10. informs us, that such Swallows as are
taken out of the Water before the due Time, do not live long; and adds, that
the Inhabitants of Tivoli, when showing him Mount Scisso, which Name it
receives from a foolish Report of its being divided at the Crucifixion of our
Savior, assured him, that in the Winter-Season, large Quantities of Swallows
apparently dead were to be found on it; whereas no such Animals are to be found
there in Summer. He then quotes Cysatus, who in his Description of Switzerland
affirms, that about Christmas, some Workmen when digging up the Earth for
laying the Foundation of a public Edifice, found a subterraneous Cave, from
which flew about twenty or more Swallows. Whence the Author concludes, that all
these Birds do not pass the Sea at their Disappearance, but that some retire
into the Cavities of Mountains, others in Hollow-Trees; but that this most
frequently happens in northerly Climates.

Fortunus Licetus, in Tr. de Feriis Altric. Animal. Disp. 19. affirms, that in
upper Poland, every Person may be experimentally convinced, that the same
Swallows which in Summer build their Nests upon the Tops of Houses, toward the
End of September plunge themselves into Ditches and Rivers, where they remain
concealed till about the Middle of May. He, also, informs us, that when the
Inhabitants seeing Fish through the Ice, break it in order to catch them, they
also frequently find Clusters of Swallows adhering to each other, without
discovering the smallest Signs of Life, till they are brought to a Stove, where
they soon return to Life. But what is still more remarkable is, that as soon as
the Polanders, who imagine it unlawful to kill these Swallows, set them at
Liberty, they forthwith fly back to the Water, and plunge themselves into it.

The celebrated Huet, Archbishop of Avranches, who traveled through Sweden,
informs us, that between Caen and the Sea, along the Shore of the River Orne,
there are many Caves, in which, during the Winter, have been found large
Clusters of Swallows, suspended like so many Bunches of Grapes; and that the
like was long ago observed in Italy. For Pedo Albinovanus, in the Elegy he
composed on the Death of Mecaenas, speaks of the Retreat of the Swallows to the
Rocks, as an infallible Sign of the Approach of Winter.

"Congelantur Aquae, scopulis se condit Hirundo,
"Verberat egeledas garrula vere Lacus."
Bodin, quoted by Camerarius, Cant. 7. Hist. 71. informs us, in the second Book
of his Theater of Nature, that when the People who inhabit the Coasts of the
Baltic Sea, are employed among the Rocks in searching for yellow Amber, they
frequently find large Clusters of Swallows. Camerarius subjoins, that some
Authors affirm, that "Swallows conceal themselves in the Bottom of the Sea,
where they sleep till the Appearance of a proper Season for their quitting it;
but this is impossible since they have Lungs, and for that Reason must
necessarily perish in such a Condition." But however specious and conclusive
this Reasoning of Camerarius may appear, yet it is certain that the Truth of
Facts, which have actually happened, can never be invalidated.

Franciseus de Frankenau in his Medicinal Satyrs, confirms this Opinion with
Respect to Swallows, by the Authorities of Lauremberg, in Acer. Philol. Lib. 3.
Cap. 71; of Isaac Vossius, in his Append. de Lucis Nature. Cap. 1; of
Deusingius, in Vindict. Faet. Sect. 5; and of Fournier, in his Geography, who
in Part 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. informs us, that they are commonly found in the
Norwegian-Seas, as also in the Lakes and Rivers of Silesia, Poland, Bohemia,
and Moravia; and that in the Beginning of the Autumn, large Numbers of them
plunge themselves into Wells. The same Author, also, establishes his own
Opinion by the additional Suffrages of Cromerus, in Hist. Polon, Lib. 1; of
Hevelius; of Marcellus Donatus, in Hist. Med. Memorab. Lib. 4. Cap. 12. and of
Helvicius, in his Epigrams.

The celebrated Mr. Falconet, whose Judgment and Veracity render his single
Word a sufficient Evidence, informs us, that being in the House of a Gentleman
of Breast in the Winter Season, he saw a Servant bring in a Kind of Mass or
Lump, which appeared to be Earth, and which some Fishermen had caught in their
Nets. By washing it carefully, in order to discover what it was, it was found
to be a Group of Swallows, which resumed Life by being exposed to the Fire for
some time.

Swallows are not the only Birds which conceal themselves in the Bottoms of
Rivers, in order to pass the Winter; for John Baptiste de Fulgosa, formerly
Doge of Genoa, affirms, that Gervas Tibellerius, wrote to Otho the Fourth, that
some Persons having thrown their Nets into a River of that Country in the
Winter Time, they brought to Land a large Quantity of Storks, which were
apparently dead, with their Beaks fixed in each other's Fundament; but they
were soon restored to Life, by means of Heat. The same Author adds, that in
1467, near Metz in Lorrain, a large Number of apparently dead Storks were found
in a River, and that being put into a warm Bath, they recovered Life.

The learned Vossius, in Append. de Lucis Nature. informs us, that at the
Approach of Winter, Storks, Herons, and some other Birds of the like Nature, do
not fly to Egypt, or into more temperate Climates, but plunge themselves into
Ditches and Marshes.

The Possibility of retaining Life for a long Time under Water, is still
farther evinced, by considering those Birds with which our Fields and Forests
are richly stocked in Summer; but which are not to be seen in Winter. If it
should be said, that these, during the Winter, live upon the Stores they have
amassed in the Summer; I answer, that they are by no Means provident against
future Want. Hence they must necessarily conceal themselves, in Places suited
to their particular Natures; and as it is equally impossilble for them, as for
the human Species, to live awake without Aliments, it is more than probable that
during the whole Winter, they are, as it were, locked up in so lethargic a
Sleep, that they sustain no Loss or Dissipation of their Fluids, and
consequently require no Reparation.

If it should be asked, whether these Animals, during such a State, retain a
real Principle of Life? I answer, that the Thing is not only probable, but may
be also evinced from Fact and Experience, since the most celebrated natural
Historians and Physicians give us strong and uncontroverted Instances of this
Kind. Thus in Ephemerid. Not. Curios. we are informed, that a certain Gentleman
in the Winter Season, ordered an hollow Trunk of a Sallow Tree, which by his
Direction had been cut down the preceding Autumn, to be laid on the Fire; but a
small Portion of it happening to be left in a Corner of the Room, he had the
Curiosity to examine it, and upon his doing so, found Feathers arrang'd and
disposed in a natural Manner: These he gently plucked off, and underneath found
the Flesh of a small Bird which he believed to be dead, though he could not
discover to what Species it belonged. However, with respect to this
Circumstance, he was soon undeceived; for having exposed it to the Influence of
the Fire, it soon discovered palpable Signs of Life. Something similar and
analogous to this, no doubt, happens with respect to many of those Quadrupeds
which inhabit our Forests, for Want of a Nourishment proper to give their Blood
that Degree of Fluidity, which is absolutely necessary to its Circulation,
since it is certain, that a far smaller Number is to be seen in Winter than in
Summer.

After these Examples of an apparent Death in Birds whose Blood is warm, we
have no Reason to be surpised at Pechlinus, when he affirms, that in the
Winter Time, Fishes not only appear dead, but are consequently covered over
with a Crust of Ice in their Holes, without having the vital Principle
destroyed in them; for they begin to live afresh, when the Heat of the
Atmosphere, or an artificial Fire, melts the Ice. The like, continues the
Author, happens to Serpents, Toads, Frogs, Tortoises, and in a Word all
amphibious Animals, when the Cold inspissates their Juices; which being
naturally viscid, are consequently more proper to prevent the Dissipation of
that vital Spirit, which is absolutely necessary to restore them to Life.

It Is to be observed, that those Fishes which have been thus frozen, do not
long survive their artificial Restitution to Life; because the Frost having
altered the Principles of their Blood, the vital Spirit, when beginning to act
and unfold itself, can no longer form a Mass of Fluids of an uniform Nature.
Thus Wine when frozen, and artificially thawed, contracts a disagreeable
Flavor, because the Solution being procured in an unnatural Manner, hinders
the spirituous Part of the Wine from mixing with its other Principles, in the
same Order and Proportion as before.

What Pechlinus advances with Respect to Fishes, is entirely conformable to the
Opinion of Theophrastus, in Tr. de Piscibus in siceo degeritibus, where we are
informed, that the Inhabitants of Pontus, frequently find Fishes in the Ice,
which discover no Signs either of Motion or Sensation, till they are put into a
Fish-Back, or laid among Straw. This Circumstance, according to Theophrastus,
happens particularly to the Gudgeon, and some other Fishes of a similar Nature.

The last Proof of the Possibility of a Person's retaining a Principle of Life
for a long Time under Water, without a Supply of Aliments for the Purposes of
Nutrition, is drawn from a Consideration of some Quadaupeds, as the Hedgehog,
the Marmotte, the Dormouse, and some others, which in the Beginning of Winter
concealing themselves in the Earth, are seized with so profound a Sleep that
they appear to be dead, since neither the Pulsation of their Arteries, nor
their Respiration are perceptible. This Circumstance, no doubt, induced the
celebrated Harvey in Lib. de Generat. Animal. Exercit. 50* to speak in the
following Manner: "Some sanguineous Animals live long without any Pulse, and
lie concealed during the Whole of the Winter, notwithstanding which they remain
alive, though their Heart retains no Motion, and their Respiration stops, just as
it happens to Persons attacked with Sincopes, and hysteric Fits, whose Pulse is
totally abolished." Though Harvey was the glorious Discoverer of the Circulation
of the Blood, and may for that Reason be supposed to be a keen Advocate in its
Behalf, yet it is sufficiently obvious from this Passage, that he did not
believe it absolutely necessary to the Preservation of Life. But Pechlinus,
whether from Prejudice, or rational Deductions from what he had observed, is of
Opinion, that in these Animals, Respiration is carried on, by a Motion of the
Diaphragm, so insensible as to escape the Eye of the Observer. He also
observes, that in this State, it is necessary their Respiration should be such,
because if it was performed in the usual Manner, the Motion of the Blood would
be so likewise; in consequence of which, the Transpiration and Necessity for
Aliments would be equally strong; a Circumstance incompatible with the
Condition of these Animals, which lie hid under the Earth during the whole
Winter.

Though these Relations may possibly appear very singular and surprising to
Persons unacquainted with Natural History; yet they infallibly prove, that in
the brute Creation at least, Respiration, the Circulation of the Blood, and
Pulsation of the Arteries may cease for a long Time, without the total
Extinction and Destruction of Life. Now is it not highly probable, or rather
absolutely certain, that something similar and analogous to this may happen to
human Creatures, who have the Misfortune to be drowned, since in both, the
Solids and Fluids act and move by the same Laws, so in both Suffocation must be
the same Thing, and consequently its Effects removed by the same Means?

Besides, there is by no Means any Reason for believing, that an Instance of
this surprsing Abstinence and Want of Food, prodnc'd by such a profound and
lethargic Sleep, as that of the Marmotte, is not to be found among the human
Species; for in Miscellan. Academ. Nature. Curios. An. 8. Obs. 67. the
celebrated Ludovicus, first Physician to the Duke of Saxe-Gotha informs us,
that a young Girl, who for some Fault she had committed being apprehensive of a
severe Chastisement from her Parents, retired to the most concealed Part of a
Thicket, where, seven Days after her Elopement, she was found lying on her
Belly with all the apparent Signs of Death, except that her Limbs were still
flexible and pliant; her Visage was overspread with a viscid Phlegm, which was
covered with an hoary Kind of Down, and with the falling Leaves which had
adhered to it. Her Mouth and Nostrils were entirely full of a thick Mucus: But
notwithstanding these seemingly discouraging Circumstances, the Physician
called to her Assistance, ordered her Body to be warmed by Means of Friction;
Then, with warm Water, washing away the Phlegm which covered her Face, and the
viscid Mucus which obstructed her Mouth and Nostrils, he poured into her Mouth
a Spoonful of Brandy, which seemed to go down her Throat, and was the only
Cordial he had at hand. Upon exhibiting a second Spoonful, she fetched a Sigh,
and a third made her open her Eyes.

We now proceed, to consider the most proper and efficacious Measure to be
taken for the Relief of drowned Persons; for which Purpose we shall previously
investigate and ascertain the genuine Cause of Suffocation.

Not only the ancient Schools of Greece and Arabia, but also most of the
succeeding Physicians, till the Days of Platerus, imagined that the Suffocation
was produced by the Water which entered into the Stomach, Breast, and Lungs; in
Consequence of which false Notion they thought themselves fully authorized to
attempt its Discharge with all possible Expedition. For this Purpose they
ordered drowned Persons to be suspended by the Feet, or laid upon their
Bellies, on a Hogshead or Tub, which was to be agitated from one Side to the
other, imagining that by this Position, the Abdomen and Breast being
compressed, and the Head hanging down, the Agitation of the Vessel, must
necessarily facilitate the Evacuation of the Water, which they supposed was
also favored by the declining Situation of the superior Part of the Body. With
the same Intention, they also ordered such Measures as had a Tendency to excite
Vomiting.

But as a false Theory never fails to lay a Foundation for a dangerous
Practice, so we have just Reason to condemn this Method of Suspension, or
hanging by the Heels; for the Water swallowed by drowning Persons descends into
the Stomach, and not into the Thorax, so that it cannot prevent their Recovery.
This Circumstance must happen, not only so long as a Person retains a Sense of
his State and Condition, but also afterward; for as the Water is hindered from
entering into the Arteria Trachaea and Lungs by a mechanical Effort, in which
Reason has no share, so the Lungs may in this State be compared to an empty
Bottle plunged in Water, into which the Fluid does not enter, because the Air
it contains resists its Access, and this the rather happens, because the Motion
of the Breast, destined to attract the Air, at that Time, totally ceases, and
consequently nothing forces the Water to enter and fill up its Place. This
Doctrine is not only evinced from the Structure of the Parts, but also
confirmed by Experience.

Thus the learned Platerus, in Quest. 5. positively affirms, that if drowned
Persons swallow any Water, the Quantity of it is too small to prove mortal to
them; because he always found but very little of it in their Stomachs. He also
adds, that most of the Water which appears to be discharged from the Mouths of
Persons suspended by the Heels, really flowed from their Clothes.

Nymman, in Tr. de Vita foet. in Utero, speaks thus, "Who could believe that a
Foetus so long included in the Uterus, where it moves all its Limbs, should yet
never move its Jaw Bone, nor open its Mouth. Besides, it always has its
Nostrils open, notwithstanding which it has never been observed that the Liquor
of the Amnios has entered its Body. Thus it is with the Human Foetus, as with
those who are drowned, since in dissecting many of these last, I have hardly
found a Pint of Water in their Bodies."

In the Miscellan. Not. Curios. An. 2. Obs. 251. Wepfer, gives an Account of
the Anatomy of some Beavers, one of which was drowned. The Author having opened
the Arteria Trachaea, no Water was discharged from the Lungs; but there were
about four Ounces of Water, like the Washings of Flesh, found in the right
Cavity of the Breast, and about three Ounces of the same Kind in the Left. This
Extravasation the Author justly supposes produced by the Expression of a bloody
Lymph from the Pores of the Bronchia of this Animal, which had for a long Time
struggled against so violent a Death as that of Drowning. Neither pure Water
nor Water tinged with Blood, were observed either in the Arteria Trachaea, or
in the Bronchia.

Bhonius, in the Appendix to his Treatise de Renuntiat. Vuln. Diss. 2. informs
us, that in dissecting a great many Women drowned for murdering their Children,
he had shown the Spectators, that there was little or no Water in their Lungs
and Abdomen; and adds, that in order to render himself more certain with
Respect to this Circumstance, he had, drowned several Animals, in whose
Cavities, though drowned alive, he had never perceived any Water.

Dethardingius, at present Professor of Medicine in Coppenhagen, in a Letter
wrote when he was Professor at Rostoch, in 1714, gives us an Account of the
Dissection of a Soldier, who attempting to make his Escape from a Garrison, was
drowned in a Ditch, and upon being opened had in his Stomach only about a Pint
of Beer, which he had drank some Time before. The Professor took care
previously to apprise the Spectators, that there would not be a single Drop of
Water in his Breast, which as well as his Abdomen, was very much elevated; and
the Event verified the Prediction.

Johannes Conradus Becker, in his Treatise de Submers. Mort. Sin. Pot. Aq.
gives us the four following Histories. A Dog, says he, being drowned and lying
in the Water for an Hour, his Abdomen, Stomach, and Intestines, appeared
tumified and inflated, though a single Drop of Water was not found in them. The
Lungs were, also, inflated, without containing Water, like those of hanged
Persons, but immediately collaps'd upon suffering the Air to escape through an
Incision made in the Arteria Traehaea. The Author subjoins, that this
Observation rendered the Doctrine of the Ancients highly suspected by him.

The second, is the History of a Peasant, taken from the Water, after he had
been some Weeks in it, and was entirely putrified. After opening his Duodenum,
two Ligatures were made on that Intestine, which was very much inflated, and
from the Aperture of which nothing was discharged, but a Liquor which was Chyle
mixed with Beer, of which the Peasant had, at a Market, drank so liberally, as
to intoxicate himself. The Tumefaction of the Stomach, laid a Foundation for
suspecting that it contained a large Quantity of Water, though upon laying it
open, nothing was found but a Pint of a Liquor, whose Smell exactly resembled
that of Beer. The Lungs were so much inflated, that when an Incision was made
in the Breast, they burst out; but their Inflation was speedily dissipated, by
making an Aperture in the Arteria Trachea, through which the Air was discharged
with a considerable Noise. In cutting the Lungs into Pieces, no extraordinary
Signs of Humidity were perceived, nor were any preternatural Circumstances
observed, except Spots of different Colors.

The third History, is that of a Woman drowned in a Well, in whose Intestines
nothing but Chyle was discovered, neither was there any Water in the Lungs. The
Intestines collaps'd upon making a small Puncture in them, and an Aperture
being made in the Arteria Trachea, the Air escaped through it from the Lungs with
some Noise.

The fourth and last History related by Becker, is that of a Man who was found
standing upright in a Basin, where he had remained under Water for five Days.
His Stomach, which was large, was only inflated with Wind, and hardly contained
six Ounces of a whitish Liquor. The Lungs being equally inflated, collaps'd
upon cutting the Arteria Trachea, from which the Air was discharged with a
considerable Noise. When he was found, two Spoonfuls of Water were not
discharged from his Mouth. "He was, however, continues Becker, every where
surrounded with Water, but that Element, notwithstanding the Minuteness of its
Parts, could not penetrate into the Arteria Trachea and Oesophagus, in order to
fill the Cavities of the Viscera; an evident Proof that these Parts were so
defended against every Thing that made an Attempt to enter them, that the Water
itself could not force a Passage into them."

From these Observations, the celebrated Author concludes, that the Absence of
Water in the Lungs and Intestines, is not a Proof that a Person has been thrown
into the Water after his Death. This Observation is of the last Importance to
those whose Business it is to make Reports before Courts of Judicature, though it
is contrary to that of Rodericus a Castro, adopted by many Philologists and
Criminalists, and among others by Feltman in Tr. de Cadavero inspiciendo, Cap.
21. But as in the Opinion of Becker, the Lungs are not inflated in those who
are thrown into the Water after Death, so we may from their Inflation draw a
Proof, that the Person was alive when drowned, or put into the Water.

Since, therefore, it is sufficiently obvious, both from the Structure of the
Parts, and the Authorities of the most penetrating Anatomists, that little or
no Water enters the Bodies of drowned Persons, so it is equally obvious, that
the Practice of hanging by the Heels, is not only useless, but must also
contribute to destroy those Remains of Life which may possibly be lost; for by
such a Suspension, the whole Column of the Blood conveyed to the Heart by the
inferior Vena Cava, will necessarily press upon that conveyed by the superior
Vena Cava, where the Blood being interrupted in its Course, must necessarily
regurgitate into the jugular Veins, and consequently into the Head, where, by
its Quantity and Weight, it retards the Motion of the Spirits, whose free
Progress is absolutely necessary to restore the Circulation of the Blood, on
which Life in a great Measure depends.

As it is of great Importance, to know the Cause of the Inflation of drowned
Persons, since it is not produced by the Water they swallow, so the learned
Dethardingius accounts for it in the following manner, "Those, says he, who die
in the Water, are not destroyed for Want of Air, but by means of too large a
Quantity of it; they do not die in Expiration, but in Inspiration; and in a
Word, nothing more resembles each Inspiration, than the Phenomenon observed in
drowned Persons; for if we attentively consider what happens to ourselves, we
perceive that the Breast is as it were lengthened, the Abdomen elevated, and
the Flanks inflated, and that this State subsists, so long as we draw in the
Air, or retain it in the Breast. Now the same Things happen in drowned Persons,
only with this Difference, that in the latter, the Inspiration is performed
with Rapidity and Violence, whereas in the former it is carried on quietly and
without any Effort. In Persons not drowned, a Depression succeeds the
Elevation; but in drowned Persons the Elevation of the Abdomen, and the
Elongation of the Breast subsist; by which means, all the Parts continue in a
State of Expansion. This is, no doubt, the Meaning of those, who look upon the
Death of drowned Persons as a Suffocation, and pretend that the Cause of it,
and that of strangled Persons is the same; for those two Kinds of Death have a
great Resemblance and Analogy, as is sufficiently obvious from the Elevation of
the Abdomen, which in hanged Persons subsists after their Death."

From this Theory it is sufficiently easy to conceive, that the Inflation of the
Lungs, is the Cause of the Death of drowned Persons; accordingly Dethardingius
from the preceding Doctrine draws the following Conclusions; "The Vesicules of
the Lungs are inflated by the Air, the Bronchia are lengthened, the Blood
Vessels distributed through the whole Body of the Lungs, are compressed; and though
the Elongation of the Bronchia assists the Entry of the Blood into the large
Vessels, as well those proper to the Lungs, as the bronchial Artery and Vein,
as those which are only subservient to the Circulation, as the pulmonary Artery
and Vein, yet the Circulation is not carried on equally in the Capillaries;
since the Presence of a rarefied Air in the Vesicules compresses the Blood, and
forcing it to stop there, hinders it from passing into the Left Ventricle of
the Heart, in order to accomplish the Circulation. Now as soon as there is a
considerable Retardation in this important Function, the vital Motions also
gradually cease, and Death approaches insensibly."

After having thus discovered the Reason of the Inflation of the Lungs, and of
the Death which succeeds that Circumstance, we shall, with the same Author,
investigate the Cause which hinders the Discharge of the Air from the Lungs and
Breast. This is by no means a Topic of pure Curiosity, since, the Assistance to
be afforded to drowned Persons* can be of no Service, except in so far as it is
proper to remove those Obstacles, which oppose and hinder the respective
Actions of the viral Functions. Now Dethardingius and Becker pretend, that the
Epiglottis, (which is a small Valve placed at the external Entrance of the
Larynx, in order by its covering the Glottis, to hinder all solid or liquid
Bodies which may be put into the Mouth, from descending into the Canal of
Respiration) being exactly and strongly applied over the Glottis, proves the
Obstacle to the Discharge of the Air from the Lungs. These Authors, also,
affirm that such a strong and convulsive Application of the Epiglottis over the
Glottis, arises from a preternatural Extension of the Fibers of those Membranes
of the Larinx, which cover the Epiglottis. This preternatural Extension they
attribute to the violent Inspiration excited by Fear, in Persons who run a Risk
of being drowned. Thus the incomparable Dethardingius reasons in the following
Manner: "If in all Kinds of Dread and Terror we observe, that Respiration is
disordered; that is to say, that Inspiration is more quick, and lasts longer;
and that, on the contrary, Expiration is intercepted, uncertain, and short, it
follows of Course, that Inspiration must be much more strong, and the Air
attracted in a far larger Quantity, when a Person perceives that he is
threatened with Death by the Water, which must in a Moment fill the Space which
ought to be occupied by the Air."

It is pretty surprising that Becker and Dethardingius should only reason
conjecturally in this Affair; since the Dissections they made of drowned
Persons, might have enabled them by their Eyes to judge of the Disposition of
the Epiglottis in these unfortunate Creatures. But, be this as it will; certain
it is that Dethardingius's Method of affording Relief to drowned Persons, is
highly rational, and promises fair for restoring them to Life. It consists in
four Things; the first of which is, to place the Body drawn from the Water in a
proper Posture and Situation. The Second is to compress the Abdomen, at the
same Time that Frictions are making on the Back. The Third is, to excite an
Irritation in the Throat; and the Fourth to make an Incision in the Arteria
Trachea.

As for the Situation of the Person taken from the Water, we have already shown
Suspension by the Heels to be prejudicial; though Becker recommends it, because
he thinks the Weight of the abdominal Viscera may thrust the Diaphragm into the
Breast, compress the Lungs, and giving a greater Spring to the Air, make it act
with such an Effort, as to raise the Epiglottis: But the judicious
Dethardingius, sensible that this Method is sufficient to destroy Respiration
in Persons alive, absolutely condemns it, and orders drowned People to be laid
with their Bodies so declining, as that the Head may be lowest. Besides, as he
had observed that Respiration is more difficultly performed on the Belly, he
directs drowned Persons to be laid on their Backs, and a strong Compression of
the Abdomen to be made, from the Region of the Pubes, as far up as the Stomach.
He adds, that it is expedient, both for the Sake of the Frictions and the
Compression, to rub the Hands with some Oil, proper to restore to the Fibers
rendered rigid by the Cold and Spasms, that Suppleness and pliant State, which
is necessary to them in order to perform the Motions of Respiration.

Pechlinus observes, that in Sweden it is customary to use Frictions on Persons
taken out of the Water, and externally to apply hot and spirituous Remedies in
order to reanimate the internal Heat, and more effectually excite the
Effervescence of the Blood. Borelli, in Hist. Cent. 2. Obs. 11. orders the Skin
to be rendered red by Means of Frictions in a warm Bed. Mr. Joly, a Physician
of Britany, in the Observations inserted in the Historical Journal, for the
Month of November 1743, advises Frictions before a large Fire with hot Cloths,
with a View to restore the Person to Heat as soon as possible. Dethardingius
orders these Frictions to be made from the Nape of the Neck down to the
Buttocks, because, the Heads of the Muscles subservient to Expiration, are
attached to the Spine of the Back, and their Tendors to the Ribs; and because,
in his Opinion, Friction facilitates the Action of these Muscles, especially
when made with Oils, which contribute to restore the Plyancy of the Fibers.

Besides Frictions before a Fire, with hot Cloths soaked in Oils or spirituous
Liquors, are beneficial in another Respect, because, the Spine of the Back is
the Origin of a great Number of Nerves and consequently of the various Motions
performed in the Body. This cannot fail to put all the vital Springs in Action;
by restoring Suppleness to the nervous and muscular Fibers, and Motion to the
flow circulating, or even totally coagulated Juices, This is the Reason, why
Frictions and Pumping so often prove successful in Apoplexies.

We must, also, observe, that Dethardingius, approves of laying drowned Persons
on their Bellies over a Hogshead, or round Vessel, which is to be agitated, not
with a View to make them discharge the Water they have swallowed, but to shake
and compress the Abdomen, and thrust its Contents toward the Diaphragm. But
Forestus, in Observat. Chirurg. Lib. 6. Obs. 33. and Obs. Med. Lib. 15. Obs.
26. condemns this Expedient as well as that of Hanging by the Heels, "because,
says he, it has produced sudden Death in some Persons who could not bear the
violent Motion, the Turning, the internal Parts of the Body topsy-turvy, and
the Agitation of the Head, and Vomiting produced by this Means." Mr. Joly also
condemns the putting drowned Persons in a Hogshead open at both Ends in order
to be rolled for some Time in different Directions.

Dethardingius seems not to have laid great Stress upon the Swedish Practice of
defending the Bodies of drowned Persons from the Contact of the Air, and of
conveying them into warm Places. The first Step however taken by the Swedes is,
according to Pechlinus, to wrap such Bodies up in warm Cloths. Langelotti also,
in Miscel. Not. Curios. An. 6. Obs. 20. informs us, that this Method is among
them universally put in Practice, because they have learned from long
Experience, that no drowned Person recovers, if he is left long, exposed to the
free Air, Mr. Joly is, also, of Opinion, that drowned Persons should be left
upon the Shore no longer, than is necessary to pull off their Cloths, which may
be cut off for the Sake of Expedition; "for, continues he, a single Moment
often determines between a State of Death or Life." In consequence of this
Principle, he adopts the Swedish Practice; "for, says he, when the drowned
Person's Cloths are taken off, he is to be wrapped up in the warmest Coverings or
Cloths which can be then had. Then he is to be conveyed to the nearest House,
where after Frictions before a warm Fire with hot Cloths, he is to be laid in a
very warm Bed. Great Care is to be taken, to apply to his Feet, the Inner-sides
of his Thighs, his Houghs, and his Armpits, Flaggons full of boiling Water,
wrapped up in linen Cloths." For the same Purpose we may make use of Bricks. I
must, however, observe, that Mr. Joly recedes from the Swedish Practice, in a
Circumstance which to me appears to be of the least Importance; for the Swedes
do not warm the Bodies of drowned Persons suddenly, but by little and little,
before a gentle Fire. The Expedience of this may be evinced by considering the
Effects of a too intense Heat upon Fishes found frozen in the Winter Time,
which indeed recover for a Moment, and then die irretriveably. Nymman and
Ranchin also ordered drowned Persons to be laid in warm Places, especially in
Winter.

As in drowned Persons, a Defect of respirable Air produces a Suffocation, so
it would be no less foolish, than barbarous, suddenly to expose them to the
entire Action of the Atmosphere, since that Fluid entering precipitately into
the Thorax, would produce, in the pulmonary Vessels, a Dilatation, which
instead of promoting the Passage of the Blood through that Organ, would produce a
fresh Obstruction in it, because the Action of the Heart is not strong enough,
to surmount the Resistance which the Air makes to the Passage of the Blood; and
this must the more inevitably happen, because the Lungs in such a State
collapse, which is the unavoidable Fate of all Fibers deprived of the Influx of
the Animal Spirits, which necessarily depends on the free Conveyance of the
Blood through the whole Body, and the Velocity of its circular Motion. The
Precaution, therefore, of wrapping Persons taken from the Water in Blankets, is
highly proper, and excellently suited not only to this Species of Suffocation,
but also of all others.

But it is not sufficient to guard drowned Persons against the rude Impressions
of the Atmosphere, since it is also requisite they should only be permitted the
free Use of that Fluid by Degrees.

As the Decrease of the Circulation is necessarily succeeded by a
proportionable Diminution of Heat, so it is justly to be expected, that the
Bodies of drowned Persons have lost the greatest Part of that Warmth, which is
so necessary to the Support of Life. Hence it is absolutely requisite they
should be warmed. But it would be equally pernicious, suddenly to expose them
at once to the Fire, or precipitately to exhibit Medicines, which by the
Volatility of their Principles, might produce a Rarefaction of the Blood. It Is,
therefore, far more safe and prudent, to begin with gradually augmented
Frictions of the Extremities with warm Cloths, than all at once to expose such
Persons to the Fire, or call in the Assistance of hot and volatile Medicines,
both of which may be safely, though sparingly and gradually used, when the
Circulation is so restored, that their bad Effects are no longer to be feared,

These Precautions are founded on physical Reasons, which though sufficiently
known to Physicians, may yet afford fresh Pleasure and Entertainment to Readers
of another Class.

The Blood, then, of the Vena Cava, discharges itself into the right Auricle of
the Heart, whose Contraction forces it into the right Ventricle, which in its
Turn contracting itself, propels the Blood into the Pulmonary Artery. That
those Operations may be performed, it is necessary the Quantity of Blood
discharged into the right Auricle, should not overpower its Action; that the
contractile Force of the right Ventricle should be sufficient to propel the
Blood in the pulmonary Artery; and that in this Artery there should be nothing
to obstruct or oppose the Distribution of the Blood, which ought to be made in
it. Now according to this Theory, the Contractions of the right Auricle and
Ventricle, are in such Cases extremely weakened, since these Muscles partake of
the Relaxation of the whole System of the Fibers. The Lungs, also, collapse,
and consequently oppose the free Circulation of the Blood, or its free
Distribution through themselves. If, therefore, in affording Assistance to
drowned Persons, we should precipitately convey too quick a Motion to the
Blood, we should by that very Circumstance produce invincible Obstacles to its
Circulation, and consequently make the Means of recalling Life subservient to
the Production of irretreivable Death; for the excessive Quantity of Blood
which enters the right Auricle, will overpower and surmount the weak Force
which resists it. Besides, though this Auricle had contractile Force enough to
convey the Blood into the Heart, yet the Action of that Muscle will not be
sufficient to propel the Blood into the Lungs, or at least to surmount the
joint Resistance made by the collapsed State of the Lungs, and the Air
compressing their Blood Vessels. These Methods, therefore, of relieving drowned
Persons and restoring them to Life, are not only founded upon the animal
Economy, but are also absolutely necessary and indispensible.

It Is, however, to be observed, that when the Circulation begins to be carried
on freely, we may, if such Practice is indicated by any pressing Circumstances,
attempt to reduce it to its natural State, by means of Cordials and
anti-apoplectic Medicines; though these, especially the latter, as being most
powerful, are in the Beginning to be used with the utmost Caution; and probably
the safest Method is totally to abstain from the anti-apoplectic Medicines, and
to begin with the mildest Cordials, whose most energetic Parts being diluted in
a large Quantity of some proper Vehicle, may more insensibly mix themselves
with the Mass of Blood, and consequently produce their Effects more slowly.
It Is, however, to be observed, that the same Danger is not to be dreaded from
the external Use of the most efficacious Remedies. Thus, for Instance, we need
not hesitate to apply Topics to the Temples, the Nostrils, the Wrists, the Pit
of the Stomach, and all those Parts, where the Arteries lying near the Surface
of the Body, are exposed to their Action and Influence. And as the Membranous
Parts are none of the least considerable Instruments of the several Motions
performed in the Body, so a very particular Regard ought to be had to them:
Frictions, then, of the Hands and Feet, as well as the Application of
spirituous Medicines to these Parts, are extremely beneficial; for though the
Propriety of this Practice could not be demonstrated from Anatomy and
Physiology, yet we might be fully convinced of it, by the Observation of
Deventer, who orders Frictions with Brushes to be made on the Soles of the Feet
of such newborn Children, as discover no Signs of Life, in order to restore
the Circulation of the Blood, which is the Foundation or first Beginning of it.

Deventer does not, indeed, advise the Application of spirituous Medicines to
these Parts; but as it is sufficiently certain, that these, as well as all other
Liquors, penetrate the Surface of the Body, and enter the Cavities of the
Vessels, so their external Applications must necessarily produce very happy
Effects. Besides, this Method of using spirituous Medicines, is of all others
the safest; not only because their Mixture with the Blood is not so quick as
when they are exhibited internally, but also, because, the Parts to which they
are applied are most remote from the Center.

But we now proceed to consider the other Methods of affording Relief to
drowned Persons, beginning with the Smoke of Tobacco, the happy Effects of
which are proved by various Observations. Thus Doctor Mead in his mechanical
Account of Poisons, after mentioning that many who have been drowned and dead
to all Appearance, have been surprisingly restored to Life, speaks in the
following manner, from the Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Sciences: "This
Circumstance should certainly encourage the Use of all Means, upon such
Accidents, especially as the Trial is not difficult. The first Step should be
to blow the Smoke of Tobacco up into the Intestines, then to warm the Body by
shaking and rolling about, and rubbing it with warm Cloths in a Bed. In a Word
to put the Blood into Motion all manner of Ways, and not to be discouraged though
no Signs of Life should be discovered after an Hour or two should be spent in
this good Work; toward the latter End of which, Spirits and volatile Salts may
produce a good Effect. Neither should bleeding be omitted when the Blood is
become sufficiently warm to drop out of the Veins."

The happy Effects of the Smoke of Tobacco in restoring drowned Persons to
Life, are farther evinced from the following Narration of Dr. Bruhier. Mr.
Thomas a professed Surgeon of Paris, being at Passy, waited in a Boat till the
Number it was to take in should be completed. During this Time, he saw a Boat
crossing the River, and when it arrived at Land, one of the Passengers stepping
ashore, and missing his Wife, asked what was become of her; but no one could
give him any Answer, except a young Child, who pointing to the River, said, she
had hid herself in it. This Woman had fallen from the Stern of the Boat,
without being perceived by any of the Passengers, except the Child, who gave
Directions to row to the very Part where the Woman fell from the Boat. The
Husband finding her in a Place which was not very deep, but full of Mud,
brought her to Land, and laid her out. Whilst some of the Spectators of this
melancholy Accident were advising to hang her by the Heels, and others ordering
different Measures to be taken, a Soldier with his Pipe in his Mouth, came to
ask the Reason of such a Concourse of People; upon being informed of the
Accident, he desired the disconsolate Husband to give over weeping, because his
Wife would return to Life very soon. Then giving his Pipe to the Husband, he
bid him introduce the small End of it into the Anus, put a Piece of Paper
perforated with a large Number of Holes upon its Mouth, and through that blow the
Smoke of the Tobacco into her Interstines, as strongly as he possibly could.
Accordingly at the fifth Blast, a considerable rumbling in the Woman's Abdomen
was heard, upon which she discharged some Water from her Mouth' and in a Moment
after returned to Life. This Practice, however insignificant in the Eyes of the
Vulgar, is nevertheless of the highest Importance; for the Irritation of the
Intestines, excited by the Heat and Acrimony of the Smoke of the Tobacco,
produces in the Muscles subservient to Expiration, such a Reflux of the animal
Spirits, as induces a Contraction of them sufficient to surmount that
Resistance which the Air contained in the Breast, found to its Discharge. This
happy Effect of the Smoke of Tobacco is sufficiently evinced by the preceding
History, since it made the Woman vomit up the Water she had swallowed. Now
vomiting is excited by a stimulating Contraction of the Diaphragm, and of the
transverse Muscle of the Abdomen, which contracting the Stomach, force it to
discharge its Contents, where the least Resistance is found, and consequently
by its superior Orifice. It is to be observed, that the same happy Effects are
produced by the Smoke of all acrid Substances, since Mr. Joly affirms, that the
same End is equally answered by the Smoke of Sage, and other Plants of a
similar Nature. It is also highly probable, that Clysters prepared with
Coloquintida or Tobacco, would produce Effects equally good; but on such
Occasions, the most ready and expeditious Measures are always to be taken,
since a very small Delay may prove of the last Consequence, by destroying a
Life which might otherwise be preserved.

In Cases of Emergence, where proper Instruments are not immediately to be
procured, the Prescription of the Soldier in the preceding History, may be
followed; but it may lose less Time to cover the Tobacco in the Bole of the
Pipe, when lighted, with a silk Handkerchief, either single, or once doubled,
than to wait till proper Holes are bored in a Piece of Paper, though this takes
up very little Time. However, that no necessary Instructions might be wanted, I
have given the Figure of an Instrument; contrived on purpose for impelling the
Smoke of Tobacco into the Intestines. A. represents a Brass or Iron Box,
capable of containing half an Ounce of the strongest Tobacco, which is to be
lighted. B. is a common Clyster Pipe, to be introduced into the Anus, joined to
the flexible Tube D. D. made of Leather. C. is another Pipe, at which a Person
blows forcibly, that the Smoke of the Tobacco in the Box A. may be impelled
through the flexible Tube D. D. and the Pipe B. into the Intestines. E.
represents the Smoke. If one Clyster is not sufficient, another should be given
soon after, and repeated till it answers.

These Clysters of the Fume of Tobacco, are of excellent Use in the Iliac
Passion, and in an incarcerated Hernia; and no Apothecary or Surgeon ought to
be without such an Instrument.

As the olfactory Nerves are of all others the most exposed to the Action of
Bodies, and have an intimate Connection with those subservient to the Motion of
the Muscles destined for Respiration, it must of course be beneficial to
irritate the Nerves of the Nose; so that what we call Sternutatories, or such
Substances as excite Sneezing, produce happy Effects in restoring drowned
Persons to Life: Indian Marum or Euphorbium introduced into the Nose, or
reduced into a Powder and blown up the Nostrils, will in all Probability
produce salutary Effects, since if they operate they will excite a violent
Expiration, sufficient to remove all those Obstacles which the Air finds to its
free Discharge. Mr. Joly warmly recommends this Practice, as also Injections of
spirituous Liquors. Thus the Injection of Spirit of Sal Ammoniac into the
Nostrils, operates more powerfully than holding volatile Sal Ammoniac to them.
Perhaps Vinegar will stimulate yet more strongly, and with better Effect.

All those Authors who treat of the Measures proper for restoring drowned
Persons to Life, order a Vomiting to be excited, in order to procure a
Discharge of the Water contained in the Stomach. This is the Doctrine of
Codronchus, Forestus, Camerarius, and Mr. Joly, who imagines that the Water in
the Stomach of drowned Persons, is one of the Causes of their Death. In order
to excite this Vomiting, they order the Throat to be tickled with the bearded
End of a Quill. Becker and Dethardingius order a Feather to be introduced into
the Oesophagus, in order to excite such a Motion of the Epiglottis, as is
sufficient to procure a Discharge of the Air contained in the Breast. Now it is
sufficiently known to every Body, that the bearded End of a Quill excites
Vomiting. We must here observe, that Mr. Joly only orders Vomiting to be
procured after drowned Persons return to Life. But it is certain, that vomiting
can produce no happy Effects, if there is nothing in the Stomach, or only a
Quantity of Water equal to that daily used by most People. As for liquid
Emetics, their Effects appear to be highly dubious, since the Oesophagus may
possibly be in such a convulsive State, as to hinder Deglutition. Dethardingius
looks upon this Irritation of the Throat, as a Circumstance of the highest
Importance; but for exciting it, prefers a certain Instrument invented in
Germany, and described by Heister in his Surgery.

According to Pechlinus, the Swedes, attempt to restore the Lives of drowned
Persons, by Means of Fomentations, with anti-apoplectic Medicines; that is,
such as are of an hot and spirituous Nature. Borelli in Obs. 11. Cent. 2.
informs us, that he successfully used toasted Bread soaked in warm Brandy,
applied to the Region of the Heart, and frequently renewed. Nymman in Tr. de
Apoplexia. Cap. 44. orders us to apply to the Nostrils of drowned Persons,
odoriferous Substances, and such as are carpable of putting the Spirits in
Motion, and restoring the Action of the Heart, and the Functions of the Brain.
Of this Kind are Pennyroyal Rue; and Lilly of the Valley, soaked in Vinegar.
He, also, orders us to apply to the Region of the Heart, Epithems prepared of
Baum, Rue, Marjoram, Amber, Cinnamon, and Lavender. Thus for Instance;

Take of the best Rose Water an Ounce and an half; of Baum-Water two Ounces and
an half; of Rosemary-Water one Ounce; of Malmsey Wine one Ounce and an half; of
Lemon Juice one Ounce, of the Powder of Cloves one Scruple; of Theriaca one
Dram, and of Camphire and Saffron each half a Dram. Mix all together, and in
the Liquor soak a Sponge, to be applied to the Region of the Heart.

As the genital Parts of both Sexes have a near and intimate Correspondence
with the Heart, as is obvious from the Effects of Cordials, applied to those
Parts, in Syncopes, Faintings, and other Affections of the Heart, so Nymman, in
order to restore drowned Persons to Life, orders these Parts to be fomented
with warm Wine, in which Cinnamon, Cloves, Musk, and Baum have been boiled.

But if any Success is to be expected from these Remedies, it is principally,
when by the Assistance of Frictions, the most volatile Parts of Spirituous
Liquors are made to penetrate into the Mass of Fluids; and it is highly
probable, that independently of the Experience of the Swedes, this Method will
answer the End proposed by Dethardingius, which is, the procuring of a free
Expiration; for, if the Admixture of the spirituous. Parts of cordial Liquors
restores the Course of the Spirits and Blood, it must necessarily follow, that
both must be more copiously conveyed to the Muscles destined for the Purposes
of Expiration.

It is also certain, from Experience, that one of the most efficacious
Expedients for restoring drowned Persons to Lise, is speedy Venesection,
especially in those Parts, most proper for relieving the Head, as the Ankles,
for Instance, and the Jugular Veins. The Use of Venesection, in such Cases,
must be sufficiently obvious to every one who considers, that drowned Persons,
as well as those who are hanged, die of an Apoplexy of the sanguineous Kind,
and not for Want of Respiration, or, as is commonly imagined, on Account of a
Repletion, or choking up of the Breast by Blood; for when such Persons are
laid open, the Breast is found almost entirely void of Blood, and the Brain
extremely inflamed; both which Phoenomena are highly agreeable to the Laws of
the Circulation.

These are the most common and approved Methods of restoring drowned Persons to
Life; but, if they should happen to prove ineffectual, the last Resource is,
what we commonly call Bronchotomy, or Tracheotomy, which consists in opening
the Trachea, in order to procure a free Access of the Air to the Lungs. This
Operation is principally intended to remove the obstinate Adherence of the
Epiglottis to the Orifice of the Glottis; in consequence of which Circumstance,
the Air contained in the Lungs is freely discharged. Tracheotomy was indeed
originally intended for the Extraction of foreign Bodies from the Trachea, or
for the procuring an Access of the Air to the Lungs when the Inflammation of
the Muscles of the Larynx, is so considerable in Quinseys, as to close up the
Aperture of the Glottis.

Tracheotomy, according to Dethardingius, has all the Advantages which can be
wished for, since it affords Relief speedily, effectually, and agreeably:
Speedily, because there is no more expeditious Method of procuring a Discharge
of the Air, which, by its natural Spring, and by the continual Compression of
the Abdomen, must necessarily be evacuated in that Manner. Now the Air cannot
escape from the Pulmonary Vesicles, without their collapsing and expressing
into the Pulmonary Vein, the Blood which had entered the Pulmonary Artery,
which cannot happen, without adding a greater Facility of Circulation to the
arterial Blood. Now the Blood arriving at the left Auricle, and thence at the
left Ventricle, produces a new Contraction of the Heart; upon which the
Circulation is reestablished, and Life discovers itself by manifest Signs,
especially by Respiration.

Tracheotomy, also, affords Relief without Danger, because we are no longer
afraid of making an Incision in those Cartilages, which the Ancients, in
Consequence of their bony Nature, imagined incapable of Consolidation. We no
longer dread the Hemorrhage, since only a few Drops of Blood are discharged in
opening the Membrane, which unites the Ringlets of the Arteria Trachea; and
since there are not contiguous to the Part, such large Blood Vessels, as being
wounded would produce terrible Effects. There is no Danger of injuring the
Voice by means of this Operation, since the Operator cannot hurt the Muscles of
the Larynx; and since there are no Nerves, the Dilaceration of which should
impair or destroy the Sensation of the Part. In a Word, it is no difficult Task
to heal up, and consolidate the Wound, for this is readily effected by means of
a Plaster, or some balsamic Ointment.

Thirdly, Tracheotomy affords Relief agreeably, for it cannot possibly be
painful to a drowned Person, whose Senses are so locked up, as to render him
incapable of feeling Pain. Thus the Operation is performed, without being
intercepted by the Cries, the Groans, and Motions, which Pain would produce.

Paulus Aegincta is the first Author extant, who described the Operation of
Broncotomy, from Antyllus. But the judicious and accurate Heister, in his
Surgery, describes this Operation very distinctly. The Words Bronchotomy, says
he, Laryngotomy, and Tracheotomy, are convertible Terms, and mean no more than
an Incision of the Aspera Arteria, or what we commonly call the Windpipe: and
indeed various Causes and Circumstances concur, to render this Operation
absolutely necessary on some Occasions; for, in the first Place, it becomes
principally and indispensably so, when in a Quinsey, the Fauces are so terribly
inflamed, that the Patient is in imminent Danger of having his Respiration
quite stopped, and a total Suffocation brought on. Secondly, It becomes
necessary, when a Bean, a Prune, a Cherry-stone, a Pea, or any other extraneous
Substance falls into the Aspera Arteria, and seems to threaten a Suffocation.
Thirdly, The Aspera Arteria is also to be opened, in such Persons, as have been
suffocated, in Consequence of their being immersed in Water, or as we commonly
express it, in newly drowned People; for Respiration has been often restored to
Persons in this Condition, by opening the Aspera Arteria, and by that means
procuring a free Access of the Air to the Lungs. I am sufficiently appriz'd,
that a great many forbid making an Incision in the Aspera Arteria, and
consequently condemn this Operation; because they think it productive of Death,
and are therefore prompted by an idle Zeal, to brand the Physicians, who
approve an Operation, so dangerous in their Eyes, with the odious Appellations
of barbarous and inhuman. But the Gentlemen, who are of this narrow and
confined Way of Thinking, are grossly mistaken; for in this Operation, the
small Incision made in the Aspera Arteria, is so far from killing the Patient,
that it does not produce that Effect when made considerably large; and
Garengeot gives Examples of various Cures performed by this Operation; so that
we think ourselves authorized with Casserius, in Tr. de Vocis, Auditusque
Organis, to pronounce those Men unskilful, timorous, and even cruel, who in the
Cases now mentioned, foolishly neglecting this Operation, which is not only
safe, but also attended with the most speedy and salutary Effects, suffer the
Patients to die for Want of this seasonable Assistance. Instances of this
Nature may be seen in Nicolai Fontani Observat. Rarior. Analect. and in
Casserius.

When Bronchotomy is to be performed, that Part of the Trachea seems most
proper for making the Aperture in, which is situated between its second and
third cartilaginous Annuli, or Ringlets. The Incision, may, however, be made a
little lower, without any Danger. The Method of performing the Operation,
especially when a foreign Substance falling into the Aspera Arteria, and
threatening a Suffocation is to be extracted, is thus. The Patient is first of
all to be situated in a reclining Posture, either in Bed, or in some convenient
Chair, and his Head is to be held firm by an Assistant standing behind his
Back. Then a longitudinal Incision is to be made, through the Skin, Fat, and
Muscles, from about two Fingers Breadth below the Cartilago Thyroides, or
Seutiformis, or the Pomum Adami, in the middle of the Trachea, down to the very
Sternum, so that the Length of the Incision may be two, three, and in tall
Patients, four Fingers Breadth in Length.

Then an Assistant is carefally to draw the Lips of this Orifice from each
other, either with proper Hooks, or with his Fingers; and having absorbed and
wiped away the Blood, either by a Sponge or Linen Cloth, so that the Aspera
Arteria may be seen, three or four of the Annuli or Ringlets of that spiral
Pipe, are to be cut in such a Manner, that the Incisions made in the Whole, may
form one continued Line, and thus whatever Substance may have slipped into it, is
to be artfully and cautiously extracted, either by a Probe, Hook, or Forceps.
This being done, the Wound is to be cleans'd, with a Sponge, and its Lips being
kept in Contact by adhesive Plasters, a proper Compress and Bandage are to be
applied. It is afterward to be carefully agglutinated, by means of vulnerary
Balsams, as in other Wounds of the Aspera Arteria. By this very Method,
continues Heister, I myself in Helmstadt, happily extracted a Piece of boiled
Mushroom from a Patient, who happening to laugh while he was supping Broth, in
which among other Things there were Mushrooms, had the Misfortune to have a
Piece of one of them slip into his Aspera Arteria, by which means he was in
Danger of being suffocated. Ravius, continues Heister, also informed me, that
by this very Method, he happily extracted a Bean from the Throat of a Patient.
Some in order to induce a more speedy and seemly Cicatrix on the Wound
recommend Conglutination by Suture as in the Hare Lip. But it is certainly
absurd to follow a Practice attended with so much Pain to the Patient, whilst
Methods equally good, and at the same Time far milder may be pursued.

But in all Cases where a Suffocation is either dreaded, or actually present,
Tracheotomy is absolutely necessary, and may be performed in three different
Manners. In the first of these the Patient is to be placed in a Bed or Chair,
with his Head reclined at the Operator's Discretion, and held firm by an
Assistant, as before directed. Then let the Surgeon make an Incision in that
middle Part of the Throat, and in the same Manner as before ordered, till he
reaches the Trachea itself, if he thinks proper; the Skin on both Sides is to
be laid hold of by the Assistant; then it may be raised and cut longitudinally.
After these Measures are taken, the Fat and Muscles lying above the Trachea are
to be cut. Some would have these Muscles first disengaged from the Trachea, or
cautiously separated from the others; but there is no Occasion for all this
Labor, since they may be cut safely and without any Danger. Then the Operator
is to cleanse the Wound with a Sponge wrung out of warm Wine, or warm Spirit of
Wine for stopping the Blood more effectually. The Assistant is, in the mean
Time to separate and retract the Lips, either by Hooks, or by his Fingers. Then
the Surgeon is to pass his Knife between two of the Annuli of Trachea, or he
may even pass it in such a Manner as to cut one of them, since by that means a
silver or leaden Pipe either round or flat, furnished with Ansae, or a Rim, so
as to prevent its falling into the Trachea, may be conveniently inserted into
the Wound. But before the Surgeon withdraws his Knife, some proper Probe ought
to be inserted in the Wound, by the Side of the Knife, that by its Assistance a
Pipe may be more commodiously and put into it. This Pipe is fixed in the Wound
by means of a Ligature passed through its Annuli or small Holes in the Rim, and
carried round the Neck, as also by means of a perforated adhesive Plaster: But
great Care is to be taken that the End of the Pipe which is inserted into the
Wound be not permitted to touch the posterior Part of the Aspera Arteria lest
by this means a troublesome Cough should be excited. But that the Lungs may not
be injured by external Cold, or any Filth falling upon them, it is highly
proper, to lay upon the Pipe, a Sponge, often impregnated with warm Wine, and
again wrung out; or as Garengeot advises, a thin Linen Cloth, and afterward a
perforated Plaster. These Directions being duly observed, Blood is to be taken
either from the Veins of the Neck or Feet, those under the Tongue, or those
situated in the Neck. When Respiration is totally restored, which is most
quickly discovered by stopping up the Pipe with one Finger, the Pipe is to be
taken out, and the Wound agglutinated in the Manner above directed. But when
the Difficulty of Breathing at the Mouth is considerable, the Pipe is to be
left for some Time longer in the Wound, and the other Medicines continued.

Another and more expeditious Method of opening the Trachea, is this, a two
edged Knife is applied to the abovementioned Part of the Throat, and cautiously
passed through the Skin, Fat, and Muscles, into the Cavity of the Trachea itself,
and a Pipe is forthwith inserted into the Wound, and carefully secured in the
Manner before directed. This Manner of Operation is not only quicker, but also
produces a smaller Cicatrix than the former.

The third and last Method of performing this Operation is, with an Instrument
called a Trocar, in tapping for the Dropsy, which no Surgeon ought to be
without. This Instrument applied to the Middle of the Trachea, may, as it were,
at one Thrust be passed through the Skin, Fat, and Muscles, into its very Cavity.
Then taking out the perforating Part, let the Pipe remain in the Orifice till
the Patient recovers. This Method of Operation, seems in one Respect, to have
the Advantage of all the rest, which is, that it is soon over, and the Pipe at
the same Time introduced into the Wound with far less Pain to the Patient, than
by any other Method: But even in this Case the same Caution ought to be used,
and the same Directions followed, which we have above specified.

If Persons drowned, continues Heister, are but just dead, their Aspera Arteria
is to be opened with all Expedition, either with an Incision-knife, or any
other Instrument the Surgeon shall judge proper. Then it is expedient strongly
to blow into the Orifice, either with the naked Mouth, or by Means of a common
Pipe, the Shank of which is to be introduced into the Wound, whilst the
Assistant blows into the Bole. The learned Dethardingius, in a Dissertation on
this very Subject, informs us, that by this Method, if speedily put in
Execution, Life returns to the suffocated Patients, with the injected Air, and
that he is in a Manner miraculously raised from the Dead. For this Reason the
Operation should in such Cases be performed with the greatest Haste and
Expedition imaginable.

Mr. Sharp our Countryman, in his Surgery, assures us that this Operation is
absolutely void of all Danger, and describes it in the following Manner.

Bronchotomy is performed, by making a longitudinal Incision through the Skin,
three Quarters of an Inch long, between the third and fourth Ringlets of the
Trachea, when the Operator has his own Choice of the Place; it is always
advised to pinch up the Skin in this Operation, which however may be left to
the Discretion of the Surgeon, who when the Skin is cut through, must make a
small transverse Incision into the Wind Pipe, and immediately introduce a
crooked Canula, near half an Inch long, of Silver or Lead, with a Couple of
little Rings at the Top of it, through which a Ribband may be passed round the
Neck, to keep it fixed in the Wound.

Some have prescribed making an Incision through the Skin and Trachea at once,
with a Lancet or Knife as the more easy and expeditious Manner, and says the
Author, I once saw it performed in this Way, but it proved very inconvenient;
for the Windpipe, in Respiration moving up and down, slipped from the Orifice
of the Skin, and made it very difficult to introduce the Canula, and afterward
maintain it in its Situation. Wherefore I think it absolutely necessary to make
an external Incision longitudinal, and even pretty large, as I have directed
above.

The Caution of raising the Sternohyoidei and Sternothyroidei Muscles before
opening the Windpipe is not to be regarded; and as to the Division of the
recurrent Nerves, and large Blood Vessels, so much dreaded in this Operation
it is not in the least to be feared, since they are quite out of the Reach of
the Instrument, as any Person skilled in the Anatomy of these Parts, must very
well know.

The Method of dressing is easily understood; since after the Patient can
breath by the natural Passage, if we withdraw the Pipe, the Wound becomes a
simple one, and notwithstanding its Penetration through a Cartilage, into a large
Cavity, requires only a superficial Application.

Upon the Whole it appears beyond all Contradiction, that Bronchotomy is a safe
Operation, and has been so often performed with Success, that no Surgeon has
any Reason to hesitate in performing it, in Cases where particular
Circumstances indicate its Propriety. For this Reason it is sufficiently
obvious, that this Operation ought with all Expedition to be performed on
drowned Persons, many of whom have been happily restored to Life by this very
Means. It is carefully to be observed, that this Expedient, is far more
efficacious than blowing into a Person's Mouth, as is confirmed by the
following Experiment made by Becker. This Physician hanged a Dog, till no more
Motion of his Heart was perceived, and having left him dead on the Ground for
half a Quarter of an Hour, he to no Purpose blowed Air into his Throat. Then he
performed the Operation of Bronchotomy, and having thrice blown the Air into
his Lungs, the Breast of the Dog began to elevate itself, and at the fifth
Blast, he moved his Feet. After this he was blooded in the Throat to give Vent
to the Blood, and at last gave some howling Barks, but survived the Accident
for several Years. Now as the Cause of Death is the same in drowned as in
hanged Animals, why should not the same Means restore them both to Life.

I have been very particular with respect to the Operation of Bronchotomy,
because it is of great Importance, and of singular Use in more Cases than one;
and that no one might be ignorant of the Methods of performing it. In the Case
before us, that of drowned Persons, it may frequently be necessary where no
Surgeon is to be procured soon enough to retrieve the Misfortune and preserve
Life. In this Situation, as there is no great Danger of injuring a Person, who
appears to be dead, and must be absolutely so without immediate Relief, any
common Person, tho not bred a Surgeon, may by these Directions, be enabled to
perform the Operation, by making a Perforation in the Place above directed,
with any Sharp pointed Knife. Then instead of a Canula or Tube of Metal, if
that is not at hand, a Tobacco Pipe may be broken about three Quarters of an
Inch, or an Inch, from the Bole, and the Part contiguous to the Bole may be
introduced into the Perforation, taking Care not to break it within the
Trachea; and then by blowing into the Bole, the Lungs may be inflated.

After having thus collected every Thing of any Importance upon the present
Subject, we must beg Leave to observe, that, though with Respect to Matters of
Religion and Conscience, it is not only extremely absurd, but also highly cruel
and barbarous to invoke the Assistance and Interposition of the secular Power.
Yet in the present Case, such an Attempt is so far from being either absurd or
barbarous, that it bespeaks Compassion and Humanity; for we may safely appeal
to Experience how many worthy Members of Society, generous Friends,
affectionate Husbands, tender Parents, and dutiful Children, have in foreign
Countries been restored to Life by these very Means; whereas in England,
Persons of equal Worth, have for Want of proper Care, been laid in their
Graves, at a Time when they might, for many future Years have proved the common
Blessings of the various Communities of which they were Members.

This melancholy and deplorable Consideration, will sufficiently authorize me
to propose a Regulation to the Legislature of England, whose principal Aim
seems ultimately to terminate in the greatest and most extensive Happiness of
the Subject. It is, that this Treatment of Persons supposd to be drowned, may
be enforced by all the Authority of the Law; and that no one may be suffered to
be buried without it; and this under severe Penalties; for otherwise I am
afraid these Endeavors of mine, however well intended, will not have the
desired Effect, nor be attended, to so much as the Subject deserves.

AN APPENDIX. Concerning the Methods of restoring hanged Persons to Life, and
Children supposed to be born dead.
AS England is above all other Nations in the World, justly branded with
Suicide, commonly known by the Name of Self-murder, and as our Countrymen
frequently make Choice of a Rope for that Purpose, we shall briefly point out
the Methods of restoring hanged Persons to Life.

It Is certain then, that hanged Persons die of an Apoplexy of the sanguineous
Kind, produced by an Obstruction of the Blood, by the Rope, in the jugular
Veins, whilst the Arteries being freer from this Compression, continue to
convey the Blood to the Brain. We may form a Judgment of the Effects produced
by a Compression of the jugular Veins, from the following Passage of Alexander
Benedictus in Lib. 2. Cap. 33. "When, says that judicious Author, a Redundance
of Blood obstructs the arterial and venous Canals, and intercepts the free
Circulation of the Spirits, the Patient falls down in the same Condition as if
he was, hanged. The Assyrians sometimes put sound Persons into a similar State,
when for Instance they intended to circumcise Adults or Children. Thus having
laid them on their Backs in a Bath, they compressed their jugular Veins, so as
speedily to produce a Privation both of Motion and Sensation; and taking the
Advantage of this Circumstance, cut off the Prepuce with as much Ease as if the
Patient was in an Apoplexy. The same is the Condition of those who having
attempted to hang themselves, are found suffocated, tho their Feet touch the
Ground."

Nymman, also, in Tr. de Apoplexia, cap. 14. declares his Sentiments on this
Subject in the following Manner. "The Functions of the Brain, says he, are
destroyed without any Lesion of the animal Spirits and Nerves, as appears in a
Syncope. The like happens to hanged Persons, who are no sooner hung up,
provided an expert Executioner exactly brace up the Vessels of the Neck, with
the Rope, than they become immovable as a Log of Wood, without even so much as
moving their Feet, notwithstanding which Phenomenon, the Brain and Origin of
the Nerves suffer nothing in such Persons; since those Parts are defended by
the Cranium and Vertebrae, which can never be injured by the Rope. Nor is the
Interception of Respiration to be accused as the Cause of Death in hanged
Persons, since tho we closely shut up the Mouth and Nostrils of an Animal so as
to hinder the Access of Air into the Breast, yet as the Brain still retains its
vital Spirit, it powerfully opposes the imminent Danger of a Suffocation, by a
violent Agitation of the Body, and an excessive Motion of the Feet, which
Circumstances are never observed in hanged Person."

From these Authorities we evidently see the speedy Effects produced by the
Compression of the jugular Veins. This Doctrine is farther illustrated by
Bartholine in Cent, 1. Hist. 32, "In dissecting, says this Author, a Man of a
tall Stature, of a sanguine Temperament, and vigorous Constitution, who was
hanged for a Robbery, I found his Lungs preternaturally large, bluish,
streaked with different Colors, light and spungious, and so full of a frothy
Blood, that every where on the Membrane which covers them, the Veins not only
appeared turgid, but the Lobes were also so large as to embarrass me in
dissecting the Heart. The Ventricules of the Brain were full of Water, as also
the Origin of the Nerves which enter the Spine. The Plexus Choroides, also,
besides the Inflation of its Vessels, contained a great many Vesicules."

The Loss of Knowledge in hanged Persons, also, proves the Truth of this
Doctrine, and this Loss is sufficiently attested by Camerarius in Cent. 7.
Hist. 40. where we are told, that a Robber being hanged and falling into the
Hands of the Surgeons for Dissection, was nevertheless restored to Life,
notwithstanding his Mouth was full of Froth, which is generally looked upon as
an infallible Sign of irritrievable Death, especially where it continues long,
as it did in the present Case, and notwithstanding he had before his Execution
been seized with a Fit of Madness. When this Man, however, was restored to
Life, he said he rememberd nothing of what had passed on that Occasion, except
that he was conducted to the criminal Chamber, after which he was insensible of
every Thing. This Robber was hanged a second Time for committing fresh
Robberies, a convincing Proof, that he did not look upon the first as a
formidable Punishment. Camerarius in Hist. 38. mentions another, who was twice
hanged; and in Hist. 39. another who was restored to Life by the Physicians of
Vienna, after he had been hanged.

Lord Bacon in his History of Life and Death, relates an Accident, which like
that of Camerarius, proves the Loss of Knowledge in hanged Persons. A young
Gentleman of some Distinction, curious to know the Pain suffered by hanged
Persons, having fixed a Rope about his Neck, threw himself from a low Stool
upon which he imagined he could easily put his Feet again: But his Attempts of
this Kind were in vain, and he had been irretrievably suffocated, without the
Assistance of a Friend who had the Curiosity to be present at such an
unaccountable Experiment. Upon his Recovery, his Friend asking him if he had
felt any Pain; he answered that he had perceived none in any Part of his Body;
but added, that at first he observed before his Eyes, a Species of Fire or
blazing Light; then an extreme Darkness, and last of all a pale Blue, or a
Seagreen, like that which frequently presents itself before the Eyes of those
who fall into Deliquiums. Lord Bacon subjoins, that he heard a Physician of
Candor and Worth, assert, that he had restored Life to a Man who had been
hanged half an Hour, affirming at the same Time, that by proper Means the same
Effect might be produced upon others, who had hung no longer, provided the
Effort of their first Fall had not luxated the Vertebrae of their Necks.

After having thus discovered the Cause of Death in hanged Persons, we are the
better able to form an Estimate of the Means most proper to restore them to
Life.

Frictions then, and hot Baths, by restoring the Motion of the Blood, and
resolving its Coagulation, must for these very Reasons produce happy Effects on
hanged Persons. Pechlinus in Tr. de Aer. and Aliment. Defect. cap. 7. relates
an Observation, which sufficiently evinces the Efficacy of Sal Ammoniac on
similar Occasions. "I knew, says he, a Woman hanged, who after she had remained
for some Time without Pulse and Respiration, with her Lips covered with Froth,
which is looked upon as an infallible Sign of the total Privation of Life, and
in a Word, after she appeared to be the necessary Victim of Death, was yet
restored to Life, by a Physician who coming accidentally to the Place where she
lay, made her swallow a considerable Quantity of the Spirit of Sal Ammoniac."
As the Activity of this acrid volatile Liquor, and its Propriety to resolve
coagulated Blood are sufficiently known; it is by no means surprising, that it
should on similar Occasions produce such happy Effects. " Pechlinus subjoins, I
don't in the least doubt, but if proper Measures were taken in due Time, a
great many hanged Persons might be restored to Life, even after those who have
an Opportunity of seeing them, think they have all the Reason in the World, to
conclude them really and irretrievably dead. This Effect is most commodiously
produced by restoring the Circulation of their Blood, by means of Frictions,
Venesections, and the Exhibition of hot and spirituous Remedies, or of some
other analogous Substances."

It is sufficiently easy from what we have before said, to conceive, how
Venesection is excellently calculated for restoring Life to hanged Persons, and
as for spirituous Liquors, they act at once on the Blood and Vessels, By
attenuating the former, and restoring the proper Spring and Tone of the latter.
The Remedies of this Kind are before specified.

Schenkius in Observat. Art. de Suffocat. ex Laquea, orders that drowned
Persons should be made to swallow Vinegar and Pepper; or Oxymel mixed with the
Powder of Pennyroyal. He, also, advises to excite a Vomiting by means of a
Feather dipped in Oil, and to wrap up the Patient's Neck in a Woollen Cloth dipped
in warm Oil, especially the Oil of Orris.

The Virtues of Oxymel, or of simple Vinegar with Pepper, are sufficiently
evinced by Christophorus de Vega Art. Med. Lib. 3. Sect. 5. Cap. 8. All
Physicians are sufficiently appriz'd, that Vinegar moderately used, is a
powerful Resolvent, whilst Pepper is an acrid Substance, equally proper to
dissolve the Coagulations of the Juices, and reanimate the Fibers, by the
Irritation it produces in them. The Powder of Pennyroyal is, also, an acrid
Aromatic, whose Effect must of course be nearly the same with that of Pepper.

As for exciting a Vomiting in hanged Persons, I think it more dangerous than
in those who are drowned; for the Contractions of the Muscles subservient to
Expiration, may serve to restore that Function as we have already observed,
since the Inflation of the Abdomen and Breast of hanged Persons, is a Proof
that their Inspiration is forced and unnatural, yet in such Circumstances it
seems dangerous to convey a greater Quantity of Blood to the Head which is
before overchargd with it, as is sufficiently obvious, not only from the
preceding Histories, but also from the livid Color of the Countenance. It is,
however, certain, that the Shocks given to the Parts by means of the Vomiting,
are very proper to dissolve the Coagulations of the Blood, though I would never
advise the Use of this Method, till after a previous Venefection.

The Topic mentioned above, which Schenkius orders to be applied to the Neck,
may produce very happy Effects, by resolving the Blood collected in the Skin
and Muscles of the Neck, and relaxing the Parts which had suffered most
immediately by the Rope.

Gesner, for a Girl who hanged herself, successfully ordered Powder of Castor,
which he forced down in warm Broth. This Remedy is also of a volatile and
resolvent Nature. Joubert. in Lib. 4, it Effect. Thor. Cap. 1. informs us, that
he restored many hanged Persons to Life, without such a Multiplicity of
Expedients; since he used no other Method than Venesection, and forcing into
their Stomachs a due Quantity of good Wine.

Ranchinus in Tr. de Morb. subit. Cap. 12. orders Oil of Orris, or of Lillies,
to be applied to the Necks of hanged Persons, whilst their Mouths are to be
gargariz'd with Syrup of Violets, dissolved in warm Water, or Barley-water. He
also prescribes Vomiting, excited by a Feather, in order to enlarge the
Passages more. The same Author also recommends Pepper and Pennyroyal, either
in Vinegar, Oxymel, Wine, or the Aqua Caelestis. But Venesection is the
Expedient on which he depends most for happy Effects. The Oils and the Syrup
are only intended to procure a Relaxation; and as for the Gargarism, it cannot
be usd till the hanged Person is previously restored to Life. The Pepper,
Pennyroyal, and other Substances mentioned by him, are designed to re-animate
and restore the natural Heat.

Aelius in Tetrabibl. Sermon. 8. Cap. 49. orders us to add to the Pepper and
Vinegar, Nettle-seeds, which are also of an highly acrid Nature. The same
Author affirms, that when the Redness round the Neck of hanged Persons is
dissipated, they open their Eyes, and the Parts are relaxed. He is also of
Opinion, that we ought not to spare Fomentations of the Neck, with warm Oils,
Cerate, or Woollen Cloths.

Ranchinus, from other Authors, greatly extols a Remedy which most People will
think as singular in itself as disagreeable to the Person who administers it.
It consists of blowing into the Mouth of hanged Persons, provided the
Administrator has in his own Mouth, a bruised Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves, or
Carraway-seeds. As it is certain, that these Aromatics produce no other Effect,
than impregnating the Air with some volatile Parts, proper to restore the
Motion of the Fluids, so it is equally certain, that the principal Efficacy of
this Practice depends upon the Blowing, which in this Case must infallibly
produce Salutary Effects; as is obvious from the following Experiments,
recorded in No. 28. of the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal society of
London.

First then, Doctor Croon, Professor of Gresham-College, in the Presence of the
Royal Society, strangled a Pullet, in such a Manner, as that it discovered no
more Signs of Life; but by afterward blowing into the Arteria Trachea, he so
effectually restored the Motion of the Lungs, that the Pullet returned to Life.

Secondly, Doctor Walter Needham, in the Presence of Mr. Boil, and other
Literati, hanged a Dog, till the Motion of his Heart was no longer to be
perceived, after which he opened the Abdomen of the Dog, and blowing into the
Thoracic Duct, restored the Motion of the Blood, upon which the Heart began to
beat, and the Dog returned to Life.

Thirdly, Doctor Hook, in the Presence of the Royal Society, cut the Ribs, the
Diaphragm, and Pericardium of a Dog, after which, making an Incision in the
superior Part of the Trachea, he introduced into it the Pipe of a Pair of
Bellows; then he blowed the Air into the Lungs, and the Dog returned to Life;
but died when he ceased to blow: By which Expedient he made him live and die
alternately, as long as the Company pleased.

A fourth Experiment is that of Becker, by which he restored a hanged Dog to
Life, by opening his Larynx, and blowing the Air into his Lungs, through the
Incision made; so that the Practice enjoined by Ranchinus, is by no Means to be
neglected.

Upon the whole, the first and fourth Experiments are absolutely the same with
the Practice recommended by that Author. Now, Why may not that which has
succeeded twice, succeed oftener? Though the other Experiments do not so
directly prove the same Truth, yet it may be easily deduced from them; for from
the second it follows, that the Air is not only necessary to the Circulation,
because by dilating the Lungs it gives a free Passage to the Blood, from one
Ventricle of the Heart to the other, but also is requisite to keep the Blood in
such a State of Solution, as Circulation requires. Now, by blowing Air into the
Lungs, we inflate their Vesicles, which is the first Advantage produced by
Respiration; and the Air by this Means insinuating itself into the Blood,
resolves its Coagulation. By means of this Explication, it is easy to comprehend
how Doctor Hook's Experiment favors the Doctrine of Ranchinus.

From what has been said, we may therefore conclude, First, that blowing in the
Mouths of hanged Persons is a proper Method of restoring them to Life;
Secondly, That if this Method does not succeed, we are to perform the Operation
of Bronchotomy, and by that Means blow Air into their Lungs: Thirdly, That we
ought not to be discouraged at some fruitless Attempts, because a Practice,
which with Becker, did not succeed till the fifth Time, may perhaps, in other
Circumstances, not succeed till later: Fourthly, That we must not at the same
Time, neglect these other Means, which have a Tendency to restore the lost
Fluidity of the Blood: Fifthly, That if Death does not succeed Strangulation,
this is rather the Effect of the Stiffness of the Cartilages which compose the
Larynx, or according to some, of the Slackness of the Rope, than of the easy
Disposition of the Blood to resume its Fluidity: Sixthly, That it is highly
probable, that an efficacious Method of restoring drowned Persons to Life,
would be, to inject Air into the Blood, by introducing a small Pipe into some
of the larger Veins, for that Purpose; For what Difference is there between
making the Air enter the Blood by the Thoracic Duct, or by any other Part. The
only Caution which I think ought to be given, is, to make choice of those Veins
most contiguous to the Heart; so that for this very Reason, as well as for
their Largeness, and the Facility of finding them, I judge the external
Jugulars most proper for this Purpose.

Having already observed, that as the Cause of Death is the same in hanged and
drowned Persons, so the Measures taken for the Relief of the one, may be also
used for restoring the Lives of the others, We proceed to give some Histories
of Facts, which prove the Possibility of restoring suffocated People to Life.

Mr. Falconet then, a Gentleman of strict Probity and Candor, told Dr.
Bruhier, That his Father had a foolhardy Coachman, who falling into a Quarrel
at Lions, killed a Man, and being apprehended on the Spot, was forthwith
condemned to be hanged, which Sentence was accordingly put in Execution. The
Surgeons of the Town having obtained his Body, in order to make a Skeleton,
brought it into a Surgery, where they left it upon a Table; but when they came
next Day to dissect it, they were surprised to find the Man not only alive, but
in good Health, and pissing in the Chimney, for want, as he said, of a
Chamber Pot.

This Man had stood in no Need of Remedies, certainly, for no other Reason, but
because the Circulation of the Blood had not been so long suppressed, but that
it could of its own Accord restore itself.

Oswaldus Gabelchaverus relates, in one of his Observations quoted by
Schenkius, the History of a Merchant of the Name of Landthtaler, who was hanged
on a Tree for some Villainies he had committed: He hung for a whole Hour, and
the Servants who had Orders to inter him, having cut the Rope, perceived, as
they thought, some Marks of Life in him, upon which they put him in a Cart,
conveyed him to a proper Place, and soon restored him to Life. He afterward
used to say, that he was sensible of no Pain in hanging, except in his Eyes,
and the Extremities of his Toes. About eighteen Years after, however, he began
to follow the same Practices, for which he had been hanged before; but Prince
Charles of Aremberg ordered him to be hanged a second Time, in such a Manner,
that he never returned to Life.

Caesariensis in Illustr. Mirac. Lib. 6. Cap. 24. relates the History of a
certain Robber, who had been hanged a little before a Servant belonging to a
Canon of Cologne happened to come up to the Gallows. The Servant imagining
there were still some Remains of Life left in him, cut the Rope, and restored
him to Life, by some cold Water takenfrom an adjacent Rivulet. The Robber, in
the mean time, gradually resuming his Strength, followed his Deliverer, who was
going to the next Town, and just as they were talking with each other, the
Robber laid hold of the Bridle of the Servant's Horse, cried out aloud, that
the Horse belonged to him, and swore that the Servant had robbed him of him:
This Debate having drawn together a large Concourse of People, their
Indignation was so strongly moved against the Servant, that without hearing
what he had to say in his own Justification, they were determined to drag him
to the Gallows from which he had lately cut down the Robber: but luckily for
the Servant, some Inhabitants of the neighboring Town, seeing a Concourse of
People going to the Gallows, which belonged in common to both Towns, came to
see what the Matter was: then the Crowd suffering the Servant to speak, he
related his Adventure, and the Manner in which the Robber had recompensed his
Service. The Robber being at last known, was a second Time hung upon the same
Gallows, in such a Manner as not to return to Life.

Though the Groundwork of the following History resembles the preceding, yet
it differs from it in many Circumstances, the most considerable of which is,
the long Time the Criminal continued hanged.

A Miller near Abbeville in France, happening to go near the Place where a
Robber had been hanged the Day before, suspected that he was not dead.
Compassion having induced him to satisfy his Suspicion, which was well-founded,
he cut him down, laid him in a Cart, conveyed him to his own House, and used
such effectual Means to restore him to Life, that in fifteen Days the Robber
recovered perfect Health. The Miller upon this intended to give him a little
Money, and take his Leave of him; but delaying for some Time to put that
Intention in Execution; he left him one Sunday alone in his House; the
miserable Wretch forgetting what he owed to his Deliverer, broke open a
Cupboard, and carried off all the Plate and ready Money he could find. The
Miller, upon coming home, and finding his House robbed, easily concluded, that
his Guest was the Person who had done it: accordingly the Miller, his two Sons,
and a Cart-driver, pursuing the Robber, overtook him about a League off, and
dragging him to the Gallows, whence he had been cut down, hung him up a second
Time, and gave him such Shocks, that they put it out of his Power to commit any
more Robberies. It is about forty Years since this Accident happened, and
Doctor Bruhier informs us, that it is attested by Persons of the best
Reputation in France; and a Pardon was actually procured for the Miller, his
Sons, and Servant, who took the Liberty of executing the Robber, without legal
Authority.

Before we put an End to this Treatise, which we intend for the common Good and
Benefit of Mankind, we shall say something with Respect to the Methods of
preserving the Lives of Children, who appear dead when born. No two Abuses
then, are more prejudicial to Society, contrary to Humanity, or inconsistent
with Reason, than to inter Women big with Child, without performing the
Caesarian Operation upon them; and without any Attempts of Relief, totally to
abandon Children who seem to be born dead.

The former of these Abuses is founded on two Errors; the first of which is,
that the Infants do not survive their Mothers, when they die near their Time;
an the second, that the Lives of Children depend absolutely on those of their
Mothers. Now these two Errors are destroyed by several Histories, which prove,
that the Death of the Mother does not necessarily produce that of the Child.

Caspar Reies, then, in his Campus Elysius Jucundarum Questionum, relates from
Cornarius, "That a Woman of Madrid, of the illustrious Hose of Lasso, being
reputed dead, after remaining three Days, in the utmost Agonies, was put into
the Tomb belonging to the Family, which being opened some Months after, her
Corpse was found, with an Infant tenderly grasped in her right Arm; for,
continues the Author, the Woman was pregnant, an near her Time, when she was
interred as dead."

The following History is also related, by the same Author, and attested by
some of the most learned and judicious Men in Spain.

"The Wife of Francis Arevallo de Swasso, fell ill in the City of Segovia,
during the last Months of Gestation: However, as she died, or rather was taken
for dead, in a few Days she was interred, according to the Custom of the Place.
The Husb^nd, in the mean time, who was sent for to a Place at a considerable
Distance, whither he had gone about some Business, came home about the Middle
of the Night, and being informed that his Wife, whom he loved to Excess, was
dead and buried, he would at any Rate have the Satisfaction of seeing her once
more: For this Purpose, he went to the Church, and ordered her to be raised
from the Grave; hardly was the Coffin opened, till the Cries of a Infant were
heard; the Bystanders were astonished, a Justice was called, the Priests, and
a great many others got Flambeaus, and attended the Husband; the Shroud was
lifted up immediately, upon which appeared the Head of an Infant, making a
vigorous Effort to disengage the Rest of its Body from the Vagina. This Infant
was not only extracted, sound, and alive, but also lived to be Lieutenant
General of the City of Cherez. The surprising Manner in which he came into the
World, laid a Foundation for his being called, The Son of the Earth."

From these Histories, Caspar Reies draws the following Consequence. "'It Is
evident that Children don't die with their Mothers when the latter die near the
Periods of their Deliveries. Sennertus affirms, not only that they live for
some Time after their Mothers are dead, but also that we may, and even ought,
to extract them alive from the Uterus, Vincelius has composed two Treatises in
order to prove these Truths, which are also sufficiently established in the
Dissertations of Nymman, De Vita Foetus in Utero, where, as well as in other
Authors we find a great many similar Histories; and others of Women who have
been delivered of live Children after their own Death. The Reader may also
consult Raynaud de ortu Infantum contra Naturam. Hence it is obvious, that we
ought not to be too rash and precipitate in burying pregnant Women who die near
their Times. I am not certain whether these Women were dead or alive at the
Time of their Interment, though it appears evident from the Circumstances, that
the first was buried alive; for Horstius proves from another Fact, that dead
Women may be delivered of Children. Thus he informs us that a Woman big with
Child, being hanged along with her Husband by the Spanish Soldiers, between
Deventer and Zutphen, was four Hours after her Death, delivered of live Twins."

Thomas Bartholin in Act. Hasn. An. 1673 relates an History which proves the
same Truth, and which is, "That of a Child born two Days after the Death of its
Mother, which happened in a Labor, in which three Midwives had employed all
their Art and Skill. Thus it is certain from Experience, that dead Women may be
delivered of live Children, and this has perhaps laid a Foundation for the
whimsical and superstitious Practice of putting into the Coffins of Women who
die big with Child, a Needle, a Thread, and a Pair of Scissars, as if the Manes
stood in Need of those Instruments to tie and cut the umbilical Chord of the
Infant about to be born. In short it has been observed, that Infants have been
born in the Coffins of their Mothers."

The same Author also mentions a Woman who in 1635, on Thursday about 9 o'Clock
at Night died of Epileptic Fits. On the Friday the Foam was discharged from her
Mouth, Cries resembling those of an infant were heard, and a sensible Motion
was observed in the Abdomen of the Mother. On Saturday about 10 o'Clock in the
Morning, the Woman discharged a great deal of Blood, so that on changing her
Linen, her Infant still warm, was found lying betwixt her Things. Bartholin
adds, that the Physicians of the Town were of Opinion that the Mother had only
died when her Mouth became full of Froth, without which Circumstance the Infant
could not probably have lived.

In the Miscellanea Naturae Curios. we have Instances of Women who have died
near their Time, and been delivered sometimes of dead, sometimes of live
Children, sometimes one, two, and three Days after their Deaths. These
Instances are recorded by Resler, first Physician to the Prince of Brieg in
Obs. 318. An. 3. By Polisius in Obs. 42. An. 4. By Doleus in Decus. 2. An. 5.
Obs. 137. By Hoyer in Decur. 2. An. and lastly by Hartmanus in Observat. 83. of
the same Volume.

From what has been said it is sufficiently obvious, that those Persons are
greatly mistaken who suppose that the Foetus does not survive its Mother; for
it is evinced from a Number of Observations, that the Life of the Foetus is
sustained by a Circulation peculiar to itself; that the umbilical Arteries,
which terminate in the Placenta, convey thither a Quantity of Blood, which is
carried back by the umbilical Vein, without passing to the Mother; and that, if
this Blood undergoes any Change, it is only from a lymphatic or lacteal Liquor,
which the Roots of the Placenta imbibe from the uterine Vessels. These Truths
are at present universally agreed upon; so that before the Death of the Mother
can destroy the Life of the Child, it is necessary to prove, First, That the
lacteal Liquor ceases to be filtrated immediately after the Death of the
Mother: Secondly, That the Suppression of this Filtration is an infallible, or
even necessary Cause of Death. In Consequence of this, we must prove, that at
every Circulation, the Juices of the Foetus have their nutritive and vivifying
Principles exhausted; and that the Foetus is incapable of sustaining in the
Uterus a Degree of Fasting, which it often supports for several Days after it
is brought into the World. Now, as these Propositions cannot be proved, so it
cannot be evinced, that the Death of the Mother is necessarily succeeded by
that of the Foetus; so that it is certain, we commit manifest Homicide, by
interring pregnant Women near their Time, without performing the Caesarian
Operation upon them.

This is no new Doctrine, since in the Digest Lib. 4. Tit. 8. these Words
occur; "A Royal Edict prohibits the Interment of dead pregnant Woman, before we
have delivered them, by Means of the Caesarian Operation. Those, who do
otherwise appear, to have destroyed with the pregnant Woman the Hope of
obtaining a living Man." It is highly to be lamented, that this Law is not
universally put in Execution, since it is a Principle founded on the eternal
and unalterable Nature of Things; That we kill those whom we do not preserve,
when we have it in our Power.

If it should be objected, that this Operation would, if not always, yet at
least very often, prove an useless Attempt. I answer, that it is, an easy
Operation, since it is performed by two or three Strokes of the Bistory, and a
few Stitches of a Needle. Besides, though Children after this Operation should
appear dead, yet we are not to trust to those Appearances, unless Putrefaction
should remove all Doubt.

Bhonius informs us, that the Faculty of Medicine at Wurtemberg being
consulted, in a criminal Process raised against a Mother for killing her own
Child, answered, that Children were sometimes born so weak, as to appear for a
considerable Time without Sensation, Motion, and Respiration; and that it was
necessary to use vellications, Fomentations, Aspersions of Wine, Spirits of
Wine, or Aqua Vitae; as also to make them swallow aromatic Liquors, or blow
spirituous Liquors into their Mouths and Nostrils, till they begin to cry,
which is an infallible Mark that the Air has entered the Lungs.

As to these Measures, we have before shown, that they have an evident Tendency
to restore Life. But we must not here pass over a Practice, which, of all
others seems to be of the greatest Importance to still-born Children, which is,
the sucking the left Nipple of the dead Foetus. This Method, as we are told in
Ephemerid. Nature. Curios. Dec. 2. An. 5. proved successful, after vellications,
Frictions, spirituous Liquors, and other Methods had been tried in vain.
Various other Instances of the Success of this Practice are found in the same
Work, and in the Writings of other practical Authors. Though this Method may at
first seem ridiculous, yet it will appear of the last Importance to the
Anatomist, who knows the Sensibility of the Breast, all whose Nerves center in
the Nipple. Hannemaun also, orders a Sponge dipped in Red Wine, or Aqua Vitae, to
be applied to the left Breast, and Pit of the Stomach, of still-born Children.
Heister, when speaking of such newborn Children, as are excessively weak, or
hardly appear to be alive, orders a robust, sound Man to breath into their
Mouths, immediately after he has drank a Dram of Brandy.

The last Method of restoring still-born Children to Life is, to blow into
their Mouths, as is obvious, from various well-attested Observations, with two
of which we shall put a Period to this Work.

Borelli in Hist. Cent. 3. Observe. 58. relates, that a Servant returning from
the Fields, and finding his Master, whom he greatly loved, lying dead, he
embraced him for a long Time, and by accidentally breathing in his Mouth,
gradually restored him to Life.

The learned Grubelius, in Miscellan. Not. Curios. Dec. 2. An. 10. Obs. 44.
informs us, that whilst a Physician was preparing the Remedies proper to
restore to Life, a Woman, who had fallen into such a Syncope, that she was
thought dead, her own Servant, who had a great Attachment to her, restored her
to Life by blowing in her Mouth. But it is probable, that this Method produces
its happy Effects, rather by restoring the Motion of the Blood and Lungs, than
by Means of that vivifying Principle, which some superstitious Authors suppose
to be lodged in the human Breath.

FINIS.

