Paine's Four Letters.

LETTERS ON GOVERNMENT: INCLUDING BOTH HIS LETTERS TO MR. DUNDAS; WITH TWO
LETTERS TO LORD ONSLOW* AND TWO FROM PARIS.

By THOMAS PAIN, AUTHOR OF "RIGHTS OF MAN," "COMMON SENSE, etc.

TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED ANECDOTES OF HIS LIFE.

LONDON: SOLD BY C. STALKER, STATIONERS' COURT, LUDGATE STREET; AND BY ALL
BOOKSELLERS.

1792.

[PRICE SIXPENCE.]

The Patrons of Liberty are informed, that in a fe^ days will be published, at
a small price, a Pamphlet, entitled,

THE FRIEND OF THE PEOPLE; OR, A VIEW OF THE ENGLISH GOVERNMENT FOR THE
INSTRUCTION OF PLAIN PERSONS.

SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.

ANECDOTES OF THE LIFE OF THOMAS PAIN.
THE celebrated Author of "THE RIGHTS OF MAN" has not been without his
biographer. In a pamphlet which extends to one hundred and sixty-six pages, and
which is published under the sanction of the fictitious name of Oldys, we have
been made acquainted with many particulars of Mr. PAINE'S private history. This
pamphlet is, in (...) degree, (...) and abusive; and the (...) of it had
evidently dipped his pen in the bitter spirit of Party Opposition. However, the
incidents which it contains seem to have been collected with care and
assiduity, and to rest, as to their authenticity, on the evidence of dates and
records. It should be remembered, likewise, that these particulars have not
been contradicted, either by Mr. PAIN, or by any of his numerous admirers;
most, if not all, of whom appear to have had no doubt of their reality.
Perhaps, the impartial Public may be pleased with beholding the following
Anecdotes, stripped of that high coloring which prejudice and party-malice are
capable of giving to truth.

THOMAS PAIN was born at Thetford, in the county of Norfolk, on the 29th of
January, 1736-7. His father, the son of a small but reputable farmer, was a
stay-make by trade, and a Quaker by religion: his mother was the daughter of an
attorney at Thetford, and of the Establishe^ Church. He was educated at his
native town, under the Rev. WILLIAM KNOWLES, master of the grammar schoo^ at
Thetford, and was deemed a boy of considerable abilities, though without much
regular application. His studies were directed, by his expectations, to what is
useful, rather than to what is ornamental; -- to reading, writing, and
arithmetic. With this kind of instruction he left the school, at the age of
thirteen, in order to learn his father's business, which, though he did not
like it, he continued to work at for nearly five years.

When almost twenty, and in the year 1756, the subject of these memoirs entered
London, the common receptacle of the silly and the wise, of the poor and the
opulent, of the busy and the idle. He worked for some time with Mr MORRIS, a
very noted stay-maker, in Hanover-street Long-Acre. He did not, however,
continue long in London; and it seems probable that this was the period at
which he made his seafaring adventure.

At an early age (as he himself observes,) raw and adventurous, and heated with
the false heroism of a master who had served in a man-of-war, he began the
career of his own fortune, and entered on board the Terrible privateer Captain
DEATH. From this adventure he was happil^ prevented by the affectionate and
moral remonstrance of good father, who, from his own habits of life, being of
the Quaker profession, must have begun to look upon him a^^ lost. But the
impression, much as it effected at the time began to wear away, and he entered
afterward in the King of Prussia privateer, and went with her to sea. What the
event of his expedition was, whether successful or otherwise, we are not
informed; but it is certain, that in the way of life he did not continue long,
for in the year 175^ we find him at Dover, where he worked at his trade s^
almost a twelvemonth.

In April 1759 he settled, as a master stay-maker, Sandwich; and, on the 27th
of September following, married MARY LAMBERT, a pretty girl of modest behavior,
and the daughter of an exciseman. At Sandwich, however, he did not continue
long: but on the 7th of April, 1760, went, with his wife, to Margate, and a
little time after, having lost his wife, again mingled with the crowds of
London.

The trials which our Author had made of his trade, as they had brought him no
pleasure and little gain, induced him to renounce it at this time for ever.
When a youth, he had enquired into the duty, and envied the perquisites, of an
exciseman. His wife had, doubtless, spoken of the honors and emoluments of her
deceased father. And he was induced by these considerations, in July, 1761, to
seek for shelter in his father's house, that he might prosecute, in quiet
privacy at Thetford, the great object of his future course.

After fourteen months of study, our Author was established in the excise, on
the 1st of December, 1762, at the age of twenty-five. He owed this
gratification of his wishes to the friendly interference of Mr. COCKSEDGE, the
learned Recorder of Thetford; but in this situation he did not continue more
than two or three years; for it is certain that, whatever was the cause, he was
dismissed from his office on the 27th of August, 1765.

In consequence of this misfortune, our celebrated Author was reduced to great
want. He is said to have been, for some time, almost without food and shelter.
On the 11th of July, 1766, he was restored to his office; a circumstance which
seems to prove that he had not merited his dismission.

Mere restoration, however, did not bring him immediate employment. At this
interval he was employed to teach English at an academy in Leman-street,
Goodman's-Fields, for which he received a salary of twenty-five pounds a year;
and afterward he lived, for a short time, in a similar situation at Kensington.

In March, 1768, he was sent to be an excise officer at Jews, in Sussex. In
this place he lodged with Mr. OLLIVE, a tobacconist; after whose death, in
1769, he opened the shop in his own name, as a grocer, and married ELIZABETH
OLLIVE, the daughter of his late landlord. This period is said to have been one
of the happy parts of his life.

In 1771 he made his first appearance as a writer. The poets of Jews were
called upon, by one of the candidates for the honor (we must not say, the
interest) of representing in Parliament the Electors of New Shoreham, to
furnish an appropriate song; and Mr. PAIN obtained the laurel, with three
guineas for his labor.

In 1772 a design was formed by the excise-officers throughout the kingdom, to
apply to Parliament for some addition to their salaries. Our Author, being one
of the leading men among them, was requested to write their Case, which he
produced and published, after many months' application. This is an octavo
pamphlet of twenty-one pages, which, exclusive of the Introduction, is divided
into two heads, viz. The State of the Salary of the Officers of the Excise; and
Thoughts of the Corruption arising from the Poverty of Excise Officers. On
these topics he says all that the ablest writer could have said. Four thousand
of the Case were printed at Jews; but, notwithstanding this effort, no
application was made to Parliament.

In the month of April, 1774, misfortunes crowded fast upon him. The effects of
his shop were sold to pay his debts. Having dealt likewise, as a grocer, in
exciseable articles, he was suspected (whether with reason or otherwise, does
not appear) of unfair practices; and, on the 8th of the same month, was again
dismissed from the excise after a dozen years service.

On the 24th of May following, Mr. PAIN and his wife entered into articles of
separation; and these articles were in consequence of some disagreement, again
drawn on the 4th of June. Some persons have not scrupled to asser^ that he
treated his wife with cruelty, and that this was the cause of their separation.

Toward the close of the year, in consequence of a strong recommendation to
Dr. FRANKLIN, he formed the resolution of quirting his native country; and, in
the month of September, he set sail for America. He arrived at Philadelphia in
the winter, a few months, as he himself relates, before the battle of
Lexington, which was fought in April, 1775.

In the New World, his first employment was that of shopman to Mr. AITKIN, an
industrious bookseller at Philadelphia, with a salary of twenty pounds a year.
Soon after, he turned chemist; and in November, as foreign supplies of
gunpowder were stopped, he employed his fertile genius in making experiments
for the purpose of discovering some cheap and expeditious method of furnishing
Congress with saltpetre.

From this era he becomes more known, and his conduct is entitled to
particular attention. On the 10th of January, 1776, he published his celebrated
pamphlet, entitled Common Sense. This work was universally read, and very
generally applauded. The first edition was quickly sold. A second, with a
Supplement of one third more, was immediately prepared. But let us here attend
to Mr. PAIN himself. Speaking of the testimony which his own heart bore to his
integrity, he thus remarks.

"Politics and self-interest have been so uniformly connected, that the world,
from being so often deceived, has a right to be suspicious of public
characters. But with regard to myself, I am perfectly easy on this head. I did
not, at my first setting out in public life, nearly seventeen years ago, turn
my thoughts to subjects of Government from motives of interest; and my conduct,
from that moment to this, proves the fact. I saw an opportunity in which I
thought I could do some good, and I followed extily what my heart dictated. I
neither read books, nor studied other people's opinions. I thought for myself.
The case was this:

"During the suspension of the old Governments in America, both prior to, and
at the breaking out of hostilities, (...) was struck with the order and decorum
with which every thing was conducted, and impressed with the idea that a little
more than what Society naturally performed, was all the Government that was
necessary, and that Monarchy and Aristocracy were frauds and impositions upon
mankind. On these principles, I published the pamphlet, Common Sense. The
success it met with was beyond any thing since the invention of printing. I
gave the copy-right up to every State in the Union, and the demand ran to not
less than one hundred thousand copies." -- Owing to this disinterested conduct
of Mr. PAIN, it seems that, notwithstanding the extensive sale of the
pamphlet, he was in debt to the printer, to the amount of 29l. 12s. 1d.

In the course of this year, 1776, Mr. PAIN joined the army, but in what
capacity is not known. It is certain, however, that he accompanied WASHINGTON
in his retreat from Hudson's River to the Delaware. At this time the Congress
fled, and all were terrified. But our Author was undismayed. He saw that the
Americans were possessed of resources sufficient to authorize hope, and he
endeavored to inspire others with the same confidence. Wit^ this view, on the
19th of December, he published the Crisis, wherein he states every topic of
hope, and examine^ every motive of apprehension. This work, which extended to
thirteen Numbers, he published at different interval till the complete
establishment of the Revolution. T^^ last Number appeared on the 19th of April,
1783, the sam^ day that a cessation of hostilities was proclaimed.

In 1777, Congress unanimously, and unknown to M^^ PAIN, appointed him
Secretary in the Foreign Depar^ment; and from this time he enjoyed the
corresponden^^ of FRANKLIN. This appointment was agreeable to hi^ because it
gave him the opportunity of seeing into the a^^lities of Foreign Courts, and
their manner of doing bu^^ness, But a misunderstanding arising between Congress
and him, respecting one of their Commissioners, then in Europe, Mr. SILAS
DEANE, he resigned the office on the 8th of January, 1779, and declined, at the
same time, the pecuniary offers made him by the Ministers of France and Spain,
M. GERARD, and DON JUAN MIRRALLES.

Soon after this he was made Master of Arts by the University of Philadelphia;
and, in 1780, was chosen a member of the American Philosophical Society, when
it was revived by the legislature of the province of Pensylvania. His
independence, as a political writer, was well known. His patriotism had gained
him many friends; and, among others, it appears that General Washington
entertained a high sense of the importance of his services. -- On account of
these services, New York conferred on him some forfeited lands at New-Rochelle,
and Pensylvania presented him with five hundred pounds.

As his exertions were no longer necessary in America, be set sail for France
in the autumn of 1786, and arrived at Paris in the beginning of the year 1787;
carrying with him his fame as a writer, and the model of a bridge, which was
shown to the Academy of Sciences. From Paris he came over to England on the 3d
of September; just thirteen years after his departure for Philadelphia. Before
the end of the month, he went to Thetford to see his mother, to whom he allowed
9s. a-week; but, owing to the bankruptcy of the American merchant who was
appointed to pay it, this allowance was afterward stopped.

During part of the year 1788, Mr. PAIN resided at Rotheram in Yorkshire,
where his iron bridge was cast and created, chiefly at the expense of the
ingenious Mr. Walter. The design, however, had cost our Author a considerable
sum, and the assignees of the American merchant, finding six hundred and twenty
pounds charged against him, caused him to be arrested on the 29th of October,
1789. On this occasion, two respectable merchants became his bail; and on his
paying down four hundred and sixty pounds, which he had received from America,
and giving his note for the remainder, he was set at liberty in November, after
three weeks confinement.

In consequence of the publication of Mr. Burke's Reflections on the French
Revolution, Mr. PAIN produced, in the month of February 1791, his well-known
Work, entitled, the Rights of Man. This pamphlet was printed for Mr. Johnson,
in St. Paul's Churchyard: but the work containing some just but severe
reflections on various parts of the English government, Mr. Johnson was
induced, by the advice of some of his friends, to decline the publication of
it; and, after a month's delay, it was published, on the 13th of March, by Mr.
Jordan, in Fleet Street.

About the middle of May, Mr. PAIN again went to France. When the King fled
from Paris, he observed to his friend, Mr. Christie, You see the absurdity of
monarchical governments. Here will be a whole nation disturbed by the folly of
one man. On the return of the King, our Author was in considerable danger. An
officer proclaimed the will of the National Assembly, that all should be
silent, and covered. In a moment, all hats were on. Mr. PAIN, however, had
lost his cockade, the emblem of liberty and equality. A cry arose Aristocrat!
Aristocrat! A' la lantern! a' la lantern! He was desired by those who stood
near him, to put on his hat. And it was not till after some time, that the mob
was satisfied by explanation.

On the 13th of July, he returned to London; but i^ was not thought prudent
that he should attend the celebration of the French Revolution. He afterward
dre^^ up the Address and Declaration of the Gentlemen who me^ at the
Thatched-House-Tavern, on the 20th of Augu^^ following.

In the month of February 1792, appeared the Secon^ Part of Rights of Man; a
publication, which has conferred additional celebrity on its Author, and
greatly increased the number of converts to the cause of liberty, and just
government.

The sale of these justly-admired productions has been much greater than that
of, perhaps, any work ever published in England. When the Second Part of Rights
of Man appeared, the number of copies to which the First Part had extended,
including England, Scotland, and Ireland, was not less than between forty and
fifty thousand; and when it is recollected that, exclusive of the Second, the
First Part of the work has now been eight months longer on sale, and that cheap
editions of each have been published, very many thousands of which have been
sold, the number purchased cannot be supposed to fall far short of, if indeed
it does not exceed, one hundred thousand copies.

Thus have we presented to our readers the principal circumstances of Mr.
PAINE's history. The changes which he has witnessed have been various; and the
man, who can drop a tear of sorrow at the recollection of the miseries of his
fellow creatures, will feel regret still more poignant when contemplating the
many difficulties under which that man has labored, who may justly be styled
the BENEFACTOR OF NATIONS. But, perhaps, (as he has well observed) it is to his
advantage that he has served an apprenticeship to life. He now knows the value
of moral instruction, for he has seen the danger of the contrary.

The number of converts to Mr. PAINE's sentiments on Civil Government is
rapidly increasing. It is a class which comprehends the most truly independent
characters throughout the nation; men, who belong to no party but that of
truth, and who acknowledge no objects of political ^doration but those of
public liberty and public happiness. The names of Pittite and Foxite, with
those other blan^ishments with which interest has contrived to catch the yes
and seduce the attention of the unthinking and the rulgar, are regarded by them
as the rattles of childhood. They aspire to a nobler character; and, instead of
consigning their understandings to the custody of others, are de^^^mined to
take the trouble of thinking for themselves.

Yet we would not be uncandid; we would not be unjust. Candor is the fair
offering of ingenuous excellence, and justice is the due of all. Many, no
doubt, there are who oppose reformation from conviction, and whose upright
hearts, if accompanied with enlightened understandings, would strink with
horror at the idea of those miseries which the villainy of Kings and Ministers
has allotted to their equals. For why must the People groan under the load of
poverty and want, that Statesmen and Kings may live in splendor? -- But Heaven
be praised for that light which is already diffused, and which will assuredly
dispel that mental darkness which has so long overshadowed the earth!

The Author of the Rights of Man, as a reward for his public-spirited
exertions, is now the subject of a Government prosecution. Of these proceedings
and their advisers we shall simply say, that they produce, in the patr^otic
breast, the fervor of indignation, or the coolness (...) contempt.

LETTERS ON GOVERNMENT.
LETTER I. To Mr. HENRY DUNDAS, In Answer to his Speech on the late EXCELLENT
Proclamation.
SIR, London, June (...) 1792.
AS you opened the debate in the House of Commons, May 25th, on the
Proclamation for suppressing Publications, which that Proclamation (without
naming any) calls wicked and seditions, and as you applied those opprobrious
epithets to the works entitled "RIGHTS OF MAN," I think it unnecessary to offer
any other reason for addressing this Letter to you.

I begin, then, at once, by declaring that I do not believe there are to be
found in the writings of any author, ancient or modern, on the subject of
Government, a spirit of greater benignity, and a stronger inculcation of moral
principles than in those which I have published. They come, Sir, from a man,
who, by having lived in different countries, and under different systems of
Government, and who, being intimate in the construction of them, is a better
judge of the subject than it is possible that you, from the want of those
opportunities, can be: -- And, besides this, they come from an heart that knows
not how to beguile.

I will further say, that when that moment arrives in which the best
consolation that shall be left will be that of looking back on some past
actions, more virtuous, more meritorious, than the rest, I shall then with
happiness remember, among other things. I have written the RIGHTS OF MAN. -- As
to what Proclamations, or Prosecutions, or Place-men, or Place-expectants, --
those who possess, or those who are gaping for office, may say of them, it will
not alter their character, either with the world or with me.

Having, Sir, made this declaration, I shall proceed to remark, not
particularly upon your own Speech on that occasion, but on any other Speech to
which your Motion on that day gave rise; and I shall begin with that of Mr.
ADAM.

This gentleman accuses me of not having done the very thing that I have done,
and which, he says, if I had done, he should not have accused me.

Mr. ADAM, in his Speech, (see the Morning Chronicle of May 26,) says, That he
had well considered the subject of Constitutional Publications, and was by no
means ready to say (but the contrary) that books of science upon Government,
though recommending a doctrine or system different from the form of our
Constitution (meaning that of England) were fit objects of prosecution; that if
he did, he must condemn (which he meant not to do) HARRINGTON for his Oceana,
Sir THOMAS MOORE for his Eutopia, and HUME for his Idea of a perfect
Commonwealth. But (continued Mr. ADAM) the Publication of Mr. PAIN was very
different; for it reviled what was most sacred in the Constitution, destroyed
every principle of subordination, and established nothing in their room.

I readily perceive that Mr. ADAM had not read the Second Part of Rights of
Man, and I am put under the necessity, either of submitting to an erroneous
charge, or of justifying myself against it; and I certainly shall prefer the
latter. -- If, then, I shall prove to Mr. ADAM, that, in my reasoning upon
systems of government in the Second Part of Rights of Man, I have shown as
clearly, I think, as words can convey ideas, a certain System of Government,
and that not existing in theory only, but already in full and established
practice, and systematically and practically free from all the vices and
defects, of the English Government, and capable of producing more happiness to
the People, and that also with an eightieth part of the Taxes, which the
present System of English Government consumes. I hope he will do me the justice
when he next goes (...) the House, to get up and confess he had been mistaken
in saying, that I had established nothing, and that I had destroyed every
principle of subordination. Having thus opened the case I now come to the point.

In the Second Part of RIGHTS OF MAN, I have distincguisted Government into two
classes or systems; the one, th^^ hereditary system; the other the
representative system.

In the First Part of Rights of Man, I have endeavored show, and I challenge
any man to refute it, that there does n^^ exist a right to establish hereditary
Government; or, in other words, Hereditary Governors; because Hereditary
Government always means a Government yet to come, and the case always is, that
the People who are to live afterward have always the same right to choose a
government for themselves, as the People had who lived before them.

In the Second Part of Rights of Man, I have not repeated those arguments,
because they are irrefutable; but have confined myself to show the defects of
what is called Hereditary Government, or Hereditary Succession; that it must,
from the nature of it, throw Government into the hands of men totally unworthy
of it, from want of principle or unfitted for it from want of capacity. --
James the IId. is recorded as an instance of the first of these cases; and
instances are to be found almost all over Europe to prove the truth of the
latter.

To show the absurdity of the Hereditary system still more strongly, I will now
put the following case -- Take any fifty men promiscuously, and it will be very
extraordinary, if, out of that number, one man should be found, whose
principles and talents taken together (for some might have principles, and
others have talents) would render him a person truly fitted to fill any very
extraordinary office of National Trust. If, then, such a fitness of character
could not be expected to be found in more than one person out of fifty, it
would happen but once in a thousand years to the eldest son of any one family,
admitting each, on an average, to hold the office twenty years. Mr. Adam talks
of something in the constitution which he calls most sacred, but I hope he does
not mean Hereditary succession, a thing which appears to me a violation of
every order of nature, and of common sense.

When I look into History, and see the multitudes of men otherwise virtuous,
who have died, and their families been ruined in defense of knaves and fools,
and which they would not have done had they reasoned at all upon the system; I
do not know a greater good that an individual can render to mankind, than to
endeavor to break the chains of political superstition. Those chains are now
dissolving fast, and proclamation and prosecution will serve but to hasten that
dissolution.

Having thus spoken of the Hereditary system as a had system, and subject to
every possible defect; I now come to the Representative System; and this Mr.
ADAM will find stated in the Second Part of the Rights of Man, not only as the
best, but as the only Theory of Government under which the liberties of a
people can be permanently secure.

But it is needless now to talk of mere Theory, since there is already a
Government in full Practice, established upon that Theory, or, in other Words,
upon the Rights of Man, and has been so for almost twenty years. Mr. Pit, in a
speech of his some short time since, said, That there never did, and never
could exist a Government established upon those Rights; and that if it began at
noon, it would end at night. Mr. Pit is not yet arrived at the degree of a
schoolboy in this species of knowledge. His practice has been confined to the
means of extorting revenue, and his boast has been -- how much? -- Whereas the
boast of the System of Government that I am speaking of, is not how much, but
how little.

The System of Government, purely representative, unmixed with any thing of
hereditary nonsense, began in America. I will now compare the effects of that
system of Government with the system of Government in England, both during, and
since the close of the war.

So powerful is the Representative system, first, by combining and
consolidating all the parts of a country together, however great the extent;
and secondly, by admitting of none but men properly qualified into the
Government, or dismissing them if they prove to be otherwise, that America was
enabled thereby totally to defeat and overthrow all the schemes and projects of
the Hereditary Government of England against her, As the establishment of the
Revolution and Independence of America is a proof of this fact, it is needless
to enlarge upon it.

I now come to the comparative effect of the two Systems since the close of the
war; and I request Mr. Adam to attend to it.

America had internally sustained the revenge of upwards of seven years of war,
which England had not. England sustained only the expense of the war; whereas
America sustained not only the expense, but the destruction of property
committed by both armies. Not a house was built during that period, and many
thousands were destroyed. The farms and plantations along the coast of the
country, for more than a thousand miles, were laid waste. Her commerce was
annihilated, her ships were either taken or had rotted within her own harbors.
The credit of her funds had fallen upwards of ninety per cent. that is, an
original hundred pounds would not sell for ten pounds. In ^ine she was
apparently put back an hundred years when the wa^ closed; which was not the
case with England.

But such was the event, that the same representative System of Government,
though since better organized, which enabled her to conquer, enabled her also
to recover; and sh^^^ now presents a more flourishing condition, and a more
happ^ and harmonized society under that system of Government that any country
in the world can boast under any other. He^ towns are rebuilt, much better than
before; her farms an^ plantations are in higher improvement than ever; her
commerce is spread over the world, and her funds have risen from less than ten
pounds the hundred to upwards of one hundred and twenty. Mr. Pit, and his
colleagues, talk of the things that have happened in his boyish Administration,
without knowing what greater things have happened elsewhere and under other
systems of Government.

I next come to state the expense of the two systems, as they now stand in each
of the countries; but it may first be proper to observe, that Government in
America is what it ought to be, a matter of honor and trust, and not made a
trade of for the purpose of lucre.

The whole amount of the net taxes in England (exclusive of the expense of
collection, of drawbacks, of seizures and condemnations, of sines and
penalties, of fees of office, of litigations and informers, which are some of
the blessed means of enforcing them) is seventeen millions. Of this sum about
nine millions go for the payment of the interest of the Nation^l Debt, and the
remainder, being about eight millions, is for the current annual expenses. Thus
much for one side of the case. I now come to the other.

The expense of all the several departments of the general Representative
Government of the United States of America, extending over a space of country
nearly ten times larger than England, is two hundred and ninety-four thousand
five hundred and fifty-eight dollars, which, at 4s. 6d. per dollar, is 66,
275l. 11s. sterling, and is thus apportioned.

Expense of the Executive Department. l. s. The Office of the Presidency, at
which the President receives nothing for himself 5,625 0 Vice President 1,125 0
Chief Justice 900 0 Five Associate Justices 3,937 10 Nineteen Judges of
Districts and Attorney General 6,873 15 Legislative Department. Members of
Congress, at six Dollars (1l. 7s.) per day, their Secretaries, Clerks,
Chaplains, Messengers, Doot-Keepers, etc. 25,5^5 0 Treasury Department.
Secretary, Assistant, Comptroller, Auditor, Treasurer, Register, and
Loan-Office Keeper, in each State, together with all necessary Clerks,
Office-keepers, etc. 12,825 0 Department of State, including Foreign Affairs.
Secretary, Clerks, etc. etc. 1,406 5 Department of War. Secretary, Clerks,
Paymaster, Commissioner, etc. 1,462 10 Commissioners for settling old Accounts.
The whole Board, Clerks, etc. 2,598 15 Incidental and Contingent Expenses. For
Firewood; Stationary, Printing, etc. 4,006 16 Total 60,275 1^

On account of the incursions of the Indians on the back settlements, Congress
is, at this time, obliged to keep six thousand militia in pay, in addition to a
regiment of foot, and a battalion of artillery, which it always keeps; and this
increases the expense of the War Department to 390,000 dollars, which is 87,
795l. sterling; but when peace shall be concluded with the Indians, the
greatest part of this expense will cease, and the total amount of the expense
of Government, including that of the army, will not amount to one hundred
thousand pounds sterling, which, as has been already stated, is but an
eightieth part of the expenses of the English Government.

I request Mr. Adam and Mr. Dundas, and all those who are talking of
Constitutions, and blessings, and Kings, and Lords, and the Lord knows what, to
look at this statement. Here is a form and system of Government, that is better
organized and better administered than any Government in the world, and that
for less than one hundred thousand pounds per annum, and yet every Member of
Congress receives, as a compensation for his time and attendance on public
business, one pound seven shillings per day, which is at the rate of nearly
five hundred pounds a year.

This is a government that has nothing to fear. It needs no proclamations to
deter people from writing and reading. It needs no political superstition to
support it. It was by encouraging discussion, and rendering the press free upon
all subjects of Government, that the principles of Government became upderstood
in America, and the people are now enjoying the present blessings under it. You
hear of no riots, tumults, and disorders in that country; because there exists
no cause to product them. Those things are never the effect of Freedom, but o^
restraint, oppression, and excessive taxation.

In America there is not that class of poor and wretched people that are so
numerously dispersed all over England, and who are to be told by a
Proclamation, that they are happy; and thi^ is in a great measure to be
accounted for, not by the differenc^ of Proclamations, but by the difference of
Governments, and tha^ difference of Taxes between that country and this. What
tha^ laboring people of that country earn they apply to their own use, and to
the education of their children, and do not pay (...) away in taxes as fast as
they earn it, to support Court extravagance, and a long enormous list of
Place-men and Pensioners and besides this, they have learned the manly doctrine
of reverencing themselves, and consequently of respecting each other and they
laugh at those imaginary beings called Kings an^ Lords, and all the fraudulent
trumpery of Courts.

When Place-men and Pensioners, or those who expect to (...) such, are lavish
in praise of a Government, it is not a sign (...) its being a good one. The
pension list alone, in England (see Sir John Sinclair's History of the Revenue,
page 6, of the Appendix) is One Hundred and Seven Thousand Four Hundred and
Four Pounds, which is more than the expenses of the whole Government of America
amount to. And I am now more convinced than before, that the offer that was
made to me of a Thousand Pounds, for the copy-right of the Second Part of the
Rights of Man, together with the remaining copy-right of the First Part, was to
have effected, by a quick suppression, what is now attempted to be done by a
prosecution. The connection which the person who made that offer has with the
King's Printing Office, may furnish part of the means of enquiring into this
affair, when the Ministry shall please to bring their prosecution to issue. But
to return to my subject. --

I have said, in the Second Part of Rights of Man, and I repent it here, that
the service of any man, whether called King, President, Senator, Legislator, or
any thing else, cannot be worth more to any country, in the regular routine of
office, than Ten Thousand Pounds per annum. We have a better man in America,
and more of a gentleman than any King I ever knew of, who does not occasion
even half that expense: for, though the salary is fixed at Five Thousand Two
Hundred and Sixty-five Pounds, he does not accept it, and it is only the
incidental expenses that are paid out of it. The name by which a man is called
is, of itself, but an empty thing. It is worth and character alone which can
render him valuable, for without these, Kings, and Lords, and Presidents are
but jingling names.

But without troubling myself about constitutions of Government, I have shown
in the Second Part of Rights of Man, that an alliance may be formed between
England, France, and America, and that the expense of Government in England may
be put back to one million and an half, viz.

Civil expense of Government, L. 500,000 Army, 500,000 Navy, 500,000 1,500,000

And even this sum is fifteen times greater than the expenses of Government are
in America; and it is also greater than the ^hole peace establishment of
England amounted to about an ^undred years ago. So much has the weight and
oppression of ^axes increased since the Revolution, and especially since the
^ear 1714.

To show that the sum of 500,000l. is sufficient to defray all ^^e civil
expenses of Government, I have, in that work, an^exed the following estimate
for any country of the same ex^^nt as England:

In the first place, three hundred Representatives, fairly elected, are
sufficient for all the purposes to which legislation can apply, and preferable
to a larger number.

If then an Allowance, at the rate of five hundred pound per ann. be made to
every Representative, deducting for non attendance, the expense, if the whole
number attended so months each year, would be L 75,000

The Official Departments could not possibly exceed the following number, with
the salaries annexed, viz.

Three Officers, at 10,000l. each, 30,000 Ten ditto, at 5,000l. each, 50,000
Twenty ditto, at 2,000l. each, 40,000 Forty ditto at 1,000l. each, 40,000 Two
hundred ditto at 500l. each, 100,000 Three hundred ditto, at 200l. each, 60,000
Five hundred ditto, at 100l. each, 50,000 Seven hundred ditto, at 75l. each,
52,500 L 497,500

If a nation chose, it might deduct 4 per cent. from all th^^ offices, and make
one of twenty thousand pounds per ann. an^ style the person who should fill it,
King, or Majesty, or Madjesty, or give him any other title.

Taking, however, this sum of one million and an half as a abundant supply for
all the expenses of Government under an form whatever, there will remain a
surplus of nearly six mi^lions and a half out of the present Taxes, after
paying the interest of the National Debt; and I have shown, in the Secon^ Part
of Rights of Man, what appears to me the best mode (...) applying the surplus
money; for I am now speaking of exper^ces and savings, and not of systems of
Government.

I have, in the first place, estimated the poor-rates at t^^ millions annually,
and shown that the first effectual step wou^^ be to abolish the poor-rates
entirely (which would be a savi^^ of two millions to the housekeepers) and to
remit four million^ out of the surplus taxes to the poor, to be paid to them in
m^ney in proportion to the number of children in each famil^ and the number of
aged persons.

I have estimated the number of persons of both sexes (...) England, of fifty
years of age and upwards, at 420,000, a^^ have taken one-third of this number,
viz. 140,000, to be po^^ people.

To save long calculations, I have taken 70,000 of them (...) be upwards of
fifty years of age and under sixty, and (...) other to be sixty years and
upwards; and to allow six pounds (...) (...) to the former class, and ten
pounds per ann. to the latter. The expense of which will be,

Seventy thousand persons at 6l. per ann. 420,000 Seventy thousand persons at
10l. per ann. 700,000 L 1,120,000

There will then remain of the four millions 2,880,000l. I have stated two
different methods of appropriating this money. The one is to pay it in
proportion to the number of children in each family, at the rate of three or
four pounds per ann. for each child; the other is, to apportion it according to
the expense of living in different countries; but in either of these cases it
would, together with the allowance to be made to the aged, completely take off
taxes from one third of all the families in England, besides relieving all the
other families from the burden of poor-rates.

The whole number of families in England, lotting five souls to each family, is
one million four hundred thousand, of which I take one third, viz. 466,666 to
be poor families, who now pay four millions of taxes, and that the poorest pays
at least four guineas a year; and that the other thirteen millions are paid by
the other two-thirds. The plan, therefore, as stated in the work is, first, to
remit or repay, as is already stated, this sum of four millions to the poor,
because it is impossible to separate them from the others in the present mode
of collecting taxes on articles of consumption; and, secondly, to abolish the
poor-rates, the house and window-light tax, and to change the Commutation Tax
into a progressive Tax on large estates, the particulars of all which are set
forth in the work, and to which I desire Mr. ADAM to refer for particulars. I
shall here content myself with saying, that to a town of the population of
Manchester, it will make a difference in its favor, compared with the present
state of things, of upwards of fifty thousand pounds annually, and so in
proportion to all other places throughout the nation. This certainly is of more
consequence, than that the Tame sums should be collected to be afterward ^pent
by riotous and profligate courtiers, and in nightly revels ^t the Star and
Garter Tavern, Pall Mall.

I will conclude this part of my letter with an extract from be Second Part of
Rights of Man, which Mr. Dundas (a man ^olling in luxury at the expense of the
nation) has branded with the epithet of "wicked."

By the operation of this plan, the poor laws, those instruments of civil
torture, will be superseded, and the wasteful expense of litigation prevented.
The hearts of the humane will not be shocked by ragged and hungry children, and
persons of seventy and eighty years of age begging for brench. The dying poor
will not be dragged from place to place to breathe their last, as a reprisal of
parish upon parish. Widows will have a maintenance for their children, and no
be carted away, on the death of their husbands, like culpri^ and criminals, and
children will no longer be considered a^ increasing the distresses of their
parents. The haunts of the wretched will be known, because it will be to their
advantage, and the number of petty crimes, the offspring of poverty and
distress, will be lessened. The poor, as well as the rich, will then be
interested in the support of Government, and the cause and apprehension of
riots and tumult^ will cease. Ye who sit in case, and solace yourselves in
plenty, and such there are in Turkey and Russia, as well as in England, and who
say to yourselves, are we not wel^ off? have ye thought of these things? When
ye do, ye^ will cease to spaak and feel for yourselves alone. -- Right^ of Man,
Part II. p. 136. After this remission of four millions be made, and the Poor
Rates and House and Window-light tax be abolished, and the Commutation Tax
changed, there will still remain nearly on^ million and an half of surplus
taxes; and as by an alliance between England, France, and America, armies and
navies will, i^ a great measure, be rendered unnecessary; and as men who have
either been brought up in, or long habited to, those lines o^ life, are still
citizens of a nation in common with the rest, an^ have a right to participate
in all plans of National Benefit, i^ is stated in that work (Rights of Man,
Part II.) to apply annually 507,000l. out of the surplus taxes to this purpose
in the following manner:

To fifteen thousand disbanded soldiers, 3s. per week each (clear of
deductions) during life 117,00 Additional pay to the remaining soldiers, per
ann. 19,5^ To the officers of the disbanded corpse, during life, the same sum of
117,0^^ To fifteen thousand disbanded sailors, 3s. per week, during life 117,0^
Additional pay to the remaing sailors 19,5^ To the officers of the disbanded
part of the navy, during life 117,0^ L. 507,0^

The limits to which it is proper to confine this letter, w^ not admit of my
entering into further particulars. I addr^^ it to Mr. Dundas, because he took
the lead in the debate, a^ he wishes, I suppose, to appear conspicuous; but the
purp^^ of it is to justify myself from the charge which Mr. Adam made.

This Gentleman, as has been observed in the beginning this letter, considers
the writings of Harrington, Moore, a^^ Hume, as justifiable and legal
publications, because they reasoned by comparison, though, in so doing, they
showed plans and systems of Government, not only different from, but preferable
to, that of England; and he accuses me of endeavoring to confuse, instead of
producing a system in the room of that which I had reasoned against; whereas
the fact is, that I have not only reasoned by comparison of the Representative
system against the Hereditary system, but I have gone further; for I have
produced an instance of a Government established entirely on the Representative
system, under which much greater happiness is enjoyed, much fewer Taxes
required, and much higher credit is established, than under the system of
Government in England. The Funds in England have risen since the war only from
54l. to 97l. and they have been down, since the Proclamation, to. 87l. whereas
the Funds in America rose in the mean time from 10l. to 120l. His charge
against me "of destroying every principle of subordination," is equally as
groundless, which even a single paragraph from the work will prove, and which I
shall here quote:

Formerly, when divisions arose respecting Governments, recourse was had to the
sword, and a civil war ensued. That savage custom is exploded by the new
system, and recourse is had to a National Convention. Discussion, and the
general will, arbitrates the question, and to this private opinion yields with
a good grace, and order is preserved uninterrupted. -- Rights of Man, Part II.
p. 173. That two different charges should be brought at the same ^ime, the one
by a Member of the Legislative for not doing a certain thing, and the other by
the Attorney General for doing (...), is a strange jumble of contradictions. I
have now justified myself, or the work rather, against the first, by stating
the case (...) this letter, and the justification of the other will be
undertaken in its proper place. But in any case the work will go on. I shall
now conclude this Letter with saying, that the only ^jection I found against
the plan, and principles contained in ^e Second Part of Rights of Man, when I
had written the ^ook, was, that they would beneficially interest at least
ninety^^e persons out of every hundred throughout the nation, and herefore
would not leave sufficient room for men to act from ^e direct and disinterested
principle of honor; but the pro^^tution now commenced has fortunately removed
that objection, and the approvers and protectors of that work now feel ^^e
immediate impulse of honor, added to that of National ^^erest.

I am, Mr. Dundas, Not your obedient humble Servant, But the contrary, THOMAS
PAIN.

LETTER II. To LORD ONSLOW.
SIR, London, June 17th, 1792.
I HAVE seen in the public Newspapers the following Advertisement, to wit --

To the Nobility, Gentlemen, Clergy, Freeholders, an other inhabitants of the
County of Surry.

At the requistion and desire of several of the Freeholder of the County, I am,
in the absence of the Sheriff, to d^^ the favor of your attendance, at a
Meeting to be held (...) Epsom, on Monday, the 18th instant, at 12 o'clock at
noo^ to consider of an humble Address to his MAJESTY, to express our grateful
approbation of his MAJESTY'S pattern and well-timed attention to the public
welfare, in his la^ most gracious Proclamation against the Enemies of o^ happy
Constitution. (Signed) ONSLOW CRANLEY.

Taking it for granted, that the aforesaid Advertisement equally as obscure as
the Proclamation to which it refers, h^^ nevertheless, some meaning, and is
intended to affect some purpose and as a prosecution (whether wisely or
unwisely, ju^^ or unjustly) is already commenced against a work, in^^^ Rights
of Man, of which I have the honor and the happin^^^ to be the author, I feel
it necessary to address this letter to y^^ and to request that it may be read
publicly to the Gentlemen^ who shall meet at Epsom in consequence of that
Advertisement.

The work now under prosecution is, I conceive, the s^^ work which is intended
to be suppressed by the aforesaid ^^^clamation. Admitting this to be the case,
the Gentlement the county of Surry are called upon by somebody to cond^^^ a
work, and they are at the same time forbidden by the ^^^clamation to know what
that work is; and they are fu^^^ called upon to give their aid and assistance
to prevent (...) people from knowing it also. It is therefore necessary (...)
the author, for his own justification, as well as to preven^^ Gentlemen who
shall meet from being imposed upon by (...) representation, should give some
out-lines of the princ^^ and plans which that work contains.

The work, Sir, in question, contains, first, an investigation of general
principles of Government.

It also distinguishes Government into two classes or systems; the one the
hereditary system -- the other the representative system; and it compares those
two systems with each other.

It shows, that what is called Hereditary Government cannot exist as a matter
of right, because Hereditary Government always means a Government yet to come;
and the case always is, that those who are to live afterward have always the
same right to establish a Government for themselves as the People had who lived
before them.

It also shows the defect to which Hereditary Government is unavoidably
subject; that it must, from the nature of it, throw Government into the hands
of men totally unworthy of it from want of principle, or unfitted for it from
want of capacity. JAMES the IId. and many others are recorded in the English
history as proofs of the former of those cases, and instances are to be found
almost all over Europe, to prove the truth of the latter.

It then shows, that the Representative System is the only true system of
Government; that it is also the only system under which the liberties of any
People can be permanently secure; and further, that it is the only one that can
continue the same equal probability at all times of admitting none but men
properly qualified, both by principles and abilities, into the Government, and
of excluding such as are otherwise.

The work shows also, by plans and calculations nor hitherto denied nor
controverted, not even by the prosecution that is commenced, that the taxes now
existing may be reduced at least six millions, that taxes may be entirely taken
off from the Poor, who are computed at one third of the nation, and that the
taxes on the other two-thirds may be very considerably reduced -- that the aged
Poor may be comfortably provided for, and the children of poor families
properly educated -- that fifteen thousand soldiers, and the same number of
sailors, may be disbanded, and allowed three shillings per week during life out
of the surplus taxes; and also, that a proportionate allowance may be made to
the officers, and the pay of the remaining soldiers and sailors be increased;
and that it is better to apply the surplus taxes to those purposes, than to
consume them on lazy and profligate placemen and pensioners; and that the
revenue, said to be twenty thousand pounds per annum, raised by a tax upon
coals, and given to the Duke of RICHMOND, is a gross imposition upon all the
people of London, and ought to be instantly abolished.

This, Sir, is a concise abstract of the principles and plans contained in the
work that is now prosecuted, and for the suppression of which the Proclamation
appears to be intended: But as it is impossible that I can, in the compass of a
letter, bring into view all the matters contained in the work, and as it is
proper that the Gentlemen who may compose that Meeting should know what the
merits or demerits of it are, before they come to any resolutions, either
directly or indirectly relating thereto, I request the honor of presenting
them with one hundred copies of the Second Part of RIGHTS OF MAN, and also one
thousand copies of my letter to Mr. DUNDAS, which I have directed to be sent to
Epsom for that purpose; and I beg the favor of the Chairman to take the
trouble of presenting them to the Gentlemen who shall meet on that occasion,
with my sincere wishes for their happiness, and for that of the Nation in
general.

Having now closed thus much of the subject of my letter, I next come to speak
of what has relation to me personally. I am well aware of the delicacy that
attends it, but the purpose of calling the Meeting appears to me so
inconsistent with that justice that is always due between man and man, that it
is proper I should (as well on account of the Gentlemen who may meet, as on my
own account) explain myself fully and heartily thereon.

I have already informed the Gentlemen, that a prosecution is commenced against
a work of which I have the honor and happiness to be the author, and I have
good reasons for believing, that the Proclamation which the Gentlemen are
called to consider, and to present an Address upon, is purposely calculated to
give an impression to the Jury before whom that matter is to come. In short,
that it is dictating a verdict by Proclamation and I consider the instigators
of the meeting to be held at Epsom, as aiding and abetting the same improper,
and, in my opinion, illegal purpose, and that in a manner very artfully
contrived, as I shall now show.

Had a Meeting been called of the Freeholders of the County of Middlesex, the
Gentlemen who had composed that Meeting would have rendered themselves
objectionable as persons t^ serve on a Jury before whom the judicial case was
afterward to come. But by calling a Meeting out of the County (...) Middlesex,
that matter is artfully avoided, and the Gentlemen of Surry are summoned, as if
it were intended thereby to gi^^ a tone to the sort of verdict which the
instigators of the Meeting no doubt wish should be brought in, and to give
countenance to the Jury in so doing.

I am, Sir, With much respect to the Gentlemen who shall meet, Their and your
Obedient humble Servant, THOMAS PAIN.

LETTER III. TO ONSLOW CRANLEY, COMMONDY CALLED LORD ONSLOW.
SIR, London, June 21st, 1792.
WHEN I wrote you the Letter which Mr. Horn Took did me the favor to present
to you, as Chairman of the Meeting held at Epsom, Monday, June 18th, it was not
with much expectation that you will do me the justice of permitting, or
recommending it to be publicly read. I am well aware that the signature of
Thomas Pain has something in it dreadful to sinecure Placemen and Pensioners;
and when you, on seeing the Letter opened, informed the Meeting that it was
signed Thomas Pain, and added, in a tone of exclamation, "the common enemy of
us all;" you spoke one of the greatest truths you ever uttered, if you confine
the expression to men of the same description with yourself; men living in
indolence and luxury, on the spoil and labors of the Public.

The Letter has since appeared in the Argus, and probably in other papers. It
will justify itself; but if any thing on that account had been wanting, your
own conduct at the Meeting would have supplied the omission. You there
sufficiently proved, that I was not mistaken in supposing that the meeting was
called to give an indirect aid to the prosecution commenced against a work, the
reputation of which will long outlive the memory of the Pensioner I am writing
to.

When meetings, Sir, are called by the partisans of the Court to preclude the
nation the right of investigating Systems and Principles of Government, and
exposing errors and defects, under the pretense of prosecuting an individual --
it furnishes an additional motive for maintaining sacred that violated right.

The principles and arguments contained in the work in question, RIGHTS OF MAN,
have stood, and they now stand, and I believe ever will stand, unrefuted. They
are stated in a fair and open manner to the world, and they have already
received the public approbation of a greater number of men, of the best of
characters, of every denomination of religion, and of every rank in life,
(Placemen and Pensioners excepted) than all the Juries that shall meet in
England, for ten years to come will amount to; and I have moreover good reasons
for believing, that the approvers of that work, as well private as public, are
already more numerous than all the present Electors throughout the nation.

Not less than forty pamphlets, intended as answers thereto have appeared, and
as suddenly disappeared: scarcely are the titles of any of them remembered,
notwithstanding their endeavors have been aided by all the daily abuse which
the Court and Ministerial Newspapers, for almost a year and a half, could
bestow, both upon the work and the author: and now that every attempt to
refute, and every abuse has failed, the invention of calling the work a Libel
has been hit upon, and the discomfited party has pusillanimously retreated to
Prosecution, and a Jury, and obscure Addresses.

As I well know that a long Letter from me will not be agreeable to you, I will
relieve your uneasiness by making it as short as I conveniently can; and will
conclude it with taking up the subject at that part where Mr. Horn Took was
interrupted from going on when at the Meeting.

That gentleman was stating, that the situation you stood in rendered it
improper for you to appear actively in a scene in which your private interest
was too visible: That you were a Bedchamber Lord at a thousand a year, and a
Pensioner at 3000l. a year more -- and here he was stopped by the little, but
noisy circle you had collected round you. Permit me then, Sir, to add an
explanation to his words, for the benefit of your neighbors, and with which,
with a few observations, I shall close my letter.

When it was reported in the English Newspapers, some short time since, that
the Empress of Russia had given to one of her minions a large tract of country,
and several thousands of peasants as property, it very justly provoked
indignation and abhorrence in those who heard it. But if we compare the mode
practiced in England, with that which appears to u^ so abhorrent in Russia, it
will be found to amount to very nearly the same thing: -- for example:

As the whole of the revenue in England is drawn by taxe^ from the pockets of
the people, those things called gifts and grants (of which kind are all
Pensions and Sinecure places) and paid out of that stock. The difference,
therefore, between the two modes is, that in England the money is collected by
the Government, and then given to the Pensioner, and in Russia h^ is left to
collect it for himself. The smallest sum which the poorest family in a county
so near to London as Surry, can b^ supposed to pay annually of taxes, is not
less than sive pounds; and as your sinecure of one thousand, and pension of
three thousand per annum, are made up of taxes paid by eight hundred of such
poor families, it comes to the same thing as if the eight hundred families had
been given to you, as in Russia, and you had collected money on your own
account. Were you to say that you are not quartered particularly on the people
of Surry, but on the nation at large, objection would amount to nothing: for as
there are more pensioners than counties, every one may be considered as
quartered on that in which he lives.

What honor or happiness you can derive from being the Principal Pauper of the
neighborhood, and occasioning a greater expense than the poor, the aged, and
the infirm, for ten miles round you, I leave you to enjoy. At the same time I
can see that it is no wonder you should be strenuous in suppressing a book
which strikes at the root of those abuses. No wonder that you should be against
Reforms -- against the Freedom of the Press, and the Right of Investigation. To
you and to others of your description, these are dreadful things; but you
should also consider, that the motives which prompt you to act, ought, by
reflection, to compel you to be silent.

Having now returned your compliment, and sufficiently tired your patience, I
take my leave of you, with mentioning, that if you had not prevented my former
letter from being read at the Meeting, you would not have had the trouble of
reading this; and also with requesting, that the next time you call me "a
common enemy," you would add, "of us Sinecure Placemen and Pensioners."

I am, Sir, etc. etc. THOMAS PAIN.

LETTER IV. TO MR. SECRETARY DUNDAS.
SIR, Calais, Sept. 15, 1792.
I Conceive it necessary to make you acquainted with the following
circumstances. The Department of Calais having elected me a Member of the
National Convention of France, I set off from London the 13th inst. in company
with Mr. Frost, of Spring Gardens, and Mr. Audibert, on of the Municipal
Officers of Calais, who brought me the certificate of my being elected. We had
not arrived more, I believe, than five minutes at the York Hotel, at Dover,
than the train of circumstances began, that I am going to relate. We had taken
our baggage out of the carriage and put it into a room, into which we went. Mr.
Frost having occasion to go out, was stopped in the passage by a gentleman, who
told him, he must return into the room, which he did, and the gentleman came in
with him and shut the door: I had remained in the room. Mr. Audibert had gone
to inquire when the packe^ was to sail. The gentleman then said, that he was
Collector of the Customs, and had an information against us, and must examine
our baggage for prohibited articles. He produced his commission as Collector.
Mr. Frost demanded to see the information, which the Collector refused to show,
and continued to refuse on every demand that we made. The Collecto^ then called
in several other officers, and began, first, to searc^ our pockets. He took
from Mr. Audibert, who was then returned into the room, every thing he found in
his pockets and laid them on the table. He then searched Mr. Frost i^ the same
manner (who, among other things, had the key (...) the trunks in his pocket)
and then did the same by me. M^^ Frost wanting to go out, mentioned it, and was
going toward the door, on which the Collector placed himself against the door,
and said nobody should depart the room. After the ke^^ had been taken from Mr.
Frost (for I had given him the ke^^ of my trunks beforehand, for the purpose of
his attendi^^ the baggage to the Customs, if it should be necessary) (...)
Collector asked us to open the trunks, presentings us the ke^^ for that
purpose; this we declined to do, unless he wou^^ produce his information, which
he again refused. The Collector then opened the trunks himself, and took out
every paper and letter, sealed or unsealed. On our remonstrance with him on the
bad policy, as well as the illegality of Custom^ouse Officers seizing papers
and letters, which were things that did not come under their cognizance, he
replied, that the Proclamation gave him that authority.

Among the Letters which he took out of my trunk were two sealed letters given
into my charge by the American Minister at London, one of which was directed to
the American Minister at Paris; the other to a private gentleman; a letter from
the President of the United States, and a letter from the Secretary of State in
America, both directed to me, and which. I had received from the American
Minister now in London, and were private letters of friendship; a letter from
the Electoral Body of the Department of Calais, containing the notification of
my being elected to the National Convention; and a letter from the President of
the National Assembly, informing me of my being also elected for the Department
of Oise.

As we found that all remonstrances with the Collector, on the bad policy and
illegality of seizing papers and letters, and detaining our persons by force,
under the pretense of searching for prohibited articles, were vain (for he
justified himself on the Prolamation, and on the information which he refused
to show) we contented ourselves with assuring him, that what he was then doing
he would afterward have to answer for, and left it to himself to do as he
pleased.

It appeared to us that the Collector was acting under the direction of some
other person or persons then in the hotel, but whom he did not choose we should
see, or who did not choose to be seen by us; for the Collector went several
times out of the room for a few minutes, and was also called out several times.

When the Collector had taken what papers and letters he pleased out of the
trunks, he proceeded to read them. The first letter he took up for this purpose
was that from the President of the United States to me. While he was doing
this, I said, that it was very extraordinary that General Washington could ^ot
write a letter of private friendship to me without its being ^^ject to be read
by a Custom-house Officer. Upon this, (...) Frost laid his hand over the face
of the letter, and told the Collector he should not read it, and took it from
him. Mr. Frost, then casting his eye on the concluding paragraph of he letter,
said, I will read this part to you, which he did; ^f which the following is an
exact transcript -- and as no one (...) can feel a greater interest in the
^appiness of mankind than (...) also, it is the first wish of my heart, that
the enlightened policy of the present age may diffuse to all men those
blessings to which they are entitled, and lay the foundation of happiness to
future generations.

As all the other letters and papers lay then on the table, the Collector took
them up, and was going out of the room with them. During the transactions
already stated, I contented myself with observing what passed, but spoke but
little; but on seeing the Collector going out of the room with the letters, I
told him that the papers and letters then in his hand, were either belonging to
me, or entrusted to my charge, and that as I could not permit them to be out of
my sight, I must insist on going with him.

The Collector then made a list of the letters and papers, and went out of the
room, giving the letters and papers into the charge of one of the officers. He
returned in a short time, and after some trifling conversation, chiefly about
the Proclamation, told us that he saw the information was ill-founded, and
asked if we chose to put the letters and papers in the trunk ourselves: which,
as we had not taken them out, we declined doing, and he did it himself, and
returned us the keys.

In stating to you these matters, I make no complaint against the personal
conduct of the Collector, or of any of the Officers Their manner was as civil
as such an extraordinary piece of business could admit of.

My chief motive in writing to you on this subject is, that you may take
measures for preventing the like in future, no^ only as it concerns private
individuals, but in order to preve^ a renewal of those unpleasant consequences
that have here^fore arisen between nations from circumstances equally as i^
significant. I mention this only for myself; but as the interruption extended
to two other gentlemen, it is probable th^^ they, as individuals, will take
some more effectual mode (...) redress.

I am, Sir, yours, etc. THOMAS PAIN.
P. S. Among the papers seized was a copy of the Attorn^ General's information
against me for publishing the Rights Man, and a printed proof copy of my latter
to the Addre^^ which will soon be published.



EXTRACT OF A LETTER FROM CALAIS.
"Sept. 15, 1792.
Mr. THOMAS PAIN, after a passage of three hours, arrived here yesterday from
Dover. The different treatment he met with at the two seaports is such as
ought to make an Englishman blush for the character of his nation We must here
correct our Correspondent's account. It is true, at he was insulted by the
Custom House Officers, and some persons ^ed, as he went down to the vessel. But
the people were very civil; done of them, in particular, came up to him, and
said, that he did ^^ want friends in Dover.
.

On the name of PAIN being announced, the soldiery at the gates were drawn up,
and the officer on guard, having embraced him, presented him with the National
cockade. A very pretty woman, who stood by, desired she might have the honor
of putting it in his hat, expressing her hopes that he would continue his
exertions in favor of Liberty, Equality, and France. This ceremony being over,
he walked to DE^^EINS, (whose street is now called Rue de l'Egalite, formerly
Rue de Roi) attended by men, women, and children, crowding round him, and
calling out " Vive THOMAS PAIN!" He was then conducted to the Town Hall, and
there presented to the Municipality, who, with the greatest affection, embraced
their new Representative. The Mayor then addressed him in (...) short speech,
which was interpreted to him by Mr. AUDI^ERT, to which PAIN (laying his hand
on his heart) replied, saying, his life should be devoted to their service.

At the inn he was waited upon by the different persons in authority, and by
the President of the Constitutional Society, desiring he would attend their
meeting of that night. The whole town would have been there, had there been
room; the ^all of the 'Minimes' was so crowded, that it was with difficulty
they made way for him to the side of the President. Over ^he chair he sat in
was placed the bust of MIRABEAU, and the colors of France, England, and
America, united. A speaker ^cquainted him, from the tribune, of his election,
amidst the ^audits of the people. The women did not spare their hands; and for
some minutes nothing was heard but " Vive la Nation! Vive THOMAS PAIN!" in
voices male and female. They have appointed an extra meeting in the church
tomorrow, in honor of their Deputy to the Convention, the Minimes being found
quite suffocating, from the concourse of people who attended yesterday.
Tonight there is to be a play, at which a box is to be reserved for the author
of "THE RIGHTS OF MAN," the object of the English Proclamation.

Every thing here has the appearance of peace and quietness. The arsenals are
well supplied, and are able to stand, two years' siege.

The Duke of BRUNSWICK is still at Verdun; DUMOURIER and KELLERMAN have joined
in his rear, and he is now surrounded by near a hundred thousand men.

"I am, etc.
P. S. Mr. PAIN has received a letter from the National Assembly, which he is
said to be answering from hence. He will not probably be at Paris so soon as he
thinks, since he has been elected for Abbeville and Beavais, as well as for
Calais; and they will hardly let him pass without paying him some mark of their
attention.

We present this Letter of Mr. AUDIBERT to our readers, a an additional
confirmation of the rising prosperity of France the defeat of the Prussians at
Thionville, and the false statement of continental affairs in the ministerial
papers. The public will be pleased to recollect, that Mr. AUDIBERT wa^ the
gentleman appointed to introduce that profound politician Mr. THOMAS PAIN, to
his foreign constituents.
YOU desire to know the state of affairs in France. As the Papers in the pay of
Government afford no certain intelligence, but rather endeavor to raise the
prejudices of you^ nation against mine, I am happy to answer your question.

We are now as quiet as ever we were in the most profound peace. On the seat of
war our friends are all busy, b^^ without confusion. Paris is calm, Calais is
quiet and agreeable, and many French and English families arrive here dai^^ If
you have any desire to reside here, or travel through t^^ country, you may do
either with the greatest safety. T^^ you may depend on. The news arrived this
day is very ^^vourable to the cause of liberty. The Austrians attacked Lille,
and were repulsed with great loss. Thionville was also attacked, and the
Prussian army twice driven back. The Prussians lost 550 men, among whom, the
Prince of WALDECK; two other German Princes were killed, and many wounded. The
combined forces attacked General DUMOURIER's army on three points at once, and
were every where repulsed with loss. Three hundred thousand men are now
marching to annihilate the despots and their satellites, and I doubt not but
before the campaign is finished, that desirable object will be accomplished.
Liberty must finally triumph throughout the world.

I went to London ten days ago, deputed by the Electoral Assembly to conduct
hither Mr. THOMAS PAIN (Author of "THE RIGHTS OF MAN") who is chosen a Member
of the National Convention. The ministerial party commissioned persons to
pursue us to Dover, to insult us in a scandalous manner, and search all our
papers. The custom-house Officers, when reprimanded for their behaving so
insolently, told us they were commanded by people of high authority to do so.
You will see this subject treated upon in THE ARGUS OF THE CONSTITUTION, and
other patriotic papers. I have written to Mr. DUNDAS, and am determined to
prosecute the Custom-house Officer, to determine publicly, whether ministers,
or their creatures, are authorized by the laws of your country to maltreat any
person who conducts himself peaceably and properly. At present you only possess
the shadow of liberty: but I hope the time is not far distant, when we shall
all not only be nominally but actually free.

I remain, with respect and esteem, Your most obedient and very humble servant,
ACHILLES AUDIBERT.
Calais, Sept. 17, 1792.
THE END.
Lately published, and sold by C. STALKER, Stationers' Court, Ludgate Street,

I. THE CHRISTIAN MISCELLANY; consisting of pieces in prose and verse, on
religious, moral, and other subjects. Price 4s. 6d. in boards.

N. B. Those Persons who have purchased the early Numbers of this Work, may, at
present procure the remainder. Price 6d. each.

II. A RECOMMENDATION OF FAMILY RELIGION: addressed to Christians of al^
Denominations. By B. KINGSBURY. Price 2s.

III. PRAYERS FOR THE USE OF FAMILIES. By B. KINGSBURY. Price 2s. 6d.


