THE LIFE AND OPINIONS OF TRISTRAM SHANDY, GENTLEMAN.

(...)
(...)
VOL. I.

The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY in Pall Mall. M.DCC.LX.

To the Right Honorable Mr. PIT.
SIR,
NEVER poor Wight of a Dedicator had less hopes from his Dedication, than I
have from this of mine; for it is written in a bye corner of the kingdom, and
in a retired thatched house, where I live in a constant endeavor to fence
against the infirmities of ill health, and other evils of lise, by mirth; being
firmly persuaded that every time a man smiles, -- but much more so, when he
laughs, that it adds something to this Fragment of Life.

I humbly beg, Sir, that you will honor this book by taking it -- (not under
your Protection, -- it must protect itself, but) -- into the country with you;
where, if I am ever told, it has made you smile, or can conceive it has
beguiled you of one moment's pain -- I shall think myself as happy as a
minister of state; -- perhaps much happier than any one (one only excepted)
that I have ever read or heard of.

I am, great Sir, (and what is more to your Honor,) I am, good Sir, Your
Well-wisher, and most humble Fellow-Subject, THE AUTHOR.

THE LIFE and OPINIONS OF TRISTRAM SHANDY, Gent.
CHAP. I.
I Wish either my father or my mother, or indeed both of them, as they were in
duty both equally bound to it, had minded what they were about when they begot
me; had they duly considered how much depended upon what they were then doing;
-- that not only the production of a rational Being was concerned in it, but
that possibly the happy formation and temperature of his body, perhaps his
genius and the very cast of his mind; -- and, for aught they knew to the
contrary, even the fortunes of his whole house might take their turn from the
humors and dispositions which were then uppermost: -- Had they duly weighed
and considered all this, and proceeded accordingly, -- I am verily persuaded I
should have made a quite different figure in the world, from that, in which the
reader is likely to see me. -- Believe me, good folks, this is not so
inconsiderable a thing as many of you may think it; -- you have all, I dare
say, heard of the animal spirits, as how they are transfused from father to
son, etc. etc. -- and a great deal to that purpose: -- Well, you may take my
word, that nine parts in ten of a man's sense or his nonsense, his successes
and miscarriages in this world depend upon their motions and activity, and the
different tracks and trains you put them into, so that when they are once set a
going, whether right or wrong, it is not a half penny matter, -- away they go
cluttering like hey-go-mad; and by treading the same steps over and over again,
they presently make a road of it, as plain and as smooth as a garden-walk,
which, when they are once used to, the Devil himself sometimes shall not be
able to drive them off it.

Pray, my dear, quoth my mother, have you not forgot to wind up the clock? --
Good G^! cried my father, making an exclamation, but taking care to moderate
his voice at the same time, -- Did ever woman, since the creation of the world,
interrupt a man with such a silly question? Pray, what was your father saying?
-- Nothing.

CHAP. II.
-- Then, positively, there is nothing in the question, that I can see, either
good or bad. -- Then let me tell you, Sir, it was a very unseasonable question
at least, -- because it scattered and dispersed the animal spirits, whose
business it was to have escorted and gone hand-in-hand with the HOMUNCULUS, and
conducted him safe to the place destined for his reception.

The HOMUNCULUS, Sir, in how-ever low and ludicrous a light he may appear, in
this age of levity, to the eye of folly or prejudice: -- to the eye of reason
in scientifick research, he stands confessed -- a BEING guarded and
circumscribed with rights: -- The minutest philosophers, who, by the bye, have
the most enlarged understandings, (their souls being inversely as their
enquiries) show us incontestably, That the HOMUNCULUS is created by the same
hand, -- engendered in the same course of nature, -- endowed with the same
loco-motive powers and faculties with us: -- That he consists, as we do, of
skin, hair, fat, flesh, veins, arteries, ligaments, nerves, cartileges, bones,
marrow, brains, glands, genitals, humors, and articulations; -- is a Being of
as much activity, -- and, in all senses of the word, as much and as truly our
fellow creature as my Lord Chancellor of England. -- He may be benefited, he
may be injured, -- he may obtain redress; -- in a word, he has all the claims
and rights of humanity, which Tully, Puffendorff, or the best ethick writers
allow to arise out of that state and relation.

Now, dear Sir, what if any accident had befallen him in his way alone? -- or
that, through terror of it, natural to so young a traveller, my little gentleman
had got to his journey's end miserably spent; -- his muscular strength and
virility worn down to a thread; -- his own animal spirits ruffled beyond
description, -- and that in this sad disordered state of nerves, he had laid
down a prey to sudden starts, or a series of melancholy dreams and fancies for
nine long, long months together. -- I tremble to think what a foundation had
been laid for a thousand weaknesses both of body and mind, which no skill of
the physician or the philosopher could ever afterward have set thoroughly to
rights.

CHAP. III.
TO my uncle Mr. Toby Shandy do I stand indebted for the preceding anecdote, to
whom my father, who was an excellent natural philosopher, and much given to
close reasoning upon the smallest matters, had often, and heavily, complained of
the injury; but once more particularly, as my uncle Toby well remembered, upon
his observing a most unaccountable obliquity, (as he called it) in my manner of
setting up my top, and justifying the principles upon which I had done it, --
the old gentleman shook his head, and in a tone more expressive by half of
sorrow than reproach, -- he said his heart all along foreboded, and he saw it
verified in this, and from a thousand other observations he had made upon me,
That I should neither think nor act like any other man's child: -- But alas!
continued he, shaking his head a second time, and wiping away a tear which was
trickling down his cheeks, My Tristram's misfortunes began nine months before
ever he came into the world.

-- My mother, who was sitting by, looked up, -- but she knew no more than her
backside what my father meant, -- but my uncle, Mr. Toby Shandy, who had been
often informed of the affair, -- understood him very well.

CHAP. IV.
I Know there are readers in the world, as well as many other good people in
it, who are no readers at all, -- who find themselves ill at ease, unless they
are let into the whole secret from first to last, of every thing which concerns
you.

It is in pure compliance with this humor of theirs, and from a backwardness
in my nature to disappoint any one soul living, that I have been so very
particular already. As my life and opinions are likely to make some noise in
the world, and, if I conjecture right, will take in all ranks, professions, and
denominations of men whatever, -- be no less read than the Pilgrim's Progress
itself -- and, in the end, prove the very thing which Montaigne dreaded his
essays should turn out, that is, a book for a parlour-window; -- I find it
necessary to consult every one a little in his turn; and therefore must beg
pardon for going on a little further in the same way: For which cause, right
glad I am, that I have begun the history of myself in the way I have done; and
that I am able to go on tracing every thing in it, as Horace says, ab Ovo.

Horace, I know, does not recommend this fashion altogether: But that gentleman
is speaking only of an epic poem or a tragedy; -- (I forget which) -- besides,
if it was not so, I should beg Mr. Horace's pardon; -- for in writing what I
have set about, I shall confine myself neither to his rules, nor to any man's
rules that ever lived.

To such, however, as do not choose to go so far back into these things, I can
give no better advice, than that they skip over the remaining part of this
Chapter; for I declare before hand, it is wrote only for the curious and
inquisitive.

-- Shut the door. -- I was begot in the night, betwixt the first Sunday and
the first Monday in the month of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and eighteen. I am positive I was. -- But how I came to be so
very particular in my account of a thing which happened before I was born, is
owing to another small anecdote known only in our own family, but now made
public for the better clearing up this point.

My father, you must know, who was originally a Turkey merchant, but had left
off business for some years, in order to retire to, and die upon, his paternal
estate in the county of (...), was, I believe, one of the most regular men in
every thing he did, whether 'twas matter of business, or matter of amusement,
that ever lived. As a small specimen of this extreme exactness of his, to which
he was in truth a slave, -- he had made it a rule for many years of his life,
-- on the first Sunday night of every month throughout the whole year, -- as
certain as ever the Sunday night came, -- to wind up a large house-clock which
we had standing upon the back-stairs head, with his own hands: -- And being
somewhere between fifty and sixty years of age, at the time I have been
speaking of, -- he had likewise gradually brought some other little family
concernments to the same period, in order, as he would often say to my uncle
Toby, to get them all out of the way at one time, and be no more plagued and
pestered with them the rest of the month.

It was attended but with one misfortune, which, in a great measure, fell upon
myself, and the effects of which I fear I shall carry with me to my grave;
namely, that, from an unhappy association of ideas which have no connection in
nature, it so fell out at length, that my poor mother could never hear the said
clock wound up, -- but the thoughts of some other things unavoidably popp'd
into her head, -- and vice versa: -- which strange combination of ideas, the
sagacious Lock, who certainly understood the nature of these things better
than most men, affirms to have produced more wry actions than all other sources
of prejudice whatsoever.

But this by the bye.

Now it appears, by a memorandum in my father's pocketbook, which now lies
upon the table, "That on Lady Day, which was on the 25th of the same month in
which I date my geniture, -- my father set out upon his journey to London with
my eldest brother Bobby, to fix him at Westminster school;" and, as it appears
from the same authority, "That he did not get down to his wife and family till
the second week in May following," -- it brings the thing almost to a
certainty. However, what follows in the beginning of the next chapter puts it
beyond all possibility of doubt.

-- But pray, Sir, What was your father doing all December, -- January, and
February? -- Why, Madam, -- he was all that time afflicted with a Sciatica.

CHAP. V.
ON the fifth day of November, 1718, which to the era fixed on, was as near
nine calendar months as any husband could in reason have expected, -- was I
Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, brought forth into this scurvy and disasterous
world of ours. -- I wish I had been born in the Moon, or in any of the planets,
(except Jupiter or Saturn, because I never could bear cold weather) for it
could not well have fared worse with me in any of them (though I will not answer
for Venus) than it has in this vile, dirty planet of ours, -- which of my
conscience, with reverence be it spoken, I take to be made up of the shreds and
clippings of the rest; -- not but the planet is well enough, provided a man
could be born in it to a great title or to a great estate; or could any how
contrive to be called up to public charges, and employments of dignity or
power; -- but that is not my case; -- and therefore every man will speak of the
fair as his own market has gone in it; -- for which cause I affirm it over
again to be one of the vilest worlds that ever was made; -- for I can truly
say, that from the first hour I drew my breath in it, to this, that I can now
scarce, draw it at all, for an asthma I got in scating against the wind in
Flanders; -- I have been the continual sport of what the world calls fortune;
and though I will not wrong her by saying, She has ever made me feel the weight
of any great or signal evil; -- yet with all the good temper in the world, I
affirm it of her, that in every stage of my life, and ate very turn and corner
where she could get fairly at me, the ungracious Duchess has pelted me with a
set of as pitiful misadventures and cross accidents as ever small HERO
sustained.

CHAP. VI.
IN the beginning of the last chapter, I informed you exactly when I was born;
-- but I did not inform you, how. No; that particular was reserved entirely for
a chapter by itself; -- besides, Sir, as you and I are in a manner perfect
strangers to each other, it would not have been proper to have let you into too
many circumstances relating to myself all at once. -- You must have a little
patience. I have undertaken, you see, to write not only my life, but my
opinions also; hoping and expecting that your knowledge of my character, and of
what kind of a mortal I am, by the one, would give you a better relish for the
other: As you proceed further with me, the slight acquaintance which is now
beginning betwixt us, will grow into familiarity; and that, unless one of us is
in fault, will terminate in friendship. -- O diem praeclarum! -- then nothing
which has touched me will be thought trifling in its nature, or tedious in its
telling. Therefore, my dear friend and companion, if you should think me
somewhat sparing of my narrative on my first setting out, -- bear with me, --
and let me go on, and tell my story my own way: -- or if I should seem now and
then to trifle upon the road, -- or should sometimes put on a fool's cap with a
bell to it, for a moment or two as we pass along, -- don't fly off, -- but
rather courteously give me credit for a little more wisdom than appears upon my
outside; -- and as we jogg on, either laugh with me, or at me, or in short, do
any thing, -- only keep your temper.

CHAP. VII.
IN the same village where my father and my mother dwelt, dwelt also a thin,
upright, motherly, notable, good old body of a midwife, who, with the help of a
little plain good sense, and some years full employment in her business, in
which she had all along trusted little to her own efforts, and a great deal to
those of dame nature, -- had acquired, in her way, no small degree of
reputation in the world; -- by which word world, need I in this place inform
your worship, that I would be understood to mean no more of it, than a small
circle described upon the circle of the great world, of four English miles
diameter, or thereabouts, of which the cottage where the good old woman lived,
is supposed to be the center. -- She had been left it, seems, a widow in great
distress, with three or four small children, in her fortyseventh year; and as
she was at that time a person of decent carriage, -- grave deportment, -- a
woman moreover of few words, and withal an object of compassion, whose
distress and silence under it called out the louder for a friendly lift: the
wife of the parson of the parish was touched with pity; and having often
lamented an inconvenience, to which her husband's flock had for many years been
exposed, inasmuch, as there was no such thing as a midwife, of any kind or
degree to be got at, let the case have been never so urgent, within less than
six or seven long miles riding; which said seven long miles in dark nights and
dismal roads, the country thereabouts being nothing but a deep clay, was almost
equal to fourteen; and that in effect was sometimes next to having no midwife
at all; it came into her head, that it would be doing as seasonable a kindness
to the whole parish, as to the poor creature herself, to get her a little
instructed in some of the plain principles of the business, in order to set her
up in it. As no woman thereabouts was better qualified to execute the plan she
had formed than herself, the Gentlewoman very charitably undertook it; and
having great influence over the female part of the parish, she found no
difficulty in effecting it to the utmost of her wishes. In truth, the parson
joined his interest with his wife's in the whole affair; and in order to do
things as they should be, and give the poor soul as good a title by law to
practice, as his wife had given by institution, -- he cheerfully paid the fees
for the ordinaries license himself, amounting, in the whole, to the sum of
eighteen shillings and fourpence; so that, betwixt them both, the good woman
was fully invested in the real and corporal possession of her office, together
with all its rights, members, and appurtenances whatsoever.

These last words, you must know, were not according to the old form in which
such licenses, faculties, and powers usually ran, which in like cases had
heretofore been granted to the sisterhood. But it was according to a neat
Formula of Didius his own devising, who having a particular turn for taking to
pieces, and new framing over again, all kind of instruments in that way, not
only hit upon this dainty amendment, but coax'd many of the old licensed
matrons in the neighborhood, to open their faculties afresh, in order to have
this whim-wham of his inserted.

I own I never could envy Didius in these kinds of fancies of his: -- But every
man to his own taste. -- Did not Dr. Kunastrokius, that great man, at his
leisure hours, take the greatest delight imaginable in combing of asses tails,
and plucking the dead hairs out with his teeth, though he had tweezers always
in his pocket? Nay, if you come to that, Sir, have not the wisest of men in all
ages, not excepting Solomon himself, -- have they not had their HOBBY-HORSES;
-- their running horses, -- their coins and their cockle-shells, their drums
and their trumpets, their fiddles, their pallets, -- their maggots and their
butterflies? -- and so long as a man rides his HOBBYHORSE peaceably and
quietly along the King's highway, and neither compels you or me to get up
behind him, -- pray, Sir, what have either you or I to do with it?

CHAP. VIII.
-- Degustibus non est disputandum; -- that is, there is no disputing against
HOBBY-HORSES; and, for my part, I seldom do; nor could I with any sort of
grace, had I been an enemy to them at the bottom; for happening, at certain
intervals and changes of the Moon, to be both fiddler and painter, according as
the fly stings: -- Be it known to you, that I keep a couple of pads myself,
upon which, in their turns, (nor do I care who knows it) I frequently ride out
and take the air; -- though sometimes, to my shame be it spoken, I take somewhat
longer journies than what a wise man would think altogether right. -- But the
truth is, -- I am not a wise man; -- and besides am a mortal of so little
consequence in the world, it is not much matter what I do; so I seldom fret or
fume at all about it: Nor does it much disturb my rest when I see such great
Lords and tall Personages as hereafter follow; -- such, for instance, as my
Lord A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, and so on, all of a row,
mounted upon their several horses; -- some with large stirrups, getting on in a
more grave and sober pace; -- others on the contrary, tucked up to their very
chins, with whips across their mouths, scouring and scampering it away like so
many little party-colored devils astride a mortgage, -- and as if some of them
were resolved to break their necks. -- So much the better -- say I to myself;
-- for in case the worst should happen, the world will make a shift to do
excellently well without them; -- and for the rest, -- why, -- God speed them,
-- even let them ride on without opposition from me; for were their lordships
unhorsed this very night, -- it is ten to one but that many of them would be
worse mounted by one half before tomorrow morning.

Not one of these instances therefore can be said to break in upon my rest. --
But there is an instance, which I own puts me off my guard, and that is, when I
see one born for great actions, and, what is still more for his honor, whose
nature ever inclines him to good ones; -- when I behold such a one, my Lord,
like yourself, whose principles and conduct are as generous and noble as his
blood, and whom, for that reason, a corrupt world cannot spare one moment; --
when I see such a one, my Lord, mounted, though it is but for a minute beyond
the time which my love to my country has prescribed to him, and my zeal for his
glory wishes, -- then, my Lord, I cease to be a philosopher, and in the first
transport of an honest impatience, I wish the HOBBYHORSE, with all his
fraternity, at the Devil.

My Lord,
I Maintain this to be a dedication, notwithstanding its singularity in the
three great essentials of matter, form and place: I beg, therefore, you will
accept it as such, and that you will permit me to lay it, with the most
respectful humility, at your Lordship's feet, -- when you are upon them, --
which you can be when you please; -- and that is, my Lord, when ever there is
occasion for it, and I will add, to the best purposes too. I have the honor to
be,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient, and most devoted, and most humble
servant, TRISTRAM SHANDY.


CHAP. IX.
I Solemnly declare to all mankind, that the above dedication was made for no
one Prince, Prelate, Pope, or Potentate, -- Duke, Marquis, Earl, Viscount, or
Baron of this, or any other Realm in Christendom; -- nor has it yet been hawk'd
about, or offered publicly or privately, directly or indirectly, to any one
person or personage, great or small; but is honestly a true Virgin-Dedication
untried on, upon any soul living.

I labor this point so particularly, merely to remove any offense or objection
which might arise against it, from the manner in which I propose to make the
most of it; -- which is the putting it up fairly to public sale; which I now
do.

-- Every author has a way of his own, in bringing his points to bear; -- for
my own part, as I hate chaffering and higgling for a few guineas in a dark
entry -- I resolved within myself, from the very beginning, to deal squarely
and openly with your Great Folks in this affair, and try whether I should not
come off the better by it.

If therefore there is any one Duke, Marquis, Earl, Viscount, or Baron, in
these his Majesty's dominions, who stands in need of a tight, genteel
dedication, and whom the above will suit, (for by the bye, unless it suits in
some degree, I will not part with it) -- it is much at his service for fifty
guineas; -- which I am positive is twenty guineas less than it ought to be
afforded for, by any man of genius.

My Lord, if you examine it over again, it is far from being a gross piece of
daubing, as some dedications are. The design, your Lordship sees, is good, the
coloring transparent, -- the drawing not amiss; -- or to speak more like a man
of science -- and measure my piece in the painter's scale, divided into 20, --
I believe, my Lord, the out-lines will turn out as 12, -- the composition as 9,
-- the coloring as 6, -- the expression 13 and a half, -- and the design, --
if I may be allowed, my Lord, to understand my own design, and supposing
absolute perfection in designing, to be as 20, -- I think it cannot well fall
short of 19. Besides all this, -- there is keeping in it, and the dark strokes
in the HOBBYHORSE, (which is a secondary figure, and a kind of back-ground to
the whole) give great force to the principal lights in your own figure, and
make it come off wonderfully; -- and besides, there is an air of originality in
the tout ensemble.

Be pleased, my good Lord, to order the sum to be paid into the hands of Mr.
Dodsley, for the benefit of the author; and in the next edition care shall be
taken that this chapter be expunged, and your Lordship's titles, distinctions,
arms and good actions, be placed at the front of the preceding chapter: All
which, from the words, De gustibus non est disputandum, and whatever else in
this book relates to HOBBY-HORSES, but no more, shall stand dedicated to your
Lordship. -- The rest I dedicate to the MOON, who, by the bye, of all the
PATRONS or MATRONS I can think of, has most power to set my book a-going, and
make the world run mad after it.

Bright Goddess,

If thou art not too busy with CANDID and Miss CUNEGUND's affairs, -- take
Tristram Shandy's under thy protection also.

CHAP. X.
WHatever degree of small merit, the act of benignity in favor of the midwife,
might justly claim, or in whom that claim truly rested, -- at first sight seems
not very material to this history; -- certain however it was, that the
gentlewoman, the parson's wife, did run away at that time with the whole of it:
And yet, for my life, I cannot help thinking but that the parson himself, though
he had not the good fortune to hit upon the design first, -- yet, as he
heartily concurred in it the moment it was laid before him, and as heartily
parted with his money to carry it into execution, had a claim to some share of
it, -- if not to a full half of whatever honor was due to it.

The world at that time was pleased to determine the matter otherwise.

Lay down the book, and I will allow you half a day to give a probable guess at
the grounds of this procedure.

Be it known then, that, for about five years before the date of the midwife's
license, of which you have had so circumstantial an account, -- the parson we
have to do with, had made himself a country-talk by a breach of all decorum,
which he had committed against himself, his station, and his office; -- and
that was, in never appearing better, or otherwise mounted, than upon a lean,
sorry, jack-ass of a horse, value about one pound fifteen shillings; who, to
shorten all description of him, was full brother to Rosinante, as far as
similitude congenial could make him; for he answered his description to a
hair-breadth in every thing, -- except that I do not remember it is any where
said, that Rosinante was broken winded; and that, moreover, Rosinante, as is
the happiness of most Spanish horses, fat or lean, -- was undoubtedly a horse
at all points.

I know very well that the HERO'S horse was a horse of chaste deportment, which
may have given grounds for a contrary opinion: But it is as certain at the same
time, that Rosinante's continency (as may be demonstrated from the adventure of
the Yanguesian carriers) proceeded from no bodily defect or cause whatsoever,
but from the temperance and orderly current of his blood. -- And let me tell
you, Madam, there is a great deal of very good chastity in the world, in behalf
of which you could not say more for your life.

Let that be as it may, as my purpose is to do exact justice to every creature
brought upon the stage of this dramatic work, -- I could not stifle this
distinction in favor of Don Quixote's horse; -- in all other points the
parson's horse, I say, was just such another, -- for he was as lean, and as
lank, and as sorry a jade, as HUMILITY herself could have bestrided.

In the estimation of here and there a man of weak judgment, it was greatly in
the parson's power to have helped the figure of this horse of his, -- for he
was master of a very handsome demi-peak'd saddle, quilted on the seat with
green plush, garnished with a double row of silver-headed studs, and a noble
pair of shining brass stirrups, with a housing altogether suitable, of gray
superfine cloth, with an edging of black lace, terminating in a deep, black,
silk fringe, poudre d'or, -- all which he had purchased in the pride and prime
of his life, together with a grand embossed bridle, ornamented at all points as
it should be. -- But not caring to banter his beast, he had hung all these up
behind his study door; -- and, in lieu of them, had seriously befitted him with
just such a bridle and such a saddle, as the figure and value of such a steed
might well and truly deserve.

In the several sallies about his parish, and in the neighboring visits to the
gentry who lived around him, -- you will easily comprehend, that the parson, so
appointed, would both hear and see enough to keep his philosophy from rusting.
To speak the truth, he never could enter a village, but he caught the attention
of both old and young. -- Labor stood still as he passed, -- the bucket hung
suspended in the middle of the well, -- the spinning-wheel forgot its round, --
even chuck-farthing and shuffle-cap themselves stood gaping till he had got out
of sight; and as his movement was not of the quickest, he had generally time
enough upon his hands to make his observations, -- to hear the groans of the
serious, -- and the laughter of the light-hearted; -- all which he bore with
excellent tranquillity. -- His character was, -- he loved a jest in his heart --
and as he saw himself in the true point of ridicule, he would say, he could not
be angry with others for seeing him in a light, in which he so strongly saw
himself: So that to his friends, who knew his foible was not the love of money,
and who therefore made the less scruple in bantering the extravagance of his
humor, -- instead of giving the true cause, -- he chose rather to join in the
laugh against himself; and as he never carried one single ounce of flesh upon
his own bones, being altogether as spare a figure as his beast, -- he would
sometimes insist upon it, that the horse was as good as the rider deserved; --
that they were, centaur-like, -- both of a piece. At other times, and in other
moods, when his spirits were above the temptation of false wit, -- he would
say, he found himself going off fast in a consumption; and, with great gravity,
would pretend, he could not bear the sight of a fat horse without a dejection
of heart, and a sensible alteration in his pulse; and that he had made choice
of the lean one he rode upon, not only to keep himself in countenance, but in
spirits.

At different times he would give fifty humourous and opposite reasons for
riding a meek-spirited jade of a brokenwinded horse, preferably to one of
mettle; -- for on such a one he could sit mechanically, and meditate as
delightfully de vanitate mundi et fuga saeculi, as with the advantage of a
death's head before him; -- that, in all other exercitations, he could spend
his time, as he rode slowly along, -- to as much account as in his study; --
that he could draw up an argument in his sermon, -- or a hole in his breeches,
as steadily on the one as in the other; -- that brisk trotting and slow
argumentation, like wit and judgment, were two incompatible movements. -- But
that upon his steed -- he could unite and reconcile every thing, -- he could
compose his sermon, -- he could compose his cough, -- and, in case nature gave
a call that way, he could likewise compose himself to sleep. -- In short, the
parson upon such encounters would assign any cause, but the true cause, -- and
he withheld the true one, only out of a nicety of temper, because he thought it
did honor to him.

But the truth of the story was as follows: In the first years of this
gentleman's life, and about the time when the superb saddle and bridle were
purchased by him, it had been his manner, or vanity, or call it what you will,
-- to run into the opposite extreme. -- In the language of the county where he
dwelt, he was said to have loved a good horse, and generally had one of the
best in the whole parish standing in his stable always ready for saddling; and
as the nearest midwife, as I told you, did not live nearer to the village than
seven miles, and in a vile country, -- it so fell out that the poor gentleman
was scarce a whole week together without some piteous application for his
beast; and as he was not an unkind-hearted man, and every case was more
pressing and more distressful than the last, -- as much as he loved his beast,
he had never a heart to refuse him; the upshot of which was generally this,
that his horse was either clapped, or spavin'd, or greaz'd; -- or he was
twitter-bon'd, or broken-winded, or something, in short, or other had befallen
him which would let him carry no flesh; -- so that he had every nine or ten
months a bad horse to get rid of, -- and a good horse to purchase in his stead.

What the loss in such a balance might amount to, communibus annis, I would
leave to a special jury of sufferers in the same traffic, to determine; -- but
let it be what it would, the honest gentleman bore it for many years without a
murmur, till at length, by repeated ill accidents of the kind, he found it
necessary to take the thing under consideration; and upon weighing the whole,
and summing it up in his mind, he found it not only disproportioned to his
other expenses, but withal so heavy an article in itself, as to disable him
from any other act of generosity in his parish: Besides this he considered,
that with half the sum thus galloped away, he could do ten times as much good;
-- and what still weighed more with him than all other considerations put
together, was this, that it confined all his charity into one particular
channel, and where, as he fancied, it was the least wanted, namely, to the
childbearing and child-getting part of his parish; reserving nothing for the
impotent, -- nothing for the aged, -- nothing for the many comfortless scenes
he was hourly called forth to visit, where poverty, and sickness, and
affliction dwelt together.

For these reasons he resolved to discontinue the expense; and there appeared
but two possible ways to extricate him clearly out of it; -- and these were,
either to make it an irrevocable law never more to lend his steed upon any
application whatever, -- or else be content to ride the last poor devil, such
as they had made him, with all his aches and infirmities, to the very end of
the chapter.

As he dreaded his own constancy in the first, -- he very cheerfully betook
himself to the second; and though he could very well have explained it, as I
said, to his honor, -- yet, for that very reason, he had a spirit above it;
choosing rather to bear the contempt of his enemies, and the laughter of his
friends, than undergo the pain of telling a story, which might seem a panegyric
upon himself.

I have the highest idea of the spiritual and refined sentiments of this
reverend gentleman, from this single stroke in his character, which I think
comes up to any of the honest refinements of the peerless knight of La Mancha,
whom, by the bye, with all his follies, I love more, and would actually have
gone further to have paid a visit to, than the greatest hero of antiquity.

But this is not the moral of my story: The thing I had in view was to show the
temper of the world in the whole of this affair. -- For you must know, that so
long as this explanation would have done the parson credit, -- the devil a soul
could find it out, -- I suppose his enemies would not, and that his friends
could not. -- But no sooner did he bestir himself in behalf of the midwife, and
pay the expenses of the ordinary's license to set her up, -- but the whole
secret came out; every horse he had lost, and two horses more than ever he had
lost, with all the circumstances of their destruction, were known and
distinctly remembered. -- The story ran like wildfire. -- "The parson had a
returning fit of pride which had just seized him; and he was going to be well
mounted once again in his life; and if it was so, 'twas plain as the sun at
noonday, he would pocket the expense of the license, ten times told the very
first year: -- so that every body was left to judge what were his views in this
act of charity."

What were his views in this, and in every other action of his life, -- or
rather what were the opinions which floated in the brains of other people
concerning it, was a thought which too much floated in his own, and too often
broke in upon his rest, when he should have been sound asleep.

About ten years ago this gentleman had the good fortune to be made entirely
easy upon that score, -- it being just so long since he left his parish, -- and
the whole world at the same time behind him, -- and stands accountable to a
judge of whom he will have no cause to complain.

But there is a fatality attends the actions of some men: Order them as they
will, they pass through a certain medium which so twists and refracts them from
their true directions -- that, with all the titles to praise which a rectitude
of heart can give, the doers of them are nevertheless forced to live and die
without it.

Of the truth of which this gentleman was a painful example. -- But to know by
what means this came to pass, -- and to make that knowledge of use to you, I
insist upon it that you read the two following chapters, which contain such a
sketch of his life and conversation, as will carry its moral along with it. --
When this is done, if nothing stops us in our way, we will go on with the
midwife.

CHAP. XI.
YORICK was this parson's name, and, what is very remarkable in it, (as appears
from a most ancient account of the family, wrote upon strong vellum, and now in
perfect preservation) it had been exactly so spelt for near, -- I was within an
ace of saying nine hundred years; -- but I would not shake my credit in telling
an improbable truth, however indisputable in itself; -- and therefore I shall
content myself with only saying, -- It had been exactly so spelt, without the
least variation or transposition of a single letter, for I do not know how
long; which is more than I would venture to say of one half of the best
surnames in the kingdom; which, in a course of years, have generally undergone
as many chops and changes as their owners. -- Has this been owing to the pride,
or to the shame of the respective proprietors? -- In honest truth, I think,
sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other, just as the temptation has
wrought. But a villainous affair it is, and will one day so blend and confound
us all together, that no one shall be able to stand up and swear, "That his own
great grand father was the man who did either this or that."

This evil had been sufficiently fenced against by the prudent care of the
Yorick's family, and their religious preservation of these records I quote,
which do further inform us, That the family was originally of Danish
extraction, and had been transplanted into England as early as in the reign of
Horwendillus, king of Denmark, in whose court it seems, an ancestor of this Mr.
Yorick's, and from whom he was lineally descended, held a considerable post to
the day of his death. Of what nature this considerable post was, this record
says not; -- it only adds, That, for near two centuries, it had been totally
abolished as altogether unnecessary, not only in that court, but in every other
court of the Christian world.

It has often come into my head, that this post could be no other than that of
the king's chief Jester; -- and that Hamlet's Yorick, in our Shakespeare, many
of whose plays, you know, are founded upon authenticated facts, -- was
certainly the very man.

I have not the time to look into Saxo-Grammaticus's Danish history, to know
the certainty of this; -- but if you have leisure, and can easily get at the
book, you may do it full as well yourself.

I had just time, in my travels through Denmark with Mr. Noddy's eldest son,
whom, in the year 1741, I accompanied as governor, riding along with him at a
prodigious rate through most parts of Europe, and of which original journey
performed by us two, a most delectable narrative will be given in the progress
of this work. I had just time, I say, and that was all, to prove the truth of
an observation made by a long sojourner in that country; -- namely, "That
nature was neither very lavish, nor was she very stingy in her gifts of genius
and capacity to its inhabitants; -- but, like a discreet parent, was moderately
kind to them all; observing such an equal tenor in the distribution of her
favors, as to bring them, in those points, pretty near to a level with each
other; so that you will meet with few instances in that kingdom of refined
parts; but a great deal of good plain household understanding amongst all ranks
of people, of which every body has a share;" which is, I think, very right.

With us, you see, the case is quite different; -- we are all ups and downs in
this matter; -- you are a great genius; -- or it is fifty to one, Sir, you are a
great dunce and a blockhead; -- not that there is a total want of intermediate
steps, -- no, -- we are not so irregular as that comes to; -- but the two
extremes are more common, and in a greater degree in this unsettled island,
where nature, in her gifts and dispositions of this kind, is most whimsical and
capricious; fortune herself not being more so in the bequest of her goods and
chattels than she.

This is all that ever staggered my faith in regard to Yorick's extraction,
who, by what I can remember of him, and by all the accounts I could ever get of
him, seemed not to have had one single drop of Danish blood in his whole
crasis; in nine hundred years, it might possibly have all run out: -- I will
not philosophize one moment with you about it; for happen how it would, the
fact was this: -- That instead of that cold phlegm and exact regularity of
sense and humors, you would have looked for, in one so extracted; -- he was,
on the contrary, as mercurial and sublimated a composition, -- as heteroclite a
creature in all his declensions; -- with as much life and whim, and gaite de
coeur about him, as the kindliest climate could have engendered and put
together. With all this sail, poor Yorick carried not one ounce of ballast; he
was utterly unpractised in the world; and, at the age of twenty-six, knew just
about as well how to steer his course in it, as a romping, unsuspicious girl of
thirteen: So that upon his first setting out, the brisk gale of his spirits, as
you will imagine, ran him foul ten times in a day of some body's tackling; and
as the grave and more slow-paced were oftenest in his way, -- you may likewise
imagine, 'twas with such he had generally the ill luck to get the most
entangled. For aught I know there might be some mixture of unlucky wit at the
bottom of such Fracas: -- For, to speak the truth, Yorick had an invincible
dislike and opposition in his nature to gravity; -- not to gravity as such; --
for where gravity was wanted, he would be the most grave or serious of mortal
men for days and weeks together; -- but he was an enemy to the affectation of
it, and declared open war against it, only as it appeared a cloak for
ignorance, or for folly; and then, whenever it fell in his way, however
sheltered and protected, he seldom gave it much quarter.

Sometimes, in his wild way of talking, he would say, That gravity was an
errant scoundrel; and he would add, -- of the most dangerous kind too, --
because a fly one; and that, he verily believed, more honest, well-meaning
people were bubbled out of their goods and money by it in one twelvemonth,
than by pocket-picking and shop-lifting in seven. In the naked temper which a
merry heart discovered, he would say, There was no danger, -- but to itself: --
whereas the very essence of gravity was design, and consequently deceit; --
'twas a taught trick to gain credit of the world for more sense and knowledge
than a man was worth; and that, with all its pretensions, -- it was no better,
but often worse, than what a French wit had long ago defined it, -- viz. A
mysterious carriage of the body to cover the defects of the mind; -- which
definition of gravity, Yorick, with great imprudence, would say, deserved to be
wrote in letters of gold.

But, in plain truth, he was a man unhackneyed and unpractised in the world,
and was altogether as indiscreet and foolish on every other subject of
discourse where policy is wont to impress restraint. Yorick had no impression
but one, and that was what arose from the nature of the deed spoken of; which
impression he would usually translate into plain English without any
periphrasis, -- and too often without much distinction of either personage, time,
or place; -- so that when mention was made of a pitiful or an ungenerous
proceeding, -- he never gave himself a moment's time to reflect who was the
Hero of the piece, -- what his station, -- or how far he had power to hurt him
hereafter; -- but if it was a dirty action, -- without more ado, -- The man was
a dirty fellow, -- and so on: -- And as his comments had usually the ill fate
to be terminated either in a bon mot, or to be enlivened throughout with some
drollery or humor of expression, it gave wings to Yorick's indiscretion. In a
word, though he never sought, yet, at the same time, as he seldom shunned
occasions of saying what came uppermost, and without much ceremony; -- he had
but too many temptations in life, of scattering his wit and his humor, -- his
gibes and his jests about him. -- They were not lost for want of gathering.

What were the consequences, and what was Yorick's catastrophe thereupon, you
will read in the next chapter.

CHAP. XII.
THE Mortgager and Mortgagee differ the one from the other, not more in length
of purse, than the Jester and Jestee do, in that of memory. But in this the
comparison between them runs, as the scholiasts call it, upon allfour; which,
by the bye, is upon one or two legs more, than some of the best of Homer's can
pretend to; -- namely, That the one raises a sum and the other a laugh at your
expense, and think no more about it. Interest, however, still runs on in both
cases; -- the periodical or accidental payments of it, just serving to keep the
memory of the affair alive; till, at length, in some evil hour, -- pop comes
the creditor upon each, and by demanding principal upon the spot, together with
full interest to the very day, makes them both feel the full extent of their
obligations.

As the reader (for I hate your ifs) has a thorough knowledge of human nature,
I need not say more to satisfy him, that my Hero could not go on at this rate
without some slight experience of these incidental mementos. To speak the
truth, he had wantonly involved himself in a multitude of small book-debts of
this stamp, which, notwithstanding Eugenius's frequent advice, he too much
disregarded; thinking, that as not one of them was contracted through any
malignancy; -- but, on the contrary, from an honesty of mind, and a mere
jocundity of humor, they would all of them be crossed out in course.

Eugenius would never admit this; and would often tell him, that one day or
other he would certainly be reckoned with; and he would often add, in an accent
of sorrowful apprehension, -- to the uttermost mite. To which Yorick, with his
usual carelessness of heart, would as often answer with a pshaw! -- and if the
subject was started in the fields, -- with a hop, skip, and a jump, at the end
of it; but if close pent up in the social chimney corner, where the culprit was
barricado'd in, with a table and a couple of arm chairs, and could not so
readily fly off in a tangent, -- Eugenius would then go on with his lecture
upon discretion, in words to this purpose, though somewhat better put together.

Trust me, dear Yorick, this unwary pleasantry of thine will sooner or later
bring thee into scrapes and difficulties, which no after-wit can extricate thee
out of. -- In these sallies, too often, I see, it happens, that a person laughed
at, considers himself in the light of a person injured, with all the rights of
such a situation belonging to him; and when thou viewest him in that light too,
and reckons up his friends, his family, his kindred and allies, -- and musters
up with them the many recruits which will list under him from a sense of common
danger; -- it is no extravagant arithmetic to say, that for every ten jokes, --
thou have got a hundred enemies; and till thou have gone on, and raised a swarm
of wasps about thy ears, and art half stung to death by them, thou will never
be convinced it is so.

I cannot suspect it in the man whom I esteem, that there is the least spur
from spleen or malevolence of intent in these sallies. -- I believe and know
them to be truly honest and sportive: -- But consider, my dear lad, that fools
cannot distinguish this, -- and that knaves will not; and thou know not what
it is, either to provoke the one, or to make merry with the other, -- whenever
they associate for mutual defense, depend upon it, they will carry on the war
in such a manner against thee, my dear friend, as to make thee heartily sick of
it, and of thy life too.

REVENGE from some baneful corner shall level a tale of dishonor at thee,
which no innocence of heart or integrity of conduct shall set right. -- The
fortunes of thy house shall totter, -- thy character, which led the way to
them, shall bleed on every side of it, -- thy faith questioned, -- thy works
belied, -- thy wit forgotten, -- thy learning trampled on. To wind up the last
scene of thy tragedy, CRUELTY and COWARDICE, twin ruffians, hired and set on by
MALICE in the dark, shall strike together at all thy infirmities and mistakes:
-- the best of us, my dear lad, lie open there, -- and trust me, -- trust me,
Yorick, When to gratify a private appetite, it is once resolved upon, that an
innocent and an helpless creature shall be sacrificed, it is an easy matter to
pick up sticks enew from any thicket where it has strayed, to make a fire to
offer it up with.

Yorick scarce ever heard this sad vaticination of his destiny read over to
him, but with a tear stealing from his eye, and a promissory look attending it,
that he was resolved, for the time to come, to ride his tit with more sobriety.
-- But, alas, too late! -- a grand confederacy, with ***** and ***** at the
head of it, was formed before the first prediction of it. -- The whole plan of
the attack, just as Eugenius had foreboded, was put in execution all at once,
-- with so little mercy on the side of the allies, -- and so little suspicion
in Yorick, of what was carrying on against him, -- that when he thought, good
easy man! full surely preferment was o'ripening, -- they had smote his root,
and then he fell, as many a worthy man had fallen before him.

Yorick, however, fought it out with all imaginable gallantry for some time;
till, overpowered by numbers, and worn out at length by the calamities of the
war, -- but more so, by the ungenerous manner in which it was carried on, -- he
threw down the sword; and though he kept up his spirits in appearance to the
last, -- he died, nevertheless, as was generally thought, quite broken hearted.

What inclined Eugenius to the same opinion, was as follows:

A few hours before Yorick breathed his last, Eugenius stepped in with an intent
to take his last sight and last farewell of him: Upon his drawing Yorick's
curtain, and asking how he felt himself, Yorick, looking up in his face, took
hold of his hand, -- and, after thanking him for the many tokens of his
friendship to him, for which, he said, if it was their fate to meet hereafter,
-- he would thank him again and again. -- He told him, he was within a few
hours of giving his enemies the slip for ever. -- I hope not, answered
Eugenius, with tears trickling down his cheeks, and with the tenderest tone
that ever man spoke, -- I hope not, Yorick, said he. -- Yorick replied, with a
look up, and a gentle squeeze of Eugenius's hand, and that was all, -- but it
cut Eugenius to his heart. -- Come, -- come, Yorick, quoth Eugenius, wiping his
eyes, and summoning up the man within him, -- my dear lad, be comforted, -- let
not all thy spirits and fortitude forsake thee at this crisis when thou most
wants them; -- who knows what resources are in store, and what the power of God
may yet do for thee? -- Yorick laid his hand upon his heart, and gently shook
his head; -- for my part, continued Eugenius, crying bitterly as he uttered the
words, -- I declare I know not, Yorick, how to part with thee, -- and would
gladly flatter my hopes, added Eugenius, chearing up his voice, that there is
still enough left of thee to make a bishop, -- and that I may live to see it.
-- I beseech thee, Eugenius, quoth Yorick, taking off his nightcap as well as
he could with his left hand, -- his right being still grasped close in that of
Eugenius, -- I beseech thee to take a view of my head. -- I see nothing that
ails it, replied Eugenius. Then, alas! my friend, said Yorick, let me tell you,
that it is so bruised and mis-shapen'd with the blows which ***** and *****, and
some others have so unhandsomely given me in the dark, that I might say with
Sancho Panca, that should I recover, and "Mitres thereupon be suffered to rain
down from heaven as thick as hail, not one of 'em would fit it." -- Yorick's
last breath was hanging upon his trembling lips ready to depart as he uttered
this; -- yet still it was uttered with something of a cervantick tone; -- and
as he spoke it, Eugenius could perceive a stream of lambent fire lighted up for
a moment in his eyes; -- faint picture of those flashes of his spirit, which
(as Shakespeare said of his ancestor) were wont to set the table in a roar!

Eugenius was convinced from this, that the heart of his friend was broke; he
squeezed his hand, -- and then walked softly out of the room, weeping as he
walked. Yorick followed Eugenius with his eyes to the door, -- he then closed
them, -- and never opened them more.

He lies buried in a corner of his churchyard, in the parish of (...), under a
plain marble slabb, which his friend Eugenius, by leave of his executors, laid
upon his grave, with no more than these three words of inscription serving both
for his epitaph and elegy.

Alas, poor YORICK!



Ten times in a day has Yorick's ghost the consolation to hear his monumental
inscription read over with such a variety of plaintive tones, as denote a
general pity and esteem for him; -- a foot way crossing the churchyard close
by the side of his grave, -- not a passenger goes by without stopping to cast a
look upon it, -- and sighing as he walks on,

Alas, poor YORICK!

entirely black page

entirely black page

CHAP. XIII.
IT is so long since the reader of this rhapsodical work has been parted from
the midwife, that it is high time to mention her again to him, merely to put
him in mind that there is such a body still in the world, and whom, upon the
best judgment I can form upon my own plan at present, -- I am going to
introduce to him for good and all: But as fresh matter may be started, and much
unexpected business fall out betwixt the reader and myself, which may require
immediate dispatch; -- 'twas right to take care that the poor woman should not
be lost in the mean time; -- because when she is wanted, we can no way do
without her.

I think I told you that this good woman was a person of no small note and
consequence throughout our whole village and township; -- that her fame had
spread itself to the very out-edge and circumference of that circle of
importance, of which kind every soul living, whether he has a shirt to his back
or no, -- has one surrounding him; -- which said circle, by the way, whenever
it is said that such a one is of great weight and importance in the world, -- I
desire may be enlarged or contracted in your worship's fancy, in a
compound-ratio of the station, profession, knowledge, abilities, height and
depth (measuring both ways) of the personage brought before you.

In the present case, if I remember, I fixed it at about four or five miles,
which not only comprehended the whole parish, but extended itself to two or
three of the adjacent hamlets in the skirts of the next parish; which made a
considerable thing of it. I must add, That she was, moreover, very well looked
on at one large grange-house and some other odd houses and farms within two or
three miles, as I said, from the smoke of her own chimney: -- But I must here,
once for all, inform you, that all this will be more exactly delineated and
explained in a map, now in the hands of the engraver, which, with many other
pieces and developments to this work, will be added to the end of the twentieth
volume, -- not to swell the work, -- I detest the thought of such a thing; --
but by way of commentary, scholium, illustration, and key to such passages,
incidents, or inuendos as shall be thought to be either of private
interpretation, or of dark or doubtful meaning after my life and my opinions
shall have been read over, (now don't forget the meaning of the word) by all
the world; -- which, betwixt you and me, and in spite of all the gentlemen
reviewers in Great Britain, and of all that their worships shall undertake to
write or say to the contrary, -- I am determined shall be the case. -- I need
not tell your worship, that all this is spoke in confidence.

CHAP. XIV.
UPON looking into my mother's marriage settlement, in order to satisfy myself
and reader in a point necessary to be cleared up, before we could proceed any
further in this history; -- I had the good fortune to pop upon the very thing I
wanted before I had read a day and a half straight forwards, -- it might have
taken me up a month; -- which shows plainly, that when a man sits down to write
a history, -- though it be but the history of Jack Hickathrift or Tom Thumb, he
knows no more than his heels what lets and confounded hindrances he is to meet
with in his way, -- or what a dance he may be led, by one excursion or another,
before all is over. Could a historiographer drive on his history, as a muleteer
drives on his mule, -- straight forward; -- for instance, from Rome all the way
to Loretto, without ever once turning his head aside either to the right hand
or to the left, -- he might venture to foretell you to an hour when he should
get to his journey's end; -- but the thing is, morally speaking, impossible:
For, if he is a man of the least spirit, he will have fifty deviations from a
straight line to make with this or that party as he goes along, which he can no
ways avoid. He will have views and prospects to himself perpetually soliciting
his eye, which he can no more help standing still to look at than he can fly;
he will moreover have various Accounts to reconcile: Anecdotes to pick up:
Inscriptions to make out: Stories to weave in: Traditions to sift: Personages
to call upon: Panegyricks to paste up at this door: Pasquinades at that:
-- All which both the man and his mule are quite exempt from. To sum up all;
there are archives at every stage to be looked into, and rolls, records,
documents, and endless genealogies, which justice ever and anon calls him back
to stay the reading of: -- In short, there is no end of it; -- for my own part,
I declare I have been at it these six weeks, making all the speed I possibly
could, -- and am not yet born: -- I have just been able, and that is all, to
tell you when it happened, but not how; -- so that you see the thing is yet far
from being accomplished.

These unforeseen stoppages, which I own I had no conception of when I first
set out; -- but which, I am convinced now, will rather increase than diminish
as I advance, -- have struck out a hint which I am resolved to follow; -- and
that is, -- not to be in a hurry; -- but to go on leisurely, writing and
publishing two volumes of my life every year; -- which, if I am suffered to go
on quietly, and can make a tolerable bargain with my bookseller, I shall
continue to do as long as I live.

CHAP. XV.
THE article in my mother's marriage settlement, which I told the reader I was
at the pains to search for, and which, now that I have found it, I think proper
to lay before him, -- is so much more fully expressed in the deed itself, than
ever I can pretend to do it, that it would be barbarity to take it out of the
lawyer's hand: -- It is as follows.

" And this Indenture further witnesses, That the said Walter Shandy,
merchant, in consideration of the said intended marriage to be had, and, by
God's blessing, to be well and truly solemnized and consummated between the
said Walter Shandy and Elizabeth Mollineux aforesaid, and diverse other good and
valuable causes and considerations him thereunto specially moving, -- does
grant, covenant, condescend, consent, conclude, bargain, and fully agree to and
with John Dixon and James Turner, Esqrs. the abovenamed trustees, etc. etc. --
to wit, -- That in case it should hereafter so fall out, chance, happen, or
otherwise come to pass, -- That the said Walter Shandy, merchant, shall have
left off business before the time or times, that the said Elizabeth Mollineux
shall, according to the course of nature, or otherwise, have left off bearing
and bringing forth children; -- and that, in consequence of the said Walter
Shandy having so left off business, shall, in despite, and against the
free will, consent, and good-liking of the said Elizabeth Mollineux, -- make a
departure from the city of London, in order to retire to, and dwell upon, his
estate at Shandy-Hall, in the county of (...), or at any other country seat,
castle, hall, mansion house, message, or grainge-house, now purchased, or
hereafter to be purchased, or upon any part or parcel thereof: -- That then,
and as often as the said Elizabeth Mollineux shall happen to be enceint with
child or children severally and lawfully begot, or to be begotten, upon the
body of the said Elizabeth Mollineux during her said coverture, -- he the said
Walter Shandy shall, at his own proper cost and charges, and out of his own
proper moneys, upon good and reasonable notice, which is hereby agreed to be
within six weeks of her the said Elizabeth Mollineux's full reckoning, or time
of supposed and computed delivery, -- pay, or cause to be paid, the sum of one
hundred and twenty pounds of good and lawful money, to John Dixon and James
Turner, Esqrs. or assigns, -- upon TRUST and confidence, and for and unto the
use and uses, intent, end, and purpose following: -- That is to say, -- That
the said sum of one hundred and twenty pounds shall be paid into the hands of
the said Elizabeth Mollineux, or to be otherwise applied by them the said
trustees, for the well and truly hiring of one coach, with able and sufficient
horses, to carry and convey the body of the said Elizabeth Mollineux and the
child or children which she shall be then and there enceint and pregnant with,
-- unto the city of London; and for the further paying and defraying of all
other incidental costs, charges, and expenses whatsoever, -- in and about, and
for, and relating to her said intended delivery and lying-in, in the said city
or suburbs thereof. And that the said Elizabeth Mollineux shall and may, from
time to time, and at all such time and times as are here covenanted and agreed
upon, -- peaceably and quietly hire the said coach and horses, and have free
ingress, egress, and regress throughout her journey, in and from the said
coach, according to the tenor, true intent, and meaning of these presents,
without any let, suit, trouble, disturbance, molestation, discharge,
hinderance, forfeiture, eviction, vexation, interruption, or incumberance
whatsoever. -- And that it shall moreover be lawful to and for the said
Elizabeth Mollineux, from time to time, and as often or often as she shall well
and truly be advanced in her said pregnancy, to the time heretofore stipulated
and agreed upon, -- to live and reside in such place or places, and in such
family or families, and with such relations, friends, and other persons within
the said city of London, as she, at her own will and pleasure, notwithstanding
her present coverture, and as if she was a femme sole and unmarried, -- shall
think fit. -- And this Indenture further witnesses, That for the more
effectually carrying of the said covenant into execution, the said Walter
Shandy, merchant, does hereby grant, bargain, sell, release, and confirm unto
the said John Dixon, and James Turner, Esqrs. their heirs, executors, and
assigns, in their actual possession, now being by virtue of an indenture of
bargain and sale for a year to them the said John Dixon and James Turner,
Esqrs. by him the said Walter Shandy, merchant, thereof made; which said
bargain and sale for a year, bears date the day next before the date of these
presents, and by force and virtue of the statute for transferring of uses into
possession, -- All that the manor and lordship of Shandy in the county of
(...), with all the rights, members, and appurtenances thereof; and all and
every the messuages, houses, buildings, barns, stables, orchards, gardens,
backsides, tofts, crofts, garths, cottages, lands, meadows, feedings, pastures,
marshes, commons, woods, underwoods, drains, fisheries, waters, and
watercourse; -- together with all rents, reversions, services, annuities,
fee-farms, knights fees, views of frank-pledge, escheats, reliefs, mines,
quarries, goods and chattels of felons and fugitives, felons of themselves, and
put in exigent, deodands, free warrens, and all other royalties and seignories,
rights and jurisdictions, privileges and hereditaments whatsoever. -- And also
the advowson, donation, presentation and free disposition of the rectory or
parsonage of Shandy aforesaid, and all and every the tenths, tithes,
glebe-lands" -- In three words, -- "My mother was to lay in, (if she chose it)
in London."

But in order to put a stop to the practice of any unfair play on the part of
my mother, which a marriage article of this nature too manifestly opened a door
to, and which indeed had never been thought of at all, but for my uncle Toby
Shandy; -- a clause was added in security of my father, which was this: --
"That in case my mother hereafter should, at any time, put my father to the
trouble and expense of a London journey upon false cries and tokens; -- that
for every such instance she should forfeit all the right and title which the
covenant gave her to the next turn; -- but to no more, -- and so on, toties
quoties, in as effectual a manner, as if such a covenant betwixt them had not
been made." -- This, by the way, was no more than what was reasonable; -- and
yet, as reasonable as it was, I have ever thought it hard that the whole weight
of the article should have fallen entirely, as it did, upon myself.

But I was begot and born to misfortunes; -- for my poor mother, whether it was
wind or water, -- or a compound of both, -- or neither; -- or whether it was
simply the mere swell of imagination and fancy in her; -- or how far a strong
wish and desire to have it so, might mislead her judgment; -- in short, whether
she was deceived or deceiving in this matter, it no way becomes me to decide.
The fact was this, That, in the latter end of September, 1717, which was the
year before I was born, my mother having carried my father up to town much
against the grain, -- he peremptorily insisted upon the clause; -- so that I
was doomed, by marriage articles, to have my nose squeezed as flat to my face,
as if the destinies had actually spun me without one.

How this event came about, -- and what a train of vexatious disappointments,
in one stage or other of my life, have pursued me from the mere loss, or rather
compression, of this one single member, -- shall be laid before the reader all
in due time.

CHAP. XVI.
MY father, as any body may naturally imagine, came down with my mother into
the country, in but a pettish kind of a humor. The first twenty or
five-and-twenty miles he did nothing in the world but fret and teaze himself,
and indeed my mother too, about the cursed expense, which he said might every
shilling of it have been saved; -- then what vexed him more than every thing
else was the provoking time of the year, -- which, as I told you, was toward
the end of September, when his wall-fruit, and green gages especially, in which
he was very curious, were just ready for pulling: -- "Had he been whistled up
to London, upon a Tom Fool's errand in any other month of the whole year, he
should not have said three words about it."

For the next two whole stages, no subject would go down, but the heavy blow he
had sustained from the loss of a son, whom it seems he had fully reckoned upon
in his mind, and registered down in his pocketbook, as a second staff for his
old age, in case Bobby should fail him. "The disappointment of this, he said,
was ten times more to a wise man than all the money which the journey, etc. had
cost him, put together, -- rot the hundred and twenty pounds, -- he did not
mind it a rush."

From Stilton, all the way to Grantham, nothing in the whole affair provoked
him so much as the condolences of his friends, and the foolish figure they
should both make at church the first Sunday; -- of which, in the satirical
vehemence of his wit, now sharpened a little by vexation, he would give so many
humorous and provoking descriptions, -- and place his rib and self in so many
tormenting lights and attitudes in the face of the whole congregation; -- that
my mother declared, these two stages were so truly tragi-comical, that she did
nothing but laugh and cry in a breath, from one end to the other of them all
the way.

From Grantham, till they had crossed the Trent, my father was out of all kind
of patience at the vile trick and imposition which he fancied my mother had put
upon him in this affair. -- "Certainly, he would say to himself, over and over
again, "the woman could not be deceived herself; -- if she could, -- what
weakness! -- tormenting word! which led his imagination a thorny dance, and,
before all was over, played the duce and all with him;" -- for sure as ever the
word weakness was uttered, and struck full upon his brain, -- so sure it set
him upon running divisions upon how many kinds of weaknesses there were; --
that there was such a thing as weakness of the body, -- as well as weakness of
the mind, -- and then he would do nothing but syllogize within himself for a
stage or two together, How far the cause of all these vexations might, or might
not, have arisen out of himself.

In short, he had so many little subjects of disquietude springing out of this
one affair, all fretting successively in his mind as they rose up in it, that
my mother, whatever was her journey up, had but an uneasy journey of it down.
-- In a word, as she complained to my uncle Toby, he would have tired out the
patience of any flesh alive.

CHAP. XVII.
THough my father traveled homewards, as I told you, in none of the best of
moods, -- pshaw-ing and pish-ing all the way down, -- yet he had the
complaisance to keep the worst part of the story still to himself; -- which was
the resolution he had taken of doing himself the justice, which my uncle Toby's
clause in the marriage settlement empowered him; nor was it till the very night
in which I was begot, which was thirteen months after, that she had the least
intimation of his design; -- when my father, happening, as you remember, to be
a little chagrin'd and out of temper, -- took occasion as they lay chatting
gravely in bed afterward, talking over what was to come, -- to let her know
that she must accommodate herself as well as she could to the bargain made
between them in their marriage deeds; which was to lye-in of her next child in
the country to balance the last year's journey.

My father was a gentleman of many virtues, -- but he had a strong spice of
that in his temper which might, or might not, add to the number. -- It Is known
by the name of perseverance in a good cause, -- and of obstinacy in a bad one:
Of this my mother had so much knowledge, that she knew 'twas to no purpose to
make any remonstrance, -- so she even resolved to sit down quietly, and make
the most of it.

CHAP. XVIII.
AS the point was that night agreed, or rather determined, that my mother
should lye-in of me in the country, she took her measures accordingly; for
which purpose, when she was three days, or thereabouts, gone with child, she
began to cast her eyes upon the midwife, whom you have so often heard me
mention; and before the week was well got round, as the famous Dr. Maningham
was not to be had, she had come to a final determination in her mind, --
notwithstanding there was a scientifick operator within so near a call as eight
miles of us, and who, moreover, had expressly wrote a five shillings book upon
the subject of midwifery, in which he had exposed, not only the blunders of the
sisterhood itself, -- but had likewise superadded many curious improvements for
the quicker extraction of the foetus in cross births, and some other cases of
danger which belay us in getting into the world; notwithstanding all this, my
mother, I say, was absolutely determined to trust her life and mine with it,
into no soul's hand but this old woman's only. -- Now this I like; -- when we
cannot get at the very thing we wish, -- never to take up with the next best in
degree to it; -- no; that is pitiful beyond description; -- it is no more than a
week from this very day, in which I am now writing this book for the
edification of the world, -- which is March 9, 1759, -- that my dear, dear
Jenny observing I looked a little grave, as she stood cheapening a silk of
five-and-twenty shillings a yard, -- told the mercer, she was sorry she had
given him so much trouble; -- and immediately went and bought herself a
yard-wide stuff of ten-pence a yard. -- It Is the duplication of one and the
same greatness of soul; only what lessened the honor of it somewhat, in my
mother's case, was, that she could not heroine it into so violent and hazardous
an extreme, as one in her situation might have wished, because the old midwife
had really some little claim to be depended upon, -- as much, at least, as
success could give her; having, in the course of her practice of near twenty
years in the parish, brought every mother's son of them into the world without
any one slip or accident which could fairly be laid to her account.

These facts, though they had their weight, yet did not altogether satisfy some
few scruples and uneasinesses which hung upon my father's spirits in relation
to this choice. -- To say nothing of the natural workings of humanity and
justice, -- or of the yearnings of parental and connubial love, all which
prompted him to leave as little to hazard as possible in a case of this kind;
-- he felt himself concerned in a particular manner, that all should go right
in the present case; -- from the accumulated sorrow he lay open to, should any
evil betide his wife and child in lying-in at Shandy-Hall. -- He knew the world
judged by events, and would add to his afflictions in such a misfortune, by
loading him with the whole blame of it. -- "Alas o'day; -- had Mrs. Shandy,
poor gentlewoman! had but her wish in going up to town just to lye-in and come
down again; -- which, they say, she begged and prayed for upon her bare knees,
-- and which, in my opinion, considering the fortune which Mr. Shandy got with
her, -- was no such mighty matter to have complied with, the lady and her babe
might both of 'em have been alive at this hour."

This exclamation, my father knew was unanswerable; -- and yet, it was not
merely to shelter himself, -- nor was it altogether for the care of his
offspring and wife that he seemed so extremely anxious about this point; -- my
father had extensive views of things, -- and stood, moreover, as he thought,
deeply concerned in it for the public good, from the dread he entertained of
the bad uses an ill-fated instance might be put to.

He was very sensible that all political writers upon the subject had
unanimously agreed and lamented, from the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign
down to his own time, that the current of men and money toward the metropolis,
upon one frivolous errand or another, -- set in so strong, -- as to become
dangerous to our civil rights; -- though, by the bye, -- a current was not the
image he took most delight in, -- a distemper was here his favorite metaphor,
and he would run it down into a perfect allegory, by maintaining it was
identically the same in the body national as in the body natural, where blood
and spirits were driven up into the head faster than they could find their ways
down; -- a stoppage of circulation must ensue, which was death in both cases.

There was little danger, he would say, of losing our liberties by French
politics or French invasions; -- nor was he so much in pain of a consumption
from the mass of corrupted matter and ulcerated humors in our constitution, --
which he hoped was not so bad as it was imagined; -- but he verily feared, that
in some violent push, we should go off, all at once, in a state-apoplexy; --
and then he would say, The Lord have mercy upon us all.

My father was never able to give the history of this distemper, -- without the
remedy along with it.

"Was I an absolute prince, he would say, pulling up his breeches with both his
hands, as he rose from his arm-chair, "I would appoint able judges, at every
avenue of my metropolis, who should take cognizance of every fool's business
who came there; -- and if, upon a fair and candid hearing, it appeared not of
weight sufficient to leave his own home, and come up, bag and baggage, with his
wife and children, farmers sons, etc. etc. at his backside, they should be all
sent back, from constable to constable, like vagrants as they were, to the
place of their legal settlements. By this means I shall take care, that my
metropolis tottered not through its own weight; -- that the head be no longer too
big for the body; -- that the extremes, now wasted and pined in, be restored to
their due share of nourishment, and regain, with it, their natural strength and
beauty: -- I would effectually provide, That the meadows and cornfieldsd, of my
dominions, should laugh and sing; -- that good cheer and hospitality flourish
once more; -- and that such weight and influence be put thereby into the hands
of the Squirality of my kingdom, as should counterpoise what I perceive my
Nobility are now taking from them.

"Why are there so few palaces and gentlemen's seats, he would ask, with some
emotion, as he walked across the room, "throughout so many delicious provinces
in France? Whence is it that the few remaining Chateaus amongst them are so
dismantled, -- so unfurnished, and in so ruinous and desolate a condition? --
Because, Sir, (he would say) "in that kingdom no man has any country-interest
to support; -- the little interest of any kind, which any man has any where in
it, is concentrated in the court, and the looks of the Grand Monarch; by the
sunshine of whose countenance, or the clouds which pass across it, every
French man lives or dies."

Another political reason which prompted my father so strongly to guard against
the least evil accident in my mother's lying-in in the country, -- was, That
any such instance would infallibly throw a balance of power, too great already,
into the weaker vessels of the gentry, in his own, or higher stations; --
which, with the many other usurped rights which that part of the constitution
was hourly establishing, -- would, in the end, prove fatal to the monarchical
system of domestic government established in the first creation of things by
God.

In this point he was entirely of Sir Robert Filmer's opinion, That the plans
and institutions of the greatest monarchies in the eastern parts of the world,
were, originally, all stolen from that admirable pattern and prototype of this
household and paternal power; -- which, for a century, he said, and more, had
gradually been degenerating away into a mixed government; -- the form of which,
however desirable in great combinations of the species, -- was very troublesome
in small ones, -- and seldom produced any thing, that he saw, but sorrow and
confusion.

For all these reasons, private and public, put together, -- my father was for
having the man-midwife by all means, -- my mother by no means. My father begged
and entreated, she would for once recede from her prerogative in this matter,
and suffer him to choose for her; -- my mother, on the contrary, insisted upon
her privilege in this matter, to choose for herself, -- and have no mortal's
help but the old woman's. -- What could my father do? He was almost at his
wit's end; -- talked it over with her in all moods; -- placed his arguments in
all lights; -- argued the matter with her like a christian, -- like a heathen,
-- like a husband, -- like a father, -- like a patriot, -- like a man: -- My
mother answered every thing only like a woman; which was a little hard upon
her; -- for as she could not assume and fight it out behind such a variety of
characters, -- 'twas no fair match; -- 'twas seven to one. -- What could my
mother do? -- She had the advantage (otherwise she had been certainly
overpowered) of a small reinforcement of chagrine personal at the bottom which
bore her up, and enabled her to dispute the affair with my father with so equal
an advantage, -- that both sides sung Te Deum. In a word, my mother was to have
the old woman, -- and the operator was to have license to drink a bottle of
wine with my father and my uncle Toby Shandy in the back parlour, -- for which
he was to be paid five guineas.

I must beg leave, before I finish this chapter, to enter a caveat in the
breast of my fair reader; -- and it is this: -- Not to take it absolutely for
granted from an unguarded word or two which I have dropped in it, -- "That I am
a married man." -- I own the tender appellation of my dear, dear Jenny, -- with
some other strokes of conjugal knowledge, interspersed here and there, might,
naturally enough, have misled the most candid judge in the world into such a
determination against me. -- All I plead for, in this case, Madam, is strict
justice, and that you do so much of it, to me as well as to yourself, -- as not
to prejudge or receive such an impression of me, till you have better evidence,
than I am positive, at present, can be produced against me: -- Not that I can
be so vain or unreasonable, Madam, as to desire you should therefore think,
that my dear, dear Jenny is my kept mistress; -- no, -- that would be
flattering my character in the other extreme, and giving it an air of freedom,
which, perhaps, it has no kind of right to. All I contend for, is the utter
impossibility for some volumes, that you, or the most penetrating spirit upon
earth, should know how this matter really stands. -- It is not impossible, but
that my dear, dear Jenny! tender as the appellation is, may be my child. --
Consider, -- I was born in the year eighteen. -- Nor is there any thing
unnatural or extravagant in the supposition, that my dear Jenny may be my
friend. -- Friend! -- My friend. -- Surely, Madam, a friendship between the two
sexes may subsist, and be supported without (...)Fie! Mr. Shandy: -- Without any
thing, Madam, but that tender and delicious sentiment, which ever mixes in
friendship, where there is a difference of sex. Let me entreat you to study the
pure and sentimental parts of the best French Romances; -- it will really,
Madam, astonish you to see with what a variety of chaste expression this
delicious sentiment, which I have the honor to speak of, is dressed out.

CHAP. XIX.
I Would sooner undertake to explain the hardest problem in Geometry, than
pretend to account for it, that a gentleman of my father's great good sense, --
knowing, as the reader must have observed him, and curious too, in philosophy,
-- wise also in political reasoning, -- and in polemical (as he will find) no
way ignorant, -- could be capable of entertaining a notion in his head, so out
of the common track, -- that I fear the reader, when I come to mention it to
him, if he is the least of a choleric temper, will immediately throw the book
by; if mercurial, he will laugh most heartily at it; -- and if he is of a grave
and saturnine cast, he will, at first sight, absolutely condemn as fanciful and
extravagant; and that was in respect to the choice and imposition of Christian
names, on which he thought a great deal more depended than what superficial
minds were capable of conceiving.

His opinion, in this matter, was, That there was a strange kind of magic
bias, which good or bad names, as he called them, irresistibly impressed upon
our characters and conduct.

The Hero of Cervantes argued not the point with more seriousness, -- nor had
he more faith, -- or more to say on the powers of Necromancy in dishonouring
his deeds, -- or on DULCINEA'S name, in shedding luster upon them, than my
father had on those of TRISMEGISTUS or ARCHIMEDES, on the one hand, -- or of
NYKY and SIMKIN on the other. How many CAESAR'S and POMPEYS, he would say, by
mere inspiration of the names, have been rendered worthy of them? And how many,
he would add, are there who might have done exceeding well in the world, had
not their characters and spirits been totally depressed and NICODEMUS'D into
nothing.

I see plainly, Sir, by your looks, (or as the case happened) my father would
say, -- that you do not heartily subscribe to this opinion of mine, -- which,
to those, he would add, who have not carefully sifted it to the bottom, -- I
own has an air more of fancy than of solid reasoning in it; -- and yet, my dear
Sir, if I may presume to know your character, I am morally assured, I should
hazard little in stating a case to you, -- not as a party in the dispute, --
but as a judge, and trusting my appeal upon it to your own good sense and
candid disquisition in this matter; -- you are a person free from as many
narrow prejudices of education as most men; -- and, if I may presume to
penetrate further into you, -- of a liberality of genius above bearing down an
opinion, merely because it wants friends. Your son! -- your dear son, -- from
whose sweet and open temper you have so much to expect. -- Your BILLY, Sir! --
would you, for the world, have called him JUDAS? -- Would you, my dear Sir, he
would say, laying his hand upon your breast, with the genteelest address, --
and in that soft and irresistible piano of voice, which the nature of the
argumentum ad hominem absolutely requires, -- Would you, Sir, if a Jew of a
godfather had proposed the name for your child, and offered you his purse along
with it, would you have confented to such a desecration of him? -- O my God! he
would say, looking up, if I know your temper right, Sir, -- you are incapable
of it; -- you would have trampled upon the offer; -- you would have thrown the
temptation at the tempter's head with abhorrence.

Your greatness of mind in this action, which I admire, with that generous
contempt of money which you show me in the whole transaction, is really noble;
-- and what renders it more so, is the principle of it; -- the workings of a
parent's love upon the truth and conviction of this very hypothesis, namely,
That was your son called JUDAS, -- the fordid and treacherous idea, so
inseparable from the name, would have accompanied him through life like his
shadow, and, in the end, made a miser and a rascal of him, in spite, Sir, of
your example.

I never knew a man able to answer this argument. -- But, indeed, to speak of
my father as he was; -- he was certainly irresistible, both in his orations and
disputations; -- he was born an orator; -- (...). -- Persuasion hung upon his
lips, and the elements of Logic and Rhetoric were so blended up in him, --
and, withal, he had so shrewd guess at the weaknesses and passions of his
respondent, -- that NATURE might have stood up and said, -- "This man is
eloquent." In short, whether he was on the weak or the strong side of the
question, 'twas hazardous in either case to attack him: -- And yet, it is
strange, he had never read Cicero nor Quintilian de Oratore, nor Isocrates, nor
Aristotle, nor Longinus amongst the ancients; -- nor Vossius, nor Skioppius,
nor Ramus, nor Farnaby amongst the moderns; -- and what is more astonishing, he
had never in his whole life the least light or spark of subtilty struck into
his mind, by one single lecture upon Crackenthorp or Burgersdicius, or any
Dutch logician or commentator; -- he knew not so much as in what the difference
of an argument ad ignorantiam, and an argument ad hominem consisted; so that I
well remember, when he went up along with me to enter my name at Jesus College
in ****, -- it was a matter of just wonder with my worthy tutor, and two or
three fellows of that learned society, -- that a man who knew not so much as
the names of his tools, should be able to work after that fashion with 'em.

To work with them in the best manner he could, was what my father was,
however, perpetually forced upon; -- for he had a thousand little skeptical
notions of the comic kind to defend, -- most of which notions, I verily
believe, at first entered upon the footing of mere whims, and of a vive la
Bagatelle; and as such he would make merry with them for half an hour or so,
and having sharpened his wit upon 'em, dismiss them till another day.

I mention this, not only as matter of hypothesis or conjecture upon the
progress and establishment of my father's many odd opinions, -- but as a
warning to the learned reader against the indiscreet reception of such guests,
who, after a free and undisturbed entrance, for some years, into our brains,
-- at length claim a kind of settlement there, -- working sometimes like yeast;
-- but more generally after the manner of the gentle passion, beginning in
jest, -- but ending in downright earnest.

Whether this was the case of the singularity of my father's notions, -- or
that his judgment, at length, became the dupe of his wit; -- or how far, in
many of his notions, he might, though odd, be absolutely right; -- the reader, as
he comes at them, shall decide. All that I maintain here, is, that in this one,
of the influence of Christian names, however it gained footing, he was serious;
-- he was all uniformity; -- he was systematical, and, like all systematick
reasoners, he would move both heaven and earth, and twist and torture every
thing in nature to support his hypothesis. In a word, I repeat it over again;
-- he was serious; -- and, in consequence of it, he would lose all kind of
patience whenever he saw people, especially of condition, who should have known
better, -- as careless and as indifferent about the name they imposed upon
their child, -- or more so, than in the choice of Ponto or Cupid for their
puppy dog.

This, he would say, looked ill; -- and had, moreover, this particular
aggravation in it, viz. That when once a vile name was wrongfully or
injudiciously given, 'twas not like the case of a man's character, which, when
wronged, might hereafter be cleared; -- and, possibly, sometime or other, if
not in the man's life, at least after his death, -- be, somehow or other, set
to rights with the world: But the injury of this, he would say, could never be
undone; -- nay, he doubted even whether an act of parliament could reach it: --
He knew as well as you, that the legislature assumed a power over surnames; --
but for very strong reasons, which he could give, it had never yet adventured,
he would say, to go a step further.

It was observable, that though my father, in consequence of this opinion, had,
as I have told you, the strongest likings and dislikings toward certain names;
-- that there were still numbers of names which hung so equally in the balance
before him, that they were absolutely indifferent to him. Jack, Dick, and Tom
were of this class: These my father called neutral names; -- affirming of them,
without a satyr, That there had been as many knaves and fools, at least, as
wise and good men, since the world began, who had indifferently borne them; --
so that, like equal forces acting against each other in contrary directions, he
thought they mutually destroyed each others effects; for which reason, he would
often declare, He would not give a cherry-stone to choose amongst them. Bob,
which was my brother's name, was another of these neutral kinds of Christian
names, which operated very little either way; and as my father happened to be
at Epsom, when it was given him, -- he would often times thank heaven it was no
worse. Andrew was something like a negative quantity in Algebra with him; --
'twas worse, he said, than nothing. -- William stood pretty high: -- Numps
again was low with him; -- and Nick, he said, was the DEVIL.

But, of all the names in the universe, he had the most unconquerable aversion
for TRISTRAM; -- he had the lowest and most contemptible opinion of it of any
thing in the world, -- thinking it could possibly produce nothing in rerum
natura, but what was extremely mean and pitiful: So that in the midst of a
dispute on the subject, in which, by the bye, he was frequently involved, -- he
would sometimes break off in a sudden and spirited EPIPHONEMA, or rather
EROTESIS, raised a third, and sometimes a full fifth, above the key of the
discourse, -- and demand it categorically of his antagonist, Whether he would
take upon him to say, he had ever remembered, -- whether he had ever read, --
or even whether he had ever heard tell of a man, called Tristram, performing
any thing great or worth recording? -- No --, he would say, -- TRISTRAM! -- The
thing is impossible.

What could be wanting in my father but to have wrote a book to publish this
notion of his to the world? Little boots it to the subtle speculatist to stand
single in his opinions, -- unless he gives them proper vent: -- It was the
identical thing which my father did; -- for in the year sixteen, which was two
years before I was born, he was at the pains of writing an express DISSERTATION
simply upon the word Tristram, -- showing the world, with great candor and
modesty, the grounds of his great abhorrence to the name.

When this story is compared with the title page, -- Will not the gentle reader
pity my father from his soul? -- to see an orderly and well-disposed gentleman,
who though singular, -- yet inoffensive in his notions, -- so played upon in them
by cross purposes; -- to look down upon the stage, and see him baffled and
overthrown in all his little systems and wishes; to behold a train of events
perpetually falling out against him, and in so critical and cruel a way, as if
they had purposedly been planned and pointed against him, merely to insult his
speculations. -- In a word, to behold such a one, in his old age, ill-fitted
for troubles, ten times in a day suffering sorrow; -- ten times in a day
calling the child of his prayers TRISTRAM! -- Melancholy dissyllable of sound!
which, to his ears, was unison to Nicompoop, and every name vituperative under
heaven. -- By his ashes! I swear it, -- if ever malignant spirit took pleasure,
or busied itself in traversing the purposes of mortal man, -- it must have been
here; -- and if it was not necessary I should be born before I was christened,
I would this moment give the reader an account of it.

CHAP. XX.
-- How could you, Madam, be so inattentive in reading the last chapter? I told
you in it, That my mother was not a papist. -- Papist! You told me no such
thing, Sir. Madam, I beg leave to repeat it over again, That I told you as
plain, at least, as words, by direct inference, could tell you such a thing. --
Then, Sir, I must have missed a page. -- No, Madam, -- you have not missed a
word. -- Then I was asleep, Sir. -- My pride, Madam, cannot allow you that
refuge. -- Then, I declare, I know nothing at all about the matter. -- That,
Madam, is the very fault I lay to your charge; and as a punishment for it, I do
insist upon it, that you immediately turn back, that is, as soon as you get to
the next full stop, and read the whole chapter over again.

I have imposed this penance upon the lady, neither out of wantonness or
cruelty, but from the best of motives; and therefore shall make her no apology
for it when she returns back: -- It Is to rebuke a vicious taste which has crept
into thousands besides herself, -- of reading straight forwards, more in quest
of the adventures, than of the deep erudition and knowledge which a book of
this cast, if read over as it should be, would infallibly impart with them. --
The mind should be accustomed to make wise reflections, and draw curious
conclusions as it goes along; the habitude of which made Pliny the younger
affirm, "That he never read a book so bad, but he drew some profit from it."
The stories of Greece and Rome, run over without this turn and application, --
do less service, I affirm it, than the history of Parismus and Parismenus, or
of the Seven Champions of England, read with it.

-- But here comes my fair Lady. Have you read over again the chapter, Madam,
as I desired you? -- You have: And did you not observe the passage, upon the
second reading, which admits the inference? -- Not a word like it! Then, Madam,
be pleased to ponder well the last line but one of the chapter, where I take
upon me to say, "It was necessary I should be born before I was christened."
Had my mother, Madam, been a Papist, that consequence did not follow The Romish
Rituals direct the baptizing of the child, in cases of danger, before it is
born; -- but upon this proviso, That some part or other of the child's body be
seen by the baptizer: -- But the Doctors of the Sorbonne, by a deliberation
held amongst them, April 10, 1733, -- have enlarged the powers of the midwives,
by determining, That though no part of the child's body should appear, -- that
baptism shall, nevertheless, be administered to it by injection, -- par le
moyen d' une petite Canulle. -- Anglice a squirt. -- It Is very strange that St.
Thomas Aquinas, who had so good a mechanical head, both for tying and untying
the knots of school divinity, -- should, after so much pains bestowed upon
this, -- give up the point at last, as a second La chose impossible, --
"Infantes in maternis uteris existentes (quoth St. Thomas) baptizari possunt
nullo modo." -- O Thomas! Thomas!

If the reader has the curiosity to see the question upon baptism, by
injection, as presented to the Doctors of the Sorbonne, -- with their
consultation thereupon, it is as follows.


.

It is a terrible misfortune for this same book of mine, but more so to the
Republic of Letters; -- so that my own is quite swallowed up in the
consideration of it, -- that this self-same vile pruriency for fresh adventures
in all things, has got so strongly into our habit and humors, -- and so wholly
intent are we upon satisfying the impatience of our concupiscence that way, --
that nothing but the gross and more carnal parts of a composition will go down:
-- The subtle hints and sly communications of science fly off, like spirits,
upwards; -- the heavy moral escapes downwards; and both the one and the other
are as much lost to the world, as if they were still left in the bottom of the
ink-horn.

I wish the male-reader has not passed by many a one, as quaint and curious as
this one, in which the female-reader has been detected. I wish it may have its
effects; -- and that all good people, both male and female, from her example,
may be taught to think as well as read.

MEMOIRE present a Messieurs les Docteurs de SORBONNE Vide Deventer. Paris
Edit. 4to, 1734. p. 366.
.
UN Chirurgien Accoucheur, represente a Messieurs les Docteurs de Sorbonne, qu'
il y a des cas, quoique tres rares, ou une mere ne scauroit accoucher, and meme
ou l'enfant est tellement renferme dans le sein de sa mere, qu' il ne fait
paroitre aucune party de son corpse, ce qui seroit un cas, suivant les Rituels,
de lui conferer, du moins sous condition, le bapteme. Le Chirurgien, qui
consulte, pretend, par le moyen d'une petite canulle, de pouvoir baptiser
immediatement l'enfant, sans fair aucun tort a la mere. -- Il demand si ce
moyen, qu' il vient de proposer, est permis and legitime, et s'il peut s'en
servir dans le cas qu' il vient d' exposer.

REPONSE.
LE Conseil estime, que la question proposee souffre de grandes difficultes.
Les Theologiens posent d'un cote pour principe, que le bapteme, qui est une
naissance spirituelle, suppose une premiere naissance; il faut etre ne dans le
monde, pour renaitre en Jesus Christ, comme ils l'enseignent. S. Thomas, 3
part. quaest. 88. artic. 11. suit cette doctrine comme une verite constante;
l'on ne peut, dit ce S. Docteur, baptiser les enfans qui sont renfermes dans le
sein de leurs Meres, et S. Thomas est fond sur ce, que les enfans ne sont
point nes, and ne peuvent etre comptes parmi les autres hommes; d'ou il
conclud, qu'ils ne peuvent etre l'object d'une action exterieure, pour recevoir
par leur ministere, les sacremens necessaires au salut: Pueri in maternis
uteris existentes nondum prodierant in lucem ut cum aliis hominibus vitam
ducant; unde non possunt subjici actioni humanae, ut per eorum ministerium
sacramenta recipiant ad salutem. Les rituels ordonnent dans la pratique ce que
les theologiens ont etabli sur les memes matieres, and ils deffendent tous
d'une maniere uniforme de baptiser les enfans qui sont renfermes dans le sein
de leurs meres, s'ils ne font paroitre quelque party de leurs corpse. Le
concours des theologiens, and des rituels, qui sont les regles des dioceses,
paroit former une autorite qui termine la question present; cependant le
conseil de conscience considerant d'un cote, que le raisonnement des
theologiens est uniquement fond sur une raison de convenance, and que la
deffense des rituels, suppose que l'on ne peut baptiser immediatement les
enfans ainsi renfermes dans le sein de leurs meres, ce qui est contre la
supposition present; and d'un autre cote, considerant que les memes
theologiens enseignent, que l'on peut risquer les sacremens qu' Jesus Christ a
etablis comme des moyens faciles, mais necessaires pour sanctifier les hommes;
and d'ailleurs estimant, que les enfans renfermes dans le sein de leurs meres,
pourroient etre capables de salut, parce qu'ils sont capables de damnation; --
pour ces considerations, and eu egard a l'expose, suivant lequel on assure
avoir trouve un moyen certain de baptiser ces enfans ainsi renfermes, sans
fair aucun tort a la mere, le Conseil estime que l'on pourroit se servir du
moyen propose, dans la confiance qu'il a, que Dieu n' a point laisse ces sorts
d'enfans sans aucuns secours, and supposant, comme il est expose, que le moyen
don't il s'agit est propre a leur procurer le bapteme; cependant comme il
s'agiroit, en autorisant la pratique proposee, de changer une regle
universellement etablie, le Conseil croit que celui qui consulte doit
s'addresser a son eveque, and a qui il appartient de juger de l'utilite, and du
danger du moyen propose, and comme, sous le bon plaisir de l'eveque, le conseil
estime qu'il faudroit recourir au Pape, qui a le droit d'expliquer les regles
de l'eglise, et d' y deroger dans le cas, ou la loi ne scauroit obliger,
quelque sage and quelque utile que paroisse la maniere de baptiser don't il
s'agit, le conseil ne pourroit l'approuver sans le concours de ces deux
autorites. On conseile au moins a celui qui consulte, de s'addresser a son
eveque, and de lui fair part de la present decision, afin que, si le prelat
enter dans les raisons sur lesquelles les docteurs soussignes s'appuyent, il
puisse etre autorise dans le cas de necessite, ou il risqueroit trop d'attendre
que la permission fut demandee and accordee d'employer le moyen qu' il propose
si avantageux au salut de l'enfant. Au rest le conseil, en estimant que l'on
pourroit s'en servir croit cependant, que si les enfans don't il s'agit,
venoient au monde, contre l'esperance de ceux qui se seroient servis du meme
moyen, il seroit necessaire de les baptiser sous condition, and en cela le
conseil se conform a tous les rituels, qui en autorisant le bapteme d'un
enfant qui fait paroitre quelque party de son corpse, enjoignent neantmoins,
and ordonnent de le baptiser sous condition, s'il vient heureusement au monde.

Delibere en Sorbonne, le 10 Avril, 1733. A. LE MOYNE, L. DE ROMIGNY, DE
MARCILLY.


Mr. Tristram Shandy's compliments to Messrs. Le Moyne, De Romigny, and De
Marcilly, hopes they all rested well the night after so tiresome a
consultation. -- He begs to know, whether, after the ceremony of marriage, and
before that of consummation, the baptizing all the HOMUNCULI at once,
slap-dash, by injection, would not be a shorter and safer cut still; on
condition, as above, That if the HOMUNCULI do well and come safe into the world
after this, That each and every of them shall be baptized again ( sous
condition.) -- And provided, in the second place, That the thing can be done,
which Mr. Shandy apprehends it may, par le moyen d'une petite canulle, and sans
fair aucun tort au pere.

CHAP. XXI.
-- I wonder what is all that noise, and running backwards and forwards for,
above stairs, quoth my father, addressing himself, after an hour and a half's
silence, to my uncle Toby, -- who you must know, was sitting on the opposite
side of the fire, smoking his social pipe all the time, in mute contemplation
of a new pair of black-plush-breeches which he had got on; -- What can they be
doing brother? quoth my father, -- we can scarce hear ourselves talk.

I think, replied my uncle Toby, taking his pipe from his mouth, and striking
the head of it two or three times upon the nail of his left thumb, as he began
his sentence, -- I think, says he: -- But to enter rightly into my uncle Toby's
sentiments upon this matter, you must be made to enter first a little into his
character, the out-lines of which I shall just give you, and then the dialogue
between him and my father will go on as well again.

-- Pray what was that man's name, -- for I write in such a hurry, I have no
time to recollect or look for it, -- who first made the observation, "That
there was great inconstancy in our air and climate?" Whoever he was, 'twas a
just and good observation in him. -- But the corollary drawn from it, namely,
"That it is this which has furnished us with such a variety of odd and
whimsical characters;" -- that was not his; -- it was found out by another man,
at least a century and a half after him: -- Then again, -- that this copious
storehouse of original materials, is the true and natural cause that our
Comedies are so much better than those of France, or any others that either
have, or can be wrote upon the Continent; -- that discovery was not fully made
till about the middle of king William's reign, -- when the great Dryden, in
writing one of his long prefaces, (if I mistake not) most fortunately hit upon
it. Indeed toward the latter end of queen Anne, the great Addison began to
patronize the notion, and more fully explained it to the world in one or two of
his Spectators; -- but the discovery was not his. -- Then, fourthly and lastly,
that this strange irregularity in our climate, producing so strange an
irregularity in our characters, -- does thereby, in some sort, make us amends,
by giving us somewhat to make us merry with when the weather will not suffer us
to go out of doors, -- that observation is my own; -- and was struck out by me
this very rainy day, March 26, 1759, and betwixt the hours of nine and ten in
the morning.

Thus, -- thus my fellow laborers and associates in this great harvest of our
learning, now ripening before our eyes; thus it is, by slow steps of casual
increase, that our knowledge physical, metaphysical, physiological, polemical,
nautical, mathematical, aenigmatical, technical, biographical, romantical,
chemical, and obstetrical, with fifty other branches of it, (most of 'em
ending, as these do, in ical) have, for these two last centuries and more,
gradually been creeping upwards toward that (...) of their perfections, from
which, if we may form a conjecture from the advances of these last seven years,
we cannot possibly be far off.

When that happens, it is to be hoped, it will put an end to all kind of
writings whatsoever; -- the want of all kind of writing will put an end to all
kind of reading; -- and that in time, As war begets poverty, poverty peace, --
must, in course, put an end to all kind of knowledge, -- and then -- we shall
have all to begin over again; or, in other words, be exactly where we started.

-- Happy! thrice happy Times! I only wish that the era of my begetting, as
well as the mode and manner of it, had been a little altered, -- or that it
could have been put off with any convenience to my father or mother, for some
twenty or five-and-twenty years longer, when a man in the literary world might
have stood some chance. --

But I forget my uncle Toby, whom all this while we have left knocking the
ashes out of his tobacco pipe.

His humor was of that particular species, which does honor to our
atmosphere; and I should have made no scruple of ranking him amongst one of the
first-rate productions of it, had not there appeared too many strong lines in
it of a family-likeness, which showed that he derived the singularity of his
temper more from blood, than either wind or water, or any modifications or
combinations of them whatever: And I have, therefore, often times wondered, that
my father, though I believe he had his reasons for it, upon his observing some
tokens of excentricity in my course when I was a boy, -- should never once
endeavor to account for them in this way; for all the SHANDY FAMILY were of an
original character throughout; -- I mean the males, -- the females had no
character at all, -- except, indeed, my great aunt DINAH, who, about sixty
years ago, was married and got with child by the coachman, for which my father,
according to his hypothesis of Christian names, would often say, She might
thank her godfathers and godmothers.

It will seem very strange, -- and I would as soon think of dropping a riddle
in the reader's way, which is not my interest to do, as set him upon guessing
how it could come to pass, that an event of this kind, so many years after it
had happened, should be reserved for the interruption of the peace and unity,
which otherwise so cordially subsisted, between my father and my uncle Toby.
One would have thought, that the whole force of the misfortune should have
spent and wasted itself in the family at first, -- as is generally the case: --
But nothing ever wrought with our family after the ordinary way. Possibly at
the very time this happened, it might have something else to afflict it; and as
afflictions are sent down for our good, and that as this had never done the
SHANDY FAMILY any good at all, it might lie waiting till apt times and
circumstances should give it an opportunity to discharge its office. --
Observe, I determine nothing upon this. -- My way is ever to point out to the
curious, different tracts of investigation, to come at the first springs of the
events I tell; -- not with a pedantic Fescue, -- or in the decisive Manner of
Tacitus, who outwits himself and his reader; -- but with the officious humility
of a heart devoted to the assistance merely of the inquisitive; -- to them I
write, -- and by them I shall be read, -- if any such reading as this could be
supposed to hold out so long, to the very end of the world.

Why this cause of sorrow, therefore, was thus reserved for my father and
uncle, is undetermined by me. But how and in what direction it exerted itself,
so as to become the cause of dissatisfaction between them, after it began to
operate, is what I am able to explain with great exactness, and is as follows:

My uncle TOBY SHANDY, Madam, was a gentleman, who, with the virtues which
usually constitute the character of a man of honor and rectitude, -- possessed
one in a very eminent degree, which is seldom or never put into the catalogue;
and that was a most extreme and unparalled modesty of nature; -- though I
correct the word nature, for this reason, that I may not prejudge a point which
must shortly come to a hearing; and that is, Whether this modesty of his was
natural or acquired. -- Which ever way my uncle Toby came by it, 'twas
nevertheless modesty in the truest sense of it; and that is, Madam, not in
regard to words, for he was so unhappy as to have very little choice in them,
-- but to things; -- and this kind of modesty so possessed him, and it arose to
such a height in him, as almost to equal, if such a thing could be, even the
modesty of a woman: That female nicety, Madam, and inward cleanliness of mind
and fancy, in your sex, which makes you so much the awe of ours.

You will imagine, Madam, that my uncle Toby had contracted all this from this
very source; -- that he had spent a great part of his time in converse with
your sex; and that, from a thorough knowledge of you, and the force of
imitation which such fair examples render irresistible, -- he had acquired this
amiable turn of mind.

I wish I could say so, -- for unless it was with his sister-in-law, my
father's wife and my mother, -- my uncle Toby scarce exchanged three words with
the sex in as many years; -- no, he got it, Madam, by a blow. -- A blow! --
Yes, Madam, it was owing to a blow from a stone, broke off by a ball from the
parapet of a horn-work at the siege of Namur, which struck full upon my uncle
Toby's groin. -- Which way could that effect it? The story of that, Madam, is
long and interesting; -- but it would be running my history all upon heaps to
give it you here. -- It Is for an episode hereafter; and every circumstance
relating to it in its proper place, shall be faithfully laid before you: --
'Till then, it is not in my power to give further light into this matter, or
say more than what I have said already, -- That my uncle Toby was a gentleman
of unparalled modesty, which happening to be somewhat subtilized and rarefied
by the constant heat of a little family-pride, -- they both so wrought together
within him, that he could never bear to hear the affair of my aunt DINAH
touched upon, but with the greatest emotion. -- The least hint of it was enough
to make the blood fly into his face; -- but when my father enlarged upon the
story in mixed companies, which the illustration of his hypothesis frequently
obliged him to do, -- the unfortunate blight of one of the fairest branches of
the family, would set my uncle Toby's honor and modesty o'bleeding; and he
would often take my father aside, in the greatest concern imaginable, to
expostulate and tell him, he would give him any thing in the world, only to let
the story rest.

My father, I believe, had the truest love and tenderness for my uncle Toby,
that ever one brother bore toward another, and would have done any thing in
nature, which one brother in reason could have desired of another, to have made
my uncle Toby's heart easy in this, or any other point. But this lay out of his
power.

-- My father, as I told you, was a philosopher in grain, -- speculative, --
systematical; -- and my aunt Dinah's affair was a matter of as much consequence
to him, as the retrogradation of the planets to Copernicus: -- The backslidings
of Venus in her orbit fortified the Copernican system, called so after his
name; and the backslidings of my aunt Dinah in her orbit, did the same service
in establishing my father's system, which, I trust, will for ever hereafter be
called the Shandean System, after his.

In any other family dishonor, my father, I believe, had as nice a sense of
shame as any man whatever; -- and neither he, nor, I dare say, Copernicus,
would have divulged the affair in either case, or have taken the least notice
of it to the world, but for the obligations they owed, as they thought, to
truth. -- Amicus Plato, my father would say, construing the words to my uncle
Toby, as he went along, Amicus Plato; that is, DINAH was my aunt; -- sed magis
amica veritas -- but TRUTH is my sister.

This contrariety of humors betwixt my father and my uncle, was the source of
many a fraternal squabble. The one could not bear to hear the tale of family
disgrace recorded, -- and the other would scarce ever let a day pass to an end
without some hint at it.

For God's sake, my uncle Toby would cry, -- and for my sake, and for all our
sakes, my dear brother Shandy, -- do let this story of our aunt's and her ashes
sleep in peace; -- how can you, -- how can you have so little feeling and
compassion for the character of our family: -- What is the character of a
family to an hypothesis? my father would reply. -- Nay, if you come to that --
what is the life of a family: -- The life of a family! -- my uncle Toby would
say, throwing himself back in his arm-chair, and lifting up his hands, his
eyes, and one leg. -- Yes the life, -- my father would say, maintaining his
point. How many thousands of 'em are there every year that comes cast away, (in
all civilized countries at least) -- and considered as nothing but common air,
in competition of an hypothesis. In my plain sense of things, my uncle Toby,
would answer, -- every such instance is downright MURDER, let who will commit
it. -- There lies your mistake, my father would reply; -- for, in Foro
Scientiae there is no such thing as MURDER, -- it is only DEATH, brother.

My uncle Toby would never offer to answer this by any other kind of argument,
than that of whistling half a dozen bars of Lillabullero. -- You must know it
was the usual channel through which his passions got vent, when any thing shocked
or surprised him; -- but especially when any thing, which he deemed very
absurd, was offered.

AS not one of our logical writers, nor any of the commentators upon them, that
I remember, have thought proper to give a name to this particular species of
argument, -- I here take the liberty to do it myself, for two reasons. First,
That, in order to prevent all confusion in disputes, it may stand as much
distinguished for ever, from every other species of argument, -- as the
Argumentum ad Verecundiam, ex Absurdo, ex Fortiori, or any other argument
whatsoever: -- And, secondly, That it may be said by my children's children,
when my head is laid to rest, -- that their learned grand-father's head had
been busied to as much purpose once, as other people's: -- That he had invented
a name, -- and generously thrown it into the TREASURY of the Ars Logica, for
one of the most unanswerable arguments in the whole science. And if the end of
disputation is more to silence than convince, -- they may add, if they please,
to one of the best arguments too.

I do therefore, by these presents, strictly order and command, That it be
known and distinguished by the name and title of the Argumentum Fistulatorium,
and no other; -- and that it rank hereafter with the Argumentum Baculinum, and
the Argumentum ad Crumenam, and for ever hereafter be treated of in the same
chapter.

As for the Argumentum Tripodium, which is never used but by the woman against
the man; -- and the Argumentum ad Rem, which, contrariwise, is made use of by
the man only against the woman: -- As these two are enough in conscience for
one lecture; -- and, moreover, as the one is the best answer to the other, --
let them likewise be kept apart, and be treated of in a place by themselves.

CHAP. XXII.
THE learned Bishop Hall, I mean the famous Dr. Joseph Hall, who was Bishop of
Exeter in King James the First's reign, tells us in one of his Decads, at the
end of his divine art of meditation, imprinted at London, in the year 1610, by
John Beal, dwelling in Aldersgate Street, "That it is an abominable thing for a
man to commend himself;" -- and I really think it is so.

And yet, on the other hand, when a thing is executed in a masterly kind of a
fashion, which thing is not likely to be found out; -- I think it is full as
abominable, that a man should lose the honor of it, and go out of the world
with the conceit of it rotting in his head.

This is precisely my situation.

For in this long digression which I was accidentally led into, as in all my
digressions (one only excepted) there is a master-stroke of digressive skill,
the merit of which has all along, I fear, been overlooked by my reader, -- not
for want of penetration in him, -- but because it is an excellence seldom looked
for, or expected indeed, in a digression; -- and it is this: That though my
digressions are all fair, as you observe, -- and that I fly off from what I am
about, as far and as often too as any writer in Great Britain; yet I constantly
take care to order affairs so, that my main business does not stand still in my
absence.

I was just going, for example, to have given you the great out-lines of my
uncle Toby's most whimsical character; -- when my aunt Dinah and the coachman
came across us, and led us a vagary some millions of miles into the very heart
of the planetary system: Notwithstanding all this you perceive that the drawing
of my uncle Toby's character went on gently all the time; -- not the great
contours of it, -- that was impossible, -- but some familiar strokes and faint
designations of it, were here and there touched in, as we went along, so that
you are much better acquainted with my uncle Toby now than you was before.

By this contrivance the machinery of my work is of a species by itself; two
contrary motions are introduced into it, and reconciled, which were thought to
be at variance with each other. In a word, my work is digressive, and it is
progressive too, -- and at the same time.

This, Sir, is a very different story from that of the earth's moving round her
axis, in her diurnal rotation, with her progress in her elliptick orbit which
brings about the year, and constitutes that variety and vicissitude of seasons
we enjoy; -- though I own it suggested the thought, -- as I believe the
greatest of our boasted improvements and discoveries have come from some such
trifling hints.

Digressions, incontestably, are the sunshine; -- they are the life, the soul
of reading; -- take them out of this book for instance, -- you might as well
take the book along with them; -- one cold eternal winter would reign in every
page of it; restore them to the writer; -- he steps forth like a bridegroom, --
bids All hail; brings in variety, and forbids the appetite to fail.

All the dexterity is in the good cookery and management of them, so as to be
not only for the advantage of the reader, but also of the author, whose
distress, in this matter, is truly pitiable: For, if he begins a digression,
-- from that moment, I observe, his whole work stands stock-still; -- and if he
goes on with his main work, -- then there is an end of his digression.

-- This is vile work. -- For which reason, from the beginning of this, you
see, I have constructed the main work and the adventitious parts of it with
such intersections, and have so complicated and involved the digressive and
progessive movements, one wheel within another, that the whole machine, in
general, has been kept a-going; -- and, what is more, it shall be kept a-going
these forty years, if it pleases the fountain of health to bless me so long
with life and good spirits.

CHAP. XXIII.
I Have a strong propensity in me to begin this chapter very nonsensically, and
I will not balk my fancy. -- Accordingly I set off thus.

If the fixure of Momus's glass, in the human breast, according to the proposed
emendation of that arch-critick, had taken place, -- first, This foolish
consequence would certainly have followed, -- That the very wisest and the very
gravest of us all, in one coin or other, must have paid window-money every day
of our lives.

And, secondly, That had the said glass been there set up, nothing more would
have been wanting, in order to have taken a man's character, but to have taken
a chair and gone softly, as you would to a dioptrical bee-hive, and looked in,
-- viewed the soul stark naked; -- observed all her motions, -- her
machinations; -- traced all her maggots from their first engendering to their
crawling forth; -- watched her loose in her frisks, her gambols, her capricios;
and ofter some notice of her more solemn deportment, consequent upon such
frisks, etc. -- then taken your pen and ink and set down nothing but what you
had seen, and could have sworn to: -- But this is an advantage not to be had by
the biographer in this planet, -- in the planet Mercury (belike) it may be so,
if not better, still for him; -- for there the intense heat of the country,
which is proved by computators, from its vicinity to the sun, to be more than
equal to that of red hot iron, -- must, I think, long ago have vitrified the
bodies of the inhabitants, (as the efficient cause) to suit them for the
climate (which is the final cause); so that, betwixt them both, all the
tenements of their souls, from top to bottom, may be nothing else, for aught
the soundest philosophy can show to the contrary, but one fine transparent body
of clear glass (bating the umbilical knot); -- so, that till the inhabitants
grow old and tolerably wrinkled, whereby the rays of light, in passing through
them, become so monstrously refracted, -- or return reflected from their
surfaces in such transverse lines to the eye, that a man cannot be seen through;
-- his soul might as well, unless, for more ceremony, -- or the trifling
advantage which the umbilical point gave her, -- might, upon all other
accounts, I say, as well play the fool out o'doors as in her own house.

But this, as I said above, is not the case of the inhabitants of this earth;
-- our minds shine not through the body, but are wrapped up here in a dark
covering of uncrystalized flesh and blood; so that if we would come to the
specific characters of them, we must go some other way to work.

Many, in good truth, are the ways which human wit has been forced to take to
do this thing with exactness.

Some, for instance, draw all their characters with wind instruments. -- Virgil
takes notice of that way in the affair of Dido and Aeneas; -- but it is as
fallacious as the breath of fame; -- and, moreover, bespeaks a narrow genius. I
am not ignorant that the Italians pretend to a mathematical exactness in their
designations of one particular sort of character among them, from the forte or
piano of a certain wind instrument they use, -- which they say is infallible.
-- I dare not mention the name of the instrument in this place; -- it is
sufficient we have it amongst us, -- but never think of making a drawing by it;
-- this is aenigmatical, and intended to be so, at least, ad populum: -- And
therefore I beg, Madam, when you come here, that you read on as fast as you
can, and never stop to make any inquiry about it.

There are others again, who will draw a man's character from no other helps in
the world, but merely from his evacuations; -- but this often gives a very
incorrect out-line, -- unless, indeed, you take a sketch of his repletions too;
and by correcting one drawing from the other, compound one good figure out of
them both.

I should have no objection to this method, but that I think it must smell too
strong of the lamp, -- and be rendered still more operose, by forcing you to
have an eye to the rest of his Non-Naturals. -- Why the most natural actions of
a man's life should be called his Non-Naturals, -- is another question.

There are others, fourthly, who disdain every one of these expedients; -- not
from any fertility of his own, but from the various ways of doing it, which
they have borrowed from the honorable devices which the Pentagraphic Brethren
Pentagraph, an instrument to copy prints and pictures mechanichally, and in any
proportion.
of the brush have shown in taking copies. -- These, you must know, are your
great historians.

One of these you will see drawing a full-length character against the light;
-- that is illiberal, -- dishonest, -- and hard upon the character of the man
who sits.

Others, to mend the matter, will make a drawing of you in the Camera; -- that
is most unfair of all, -- because, there you are sure to be represented in some
of your most ridiculous attitudes.

To avoid all and every one of these errors, in giving you my uncle Toby's
character, I am determined to draw it by no mechanical help whatever; -- nor
shall my pencil be guided by any one wind instrument which ever was blown upon,
either on this, or on the other side of the Alps; -- nor will I consider either
his repletions or his discharges, -- or touch upon his Non-Naturals; -- but, in
a word, I will draw my uncle Toby's character from his HOBBYHORSE.

CHAP. XXIV.
IF I was not morally sure that the reader must be out of all patience for my
uncle Toby's character, -- I would here previously have convinced him, that
there is no instrument so fit to draw such a thing with, as that which I have
pitched upon.

A man and his HOBBYHORSE, though I cannot say that they act and re-act exactly
after the same manner in which the soul and body do upon each other: Yet
doubtless there is a communication between them of some kind, and my opinion
rather is, that there is something in it more of the manner of electrified
bodies, -- and that by means of the heated parts of the rider, which come
immediately into contact with the back of the HOBBYHORSE. -- By long journies
and much friction, it so happens that the body of the rider is at length filled
as full of HOBBY-HORSICAL matter as it can hold; -- so that if you are able to
give but a clear description of the nature of the one, you may form a pretty
exact notion of the genius and character of the other.

NOW the HOBBYHORSE which my uncle Toby always rode upon, was, in my opinion,
an HOBBYHORSE well worth giving a description of, if it was only upon the
score of his great singularity; for you might have traveled from York to
Dover, -- from Dover to Penzance in Cornwall, and from Penzance to York back
again, and not have seen such another upon the road; or if you had seen such a
one, whatever haste you had been in, you must infallibly have stopped to have
taken a view of him. Indeed, the gait and figure of him was so strange, and so
utterly unlike was he, from his head to his tail, to any one of the whole
species, that it was now and then made a matter of dispute, -- whether he was
really a HOBBYHORSE or no: But as the Philosopher would use no other argument
to the skeptic, who disputed with him against the reality of motion, save that
of rising up upon his legs, and walking a cross the room; -- so would my uncle
Toby use no other argument to prove his HOBBYHORSE was a HOBBYHORSE indeed,
but by getting upon his back and riding him about; -- leaving the world after
that to determine the point as it thought fit.

In good truth, my uncle Toby mounted him with so much pleasure, and he carried
my uncle Toby so well, -- that he troubled his head very little with what the
world either said or thought about it.

It is now high time, however, that I give you a description of him: -- But to
go on regularly, I only beg you will give me leave to acquaint you first, how
my uncle Toby came by him.

CHAP. XXV.
THE wound in my uncle Toby's groin, which he received at the siege of Namur,
rendering him unfit for the service, it was thought expedient he should return
to England, in order, if possible, to be set to rights.

He was four years totally confined, -- part of it to his bed, and all of it to
his room; and in the course of his cure, which was all that time in hand,
suffered unspeakable miseries, -- owing to a succession of exfoliations from
the oss pubis, and the outward edge of that part of the coxendix called the oss
illeum, -- both which bones were dismally crushed, as much by the irregularity
of the stone, which I told you was broke off the parapet, -- as by its size, --
(though it was pretty large) which inclined the surgeon all along to think,
that the great injury which it had done my uncle Toby's groin, was more owing
to the gravity of the stone itself, than to the projectile force of it, --
which he would often tell him was a great happiness.

My father at that time was just beginning business in London, and had taken a
house; -- and as the truest friendship and cordiality subsisted between the two
brothers, -- and that my father thought my uncle Toby could no where be so well
nursed and taken care of as in his own house, -- he assigned him the very best
apartment in it. -- And what was a much more sincere mark of his affection
still, he would never suffer a friend or an acquaintance to step into the house
on any occasion, but he would take him by the hand, and lead him up stairs to
see his brother Toby, and chat an hour by his bed side.

The history of a soldier's wound beguiles the pain of it; -- my uncle's
visiters at least thought so, and in their daily calls upon him, from the
courtesy arising out of that belief, they would frequently turn the discourse
to that subject, -- and from that subject the discourse would generally roll on
to the siege itself.

These conversations were infinitely kind; and my uncle Toby received great
relief from them, and would have received much more, but that they brought him
into some unforeseen perplexities, which, for three months together, retarded
his cure greatly; and if he had not hit upon an expedient to extricate himself
out of them, I verily believe they would have laid him in his grave.

What these perplexities of my uncle Toby were, -- it is impossible for you to
guess; -- if you could, -- I should blush; not as a relation, -- not as a man,
-- nor even as a woman, -- but I should blush as an author; inasmuch as I set
no small store by myself upon this very account, that my reader has never yet
been able to guess at any thing. And in this, Sir, I am of so nice and singular
a humor, that if I thought you was able to form the least judgment or probable
conjecture to yourself, of what was to come in the next page, -- I would tear
it out of my book.

END of the FIRST VOLUME.

