ORIGINAL LETTERS OF THE LATE REVEREND Mr. LAURENCE STERN.

ORIGINAL LETTERS OF THE LATE REVEREND MR. LAURENCE STERN; NEVER BEFORE
PUBLISHED.

LONDON: Printed at the Logographic Press, AND SOLD BY T. LONGMAN,
PATERNOSTER ROW; J. ROBSON, AND W. CLARKE, NEW BOND STREET; AND W. RICHARDSON,
UNDER THE ROYAL EXCHANGE. 1788.

LETTERS OF THE LATE Mr. LAURENCE STERN.
To W. C. Esquire.
Coxwould, July 1, 1764.
I Am safe arrived at my bower -- and I trust that you have no longer any doubt
about coming to embower it with me. Having, for six months together, been
running at the ring of pleasure, you will find that repose here which, all
young as you are, you ought to want. We will be witty, or classical, or
sentimental, as it shall please you best. My milk-maids shall weave you
garlands; and every day after coffee I will take you to pay a visit to my nuns.
Do not, however, indulge your fancy beyond measure, but rather let me indulge
mine, or, at least, let me give you the history of it, and the fair sisterhood
who dwell in one of it is visionary corners. Now, what is all this about? you will
say -- have a few moments patience, and I will tell you.

You must know then, that, on passing out of my back door, I very soon gain a
path, which, after conducting me through several verdant meadows and shady
thickets, brings me, in about twenty minutes, to the ruins of a monastery,
where, in times long past, a certain number of cloistered females had devoted
their -- lives -- I scarce know what I was going to write -- to religious
solitude. -- This saunter of mine, when I take it, I call paying a visit to my
nuns.

It is an awful spot -- a rivulet flows by it, and a lofty bank, covered with
wood, that rises abruptly on the opposite side, gives a gloom to the whole, and
forbids the thoughts, if they were ever so disposed, from wandering away from
the place. Solitary sanctity never found a nook more appropriated to her
nature! -- It is a place for an antiquary to sojourn in for a month -- and
examine with all the spirit of rusty research. But I am no antiquary, as you
well know -- and, therefore, I come here upon a different and a better errand
-- that is -- to examine myself.

So I lean, lackadaysically, over a gate, and look at the passing stream -- and
forgive the spleen, the gout, and the envy of a malicious world. And, after
having taken a stroll beneath mouldering arches, I summon the sisterhood
together, and take the fairest among them, and sit down with her on a stone
beneath a bunch of alders -- and do -- what? you will say -- why I examine her
gentle heart, and see how it is attuned; I then guess at her wishes, and play
with the cross that hangs at her bosom -- in short -- I make love to her.

Fie, for shame! Tristram -- that is not as it ought to be: -- Now I declare,
on the contrary, that it is exactly what it ought to be; for, though
philosophers may say, among the many other foolish things philosophers have
said, that a man who is in love is not in his right senses -- I do assert, in
opposition to all their saws and see-saws, that he is never in his right
senses, or I would rather say his right sentiments, but when he is pursuing
some Dulcinea or other. If that should be the case with you at this moment, I
will forgive your staying from me; but if this letter should find you at the
instant when your last flame is blown out, and before a new one is lighted up,
and you should not take post and come to me and my nuns, I will abuse you in
their name and my own, to the end of the chapter -- though I believe, after
all, at the end of the chapter, I should feel myself

affectionately yours, L. STERN.

LETTER II.
Coxwould, July 17, 1764.
AND so you have been at the seats of the learned. -- If I could have guessed
at such an intention, I would have contrived that something in an epistolary
shape should have met you there, with half a dozen lines recommending you to
the care of the Master of Jesus. -- He was my tutor when I was at College, and
a very good kind of man. He used to let me have my way, when I was under his
direction, and that showed his sense, for I was born to travel out of the
common road, and to get aside from the highway path, and he had sense enough to
see it, and not to trouble me with trammels. I was neither made to be a
thill-horse, nor a fore-horse; in short I was not made to go in a team, but to
amble along as I liked; and so that I do not kick, or splash, or run over any
one, who in the name of common sense has a right to interrupt me? -- Let the
good folks laugh if they will, and much good may it do them. Indeed, I am
persuaded, and I think I could prove, nay, and I would do it, if I were writing
a book instead of a letter, the truth of what I once told a very great
statesman, orator, politician, and as much more as you please -- that every
time a man smiles -- much more so -- when he laughs -- it adds something to the
fragment of life.

But the staying five days at Cambridge does not come within the immediate
reach of my crazy comprehension, and you might have employed your time much,
much better, in urging your mettlesome tits to wards Coxwould.

I may suppose that you have been picking a hole in the skirts of Gibb's
cumbrous architecture, or measuring the facade of Trinity College Library, or
peering about the gothic perfections of King's College Chapel, or, which was
doing a better thing, sipping tea and talking sentimentally with the Miss
Cooks, or disturbing Mr. Gray with one of your enthusiastic visits -- I say
disturbing him, for with all your own agreeableness, and all your admiration of
him, he would rather have your room than your company. But mark me, I do not
say this to his glory, but to his shame. For I would be content with any room,
so I had your company.

But tell me, I beseech you, what you did with S -- all this time. The looking
at the heavy walls of muzzing Colleges, and gazing at the moldy pictures of
their founders, is not altogether in his way; nor did he wander where I have
whilom wandered, on Cam's all verdant banks with willows crowned, and call the
muse: Alas, he would rather call a waiter -- and how such a milksop as you could
travel -- I mean be suffered to travel, two leagues in the same chaise with
him, I know not -- but from that admirable and kind pliability of spirit which
you possess whenever you please, but which you do not always please to possess.
I do not mean that a man should wear a court dress when he is going to a
puppet-show; but, on the other hand, to keep the best suit of embroidery for
those only whom he loves, though there is something noble in it, will never do.
The world, my dear friend, will not let it do. For while there are such
qualities in the human mind as ingratitude and duplicity, unlimited confidence
and this patriotism of friendship, which I have heard you rave and rant about,
is a very dangerous business.

I could preach a sermon on the subject -- to say the truth, I am got as grave
as if I were in my pulpit. Thus are the projects of this life destroyed. When I
took up my pen, my humor was gay, frisky, and fanciful -- and now I am sliding
into all the see-saw gravity of solemn councils. I want nothing but an ass to
look over my pales and set up a braying to keep me in countenance.

Leave, leave your Lincolnshire seats, and come to my dale; S --, I know, is
heartily tired of you. Besides I want a nurse, for I am not quite well, and
have taken to milk-coffee. Remember me, however, to him kindly, and to yourself
cordially, for

I am yours, most truly, L. STERN.

LETTER III. To W. C. Esquire.
Coxwould, Aug. 5, 1764.
AND so you sit in S -- 's temple and drink tea, and converse classically: --
now I should like to know what is the nature of this disorder which you call
classicality; -- if it consists in a rage to converse on ancient subjects in a
modern manner; or on modern subjects in an ancient one; -- or are you both out
of your senses, and do you fancy yourselves with Virgil and Horace at Sinuessa,
or with Tully and Atticus at Tusculum? Oh how it would delight me to peep at
you from behind a laurel bush, and see you surrounded with columns and covered
by a dome, quaffing the extract of a Chinese weed, and talking of men who
boasted the inspiration of the Falernian grape!

What a couple of vapid, inert beings you must be! -- I should really give you
up for lost, if it were not for the confidence I have in the reinvigorating
powers of my society, to which you must now have immediate recourse, if you
wish for a restoration. Make haste then, my good friend, and seek the aid of
your physician ere it be too late.

You know not the interest I take in your welfare. Have I not ordered all the
linen to be taken out of the press, and rewashed before it was dirty, that you
may have a clean table cloth every day, with a napkin into the bargain? And
have I not ordered a kind of windmill, that makes my head ach again with its
clatter, to be placed in my fine cherry-tree, that the fruit may be preserved
from the birds, to furnish you a desert? And do you not know that you will have
curds and cream for your supper? Think on these things, and let S -- go to
Lincoln sessions by himself, and talk classically with country justices. In the
mean time we will philosophize and sentimentalize; -- the last word is a bright
invention of the moment in which it was written, for yours or Dr. Johnson's
service, -- and you shall sit in my study and take a peep into the world as
into a show-box, and amuse yourself as I present the pictures of it to your
imagination. Thus will I teach you to laugh at its follies, to pity its errors,
and despise its injustice; -- and I will introduce you, among the rest, to some
tenderhearted damsel, on whose cheeks some bitter affliction has placed a
tear; -- and having heard her story, you shall take a white handkerchief from
your pocket to wipe the moisture from her eyes, and from your own: -- and then
you shall go to bed, not to the damsel, but with an heart conscious of those
sentiments, and possessed of those feelings, which will give softness to your
pillow, sweetness to your slumbers, and gladness to your waking moments.

You shall sit in my porch, and laugh at attic vestibules. I love the classics
as well as any man ought to love them, -- but among all their fine sayings,
their fine writings, and their fine verses, their most enthusiastic admirer
would not be able to find me half a dozen stories that have any sentiment in
them, -- and so much for that.

If you don't come soon, I shall set about another volume of Tristram without
you. So God bless you, for

I am yours most truly, L. STERN.

LETTER IV. To -- --.
Coxwould, near Easingwould, August 8, 1764.
I AM grieved for your downfall, though it was only out of a park-chair -- May
it be the last you will receive in this world; though, while I write this wish,
my heart heaves a deep sigh, and I believe it will not be read by you, my
friend, without a similar accompaniment.

Alas! alas! my dear boy, you are born with talents to soar aloft with; but you
have an heart, which, my apprehensions tell me, will keep you low. -- I do not
mean, you know I do not, any thing base or grovelling; -- but, instead of
winging your way above the storm, I am afraid that you will calmly submit to
its rigours, and house yourself afterward in some humble shed, and there live
contented, and chaunt away the time, and be lost to the world.

How the wind blows I know not; and I have not an inclination to walk to my
window, where, perhaps, I might catch the course of a cloud and be satisfied,
-- but here I am up to my knees -- I should rather say up to my heart, in a
subject, which is ever accompanied with some afflicting vaticination or other.
I am not afraid of your doing any wrong but to yourself. A secret knowledge of
some circumstances which you have never communicated to me, have alarmed my
affection for you -- not from any immediate harm they can produce, but from the
conviction they have forced upon me, concerning your disposition, and the nicer
parts of your character. If you do not come soon to me, I shall take the wings
of some fine morning and fly to you; but I should rather have you here; for I
wish to have you alone; and if you will let me be a Mentor to you for one
little month, I will be content -- and you shall be a Mentor to me the rest of
the year; or, if you will, the rest of my days.

I long, most anxiously, my dear friend, to teach you -- not to give an opiate
to those sensibilities of your nature, which make me love you as I do; nor to
check your glowing fancy, that gives such grace to polished youth; nor to yield
the beverage of the fountain for the nectar of the cask; but to use the world
no better, or to please you a very little better, than it deserves. -- But
think not, I beseech you, that I would introduce my young Telemachus to such a
foul and squint-eyed piece of pollution as Suspicion. Avaunt to such a base
ungenerous passion! I would sooner carry you to Calypso at once, and give you
at least a little pleasure for your pains. But there is a certain little spot
to be found somewhere in the midway between trusting every body and trusting
nobody; and so well am I acquainted with the longitudes, latitudes, and
bearings of this world of ours, that I could put my finger upon it, and direct
you at once to it; and I think I could give you so many good reasons why you
should go there, that you would not hesitate to set off immediately, and I
would accompany you thither, and serve as a Cicerone to you. I wish therefore
much, very much, to talk with you about that and other serious matters.

As for your bodily infirmity, never mind it; you may come here by gentle
stages, and without inconvenience; and I will be your surgeon, or your nurse;
and warm your verjuice every evening, and bathe your sprain with it, and talk
of these things. So tell me, I pray you, the day that I am to meet you at York.
In the mean time, and always may a good Providence protect you -- It is the
sincere wish of

Your affectionate, L. STERN:

LETTER V. To W. C --. Esquire.
Wednesday Morning:
THIS letter will meet you at Hewit's, instead of myself; for I have taken some
how or other, and I know not how, a very violent cold, and cannot come; and as
I would receive you with my best looks, if possible, as well as my best
welcome, I am nursing myself into some sort of restoration against your
arrival; though my cough torments me without mercy, and I am so hoarse at this
moment, that I can scarce make myself heard across my table.

This phthisic of mine will sooner or later, and, perhaps, sooner than either I
or you, my friend, may think, bear me to my last asylum from a splenetic world.
You will say, perhaps, that I am splenetic also in my turn by writing thus
gravely; -- but as I well know this vile cough is the engine which that
scarecrow death employs to shatter my poor frame, and bring it to his
dominion, how can I be merry or satisfied? -- It is true, I love laughing and
merry-making, and all that, as well as any soul upon earth; nevertheless, I
cannot think of piping and taboring it out of the world, like the figures in
Holbein's dance. Besides I have been so used to my own way, that I don't like
to be put out of it, by being made to cough so villainously as I do, more than
half my time. It is most inurbane in him, -- by Heaven, it is cowardly in the
rascal, to rob me of those spirits, with which I have so often defeated him.

And this is not all, -- for I have forty volumes more to write; nay, and have
absolutely promised the world to do it; and I have my engagements to you as
well as to the world -- and to myself as well as to you both; and how shall I
keep my word as an author and a gentleman, and what is of more consequence than
either -- as a friend, -- if I cannot shake off this piece of anatomy: Besides,
no one can do these things for me but myself; the business is beyond all power
of attorney; for if I were to leave fifty executors to my last will and
testament, and if they were to be joined by a regiment of administrators and
assigns, they could not take up their pens and do as I would do.

But what a wayward fancy mine is! -- and with what a seducing pen am I writing
-- for I am got leagues without number from the idea which danced before me,
when I first began this letter. And here I am wrong again: -- for what great
distance can there be between the grave of my grandfather and my own; and it
was to his tomb that I wished to conduct you!

I know full well, that all sprained your ancle may be, it will be wholly
impossible for you to pass through York, without popping your head into its
cathedral, and indulging your mind with a few of those reflections which such a
building is calculated to inspire. Now, when you are there, tell a verger to
conduct you to the tomb of Archbishop Stern. He is the same whose picture you
saw at Cambridge, and which you were pleased to say, bore so strong a
resemblance to me. In the marble whole length figure which dignifies the
monument, you will find the likeness still stronger: and if I drop in this
corner of the world, I should like to be deposited in that corner of the
church, and sleep out my last sleep beside my pious ancestor.

He was an excellent prelate and an honest man: -- I have not half his virtues,
if report speaks true of us both, which, for his sake, I hope it does -- and
for my own, I hope it does not. Though, to use an expression which dropped from
the lips and at the table of a brother Arch-prelate of his, and one of his
successors, "My ideas are sometimes rather too disorderly for a man in orders."
In his Grace's Concio ad clerum, I do not find myself a very principal figure,
but in his private hours, he is always most cordial to me.

The day after tomorrow, I shall hope to embrace you at my gate; till then, my
dear friend, may God bless you -- and always.

Yours, most affectionately, L. STERN.

LETTER VI. To -- --.
Coxwould, Monday Morning.
I SHALL forgive the tardiness of your passage hither, if it be true, as a
still small voice of a York gossip has informed me, that you repose, with your
infirm limb, on a sofa, in Mrs. -- 's withdrawing room, and have your coffee
and tea handed you by her two daughters, and one of them has charms enough for
the three Graces -- and that they play on their harpsichord, and, with voices
stolen from heaven, sing duets to you, while you, stretched on damask, command,
as it were, that little world of beauty and good sense which surrounds you.

You cannot, my good friend, have known the charming people, with whom you are
so happy, more than eight and forty hours at most. Now I make this observation,
merely to have the pleasure of making another, which is, that you have learned
the art, and a very comfortable one it is, of setting yourself at ease with
worthy spirits, when you have the good fortune to meet them. Indeed, I may
claim the credit of having taught you the maxim, that life is too short to be
long in forming the tender and happy connections of it. It Is a miserable waste
of time, as well as a very base business, to be looking at each other, as an
usurer looks at a security, to find a flaw in it. No: -- if you meet a heart
worth being admitted into, and you really feel yourself worthy of admission,
the matter is arranged in five hours, as well as five years.

Hail, ye gentle sympathies, that can approach two amiable hearts to each
other, and chase every discordant idea from an union that nature has designed
by the same happy coloring of character that she has given them! -- But lucus
a non lucendo -- I have received a kind of dish dash sort of letter from
Garrick -- out of which all my chemistry cannot extract a sympathetic atom. I
am glad, however, to have an opportunity of writing a short answer to him, that
I may address a long postscript to his cara sposa.

I love Garrick on the stage, better than any thing in the world, except Mrs.
Garrick off it; and if there is any one heart in the world I should like to get
a corner of -- it would be hers. But I am too great a sinner to do more than
approach the portal of so much excellence -- there to bend one knee at least,
and ejaculate at a distance from the altar.

I have often thought on what this spirit of idolatry, which is continually
bearing me to the feet of some fair image or other, will do with me twenty
years hence; and whether, after having had, during my younger days, a damsel to
smooth my pillow -- I should find one, in my age, to put on my slipper.
However, I need not trouble myself or you about these conjectures; for I well
know there is not life in me to make the experiment.

This instant brings me a letter from your kind hostess, who is determined not
to let you go till I come to fetch you. -- Tomorrow, by noon, therefore, I
shall embrace you, and her -- and -- the damsels.

I am, most cordially yours, L. STERN.

LETTTER VII. To -- --, Esquire.
Crazy Castle.
THOUGH I hope and trust you believe that I am not only disposed to laugh with
those who laugh, but to weep with those who weep; -- yet it is most true, my
dear friend, that I could not but smile as I read the account you sent me of
your distress and disappointment; and when I gave your letter to Hall, for you
see I am at Crazy Castle, he laughed the tears into his eyes.

Now you must not suppose, nor can you imagine, that either of us trifled with
your sufferings, for you know I love you, and Hall says you are a lad of
promise; but we were merry at the amiable simplicity of your nature, in
wondering that there is ever any villainy in a villainous world; and at the
idea, how little a time you were destined to possess that delicious -- for I
will call it with all its scrapes and duperies, a delicious sentiment. You have
just opened the volume of life, and startle to find a blot in the first page;
alas! alas! as you proceed, you will find whole pages so blotted and blurred,
that you will scarce be able to distinguish the characters. It Is a sorry
business I must confess, to plant suspicion in a breast that has never known
it, and to check the glow of hope which animates the beginning of the journey,
by pointing out the interruptions and dangers that will be necessarily
encountered in the course of it: But this is the duty of friendship, and arises
from the nature of our existence and the state of the world. If, however, after
all, you can acquire an useful experience, and be taught to put yourself on
your guard, at the expense of a few score guineas, you have made a good
bargain: -- so be content, and no more of your complainings.

But you will tell me, perhaps, that it is not the matter of the loss, but the
manner of it, that you consider as a misfortune: The being treated so ill, and
with so much ingratitude, is the business that afflicts you. Hall, who is still
laughing, bids me tell you for your comfort, that he who dupes must be a
rascal; and he who is duped may be an honest man; but he is a cynic, and
administers his dose in his own way. Now, was I to console you in mine, I
should tell you, that gratitude is not so common a virtue in the world as it
ought to be, for all our sakes: but ingratitude, my dear friend, is not an
offspring of the present moment; it seems to have existed from the beginning,
and will continue to disgrace the world when we have long been in the valley of
Jehosaphat: -- nay, you must have read -- indeed I know that I have written a
sermon upon the subject -- that of the lepers who were healed, but one returned
to give thanks for his restoration. I do not, however, tell you these things
that you may find consolation in the miserable habits of mankind, but that you
may not suppose yourself worse used than the rest of the world, which is very
common with young men like yourself, who feel at every pore, and have not yet
had that collision with untoward circumstances which awakens caution, or begets
patience.

And so much for you and your miseries, which I doubt not will have been
dissipated by the bewitching smiles of some fair damsel or other, before my
grave see-saw letter shall reach you. Let me know, I beg of you, your plan of
operations for the winter, if you have one. You may, I think -- though you may
think otherwise -- fly from the joys and damps of this ungenial climate, and
winter serenely with me in Languedoc; your company would do me good, and mine
would do you no harm: -- at least I think so; and we shall return to London
time enough to peep in at Ranelagh, and look at the birthday. In short, write
to me upon the subject, and direct to me here, for here I am to be during this
shooting month of September; so God bless you, and give you patience if you
want it.

I remain, Yours, most cordially, L. STERN.

LETTER VIII. To W -- C --, Esquire.
Coxwould, June 11, 1765.
SO Burton The late amiable and excellent Lord Cunningham.
really told you with a grave face, and an apparent mortification, that I had
ridiculed my Irish friends at Bath for an hour together, and had made a large
company merry at Lady Lepel's The late Lady Mulgrave.
table during an whole afternoon at their expense. By Heaven's it is false as
misrepresentation can make it. It is not in my nature, I trust, to be so
ungrateful, as I should be, if absent or present, I were to be ungracious to
them. That I should make Burton look grave, whose countenance is formed to mark
the smiles of an amiable and an honest heart, is not within my chapter of
possibilities: -- I am sure it is not in that of my intentions to say any thing
that is inurbane of such a man as he is: -- for, in my life, did I never
communicate with a gentleman of qualities more winning, and dispositions more
generous. He invited me to his house with kindness, and he gave me a truly
graceful welcome; for it was with all his heart. He is as much formed to make
society pleasant as any one I ever saw; and I wish he were as rich as Croesus,
that he might do all the good an unbounded generosity would lead him to do. I
never passed more pleasant hours in my life than with him and his fair
countrywomen; and foul befall the man who should let drop a word in dispraise
of him or them! -- And there is the charming widow Moor, where, if I had not a
piece of legal meadow of my own, I should rejoice to batten the rest of my
days; -- and the gentle elegant Gore, with her fine form and Grecian face, and
whose lot I trust it will be to make some man happy, who knows the value of a
tender heart: -- Nor shall I forget another widow, the interesting Mrs. Vesey,
with her vocal, and fifty other accomplishments. -- I abuse them! -- it must
not be told, -- for it is false, -- and it should not be believed, for it is
unnatural. -- It is true I did talk of them, for an hour together, but no
sarcasm or unlucky sallies mingled with my speech: -- Yes, I did talk of them
as they would wish to be talked of, -- with smiles on my countenance, praise on
my tongue, hilarity in my heart, and the goblet in my hand. -- Besides, I am
myself of their own country: -- My father was a considerable time on duty with
his regiment in Ireland; and my mother gave me to the world when she was there,
on duty with him. I beg of you, therefore, to make all these good people
believe that I have been at least misunderstood, for it is impossible that Lady
Barrymore could mean to misrepresent me.

Read Burton this letter if you have an opportunity, and assure him of my most
cordial esteem and respect for him and all his social excellencies: and whisper
something kind and gentle for me, as you well know how, to my fair
countrywomen; and let not an unmerited prejudice or displeasure against me
remain any longer in their tender bosoms. -- When you get into disgrace of any
kind, be assured that I will do as much for you.

I am here as idle as ease of heart can make me: -- I shall wait for you till
the beginning of next month; when, if you do not come, I shall proceed to while
away the rest of the summer at Crazy Castle and Scarborough. In the beginning,
the very beginning of October, I mean to arrive in Bond-street with my Sermons;
and when I have arranged their publication, then -- hey go mad for Italy --
whither you would do well to accompany me. -- In the mean time, however, I
hope, and wish to see you here; it will after all, be much better than playing
the Strephon with phthisical nymphs at the Bristol Fountain. But do as you may
--

I am, Most sincerely yours, L. STERN.

LETTER IX. To -- --.
I DID not answer your letter as you desired me, for at the moment I received
it, I really thought all my projects, for some time to come, were burned to a
cinder; or, which is the better expression of the two, had evaporated in smoke;
-- for, not half an hour before an affrighted messenger, on a breathless horse,
had arrived to acquaint me, that the parsonage house at -- was on fire, when he
came away, and burning like a bundle of faggots; and while I was preparing to
set off to see my house, after it was burned down, your letter arrived to
console me on my way; for it gave me every assurance that, if I were left
without an hole to put my head into, or a rag to cover my -- body, you would
give me a comfortable room in your house, and a clean shirt into the bargain.

In short, by the carelessness of my curate, or his wife, or some one within
his gates, I am an house out of pocket -- I say, literally, out of pocket; for
I must rebuild it at my own costs and charges, or the church of York, who
originally gave it me, will do those things, which in good sense ought not to
be done; but which the wise-acres who compose it, will tell me they have a
right to do. My loss will be upwards of two hundred pounds, with some books,
etc. etc. -- so that you may now lay aside all your apprehensions about what I
shall do with the wealth that my sermons have brought, and are to bring to me.
-- I told you then that some devilish accident or other would provide me with
the ends of getting rid of the means; and I had a cross accident in my head at
the time, which I did not communicate to you; but it is not that which has
fallen out, nor any thing like it; -- though this may fall out too, for aught I
know, and then the fee simple of my sermons will be gone for ever.

Now these sermons of mine, were most of them written in the very house that is
burned down, and all of them preached, I fear again and again, in the very
church to which it belonged; and they now answer a purpose I never dreamed or
thought of; but so it is in this world, and thus are things hinged and hung
together -- or rather unhinged or unhung; for I have my doubts at present,
whether we shall see the dying gladiator next winter. The matter, however, that
concerns me most in the business, is the strange unaccountable conduct of my
poor unfortunate curate, not in setting fire to the house, for I do not accuse
him of it, God knows, nor any one else; but in setting off the moment after it
happened, and flying like Paul to Tarsus, through fear of a prosecution from me.

That the man should have formed such an idea of me, as to suppose me capable,
if I did not sooth his sorrows, of adding another to their number, wounded me
sorely. For, amidst all my errors and sollies, I do not believe there is any
thing, in the color or complexion of any part of my life, that would justify
the shadow of such an apprehension. -- Besides he deprived me of all the
comfort I made out to myself from the misfortune; which was, as it pleased
Heaven to deprive him of one house, to take him and his wife, and his little
one, into another -- I mean into that where I lived myself. And he who now
reads my heart, and will one day judge me for the secrets of it -- he well
knows that it did not grow cold within me, on account of the accident, till I
was informed that this silly man was a fugitive, from the fear of my wrath.

The family of the C -- s were kind to me beyond measure, as they have always
have been. They are a sort of people that you would like extremely; and before
the summer is past, I hope to present you to them. Though, if I recollect
aright, you know the charming damsel of the house already; and the rest of it,
though not so young or so fair, are as amiable as she is. -- As I cannot leave
you in possession of a better subject for your reflection, etc. I shall say
adieu, and God bless you. -- In a few days you shall hear again from

Your affectionate and faithful L. STERN.
I write this from York -- where you may write to me.



LETTER X. To -- --, Esquire.
I HAVE received, my dear friend, your kind answer to my letter. And you must
know that it was just such an one, as I wished to receive from you: -- Nay, it
was just such an one as I expected you would write to me. I should have been
disappointed if it had been in any other sorm or shape of friendship. But
understand me, if you please; I should have been disappointed for your sake,
and not for my own: for though I am charmed that you should have made me those
unreserved offers of friendship, which are so gracious in you, I am almost as
much pleased that my Exchequer is in that slate of sufficiency as not to
require them.

I have made my bargain for rebuilding my parsonage, and settled all
arrangements with all parties concerned, in a manner more to my satisfaction
than I could have expected. I was rather in haste to settle this account, that
there might be no risque of leaving my wife and Lydia a dilapidation for their
fortune: for I have no reason to believe that the *** of *** would be more kind
to them when friendless and unprotected, than they had been to the husband of
the one, and the father of the other, who, when he was a poor Curate, had pride
enough to despise their Reverences, and wit enough to make others laugh at
them. But may God forgive them, as I do! -- Amen.

I wrote to Hall an account of my disaster; -- and his answer bid me find out a
conceit on the occasion, and comfort myself with it. Tully, the Orator, the
Politician, the Philosopher, the Moralist, the Consul, etc. etc. etc. adopted
as he heartily tells us every one, who reads his works, this mode of
consolation, when he lost his daughter; and, if we may believe him, with
success. Now this same Tully, you must know, was like my father; I mean Mr.
Shandy, of Shandy Hall, who was as well pleased with a misfortune that gave him
an opportunity of displaying his eloquence, as with a blessing that obliged him
to hold his tongue. Both these great men were fond of conceits I mean their
own; so I will tell you a story of a Conceit, not of Cicero's nor my Father's,
but of the Lord of Crazy.

You must know then, that this same friend of mine, and, I may add, of yours
also, in a moment of lazy pride, took it into his head that he would have a
town chariot, to save his feet by day, and to carry him to Ranelagh in the
evening. For this purpose, after consulting a coach-maker, he had allotted one
hundred and forty pounds; and he wrote me word of it. On my arrival in town,
about three months after this communication, I found a card of invitation from
Lord Spencer to dine with him on the following Sunday; and I had no sooner read
it, than Hall's fine crane-neck'd chariot came bounce as it were, upon my
recollection; so I sallied forth to ask him how he did, and to borrow his
carriage, that I might pay my visit in pomp as well as Pontificalibus. I found
him at home, made a friendly enquiry or two, and told him of the little
arrangement I had formed; when he replied with one of his Cynical smiles, that
his mortification was in the extreme, for that his chariot was gone post to
Scotland. I stared, and he laughed, -- not at me, but at his own conceit; and
you shall have it, such as it is:

I must inform you then, that at the moment when the coach-maker, was receiving
his last instructions, he himself received a letter; which letter acquainted
him that his son, who was quartered at Edinburgh, had got into a terrible riot
there; to get out of the consequences of which, demanded almost the precise sum
that had been destined for the chariot. So that the hundred and forty pounds,
which had been set a part to build a chariot in London, were employed to repair
broken windows, broken, lamps and broken heads, in Edinburgh; and Hall
comforted himself with the conceit that his chariot was gone post to Scotland.
So much for comforts and conceits; -- and happy is it for us when we can, by
any means, conceit ourselves into comfort. I could say more upon this matter,
but my paper is almost filled; and I have only space to express a wish, that
your life may never want any of these petty helps to make it as happy as, if I
greatly mistake not, it must be honorable -- Let me see you soon; and, in the
mean time, and at all times, may God be with you.

Yours most affectionately, L. STERN.

LETTER XI. To -- --, Esquire.
Coxwould, near Easingwould.
YOU are not singular in your opinion about my wonderful capacity for poetry.
-- Beauclerk, and Lock, and I think Langton, have said what you have said on
the subject, and founded their opinion, as you have done, on the sragment of an
Introduction to the Ode to Julia, in Tristram Shandy. The unity of the episode
would have been wounded, if I had added another line; and if I had added a
dozen, my character as a poetical genius, which, by the bye, I never had, would
have been lost for ever -- or rather would never have been suspected.

Hall had also similar ideas on this very matter, and, on the strength of his
opinion, ventured once to giveme an unfinished poem of his own, and bade me go
on with it -- and so I did, heltering and skeltering at a most terrible rate;
-- In short, I added some sixty or fourscore lines to the business, which he
called doggrel, and which I think he called rightly; however, he chose to let
them stand, to use his own phrase, as a curiosity; so into the press they went,
and helped to compose the worst squib our crazy friend ever let off. I do not,
however, mention these things to lessen the merit of your opinion, by pointing
out its similarity to that of others. You need not be ashamed to think with
such men, if even they should be wrong, which, on this particular subject, I
most solemnly believe you all to be. Cum his errare is something -- and all
that --

I once, it is true, wrote an epitaph, which I liked myself, but the person, at
whose request I did it, sacrificed it to one of his own, which he liked better,
but which I did not -- so my lines were thrown aside, and his own nerveless
rhyme was engraved on a marble, which deserved a better inscription; for it
covered the dust of one, whose gentle nature, and amiable qualities, merited
more than common praise, or commonplace eulogium. However, I shed a tear over
the sepulcher, which, if the dead could have known it, would have been more
acceptable than the most splendid diction that ever glared on monumental
alabaster.

I also wrote a kind of Shandean, singsong, dramatic piece of rhyme for Mr.
Beard -- and he sung it at Ranelagh, as well as on his own stage, for the
benefit of some one or other. He asked for something of the kind, and I knew
not how to refuse him; for, a year before, he had in a very respectful manner,
and without any previous acquaintance, presented me with the freedom of
Covent Garden Theater. The act was gracious; and I liked it the better, because
the monarch of Drury Lane had known me for some years, and besides had, for
some time, occupied a front seat in my page, before he offered me the freedom
-- not of Drury Lane house, but of Drury Lane pit. I told him, on the occasion,
that he acted great things and did little ones: -- so he stammered and looked
foolish, and performed, at length, with a bad grace, what his rival manager was
so kind as to do with the best grace in the world -- But no more of that -- he
is so complete on the stage, that I ought not to mention his patch-work off it.

However, to return to my subject -- if I can; for digression is interwoven
with my nature; and to get to my point, or find my way back to it, when I have
wandered aside, as other men do, is not in the line of my faculties. -- But
though I may not be a poet, the clerk of my parish is -- not absolutely in my
conceit -- but, which is better, in that of his neighbors; and, which is the
best of all -- in his own. His muse is a professional one, for she only
inspires him to indite hymns; and it is appropriate, for she leads him to such
subjects as are suitable to his spiritual office, and which, like those of his
brethren Stera^^ld and Hopkins, may be said or sung in churches. In short,
there had been a terrible disease among the cattle, and our parish had suffered
greatly, so that this parochial bard thought it a proper subject for a
spiritual song, which he accordingly composed, and gave it out on the Sunday
following, to the praise and glory of God, as an hymn of his own composing. Not
only the murrain itself, but the sufferers by the calamity, were vociferated
through the aisles in all the pomp and devotion of rustic psalmody. The last
stanza, which is the only one I recollect, rather unhinged my devotion, but it
seemed to rivet that of the congregation, and therefore I had no right to
complain. I leave it with you as a bonne bouche, and wish you a good night.

Here Is Jemmy How has lost a cow,
And so has Johnny Bland;
Therefore we'll put our trust in God,
And not in any other man.
Yours, L. S.

LETTER XII. To -- --, Esquire.
Coxwould, Wednesday Night.
I SENT you, my dear friend, as you request it, the Epitaph which I mentioned
in my last epistle to you. I write it from recollection; and, though it may not
contain the precise expression, it will certainly possess the sentiment of the
original composition -- and that is of the most consequence. I remember well it
came from the heart, for I most sincerely loved the amiable person, whose
virtues deserved a better inscription, and, according to a very common course
of things, found a worse. But here it is --

Columns and labored urns but vainly show,
An idle scene of fabricated woe: --
The sweet companion and the friend sincere
Need no mechanic arts to force the tear.
In heartfelt numbers, never meant to shine,
'Twill flow eternal over an hearse like thine,
'Twill flow while gentle goodness has one friend,
Or kindred tempers have a tear to lend.
Hall liked it, I remember -- and Hall always knows what ought to be liked,
and, in certain humors, will be candid upon these sentimental subjects, and
acknowledge that he feels them. He is an excellent scholar and a good critic:
but his judgment has more severity than it ought to have, and his taste less
delicacy than it should possess. He has, also, great humanity, but, somehow or
other, there is so often such a mixture of sarcasm in it, that there are many
who will not believe he has a single scruple of it in his composition. -- Nay,
I am acquainted with several, who cannot be persuaded but that he is a very
insensible, hard-hearted man, which I, who have known him long, and known him
well, assure you he is not. -- He may not always possess the grace of charity,
but he feels the reality of it, and continually performs benevolent actions,
though not always, I must confess, in a benevolent manner. And here is the
grief of the business. He will do a kindness with a sneer, or a joke, or a
smile; when, perhaps, a tear, or a grave countenance, at least, would better
become him. But this is his way; it is the language of his character; and,
though one might wish it to be otherwise, yet I cannot tell what right any of
us have to pass a severe sentence upon it, for no other reason in the world,
but because our own failings are of a different complexion. And so much for all
that.

I am preparing to prance it for a week or ten days at Scarborough. If you pass
your autumn at Mulgrave-Hall, take that place in your way, and I will accompany
you on your visit, and then to Crazy Castle, and so home: and then to London --
and then God knows where -- but it shall be where it pleases him: this is
clerically said, however, and it would be well for the best of us, if it were
thought and considered as often as it was said. But so it is, that the lips and
the heart, which ought never to be asunder, are sometimes wandering at
different corners of the earth. Mine however are in the closest conjunction,
when I offer you my most affectionate regard. So good night, and may the
visions of a good spirit attend you.

Most truly yours L. STERN:

LETTTER XIII. To -- --, Esquire.
Scarborough,
I SHALL not reply, my dear friend, to all the kind things you think and say of
me. -- I trust, indeed, that I deserve some of them; and I am well pleased to
find that you think I deserve them all. -- But however that may be, I desire
you to cherish those benevolent sentiments which you have so warmly expressed
in the paper before me, both for your own sake, and that of the person who is
the subject of them.

Your commands, in general, should be obeyed without reflection -- but in this
particular instance, a rare gleam of prudence has shot across me, and, I beg
leave to reflect for a few moments on the subject -- and were I to take wisdom
upon me, and reflect for a few days -- the result, I am sure, would be, that I
should not obey your commands at all.

The giving advice, my good friend, is the most thankless generosity in the
world -- because in the first place, it costs you nothing; and, in the next, it
is just such a thing as the person to whom you present it will think that he
does not want. This, you see, is my way of reasoning; but I believe, from my
heart, that it will apply too well to the subject between us.

There are such things in the world as wrong heads and right hearts -- and
wrong hearts and right heads. -- Now, for myself, and speaking under the
influence of my own particular feelings, I would rather be of the right heart
family, with all their blunders, errors and confusions; but if I want a
business to be done, or a plan to be executed, give me the right head: -- if
there is a right heart into the bargain, so much the better: but it is upon the
former that I must rely -- and whether the latter be right or wrong, is not a
matter of absolute consideration. This is not, my dear friend, quite orthodox,
according to your system, but as you proceed, every day will tend to increase
the propinquity of this opinion to your own.

Now, I am rather disposed to think, without leaning to the uncharitable side
of the question, that poor -- is of the Wrong-head family. -- I know his heart
-- and I am sure his present scrape arises from the good dispositions of it.
Nevertheless, though I think myself a dab at giving good counsel in such cases
as his, I cannot bring myself to prescribe on the occasion -- It is impossible
to do it, without informing him of the nature of his disease, which is neither
more nor less than absolute wrong-headedness; and, were I to do it, he would
exhibit another symptom of his disorder, by throwing my prescription out of the
window, and perhaps threatening the same mischief to the physician himself.

If you have influence sufficient to induce him to apply to me, I will most
readily exert my best for him; and I can then do the bitter business, and give
the the unpalatable dose with a good grace. Here then we will, if you please,
let the matter rest for the present.

I write in haste, and on my pillow, that you may, as soon as possible, be
acquainted with my sentiments in a matter wherein you have a greater dependence
upon me than I fear the event will justify. -- So good morning, and God bless
you. --

I received a letter, yesterday, from poor dear Lydia. -- It is an amiable
madcap -- and God bless her also. -- Once more adieu.

Yours, etc. L. STERN.

LETTER XIV.
Scarborough, Aug. 29, 1765.
YOU refine too much, my dear friend, -- you do indeed. -- Your reasoning is
ingenious, and produces a neat, pretty, plausible train of argument, that would
make a figure in a company of female philosophers; but if committed to paper,
would be pardonable only when written on the fan of some pedantic Dulcinea. You
run into divisions, when a simple modulation would answer better; that is,
would produce more pleasing effects both in yourself, and the sentimental
spirit whom you might wish to please.

Opinion, my dear fellow, somehow or other, rules all mankind; and not like a
kind master, or, which would be more congenial, a gentle mistress, but like a
tyrant, whose wish is power, and whose gratification is servility. -- Opinion
leads us by the ears, the eyes, -- and, I had almost said, by the nose. It
warps our ununderstandings, confounds our judgments, dissipates experience and
turns our passions to its purpose. In short, it becomes the governess of our
lives, and usurps the place of reason, which it has kicked out of office. --
This is among the strange truths which cannot be explained but by that
mortifying description which time will display to your experience hereafter,
with ten times the credit that would accompany any present endeavors of mine
to the same purpose.

If you would know more of the matter and can bring yourself to risque the
opinion, which, by the bye, I do not advise you to do, ask A -- why he submits,
with such a placid subservience, to the little wench who lives with him? You
know -- and all his friends know -- that he has but half, nay not half the
enjoyments of life, through the fear of her vengeance, whatever it may be. He
has fortune, understanding, and courage: -- he loves society, and adds greatly
to the pleasures of it, -- and yet, how often does he leave it half-enjoyed!
Nay, to come more home to the business, how often has he left our pleasant
classical meetings, before they have arisen to their usual glow, in order to
humor this little piece of disgrace, whom he has not the resolution to send
back to the banks of the Wye, where the fifty pounds a year he might give her,
would make her queen of the village! -- We pity poor A --, we argue with him,
we wonder at him -- do we not? -- But in this we deceive ourselves, -- for the
wisest and best of us are governed by some little dirty drab of an opinion,
whose governance is equally disgraceful, and may be much more injurious -- as
it will, perhaps, give a color to the whole current of our lives. A mistress,
with all her arts and fascinations, may, in time, be got rid of; but opinion,
once rooted, becomes a part of ourselves -- it lives and dies with us.

It must be acknowledged, that I have been rather sermonic this fine morning,
but you know how and where to apply what has been written, and I leave the
whole to your practice, if you think proper; and if you do not -- but what have
I to do with ifs? -- It is an exceptious monosyllable, and I fling it from me.

B -- is here, and tells me that he left you continually driving between London
and Richmond -- What beauty of the Hill has enchanted you there? Or what swan
of the silver Thames are you dying for? -- I take it very ill of you that you
never favor me with a single communication concerning your Dorothies or your
Delias: I protest most seriously that I will never write to you again, till you
give me an history of your chains; and who it is has bound you at present on
the river's bank -- tell me who the Naiad is.

Mr. F --, the Apostolic F --, as Lady -- calls him, in his way to --, hinted
to me something serious. He talked of a marriage, -- to which I replied, God
forbid! -- But do not, I pray, be angry with my exclamation; for it was neither
a thoughtless, or a peevish one, but an impulse of that sincere regard which
you more than deserve from me. -- With your dispositions, and in your
situation, I hardly think there is a woman in the kingdom who would be an happy
match for you: and if you think proper to ask me, I will, hereafter, tell you
why: -- at present I shall content myself with telling you that

I am, most cordially yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XV.
September 9, 1765.
I MEAN my dear friend, that this epistle should meet you, and greet you, a day
or two at least before you leave town; and I wish it, from that spirit of
miserable self-interest, which you know governs and directs me in all I do. --
But, lest you should not like this reason, I will give you another, and which
may be ncarer the truth; at least I hope so.

I want very much to know whether B -- has arranged the matter with Foley the
banker, at Paris, about Mrs. Sterne's remittance, as I ordered him. You must
know that I suspect he has been dilatory, not from dishonesty, for I believe
him to be as honest a poor creature as was ever vamped into the form he wears:
but, perhaps, his exchequer might not be in a convenient state to answer my
orders; and if so, I only beg to be informed of the truth; which, as he does
not answer my letters, he appears to be afraid to tell.

I have received a letter from Toulouse which does not comfort my spirits; and
I have reason to apprehend from thence, that there is some neglect at the
fountain head of my treasury, which I must beg you to enquire into; and, if you
see occasion, to correct, in order that the little rill of ways and means may
not be interrupted between London and Languedoc -- that is, between me and Mrs.
Stern, and my poor dear Lydia.

They write me word that they have drawn upon Foley, as I desired, who tells
them he has no effects to answer the bill; but that, if they are in distress,
he will accommodate them for my sake. This is very handsome dealing, and I am
rather proud of it; -- but, in the mean time, there is an uncertainty which is
very unpleasant -- I mean to the poor women, who are at such a distance, that a
great deal of anxious suspense must be suffered before the mistake can be
rectified.

Besides, --, these things breed words, and questions, as well as suspicions,
and all that. -- My dear Lydia contents herself with a gentle complaint or so;
but her mother does not hesitate to discharge a volume of reproaches. Now the
truth is, that I deserve neither the one nor the other, -- and had managed the
matter for the supply of their wants, and the ridding myself of all future
anxiety in the business, in as plain a manner as my handwriting and spirit of
calculation could make it. -- However, it has abated the ardour of my Knight
Errantry for the present, and thrown more than a sickly thought or two on my
imagination.

I am prodigal of words, my dear friend, in a matter wherein a mere hint is all
that would be necessary for you to exert yourself. So do me the honor to see
that it is absolutely done without a moment's delay; and if B -- should
hesitate the tithe of an instant, -- do that for me, my friend, which I would
do for you on a similar occasion. -- So God bless you. -- My heart will not
suffer me to offer you an apology, because I know it will be ungracious to
yours. -- Once more farewell!

Most cordially yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XVI To -- --, Esquire.
Coxwould, Wednesday Evening.
I HAVE received the Letter which you informed me I should receive from Doctor
L --, and return you both my best thanks for it. -- He is certainly a man of
Learning and an excellent Critic, and would do well to employ his leisure hours
on Virgil; or rather, if I understand him well, on Horace; and he would give us
such a Commentary on both those Authors as we have not, and perhaps, may never
have, if he does not set about it.

But Tristram Shandy, my friend, was made and formed to baffle all criticism:
-- and I will venture to rest the book on this ground, -- that it is either
above the power or beneath the attention of any critic or hypercritic
whatsoever. -- I did not fashion it according to any rule. -- I left my fancy,
or my Genius, or my feelings, -- call it what you may, -- to its own free
course, without a single intruding reflection, that there ever had been such a
man as Aristotle in the world.

When I mounted my Hobby Horse, I never thought, or pretended to think, where I
was going, or whether I should return home to dinner or supper, the next day,
or the next week: -- I let him take his own course; and amble, or curvet, or
trot, or go a sober, sorrowful Lackadaysical pace as it pleased him best. -- It
was all one to me, for my temper was ever in unison with his manner of coursing
it, -- be it what it might. I never pricked him with a spur, or struck him with
a whip; but let the rein lay loosely on his neck, and he was wont to take his
way without doing injury to any one.

Some would laugh at us as we passed along, -- and some seemed to pity us --
and now and then a melancholy tender hearted passenger would look at us and
heave a sigh. -- Thus have we traveled together -- but my poor Rosinante did
not, like Balaam's Ass, stand still if he saw an Angel in the way, but directly
pushed up to her; -- and if it were but a damsel, sitting by a fountain, who
would let me take a refreshing draught from her cup, she was, surely an Angel
to me.

The grand Error of Life is, that we look too far: -- We scale the Heavens, --
we dig down to the center of the Earth, for Systems, -- and we forget
ourselves. -- Truth lies before us; it is in the high way path; and the
Ploughman treads on it with his clouted Shoon.

Nature defies the rule and the Line; -- Art raises its structures, and forms
its works on their aid: -- but Nature has her own Laws, which Art cannot always
comprehend, and Criticism can never reach.

Doctor L -- acknowledges, however, that my Sermon on Conscience is a most
admirable composition; but is of opinion that it is degraded by being made a
part of Tristram Shandy -- Now, if you please; be so good as to note my answer:
-- If this sermon is so excellent, and I myself believe it to be so, -- because
Judge Burnet, who was a man of taste and erudition, as well as Law, desired me
to print it; -- I say, if it be a good Sermon, it ought to be read; and since
it appeared in the pages of Tristram Shandy, it has been read by thousands;
whereas the fact is, that when it was published by itself, it was read by no
one.

I have answered Doctor L -- with all the respect which his amiable Character
and admirable Talents deserve; but I have told him, at the same time, that my
book was not written to be tried by any known Laws of Scholastic Criticism; and
that if I thought any thing I might hereafter write would be within their
reach, I would throw the Manuscript that is now before me into the fire, and
never dip my pen into my Ink-stand again, but for the purpose of assuring some
uncritical, and uncriticising friend, like yourself, of my sincere and cordial
regard. -- At this moment I make that offering to you, -- So God be with you.

L. S.
I begin to peep out of my hermitage a little; for Lord and Lady Fauconberg are
come down, and bring with them, as usual, a large store of amiable, easy, and
hospitable virtues. -- I wish you were here to partake of, and add to them.



LETTER XVII. To -- -- Esquire.
Monday Evening.
YOU have hit my fancy most wonderfully, in the account you have given me of
Lady --; the Juno character not only prevails, but absolutely predominates. The
Minerva qualities are all secondary, -- and as to any Cyprian dispositions, I
know nothing about them.

She certainly possesses a very good understanding, and is not without
seize; but both the one and the other derive all their consequence from
her manners. -- She has somewhat of an imperious disposition, which would be
either silently despised by some, or violently opposed by others, if she did
not give a grace to it that annihilates any unpleasant sensation that might
attempt to rise in the breast of a by-stander, or which is better, bysitter:
but this is not all, for it calls forth also, that kind of respectful
submission, which does not lessen us in our own opinion for having practiced it.

I never, in my life, felt the merit of exterior decoration so much as in my
conversations and communications with this Lady; and I really do not know any
position, in the present school of fashion, where a young man might learn so
much as in her drawing room, or without meaning any mischievous equivoque, her
dressing room. -- It is really no common satisfaction to me to reflect that my
young friend is an Eleve of such an instructress.

There is a time and circumstance of life, and that period and circumstance are
now yours, when nothing but the easy, society, and little tender friendships of
an accomplished woman are wanting to render a character complete: -- and
without saying a word more than I think on the business, -- I cannot but
express my satisfaction that you are in such hands as will probably produce the
very effects which so sincere a friend as myself can wish and desire.

It has ever been a maxim with me, since I knew any thing of the world, that we
are all of us as much in want of a Schoolmistress at the finish, as we do at
the commencement of our education. And as you are so fortunate as to have Lady
-- to teach you the Horn-book of high life, you will bid fair to spell it and
put it together, so as to become the charm of all society: -- and you will
lose, what I so much wish you to lose, the attention to one, and the neglect of
the many; which though there may be something amiable in the principle, is not
adapted to the general intercourse of life.

Lady M -- F -- might forward business, and Lady C -- I am sure is ready to do
it -- so that in such a soil, in such a season, and with such cultivations,
what has not partial friendship a right to expect. And now what can I do better
than leave you in such good and excellent company, and desire you, in return to
present my respectful compliments to them all, -- and to receive yourself the
most cordial regard of

your very sincere and affectionate L. STERN.

LETTER XVIII. To -- --
Coxwould, Wednesday Noon.
I UNDERSTAND, from Mr. Phipps, The Late Lord Mulgrave.
that you are absolutely engaged to pass the Summer, or rather the Autumn, with
him at Mulgrave-Hall; so that I now consider a previous visit to me as a matter
on which I may depend, and to which believe me, I look with real satisfaction.
We will while away a month or six weeks at my vicarage in a manner which, I
trust, will not be unpleasing or unprofitable to you.

However, in saying this, or rather writing it, I address myself to the
excellence of your heart, which I cannot enough admire, and that cultivated
understanding of which I have the greatest hopes. -- I know the pleasures you
will quit, and the societies you must sacrifice, to come and pass any part of
the Summer with me; but, at the same time, I do not doubt of your visit, -- and
that a Shande an Tete a Tete has its charms for you

I remember a circumstance, which I shall never think of without the utmost
pride in my own heart, and the most sincere affection for yours; -- but,
besides that it flattered me in the highest degree, it proved that you
possessed a source of sentiment which, whatever may befall you in life, must
preserve you in honor and happiness: -- with such a delicious quality,
misfortune will never be able to bear you down; nor will folly, passion, or
even vice, though they may for a time obscure or lessen the excellence of your
character, possess the power of destroying it. -- I allude to a little delicate
touch of sentiment that escaped you last winter, -- which though I have
mentioned it with every possible eulogium to others, again and again, I have
never before hinted it even to you; the moment, however, is now come, when my
spirit urges me to speak of it; and I do it with those dispositions which are
congenial to the subject, and, I trust, natural to myself.

You cannot absolutely have forgotten an evening visit which you paid me last
January, in Bond Street, when I was ill in bed; -- nor ought it to escape your
occasional reflection that you sat by my bedside the whole night, performing
every act of the most friendly and pious attention. -- I then thought that the
scarecrow death was at my heels; -- nay, I thought the villain had got me by
the throat, -- and I told you as much. -- However, it pleased Heaven, that I
should not be snatched from the world at that moment; though I spoke my own
honest opinion when I vaticinated my destiny by expressing little hopes of
getting to the winter's end -- I believe, my dear friend, said I, that I shall
soon be off. -- I hope not, you replied, with a squeeze of my hand and a sigh
of your heart, which went to the very bottom of mine: -- but, -- you were
pleased to add lest that should be the case, I hope you will do me the favor
to let me be always with you, that I may have every atom of advantage and
comfort your society may afford me, while Heaven permits it to last. --

I spoke no reply, for I could not, -- but my heart made one then, and will
continue to do so, -- till it is become a clod of the Valley.

Hence it is, that I do not doubt but you will quit the ring of pleasure
without regret, to come and sit with me beneath my Honey-Suckle, which is now
flaunting like a Ranelagh beauty, and accompany me in paying my nuns their
pensive evening visit. -- We can go to vespers with them, and return home to
our curds and cream with more delicious sentiments than all the pleasures of
the world, and the beauties thereof, in their vainest moments, can truly afford.

I am busy about another couple of volumes to amuse, and, as I hope, to
instruct a gouty and a splenetic world; -- in which, I solemnly declare, I have
no Ambition to remain, but for the love I bear to such friends as you; and,
perhaps, the vanity, which I am vain enough not to call an idle one, of adding
a few more leaves to the wreath which I have been able to weave for my own
little glory.

Come, then, and let me read the pages to you as they fall from my pen; and be
a Mentor to Tristram, as you have been to Yorick. -- At all events, -- I am
sure you cannot come to York without coming to me; and I shall triumph
completely over Lady Lepel, etc. if I draw you for a month from the bright
center to which you are so naturally attracted. So God bless you, -- and
believe me, with all sincerity, to be

Most affectionately yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XIX. To -- --
Bishopthorp, Thursday night.
I SAW the charming Mrs. Vesey but for a moment, and she contrived with her
voice and her thousand other graces to dis -- order me; and what she will have
to answer for on the occasion, I shall not employ my casuistry to determine; --
nor shall I ask my good friend the Archbishop, from whose house, and amidst
whose kindness and hospitality I address this to you.

I envy, however, your saunter together round an empty Ranelagh, though I
should have liked it the better, because it was empty, and would give the
imagination and every delicious feeling, opportunity to make one forget there
was another being in the room -- but ourselves.

You will, I am sure, more than understand me when I mention that sense of
female perfection, -- I mean, however, when the female is sitting or walking
beside you, -- which so possesses the mind that the whole Globe seems to be
occupied by none but two. -- When your hearts, in perfect unison, or, I should
rather say, harmony with each other, produce the same chords, -- and blossom
with the same flowers of thought and sentiment.

These hours, -- which virtuous, tender minds have the power of separating from
the melancholy seasons of life, -- make ample amends for the weight of cares
and disappointments, which the happiest of us are doomed to bear. -- They cast
the brightest sunshine on the dreary landscape, -- and form a kind of refuge
from the stormy wind and tempest.

With such a companion, is not the primrose bank and the cottage, which humble
virtue has raised on its side, superior to all that splendor and wealth has
formed in the palaces of monarchs -- The scented heath is then the Perfumed
Araby, and, though the Nightingale should refuse to lodge among the branches of
the poor solitary tree that overshadows us, -- if my fair minstrel did but pour
forth the melting strain, I would not look to the music of the spheres for
ravishment.

There is something, my dear friend, most wonderfully pleasant in the idea of
getting away from the world; -- and though I have ever found it a great
comfort, yet I have been more vain of the business, when I have done it in the
midst of the world. -- But this aberration from the crowd, while you are
surrounded and pressed by it, is only to be accomplished by the magic of female
perfection. -- Friendship, with all its powers, -- mere friendship, cannot do
it. -- A more refined sentiment must employ its influence to wrap the heart in
this delicious oblivion. -- It is too pleasing to last long, -- for envious,
sleepless care is ever on the watch to awake us from the bewitching trance.

You, my friend, possess something of the reality of it: and I, while I enjoy
your happiness, apply to fancy for the purpose of creating a copy of it. -- So
I sit myself down upon the turf, and place a lovely fair one by my side, -- as
lovely, if possible, as Mrs. V --, and having plucked a sprig of blossoms from
the Maybush, I place it in her bosom, and then address some tender tale to her
heart, -- and if she weeps at my story, I take the white handkerchief she holds
in her hand and wipe the tears from off her cheek: and then I dry my own with
it: -- and thus the delightful vision gives wing to a lazy hour, calms my
spirits, and composes me for my pillow.

To wish that care may never plant a thorn upon yours, would be an idle
employment of votive regard; -- but that you may preserve the virtue which will
blunt their points, and continue to possess the feelings which will, sometimes,
pluck them away, is a wish not unworthy of that friendship, with which

I am, your most affectionate, L. STERN.
P.S. Lydia writes me word she has got a lover. -- Poor dear Girl! --



LETTER XX. To -- --.
Sunday Evening.
DO not imagine, my dear Boy -- and do not suffer, I beseech you any pedantic,
cold-hearted fellow to persuade you -- that sensibility is an evil. You may
take my word on this subject, as you have been pleased to do on many others --
that sensibility is one of the first blessings of life -- as well as the
brightest ornament of the human character.

You do not explain matters to me, which, by the bye, is not fair; but I
suppose, from the tenor of your letter, which is now beside me, that you have
been made a dupe of by some artful person -- who, I am disposed to think, is
some cunning baggage -- and that, under the impressions of this game that has
been played you, your vanity is alarmed, and your understanding piqued; and
then, you lay all this dire grievance, in a very pettish manner, let me tell
you, at the door of your sensibility. And, which is worse than all the rest,
you write to me as if you really believed yourself to be in earnest, in all the
see-saw observations you have written to me on the subject.

Be assured, my dear friend, if I thought the sentiments of your last letter
were not the sentiments of a sickly moment -- if I could be made to believe,
for an instant, that they proceeded from you, in a sober, reflecting condition
of your mind -- I should give you over as incurable, and banish all my hopes of
your rising into that proud honor, and brilliant reputation, which, I trust,
you will one day possess.

I was almost going to write -- and wherefore should I not -- that there is an
amiable kind of cullibility, which is as superior to the slow precaution of
worldly wisdom, as the sound of Abel's Viol di Gamba, to the braying of an ass
on the other side of my paling.

If I should, at any time, hear a man pique himself upon never having been a
dupe -- I should grievously suspect that such an one will, some time or other,
give cause to be thought, at best, a mean-spirited, dirty rascal.

You may think this a strange doctrine -- but, be that as it may -- I am not
ashamed to adopt it. -- What would you say of any character, who had neither
humanity, generosity, nor confidence? -- Why you would say -- I know you would
-- such a man Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils -- And yet imposition
-- dupery -- deception -- call it by what name you will -- attends upon these
virtues like their shadow. For virtue, my dear friend, like every other
possession in this world, though it is the most valuable of all -- is of a
mixed nature; and the very inconveniences of it, if they deserve that name,
form the basis on which its importance and natural excellence is established.

Sensibility is oftentimes betrayed into a foolish thing; -- but its folly is
amiable, and some one or other is the better for it. I am not for its excesses
-- or a blind submission to its impulse, which produces them; -- yet, some how
or other, I should be strongly disposed to hug the being, who would take the
rag off his back -- to place it on the shivering wretch who had naught to cover
him.

Discretion is a cold quality -- but I have no objection to the possessing as
much of it -- as will direct your finer feelings to their proper objects; --
but here let its office finish; if it proceeds a step further there may be
mischief; -- it may cool that currrent which is the lifeblood of all virtue,
and will, I trust, warm your heart, till it is become a clod of the valley.

Sensibility is the source of those delicious feelings which give a brighter
color to our joys, and turn our tears to rapture. -- Though it may, now and
then, lead us into a serape, as we pass through life -- you may be assured, my
dear friend, it will get us out of them all, at the end of it; -- and that is a
matter which wiser men than myself will tell you is well worth thinking about.

So leaving you to your contemplations -- and wishing them, and every thing you
do, an happy issue -- I remain, with great truth,

your affectionate, L. STERN.

LETTER XXI. To -- --.
Bond Street, Thursday Morning.
So, my dear friend, you are pleased to be very angry with the Reviewers; -- so
am not I. -- but as your displeasure proceeds from your regard for me, -- I
thank you, as I ought to do, -- again and again.

I really do not know to whom I am personally indebted for so much obliging
illiberality. -- Nor can I tell whether it is the society at large, or a
splenetic Individual, to whom I am to acknowledge my obligation. -- I have
never enquired who it is or who they are: -- and if I knew him or them, -- what
would it signify? -- and wherefore should I give their names immortality in my
writings, which they will never find in their own. -- Let the Asses bray as
they like; -- I shall treat their worships as they deserve, in my own way and
manner, -- and in a way and manner that they will like less than any other.

There is a certain race of people, who are ever aiming to treat their betters
in some scurvy way or other -- but it has ever been a practice with me, not to
mind a little dirt thrown upon my coat, -- so that I keep my lining unrumpled.
-- And so much for that envy, ignorance and ill nature, for which, what I have
written, is far too much.

I am rejoiced, however, for twenty good reasons, which I will tell you
hereafter, that London lies in your way between Oxforshire and Suffolk, and one
of them I will tell you now -- which is, that you can be of very great service
to me; so I would desire you to prepare yourself to do me a kindness; if I did
not know that you are always in such a state of preparation.

The town is so empty, that though I have been in it, full four and twenty
hours, I have seen only three people I know -- Foot on the stage -- Sir
Charles Davers at St. James's Coffee-house, and Williams, who was an hasty bird
of passage, on his flight to Brigthelmstone, where I am told he is making love
in right earnest, to a very fine woman, and with all the success his friends
can wish him. Our races at York were every thing we could desire them to be in
the ball-room, and every thing we did not desire them to be on the ground. The
rain said nay, with a vengeance, to the sports of the course, for all the
water-spouts of the heavens seemed to be let loose upon it. However in the
amusements under cover, we were all as merry as heart could wish. I had
promised a certain person that you should be there, and was obliged to parry a
score or two of reproaches on your account.

But though I forgot to tell it you before, I am by no means well, and if I do
not get away from this climate before winter sets in, I shall never see another
spring in this world; and it is to forward my journey to the South, that I
request you to make haste to me from the West.

Alas, alas, my friend! I begin to feel that I lose strength in these annual
struggles and encounters with that miserable scarecrow, who knows as well as I
do, that, do what I can he will finally get the better of me, and all of us.
Indeed, he has already beat the vizard from my helmet, and the point of my
spear is not as it was wont to be. But while it pleases heaven to grant me
life, it will, I trust, grant me spirits to bear up against the sawey
circumstances of it, and preserve to my last separating sigh, that sensibility
to whatever is kind and gracious, which, when once it possesses the heart,
makes, I trust, ample amends for a large portion of human error.

You may, indeed, believe, that while I am sensible of any thing, I shall be
sensible of your friendship; and I have every reason to think, that should my
term be drawing nigh to its period, you will continue to love me while I live,
and when I am no more, to cherish the memory of

Your ever faithful and affectionate L. STERN.

LETTER XXII. To -- --
Sunday Morning.
IF you wish to have the representation of my spare, meagre-form -- which, by
the bye, is not worth the canvas it must be painted on -- you shall be most
welcome to it; and I am happy in the reflection, that when my bones shall be
laid low, there may be any resemblance of me, which may recall my image to your
friendly and sympathizing recollection.

But you must mention the business to Reynolds yourself; for I will tell you
why I cannot. He has already painted a very excellent portrait of me, which,
when I went to pay him for, he desired me to accept, as a tribute, to use his
own elegant and flattering expression, that his heart wished to pay to my
genius. That man's way of thinking and manners, are at least equal to his
pencil.

You see therefore the delicacy of my situation, as well as the necessity, if
the genius of Reynolds is to be employed in the business, of your taking it
entirely upon yourself. Or if your friendly impatience which you express with
so much kindness, will let you wait till we make our tour to Bath, your
favorite Gainshorough may do the deed.

Or why not your little friend Cosway, who is rising fast into fame and
fortune. But be it as you please, and arrange it according to your own fancy.

At all events, I shall treat myself when I get to Rome with my own busto, if
Nollikens does not make a demand for it that may be inconsistent with my
Exchequer. The statuary decorations of my grandfather the Archbishop's
monument, in the Cathedral at York, which you admire so much, have given birth,
I believe, to this whim of mine; and this piece of marble, which my vanity --
for let it be vanity if you please -- destines for myself, may be placed by the
hand of friendship, and by yours perhaps, near my grave -- and so much for that.

But I was born for digressions, and I, therefore, tell you at once, not
rashly, or prematurely, but with all due sobriety and reflection, that Lord --
is of a low, base, pimping nature. If he had been nothing but a fool, I should
have said -- Have mercy upon him: but he has just understanding sufficient to
make him answerable for what he does, and not sufficient to perceive the
superiority of what is great over what is little. -- If ever that man rises
into a good or a noble action, I would be bound to be considered as a retailer
of scandal, and an ill-natured man, as long as I live, and as long as my memory
lives; but no more of him I beseech you -- and the hour tells me to write no
more of any thing, for I must hasten where I ought to have been half an hour
ago -- so God bless you, and believe me, where ever I am, to be

Most cordially yours, L. STERN

LETTER XXIII. To -- --
Monday Morning.
THE story, my dear friend, which you heard related, with such an air of
authority, is like many other true stories, absolutely false. Mr. Hume and I
never had a dispute -- I mean a serious, angry or petulant dispute, in our
lives: -- indeed I should be most exceedingly surprised to hear that David ever
had an unpleasant contention with any man; -- and if I should be made to
believe that such an event had happened, nothing would persuade me that his
opponent was not in the wrong: for, in my life, did I never meet with a being
of a more placid and gentle nature; and it is this amiable turn of his
character, that has given more consequence and force to his skepticism, than
all the arguments of his sophistry. -- You may depend on this as a truth.

We had, I remember well, a little pleasant sparring at Lord Hertford's table
at Paris; but there was nothing in it that did not bear the marks of good will
and urbanity on both sides. -- I had preached that very day at the Ambassador's
Chapel, and David was disposed to make a little merry with the Parson; and, in
return, the Parson was equally disposed to make a little mirth with the
Infidel; we laughed at one another, and the company laughed with us both --
and, whatever your informer might pretend, he certainly was not one of that
company.

As for his other history, that I preached an offensive sermon at the
Ambassador's Chapel -- it is equally founded in truth; for Lord Hertford did me
the honor to thank me for it again and again. The text, I will own, was an
unlucky one, and that was all your informer could have heard to have justified
his report. -- If he fell asleep immediately after I repeated it -- I will
forgive him.

The fact was as follows:

Lord Hertford had just taken and furnished a magnificent Hotel; and as every
thing, and any thing gives the fashion of the moment at Paris, it had been the
fashion for every one to go to see the English Ambassador's new hotel. -- It
occupied the curiosity, formed the amusement, and gave a subject of
conversation to the polite circles of Paris, for a fortnight at least.

Now it fell to my lot, that is to say, I was requested to preach, the first
day service was performed in the chapel of this new hotel. -- The message was
brought me when I was playing a sober game of Whist with the Thornhills, and
whether it was that I was called rather abruptly from my afternoon's amusement
to prepare myself for this business, for it was to be on the next day; or from
what other cause I do not pretend to determine, but that unlucky kind of fit
seized me, which you know I can never resist, and a very unlucky text did come
into my head, -- and you will say so when you read it. "And Hezekiah said unto
the Prophet, I have shown them my vessels of gold, and my vessels of silver,
and my wives and my concubines, and my boxes of ointment, and whatever I have
in my house, have I shown unto them: and the Prophet said unto Hezekiah, thou
have done very foolishly."

Now, as the text is a part of Holy writ, that could not give offense; though
wicked wits are sometimes disposed to ill-treat it with their own scurvy
misrepresentations. -- And as to the discourse itself, nothing could be more
innocent, and David Hume favored it with his grace and approbation.

But here I am got, I know not how, writing about myself for whole pages
together -- whereas the only part of my letters that can justify my being an
egotist, is, when I assure any gentle spirit, or faithful friend, as I now do
you, that I am her, or his, or your

Most affectionate, humble servant. L. STERN.

LETTER XXIV. To -- --.
Wednesday Noon.
BELIEVE me, my dear friend, I have no great faith in Doctors. Some eminent
ones of the faculty assured me, many years ago, that if I continued to do as I
was then doing, I should not live three months. Now the fact is, that I have
been doing exactly what they told me I ought not to do, for thirteen years
together -- and here I am, as thin, it is true, but as saucy as ever; and it
will not be my fault, if I do not continue to give them the lie for another
period of equal duration.

It is Lord Bacon, I think, who observes, -- at least be it who it may that
made the observation, it is not unworthy the great man whose name I have just
written -- That Physicians are old women, who sit by your bedside till they
kill you, or Nature cures you.

There is an uncertainty in the business that often baffles experience, and
renders genius abortive -- Though I mean not, believe me, to be severe on a
science which is sometimes made the means of doing good. Nay, the science
itself considered, naturally and physically, is the eye of all the rest. But I
do not always hold my peace when I reflect on those self-conceited, upstart
professors of it, who fly and bounce, and give themselves airs, if you do not
read the directions upon the label of a phial, which contains the matter of
their prescriptions, with as much reverence, as if it had been penned by St.
Luke himself.

Goddess of Health -- let me drink thy healing and sustaining beverage at the
pure fountain which flows at thy command! Give me to breathe the balmy air, and
to feel the enlivening sun -- and so I will! -- for if I do not see you in
fifteen days, I will, on the sixteenth, step quickly into the Dover coach, and
proceed without you to the banks of the Rhone, where you may follow me if you
please -- and if you do not, the difference between us will be -- that while
you are passing your Christmas Day in fencing against fogs, by warm clothes and
large fires, I shall be sitting on the grass, courting no warmth but the
allcheering one which proceeds from the grand luminary of nature.

So think on these things I beseech you -- and let me know about it, for I will
not remain gasping another month in London, even for your sake, -- or for your
company, which, -- I might add, would be for my own sake.

In the mean time, and at all times, may God bless you.

I am, most cordially yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XXV. To -- --.
Wednesday Noon.
I AM always getting into a scrape, not from a carelessness of offending, as
some good-humoured people have suspected, for I do not wish to give offense,
but from the want of being understood. -- Pope has well expressed the hardship
of being forced -- to trudge
Without a second and without a judge.


I think the quotation is correct. -- Indeed, a man may proceed well enough
without a second. Genius is oftentimes so far from wanting such an assistant,
that it is frequently clogged by it; -- but to be without a judge is a
mortification which comes home with much severity to the bosoms of those who
feel, or fancy, which is pretty near the same thing, that judgment -- I mean
impartial, adequate judgment, would be their reward.

To be eternally misunderstood, and which naturally follows, to be eternally
misrepresented by ignorance, is far, far worse than to be slandered by malice.
-- Calumny is more than oftentimes, for it is almost always the sacrifice which
vice pays to virtue, and folly offers up to wisdom. -- A wise man while he
pities the efforts of slander, will feel a kind of consequence from the
exertion of them; -- like the philosopher who is said to have raised a monument
to his own fame, with the stones, which the malignity of his competitors had
thrown at him.

The divorce between virtue and reputation is too common to be wondered at --
though it is too unjust not to be lamented: but that being a circumstance which
connects itself with something like the general order of Providence, we are
able to console ourselves under it, by hope and resignation. But in the little,
and comparatively speaking, the petty business of human fame -- the mind may be
justified in kicking at the perversions to which its honest and best endeavors
are so continually subject.

I do most sincerly assure you, that I have seldom been so proud of myself and
the little display of my talents, -- whatever they may be -- as I was in the
very circumstance which has given so much uneasiness. I intended no severity --
I was all complacency and good humor -- my spirits were in unison with every
generous and gracious thought, -- and, so far was I from possessing the idea of
giving offense -- and to a Lady -- that there never was a moment of my life,
perhaps, when I was so disposed to buckle on my armor, and mount my Rosinante,
to go and fight the cause of injured or captive beauty. -- But instead of all
this, here am I considered as the very monster whom I myself was ready to
combat and to destroy.

You will, therefore, be so good as to communicate these thoughts, in as much
better a manner as you please, to Mrs. H --, and assure her, that she has only
done what so many have done before her -- that is, she has misconceived, or, as
that word may produce a misconception -- she has misunderstood me.

So far I am most willing to travel in the highway of apology; and, if she is
disposed to smile, I will receive her returning favor, with all due
acknowledgments; but if she should think it clever, or witty, or consequential,
to continue to be offended -- I will not fail to remember her in a postscript
to my chapter on the right and wrong end of a woman; which, though my uncle
Toby, from a certain combination of circumstances could never be made to
understand, I will explain to the world in such a manner, that they who run may
read.

I am not, however, unintelligible to all. There are some spirits who want no
key either to my speech or my writings; and they -- I mean the spirits -- are
of the first order. This is some comfort, and that comfort increases both in
its weight and measure, on the reflection that you are one of them.

But my paper and postman's bell both warn me to do -- what I ought to have
done at least a page ago -- and that is to write adieu; so adieu, and God bless
you.

I am, most cordially yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XXVI. To -- --
Thursday Nov. 1.
WERE I a Minister of State -- instead of being a country-parson; -- or rather,
though I do not know that it is the better thing of the two, -- were I king of
a country, not like Sancho-Pancha, without a will of my own, but with all the
rights, privileges and immunities belonging to such a situation, I would not
suffer a man of genius to be pulled to pieces, or pulled down, or even whistled
at, by any man who had not some sort of genius of his own. -- That is to say, I
would not suffer blockheads of any denomination to show their heads in my
territories.

What -- will you say -- is there no saving clause for the ignorant and the
unlettered? -- No spot set apart for those on whom science has not beamed; or
the current of whose genius poverty has frozen? -- My dear friend, you do not
quite understand me, -- and I beg of you not to suppose -- that all men are
blockheads who are not learned -- and that no man who is learned can be a
blockhead.

My definitions are not borrowed from the common room of a College, or the dull
muzzing pericranium of a wordmongering dictionary maker, but from the book of
Nature, the volume of the world, and the pandects of experience. There I find a
blockhead to be a man, (for I am not at present in a humor to involve the poor
women in the definition) who thinks he has what, in fact, he has not -- and who
does not know how to make a right use of that which he has.

It is the mode of applying means to ends that marks the character of superior
understanding. -- The poor scarecrow of a beast that Yorick rode so long and
to the last, being once set in the right road, will sooner get to the end of
his journey, than the fleetest race-horse of Newmarket, who has taken an
opposite direction.

Wisdom very often cannot read or write, and Folly will often quote you
passages from all the dead, and half the living languages. I beg therefore, you
will not sorm a bad, -- that is to say a false idea of this kingdom of mine --
for whenever I get it, you may be sure of being well appointed, and living at
your ease, as every one must do there, who lives to his honor. -- But to the
point.

To the point, did I say? -- Alas! there is so much zig-zag in my destiny, that
it is impossible for me to keep going on strait through one poor letter -- and
that to a friend; but so it is -- for here is a visitor arrived to whom I
cannot say nay -- and who obliges me to write adieu, a page or two, or three,
perhaps, before I intended to do it. I must therefore fold up my paper as it is
-- and shall only add, God bless you -- which, however, is the constant and
sincerest wish of

your affectionate, L. STERN.

LETTER XXVII. To -- --.
Dijon, Nov. 9, 1765. MY DEAR FRIEND,
I recommend it to you, -- not, perhaps, above all things, but very assuredly
above most things, -- to stick to your own understanding a little more than you
do; for, believe me, an ounce of it will answer your purpose better than a
pound weight of other people's. There is a certain timidity which renders early
life amiable, as a matter of speculation; but is very inconvenient indeed, not
to say dangerous, according to the present humor of the world, in matters of
practice.

There is a manly confidence, which, as it springs from a consciousness of
possessing certain excellent qualities and valuable seize, we cannot have
too early; and there is no more impropriety in offering manifestations of it to
the world, than the putting on your helmet in the day of battle. We want it as
a protection -- I say as a protection, from the insults and injuries of others;
for, in your particular circumstances, I consider it merely as a defensive
quality -- to prevent you from being run down, or run over, by the first
ignorant blockhead or insolent coxcomb, who perceives your modesty to be a
restraint on your spirit.

But this by the way. -- The application of it is left to your own discernment
and good sense, of which I shall not write what I think, and what some others
think, whose testimony will wear well.

I am so much better pleased since I set my foot on the Continent, that it
would do you good to see -- and more good still to hear me; for I have
recovered my voice in this genial climate; and so far am I now from finding a
difficulty to make myself heard across the table, that I am almost fit to
preach in a cathedral.

Here they are all hey -- go -- mad. -- The vintage has been abundant, and is
now at the close. Every eye beams delight, and every voice is attuned to joy.
-- Though I am running away as fast as I can well go, and am withal so pressed
by the rascal, death! that I ought not in prudence to take time to look behind
me; yet cannot I resist the temptation of getting out of my chaise, and sitting
for a whole evening on a bank, to see those happy people dance away the labors
of the day: and thus they contrive, for two or three hours at least out of the
four and twenty, to forget, God bless 'em, that there are such things as labor
and care in the world.

This innocent oblivion of sorrow is one of the happiest arts of life; and
philosophy, in all its storehouse of human remedies, has nothing like unto it.
Indeed, I am persuaded that mirth -- a sober, well regulated mirth -- is
perfectly acceptable to the kind Being that made us; -- and that a man may
laugh and sing, and dance too -- and, after all, go to Heaven.

I never could -- and I never can -- nay, I positively never will, believe that
we were sent into this world to go sorrowing through it. On the contrary, every
object around me -- the rural dance, and the rustic minstrelsy, that I behold
and hear from my window, tell me that man is framed for joy. Nor shall any
crack-brained Carthusian Monk, -- or all the Carthusian Monks in the world, --
persuade me to the contrary.

Swist says, vive la bagatelle. I say, vive la joie; which I am sure is no
bagatelle; but, as I take it, a very serious thing, and the first of human
possessions.

May your treasury, my dear friend, continue to have good store in it -- and,
like the widow's cruse, may it fail not!

At Lions I expect to find some tidings of you, and from thence I will dispatch
some further tidings of myself. -- So in the mean time, and at all times, may
God bless you. -- Believe me,

I shall ever remain most truly And affectionately yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XXVIII. To -- --.
Lions, Nov. 15.
I have traveled hither most deliciously -- though I have made my journey in a
desoblegeant, and of course, alone. But when the heart is at rest, and the mind
is in harmony with itself, and every subordinate feeling is well attuned, not
an object offers itself to the attention but may be made to produce pleasure --
Besides, such is the character of this happy people, that you see a smile on
every countenance, and hear the notes of joy from every tongue. -- There is an
old woman, at this moment, playing on the viol before my window, and a groupe
of young people are dancing to it, with more appearance, and, I believe, more
reality of pleasure, than all your brilliant assemblies at Almack's can boast.

I love my country as well as any of her children -- and I know the solid,
characteristic virtues of its people; -- but they do not play the game of
happiness with that attention or success which is practiced and obtained here.
-- I shall not enter into the physical or moral difference between the two
nations -- but I cannot, however, help observing that, while the French possess
a gaity of heart, that always weakens and sometimes baffles sorrow, the English
still answer the description of the old Frenchman, and really continue to
divert themselves moult tristement.

Nay, how often have I seen at a York Assembly, two young people dance down
thirty couple, with as grave countenances as if they did it for hire, and were,
after all, not sure of being paid: and here have I beheld the sunburned sons
and daughters of labor rise from their scanty meal with not a pulse in their
hearts that did not beat to pleasure; -- and, with the brightest looks of
satisfaction, make their wooden shoes responsive to the sound of a
broken-winded hautboy.

All the world shall never persuade me there is not a Providence, and a
gracious one too, which governs it. With every blessing under the sun we look
grave, and reason ourselves into dissatissaction; while here -- with scarce any
blessing but the Sun -- on est content de son etat.

But the kind Being who made us all, gives to each the portion of happiness,
according to his wise and good pleasure; for no one -- and nothing is beneath
his allprovidential care; -- he even tempers the wind to the shorn lamb.

By such reflections, and under such influences, I am perverted from my
purpose; for when I drew my chair to the table, and dipped my pen into the
inkhorn, I breathed nothing but complaint, and it was my sole design to tell
you so -- for I have sent -- a la post restante again and again, and there is
no letter from you. But though I am impatience itself to continue my journey
toward the Alps, and cannot possibly indulge my curious spirit till I hear
from you, yet such is the effect of my sympathetic nature, that I have caught
all the ease and good humor of the people about me, and seem to be sitting
here, in my black coat and yellow slippers, as contented as if I had not
another step to take; and, God knows, I have a pretty circuit to make, my
friend, before I may embrace you again.

It is not, as you well know, my practice to icratch out any thing I write, or
I would erase the last dozen lines; as, the very moment I had concluded them,
your letter and two others arrived, and brought me every thing I could wish. --
I would really linger, if I thought you would overtake me. At all events, we
shall meet at Rome -- at Rome -- and I shall now take the wings of tomorrow
morning to forward my progress thither.

I sincerely hope this paper may be thrown away upon you, -- that is, I wish
you may be come away before it has made its passage to England. -- At all
events, my dear boy, we shall meet at Rome. So till then -- fare thee well: --
there and every where -- I shall be,

Your most faithful and affectionate Ls L. STERN.

LETTER XXIX. To -- --
Bond Street.
I HAVE a great mind to have done with joking, laughing and merry-making, for
the rest of my days, with either man, woman, or child; and set up for a grave,
formal, see-saw character; and dispense stupid wisdom, as I have hitherto been
said to have done sensible nonsense, to my countrymen and country-women.

To tell you the truth -- I began this letter yesterday morning, and was
interrupted in getting to the end of it, by half a dozen idle people, who
called upon me to lounge and to laugh; though one of them forced me home with
him to dine with his sister, whom I found to be a being of a superior order,
and who has absolutely made the something like a resolution with which I began
this letter, not worth the feather of the quill with which it was written.

She is, in good faith, charming beyond my powers of description; and we had
such an evening, as made the cup of tea she gave me more delicious than nectar.

By the bye, she wishes very much to become acquainted with you -- not, believe
me, from any representations or biography of mine, but from the warm encomiums
she has received of you from others, and those, as she says, of the first
order. After all this, however, you may be sure that my testimony was not
wanting. -- So that, when you will give an opportunity, I shall have the honor
of presenting you to kiss her hand, and add another devout worshipper at the
temple of such transcendant merit.

I am really of opinion that, if there is a woman in the world formed to do you
good, and to make you love her into the bargain -- which, I believe, is the
only way of doing you any good -- this is the pre-eminent and bewitching
character. -- Indeed, were you to command my seeble powers to deliniate the
lovely being whose affections would well repay thee for all the heart-achs and
disquieting apprehensions that may and will afflict thee in thy passage through
life, it would be this fair and excellent creature. My Knight Errant spirit has
already told her that she is a Dulcinea to me -- but I would most willingly
take off my armor and break my spear, and resign her as an Angel to you.

I need not say any thing, I trust, of my affection for you; and I have, just
now, some singular ideas on your subject, which kept me awake last night, when
I ought to have been found asleep -- but I shall reserve them for the
communication of my fireside, or yours, as it may be; and I wish, as devoutly
as ever I wished any thing in my life, that my fire was to brighten before you
this very evening.

In the name of fortune, -- for want of a better at the moment, -- what
business have you to be fifty leagues from the capital, at a time when I stand
so much in need of you, for your own sake.

I hear you exclaim -- whom is all this about? -- And I see you half determined
to throw my letter into the fire, because you cannot find her name in it. This
is all, my good friend, as it ought to be -- for you may be assured that I
never intended to write her name on this sheet of paper. I have told you of the
divinity, and you will find the rest inscribed on the altar.

I was never more serious in my life; so let the wheels of your chariot roll as
rapidly as posthorses can make them, toward this town; where if you come not
soon, I shall be gone; and then I know not what may become of all my present
good intentions toward you; -- future ones, it is true, I shall have in plenty
-- for, at all events, in all circumstances, and every where,

I am, Most cordially, and affectionately yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XXX. To -- --
Friday.
THESE may be piping times to you, my dear friend, and I rejoice at it -- but
they are not dancing ones to me.

You will perceive, by the manner in which this letter is written, that if I
dance -- Holbein's piper must be the fiddler.

Since I wrote to you last, I have burst another vessel of my lungs, and lost
blood enough to pull down a very strong man: what it has done then with my
meagre form, clad as it is with infirmities, may be better imagined than
described. -- Indeed, it is with difficulty and some intervals of repose that I
can trail on my pen; and, if it were not for the anxious forwardness of my
spirits; which aids me for a few minutes by their precious Mechanism, I should
not be able to thank you at all: -- I know I cannot thank you as I ought, for
your four letters which have remained so long unanswered, and particularly for
the last of them.

I really thought, my good friend, that I should have seen you no more. The
grim scarecrow seemed to have taken post at the foot of my bed, and I had not
strength to laugh him off as I had hitherto done: -- so I bowed my head in
patience, without the least expectation of moving it again from my pillow.

But somehow or other he has, I believe, changed his purpose for the present --
and we shall, I trust, embrace once again. I can only add, that, while I live,
I shall be

Most affectionately yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XXXI. To -- --
Bond-street, May 8.
I Felt the full force of an honest heart-ach on reading your last letter. --
The story it contains may be placed among the most affecting relations of human
calamity, and the happiest efforts of human benevolence. I happened to have it
in my pocket yesterday morning when I breakfasted with Mrs. M --; and, for want
of something so good of my own, I read the whole of your letter to her, -- but
this is not all; for, what is more to the purpose, (that is, to the purpose of
your honor) she desired to read it herself, and then she entreated me not to
delay the earliest opportunity to present you to her breakfast-table, and the
mistress of it to you. I told her of the awkward distance of an hundred miles,
at least, that lay between us; but I promised and vowed, -- for I was obliged
to do both, -- that the moment I could lay hold of your arm, I would lead you
to her vestibule. -- I really begin to think I shall get some credit by you.

Love, I most readily acknowledge, is subject to violent paroxysms, as well as
slow fevers; but there is so much pleasure attendant upon the passion in
general, and so many amiable sympathies are connected with it; nay, -- it is
sometimes so suddenly, and oftentimes so easily cured, that I cannot, for the
life of me, pity its disasters with the same tone of commiseration, which
accompanies my consolatory visits to other less oftensible sources of distress.
-- In the last sad separation of friends, hope comforts us with the prospect of
an eternal reunion, and religion encourages the belief of it: -- but, in the
melancholy history which you relate, I behold what has always appeared to me,
to be the most affecting sight in the gloomy region of human misfortune: I mean
the pale countenance of one who has seen better days, and sinks under the
despair of seeing them return. The mind that is bowed down by unmerited
calamity, and knows not from what point of the compass to expect any good, is
in a state, over which the Angel of pity sheds all his showers -- Unable to
dig, and to beg ashamed -- what a description! -- what an object for relief; --
and how great the rapture to relieve it!

I do not, my dear boy, -- indeed I do not -- envy your feelings, for I trust
that I share them; but if it were possible for me to envy you any thing that
does you so much honor, and makes me love you, if possible, so much better
than I did before -- it is the little fabric of comfort and happiness which you
have erected in the depths of misery. The whole may occupy, perhaps, but little
space in this world -- but, like the mustard seed, it will grow up and rear its
head toward that Heaven, to which the Spirit that planted it will finally
conduct you.

Robinson called upon me yesterday, to take me to dinner in Berkeley-square; --
and, while I was arranging my drapery, I gave him your letter to read. He felt
it as he ought, and not only desired me to say, every handsome thing on his
part to you, but he said a great many handsome things of you himself, during
dinner and after it, and drank your health. Nay, as his wine warmed him, he
talked loud, and threatened to drink water -- like you -- the rest of his days.

But while I am relating so many fine things to flatter your vanity, let me, I
beseech you, mention something to flatter my own; -- and this is neither more
or less than a very elegant silver standish, with a motto engraved upon it,
which has been sent me by Lord Spencer. This mark of that Nobleman's good
disposition toward me, was displayed in a manner, which enhanced the value of
the gift, and heightened my sense of the obligation. I could not thank him for
it as I ought; but I wrote my acknowledgements as well as I could, and promised
his Lordship that, as it was a piece of plate the Shandy family would value the
most, it should certainly be the last they will part with.

I had another little business to communicate to you, but the postman's bell
warns me to write adieu -- so God bless you, and preserve you, as you are; --
and this wish, by the bye, is saying no small matter in your favor; but it is
addressed for, and to you, with the same truth that guides my pen in assuring
you, that I am, most sincerely and cordially, your faithful friend,

L. STERN.

LETTER XXXII. To -- --
Bond Street.
THERE is a certain pliability of the affections, my dear friend, which, with
all its inconveniences, -- and I will acknowledge a thousand, -- forms a
wonderful charm in the human character. -- To become a dupe to others, who are
almost always worse, and, very often, more ignorant than yourself, is not only
mortifying to one's pride, but frequently destructive to one's fortune.
Nevertheless, there is something, in the very face, and, which is worse, in the
mind, of suspicion, of such a detestable complexion and character, that I could
never bear it; and whenever I have observed mistrust in the heart, I would
never rap at the door of it, even to pay, if I could help it, a morning visit,
much less to take my lodging there.

Niger est, hune tu Roman caveto. This sort of cullibility most certainly lays
you open to the designs of knaves and rascals; and they are, alas! to be found
in the hedges and highway sides, and will come in without the trouble of
sending for them. -- The happy mean between mad goodnature and mean self-love,
is of difficult attainment; though Mr. Pope says, -- that Lord Bathurst
possessed it in an eminent degree, -- and I believe it. Indeed, it is for my
honor that I should believe it, as I have received much kindness, and many
generous attentions from that venerable, and excellent nobleman: -- as I never
possessed this happy quality myself, I can only recommend it to you, without
offering any instructions on a duty, of which I cannot offer myself as an
example. -- This is not altogether clerical, -- I mean as clergymen do, -- but
no matter.

B -- is exactly one of these harmless, inoffensive people, who never frets or
fumes, but bears all his losses with a most Christian patience, and settles the
account in this manner, -- that he had rather lose any thing than that
benevolence of disposition, which forms the happiness of his life. But how will
all this end? -- for you know, as I know, that when once you have won his good
opinion, you may impose upon him ten times a day, -- if nine did not suit your
purpose. The real friends of virtue, of honor, and what is best in the human
character, should form a phalanx round such a man, and preserve him from the
harpy plottings of sharpers and villains.

But there is another species of cullibility that I never can be brought to
pity, which arises from the continual aim to make culls of others. It is not
that gentle, confidential, unsuspicious spirit, which I have already hinted to
you, but an overweening, wicked, insidious disposition, which, by being
continually engaged in the miserable business of deceiving others, either
outwits itself, or is outwitted by the very objects of its own fallacious
intentions.

There is not, believe me, a more straight way to the being a dupe yourself,
than the resting your hopes or pleasure in making dupes of others.

Cunning is not an honorable qualification; it is a kind of left handed
wisdom, which even fools can sometimes practice, and villains always make the
foundation of their designs: -- But, alas! how often does it betray its
votaries to their dishonor, if not to their destruction.

Though an occasional stratagem may be sometimes innocent, I am ever disposed
to suspect the cause where it must be employed; for, after all, you will, I am
sure, agree with me, that where artifice is not to be condemned as a crime, the
necessity, which demands it, must be considered as a misfortune.

I have been led to write thus Socratically from the tenor of your letter;
though, if my paper would allow me, I would take a frisk, and vary the scene;
but I have only room to add, that I dined in Brook-street last Sunday, where
many gracious things were said of you, not only by the old folks, but, which is
better, by the young virgins. I went afterward, not much to my credit, to
Argyle Buildings, but there were no virgins there. So may God forgive me, and
bless you, -- now, and at all times. -- Amen.

I remain, Most truly and cordially, Yours L. STERN.

LETTER XXXIII. To -- --.
Coxwould, August 19, 1766.
AMONG your Whimsicalities, my dear friend, for you have them as well as
Tristram, -- there is not one of them which possesses a more amiable tendency,
than that gentle spirit of modern Romance which, had thou lived in days of
Yore, would have made thee the veriest Knight Errant, that ever brandished a
spear, or wore a vizard.

The very same spirit that has led thee from hence to the Bristol Fountain, for
no other earthly purpose, but to let a Phthysical maiden lean upon thine arm,
and receive the healing waters from thine hand, would, in a former age, have
urged thee to traverse forests and fight with monsters, for the sake of some
Dulcinea whom thou had never seen; or perhaps have made a redcross-Knight of
thee, and carried thee over lands and seas to Palestine. --

For to tell thee the truth, enthusiasm, is in the very soul of thee: -- if
thou were born to live in some other planet, I might encourage all its glowing,
high-colored vulgarities; -- but in this miserable, backbiting, cheating,
pimping world of ours, it will not do, -- indeed, indeed it will not. -- And
full well do I know, nor does this vaticination escape me without a sigh, that
it will lead thee into a thousand scrapes, -- and some of them may be such, as
thou will not easily get out of; -- and should the fortunes of thine house be
shaken by any of them, -- with all thy pleasant enjoyments; -- what then? you
may say; nay I think I hear you say so, -- why thy friends will then lose thee.

For if foul fortune should take thy stately palfrey, with all its gay and
gilded trappings from beneath thee; or if, while thou art sleeping by
moonlight beneath a tree, -- it should escape from thee, and find another
master; -- or if the miserable Banditti of the world should plunder thee, -- I
know full well that we should see thee no more; -- for thou would then find
out some distant cell, and become an Hermit; and endeavor to persuade thyself,
not to regret the separation from those friends, who will ever regret their
separation from thee.

This enthusiastic spirit, is in itself a good spirit; -- but there is no
spirit whatever, -- no, not a termagant spirit, that requires a more active
restraint, or a more discreet regulation.

And so we will go next spring, if you please, to the fountain of Vauclusa, and
think of Petrarch, and, which is better, apostrophise his Laura. -- By that
time, I have reason to think my wife will be there, who, by the bye, is not
Laura; -- but my poor dear Lydia will be with her, and she is more than a Laura
to her fond father.

Answer me on these things, and may God bless you. --

I remain, With the most cordial truth, Your affectionate L. STERN.

LETTER XXXIV. To -- --
Sunday Evening:
THERE is a certain kind of offense which a man may, -- nay, which he ought to
forgive: -- But such is the jealous honor of the world, that there is a sort
of injury, commonly called an affront, which, if it proceeds from a certain
line of character, must be revenged. -- But let me entreat thee to remember
that hardness of heart is not worth thine anger, and would disgrace thy
vengeance. -- To turn upon a man who possesses it, would not, like Saint Paul,
be kicking against the pricks, -- but, which is far worse, against a flint. --
Thou did right, therefore my dear boy, -- in letting the matter pass as thou
have done.

As far as my observation has reached, and the circle of it is by no means, a
narrow one -- an hard heart is always a cowardly heart. -- Generosity and
courage are associate virtues; and the character which possesses the former,
must, in the nature of mental arrangements, be adorned with the latter.

If I perceive a man to be capable of doing a mean action, -- if I see him
imperious and tyrannical; if he takes advantage of the weak to oppress, or of
the poor to grind, or of the downcast to insult, -- or is continually on the
hunt after excuses not to do what he ought, -- I determine such a man, though
he may have fought fifty duels, to be a coward. -- It is by no means a proof
that a man is brave because he does not refuse to fight; -- for we all know
that cowards have fought, nay, -- that cowards have conquered, -- but a coward
never performed a generous or a noble action: -- and thou have my authority to
say, -- and thou might find a worse, that a hard-hearted character never was
a brave one. I say, thou may justly call such a man a coward, -- and, if he
should be spirited into a resentment of thy words -- fear him not. -- Tristram
shall brighten his armor, and scour the rust from off his spear, and aid thee
in the combat.

And now let me ask thee, my good friend, how it happens that thy fancy has of
late taken to the Dormitory. -- I thought the very names of Petrarch and Laura,
and the enchanting scene of Vauclusa's fountain, which is such a classical spot
to all tender minds, must have inspired thee with a flow of sentiment, that
would have meandered through every page of thy last letter; -- but instead of
it, here have I been saluted with a string, of stiff, starched notions of
honor, and God knows what -- that you could have found no where but in
conversing with the young Lords in great periwigs, -- and the old Ladies in
bouncing fardingals, -- who have so long inhabited -- 's long, long Gallery.

However, when you are tired of such company, and stalking about upon a matted
floor, you may come here and contemplate the Autumn leaf; and relax yourself
with looking at me while I prepare another volume or two to lessen the spleen
of a splenetic world. -- For with all its faults, I am willing to do it that
good at least, -- if it will let me; -- and, if it will not, -- I shall leave
you to pity it. So fare thee well, -- and God bless you.

I remain, Thine most affectionate, L. STERN.

LETTER XXXV. To Lady C -- H --
Saturday Noon.
HERE am I now actually at my writing table, -- shall I divulge the secret? --
in something between the fortieth and forty-fifth year of my life, -- I shall
leave your Ladyship, if you please, to imagine all the rest; -- and, in this
advancing state of my age, am I to address myself to all those charms which are
composed by the happiest combination of youth and beauty. --

But if you should consider this as a presumption, I will quit those beauties
which belong only to early life, and make my application to qualities, which
are of every period, and possess that lengthened charm, which makes one
overlook the wrinkles of age, and turns the hoary hair into Auburn Tresses.
That you will always possess the one as you now do the other, I have heard
acknowledged wherever I have heard your name mentioned: nor do I remember that
your praise was ever accompanied with the exception of a single but -- from any
of the many various forms and shapes, which envy plants in every corner to
snarl at excellence.

But while your Ladyship, by a kind of miraculous power, can subdue envy with
respect to yourself, -- you many sometimes, without meaning it, encourage its
attacks upon others. -- For my part, nothing can be more certain than that I
shall be envied with a vengeance, when it is known with what a gracious
condescension you have indulged my request: but envy, on such an occasion, will
add to my laurels instead of withering them: -- it is like the scar of glory;
and, I am as proud of the one, as the patriot hero has reason to be of the
other.

To confine myself, however, to the purpose of this paper.

Permit me to thank your Ladyship most cordially, for permiting me to solicit
the honor of your protection -- as for attempting to thank you for having
granted it, that is not in my power; both my pen and my lips find it impossible
to obey the impulse of my heart on the occasion. -- Perhaps the time may come,
when some of the Shandy family may possess a sufficient eloquence; to offer you
that homage, which is very devoutly felt, but cannot be adequately expressed,
-- indeed it cannot, by

Your Ladyship's most faithful, and obedient humble servant, L. STERN

LETTER XXXVI. To -- --
Wednesday, -- past 9 at Night -- and not very well.
THAT woman is a timid animal, I am most ready, my dear friend, to acknowledge,
-- but, like other timid animals, is more dangerous, in certain situations,
than those who possess a greater degree of natural courage. -- I would,
therefore, counse thee for this, among a thousand other reasons, never to make
a woman thine enemy, if thou can possibly help it. -- Not that I suspect thee
to be capible of an uncourteous act, to any of the lovelier sex, -- on the
contrary, I think thee qualified, and disposed too, beyond most men I ever
knew, to charm them, and do them good: and it is, perhaps, on that, as much as
any other account, that I warn thee against giving them offense. -- For I have
more than once observed, and mentioned with some concern, a propensity in thy
character to collect thy warm affections in one particular circle, and to be
careless of, which, as it relates to women, is the same thing as to be
ungracious to those, who are not included in it.

There is something amiable, -- nay, there may be something noble in the
principle of such a conduct; but it is too refined for a world like our's; in
which, short as life is, we may easily live long enough, to find the
inconvenience and distress of it. He who attaches himself entirely to one
object -- or even to a few, -- may, from ingratitude, caprice, or death, be
soon left alone: and he will come with an ill-grace, when necessity compels
him, to seek for kindness and society, where he formerly appeared to disdain
both.

If a small cohort of friends could be certain of continuing together, till
they all sunk, into one common grave, your present theory might form not only a
gallant, and a pleasant, but a practicable system; this, however, my dear
fellow, cannot be, and, as for living alone when all our friends are gone, it
is neither more, or less, than making life a living tomb, which, in my mind, is
far, -- far worse, than a dead one.

But to return to my subject.

Woman is a timid animal, -- and, therefore, I trust and am sure thy generous
nature, laying aside every other consideration, will never do any thing
designedly to distress it. -- Indeed, it does not appear to me, that there can
be a possible situation, which will justify any kind of inattention to the sex,
that may give them pain. -- For be assured, and I will rest my experience of
woman kind, of which I am not a little proud, on the opinion, that the passion
for any individual of the sex, whatever her perfections may be, which makes
thee relax in thy gracious behavior to the rest, will never promote thy real
happiness: -- it may afford thee a certain season, though I believe a very
short one, of tumultuous rapture, and then thou will awake from thy delirium,
to all the grievances of a fretful spirit.

Women look at least for attentions; -- they consider them as an inherent
birthright, given to their sex by the laws of polished society; and when they
are deprived of them, they most certainly have a right to complain -- and will
be, one and all, disposed to practice that revenge, which is not, by any means,
to be treated with contempt. It would be very unpleasant for me to hear in any
female society, that my friend was a strange, eccentric, singular, unpleasant
character; -- and I rather think that he himself would not be pleased to find,
that such a description was given, and believed of him. -- I do not mean to
urge, -- indeed, I well know you cannot suspect me of so gross an error, --
that the same regard is to be equally dealt to all: this is far from being my
system; -- but I affirm on the other hand -- that all are not to be disregarded
for one; for it will seldom happen, that the affection of that one, will
recompense thee for the enmity of all the rest. -- Love one, if you please, and
as much as you please -- but, be gracious to all.

Affection may, surely, conduct thee through an avenue of women, to her who
possesses thy heart, without tearing the flounces of any of their petticoats.
The displaying courtesy to all whom you meet, will delay you very little in
your way, to the arms of her whom you love -- and, if I mistake not, will
attune your sensibilities, to the higher enjoyment of the raptures you will
find there.

We have all of us, enemies enough, my good friend, from the inevitable course
of human events, without our increasing the number by so strange, and
unprofitable conduct, as that of neglecting any of the most trifling offices of
familiar life.

Besides, -- to come more home to thine heart, -- let me observe to thee, --
that charity, and humanity, which, by the bye, are one, and the same thing, are
said to be the foundation of those qualities, which form what is called a
well-bred man. -- If, therefore, you should, on any account, get into the habit
of neglecting the latter, -- you may stand more than a chance of its being
said, that you do not possess the former, which, you know to be the brightest
jewel in the human character. -- And this I am certain would wound thee in thy
very soul.

-- My dear boy, neglect not these, and other things, which, thou may call,
little things; -- for little things, believe me, are, oftentimes, of great
importance, in the arrangements of life.

You have been frequently pleased to tell me, as a matter of praise, that, in
my descriptions, I am natural to a nicety, -- and, when I tell of picking up an
handkerchief, or wiping a tear from the cheek of a distressed damsel, with a
white one -- or the sticking a pin into a pincushion, -- and such things, I am
far superior to any other writer. -- Apply then, I beseech thee, this
observation to thyself, and give me an opportunity of retorting the eulogium
upon thee. This, is the sincere wish of thy friend.

So may God bless thee, and direct the best feelings of thy heart, to the best
purposes of thy life.

I am, Yours, most affectionately, L. STERN.
The postman's bell tells me I have not time to read what I have written; but I
will trust to both our hearts, that there is nothing which either ought to be
ashamed of.



LETTER XXXVII. To MRS V --
Monday Morn.
WHEN all the crowd, my fair lady, was hurried into the gardens, to hear the
music of squibs and crackers -- and to see the air illuminated by rockets, and
balloons, -- I was flattered, exquisitely flattered, to find you contented to
saunter lackadaysically with me, round an exhausted Ranelagh, and give me your
gentle, amiable, elegant sentiments, in a tone of voice, that was originally
intended for a Cherub. How you got it I know not -- nor is it my business to
enquire; I am ever rejoiced to find, any emanation of the other world, in any
corner of this, be it where it may; -- but particularly, when it proceeds
through any female organ, -- where the effect must be more powerful, because it
is always most delicious.

Now after this little emanation of my spirit, which may not be quite so
celestial as it ought, I trust you will not think me ungracious, in desiring
you to excuse my promised duties, at your drawing room this evening. The truth
is, -- my cough has seized me so violently by the throat, that, though I could
hear you sing, I should not be able, to tell you the effects, of your music,
upon my heart. Indeed, -- I can scarce produce a whisper, loud enough, to make
the servant bring my gruel.

I have now been so long acquainted with this crazy frame of mine, that I know
all its tricks, -- and, I foresee, that I have a week's indulgence, at least,
to bestow upon it. -- However, on Sunday next, I trust, -- I may be-cassock
myself, in my cloak, and be chaired to your warm cabinet, where, I hope to
possess voice enough, to assure you, of the sincere esteem, and admiration, I
feel for you, -- whether I can tell you so, or no. Colds, and coughs, and
catarrhs, may tie up the tongue, but the heart is above the little
inconveniences, of its prisonhouse, and will one day escape from them all.
'Till that period, I shall beg leave to remain, with great truth,

Your most faithful, And obedient, humble servant, L. STERN.

LETTER XXXVIII. To -- --.
Sunday Evening.
THE poor in spirit, and the poor in purse, with nine out of ten, -- nay, with
ninety-nine, in an hundred of the world, are so alike, that, by practicing the
virtues of the former, a man generally gets, all the credit, or rather
discredit of the latter.

Here are very few, my friend, who have that nice insight into characters, as
to be able to discern the various, but approaching shades, that distinguish
them from each other -- and, sorry am I to say it, but, there are still fewer,
who have the humanity to make them employ their discernment, where it ought to
be employed, in favor of the heart.

This moderation of temper, which is always associated to sterling merit, is
made to win the love of the few, but is too apt, at the same time, to be not
only the dupe, but the contempt of the many. He, who comes not forward with his
pretensions, is either supposed to possess none, -- or to be prevented by some
awkward, or disgraceful circumstances, from offering them. -- The ignorant, the
upstart, and the assuming will, not be made to believe, that the humble can
have merit. -- As they themselves wear, the tinsel suit of tawdry
qualifications, upon their backs, they look no further for the qualities of
others -- Which, by the bye, is natural enough.

The wicked, and the knavish, will not suppose, that a man on the score of
conscience, or virtue, can be such an idiot, as to practice submission, and
keep back brilliant talents from exercise, because he cannot enlist them in an
honest cause; -- or, that when he is employing them in an humble way, -- it is
not with some design of artifice, or from some motive that is base; -- so that
the modest, diffident, and Christian character, stands but little chance of
what is called good fortune in the world. -- Indeed, Christianly speaking,
there is no great promise made to it, in this petty circle of time; -- Such
virtues, are to look, to more durable honors, when this world is faded away,
-- and it is their consolation and their delight, here, that such a reward
awaits them. Alas, -- without this hope, how could the good bear as they do,
the thousand untoward circumstances, that are continually pressing upon them,
-- and, chasing away the smile from the cheeks, and placing tears in their
stead.

But I am interrupted, -- or I believe, -- instead of a letter -- you would
have had a sermon; but it is Sunday evening, -- and therefore with, -- a God
bless you, -- I conclude myself,

Your affectionate -- L. STERN.

LETTER XXXIX. To -- --
Saturday Evening.
I HAVE had, my friend, another attack, and though I am, in a great measure
recovered, it has hinted to me one thing, at least, which is, -- that if I am
rash enough to risk the Winter in London, I shall never see another Spring. In
the very beginning of the following Spring, he died at his lodgings in
Bond-street.


But be that as it may, -- as my family is now in England, and as I have my
sentimental journey; -- which, I think with you, will be the most popular of my
works, to give to the world: -- I know not how it will be possible for me, to
run so counter to my interest, my affections, and my vanity -- as to set my
face southward before March, -- and I think if I get to that period, I may bid
the scarecrow, defiance, for another seven, or eight months, -- and then I may
leave him in the fogs, and go where, as he so often followed me in vain, he
will not follow me again. And this idea cheers my spirit -- not, believe me,
that I am uneasy about death, as death; -- but, that I think, for a dozen years
to come -- I could make a very tolerable, good use of life.

But be that as it pleases God.

Besides I have promised your, -- and sure I may add, my charming friend, Mrs.
V --,to pay her a visit in Ireland, -- which, -- I mean that you should do with
me.

It is not that you introduced me to her acquaintance, -- which is something;
it is not her enchanting voice which, humanly speaking may be more, -- nor that
she has come herself, in the form of a pitying angel, and made my Tisan for me
during my illness, -- and played at picquet with me, in order to prevent my
attempt to talk, as she was told it would do me harm; -- which is most of all
-- that makes me love her so much as I do; -- but it is a mind attuned to every
virtue, and a nature of the first order, -- beaming through a form of the first
beauty. In my life did I never see any thing -- so truly graceful as she is,
nor had I an idea, 'till I saw her -- that grace could be so perfect in all its
parts, and so suited to all the higher ordinances of the first life, from the
superintending impulse of the mind. For I will answer for it, that education,
though called forth to the utmost exertions, has played a very subordinate
part, in the composition of her character. All its best efforts are -- as it
were -- in the back ground, or rather are lost in the general mass of those
qualities, which predominate over all her accessory accomplishments.

In short if I had ever so great an inclination to cross the gulf, while such
a woman beckoned me to stay, -- I could not depart.

The world, however has absolutely killed me, and should such a report have
reached you, I know full well, that it would have grieved you sorely, -- and I
wish you not to shed a tear for me in vain. -- That you will drop more than one
over thy friend Yorick, when he is dead, sooths him while he is yet alive; --
but I trust that, though there may be something in my death, whenever it
happens, -- to distress you, there will, be something, also in the remembrance
of me, to comfort you, when I am laid beneath the marble.

But why do I talk of marble, -- I should say beneath the sod.

For cover my head with a turf, or a stone,
'Twill be all one --
'Twill be all one.
Till then, at least, I shall be, with great truth,

Your most affectionate, L. STERN.

FINIS.

