A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY, etc. etc.

A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY THROUGH FRANCE AND ITALY.

BY MR. YORICK.

VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET and P. A. DE HONDT, in the Strand. MDCCLXVIII.

THE FILLE DE CHAMBER
PARIS.
WHAT the old French officer had delivered upon traveling, bringing Polonius's
advice to his son upon the same subject into my head -- and that bringing in
Hamlet; and Hamlet, the rest of Shakespeare's works, I stopped at the Quai de
Conti in my return home, to purchase the whole set.

The bookseller said he had not a set in the world -- Comment! said I; taking
one up out of a set which lay upon the counter betwixt us. -- He said, they
were sent him only to be got bound, and were to be sent back to Versailles in
the morning to the Count de B****.

-- And does the Count de B**** said I, read Shakespeare? C'est un Esprit fort;
replied the bookseller. -- He loves English books; and what is more to his
honor, Monsieur, he love the English too. You speak this so civilly, said I,
that it is enough to oblige an Englishman to lay out a Louis d'or or two at your
shop -- the bookseller made a bow, and was going to say something, when a young
decent girl of about twenty, who by her air and dress, seemed to be fille de
chamber to some devout woman of fashion, came into the shop and asked for Les
Egarments du Coeur and de l'Esprit: the bookseller gave her the book directly;
she pulled out a little green satin purse run round with a ribband of the same
color, and putting her finger and thumb into it, she took out the money, and
paid for it. As I had nothing more to stay me in the shop, we both walked out
at the door together.

-- And what have you to do, my dear, said I, with The Wanderings of the Heart,
who scarce know yet you have one? nor till love has first told you it, or some
faithless shepherd has made it ache, can thou ever be sure it is so. -- Le
Dieu m'en guard! said the girl. -- With reason, said I -- for if is a good one,
it is pity it should be stolen: it is a little treasure to thee, and gives a
better air to your face, than if it was dressed out with pearls.

The young girl listened with a submissive attention, holding her satin purse
by its ribband in her hand all the time -- It Is a very small one, said I,
taking hold of the bottom of it -- she held it toward me -- and there is very
little in it, my dear, said I; but be but as good as thou art handsome, and
heaven will fill it: I had a parcel of crowns in my hand to pay for Shakespeare;
and as she had let go the purse entirely, I put a single one in; and tying up
the ribband in a bow-knot, returned it to her.

The young girl made me more a humble courtesy than a low one -- 'twas one one
of those quiet, thankful sinkings where the spirit bows itself down -- the body
does no more than tell it. I never gave a girl a crown in my life which gave me
half the pleasure.

My advice, my dear, would not have been worth a pin to you, said I, if I had
not given this along with it: but now, when you see the crown, you will remember
it -- so don't, my dear, lay it out in ribbands.

Upon my word, Sir, said the girl, earnestly, I am incapable -- in saying
which, as is usual in little bargains of honor, she gave me her hand -- En
verite, Monsieur, je mettrai cet argent apart, said she.

When a virtuous convention is made betwixt man and woman, it sanctifies their
most private walks: so notwithstanding it was dusky, yet as both our roads lay
the same way, we made no scruple of walking along the Quai de Conti together

She made me a second courtesy in setting off, and before we got twenty yards
from the door, as if she had not done enough before, she made a sort of a
little stop to tell me again, -- she thanked me.

It was a small tribute, I told her, which I could not avoid paying to virtue,
and would not be mistaken in the person I had been rendering it to for the
world -- but I see innocence, my dear, in your face -- and foul befall the man
who ever lays a snare in its way!

The girl seemed affected some way or other with what I said -- she gave a low
sigh -- I found I was not empowered to enquire at all after it -- so said
nothing more till I got to the corner of the Rue de Nevers, where we were to
part.

-- But is this the way, my dear, said I, to the hotel de Modene? she told me
it was -- or, that I might go by the Rue de Guineygaude, which was the next
turn. -- Then I Will go, my dear, by the Rue de Guineygaude, said I, for two
reasons; first I shall please myself, and next I shall give you the protection
of my company as far on your way as I can. The girl was sensible I was civil --
and said, she wished the hotel de Modene was in the Rue de St. Pierre -- You
live there? said I. -- She told me she was fille de chamber to Madame R**** --
Good God! said I, it is the very lady for whom I have brought a letter from
Amiens -- The girl told me that Madame R****, she believed expected a stranger
with a letter, and was impatient to see him -- so I desired the girl to present
my compliments to Madame R****, and say I would certainly wait upon her in the
morning.

We stood still at the corner of the Rue de Nevers whilst this passed -- We
then stopped a moment whilst she disposed of her Egarments de Coeur, etc. more
commodiously than carrying them in her hand -- they were two volumes; so I held
the second for her whilst she put the first into her pocket; and then she held
her pocket, and I put in the other after it.

It Is sweet to feel by what fine-spun threads our affections are drawn together.

We set off a-fresh, and as she took her third step, the girl put her hand
within my arm -- I was just bidding her -- but she did it of herself with that
undeliberating simplicity, which showed it was out of her head that she had
never seen me before. For my own part, I felt the conviction of consanguinity
so strongly, that I could not help turning half round to look in her face, and
see if I could trace out any thing in it of a family likeness -- Tut! said I,
are we not all relations?

When we arrived at the turning up of the Rue de Guineygaude, I stopped to bid
her adieu for good an all: the girl would thank me again for my company and
kindness -- She bid me adieu twice -- I repeated it as often; and so cordial
was the parting between us, that had it happened any where else, I Am not sure
but I should have signed it with a kiss of charity, as warm and holy as an
apostle.

But in Paris, as none kiss each other but the men -- I did, what amounted to
the same thing --

-- I bid God bless her.

THE PASSPORT.
PARIS.
WHEN I got home to my hotel, La Fleur told me I had been enquired after by the
Lieutenant de Police -- The duce take it! said I -- I know the reason. It is
time the reader should know it, for in the order of things in which it
happened, it was omitted; not that it was out of my head; but that had I told
it then, it might have been forgot now -- and now is the time I want it.

I had left London with so much precipitation, that it never entered my mind
that we were at war with France; and had reached Dover, and looked through my
glass at the hills beyond Boulogne, before the idea presented itself; and with
this in its train, that there was no getting there without a passport. Go but
to the end of a street, I have a mortal aversion for returning back no wiser
than I sat out; and as this was one of the greatest efforts I had ever made for
knowledge, I could less bear the thoughts of it: so hearing the Count de ****
had hired the packet, I begged he would take me in his suite. The Count had
some little knowledge of me, so made little or no difficulty -- only said, his
inclination to serve me could reach no further than Calais; as he was to return
by way of Brussels to Paris: however, when I had once passed there, I might get
to Paris without interruption; but that in Paris I must make friends and shift
for myself. -- Let me get to Paris, Monsieur le Count, said I -- and I shall do
very well. So I embarked, and never thought more of the matter.

When Le Fleur told me the Lieutenant de Police had been enquiring after me --
the thing instantly recurred -- and by the time Le Fleur had well told me, the
master of the hotel came into my room to tell me the same thing, with this
addition to it, that my passport had been particularly asked after: the master
of the hotel concluded with saying, He hoped I had one. -- Not I, faith! said I.

The master of the hotel retired three steps from me, as from an infected
person, as I declared this -- and poor Le Fleur advanced three steps toward
me, and with that sort of movement which a good soul makes to succor a
distressed one -- the fellow won my heart by it; and from that single trait, I
knew his character as perfectly, and could rely upon it as firmly, as if he had
served me with fidelity for seven years.

Mon seignior! cried the master of the hotel -- but recollecting himself as he
made the exclamation, he instantly changed the tone of it -- If Monsieur, said
he, has not a passport (apparament) in all likelihood he has friends in Paris
who can procure him one. -- Not that I know of, quoth I, with an air of
indifference. -- Then certes, replied he, you will be sent to the Bastile or the
Chatelet, au moins. Poo! said I, the king of France is a good natured soul --
he will hurt no body. -- Cela n'empeche pas, said he -- you will certainly be
sent to the Bastile tomorrow morning. -- But I Have taken your lodgings for a
month, answered I, and I Will not quit them a day before the time for all the
kings of France in the world. La Fleur whispered in my ear, That no body could
oppose the king of France.

Pardi! said my host, ces Messieurs Anglois sont des gens tres extraordinaires
-- and having both said and sworn it -- he went out.

THE PASSPORT.
The Hotel at Paris.
I COULD not find in my heart to torture La Fleur's with a serious look upon
the subject of my embarrassment, which was the reason I had treated it so
cavalierly: and to show him how light it lay upon my mind, I dropped the subject
entirely; and whilst he waited upon me at supper, talked to him with more than
usual gaiety about Paris, and of the opera comique. -- La Fleur had been there
himself, and had followed me through the streets as far as the bookseller's
shop; but seeing me come out with the young fille de chamber, and that we
walked down the Quai de Conti together, La Fleur deemed it unnecessary to
follow me a step further -- so making his own reflections upon it, he took a
shorter cut -- and got to the hotel in time to be informed of the affair of the
Police against my arrival.

As soon as the honest creature had taken away, and gone down to sup himself, I
then began to think a little seriously about my situation. --

-- And here, I know, Eugenius, thou will smile at the remembrance of a short
dialogue which passed betwixt us the moment I was going to set out -- I must
tell it here.

Eugenius, knowing that I was as little subject to be overburthen'd with money
as thought, had drawn me aside to interrogate me how much I had taken care for;
upon telling him the exact sum, Eugenius shook his head, and said it would not
do; so pulled out his purse in order to empty it into mine. -- I Have enough in
conscience, Eugenius, said I. -- Indeed, Yorick, you have not, replied Eugenius
-- I know France and Italy better than you. -- But you don't consider,
Eugenius, said I, refusing his offer, that before I have been three days in
Paris, I shall take care to say or do something or other for which I shall get
clapped up into the Bastile, and that I shall live there a couple of months
entirely at the king of France's expense. -- I beg pardon, said Eugenius,
drily: really, I had forgot that resource.

Now the event I treated gaily came seriously to my door.

Is it folly, or nonchalance, or philosophy, or pertinacity -- or what is it in
me, that, after all, when La Fleur had gone down stairs, and I was quite alone,
that I could not bring down my mind to think of it otherwise than I had then
spoken of it to Eugenius?

-- And as for the Bastile! the terror is in the word -- Make the most of it
you can, said I to myself, the Bastile is but another word for a tower -- and a
tower is but another word for a house you cannot get out of -- Mercy on the
gouty! for they are in it twice a year -- but with nine livres a day, and pen
and ink and paper and patience, albeit a man cannot get out, he may do very well
within -- at least for a month or six weeks; at the end of which, if he is a
harmless fellow his innocence appears, and he comes out a better and wiser man
than he went in.

I had some occasion (I forget what) to step into the courtyard, as I settled
this account; and remember I walked down stairs in no small triumph with the
conceit of my reasoning -- Beshrew the sombre pencil! said I vauntingly -- for
I envy not its powers, which paints the evils of life with so hard and deadly a
coloring. The mind sits terrified at the objects she has magnified herself,
and blackened: reduce them to their proper size and hue she overlooks them --
It Is true, said I, correcting the proposition -- the Bastile is not an evil to
be despised -- but strip it of its towers -- fill up the fosse -- unbarricade
the doors -- call it simply a confinement, and suppose it is some tyrant of a
distemper -- and not of a man which holds you in it -- the evil vanishes, and
you bear the other half without complaint.

I was interrupted in the hey-day of this soliloquy, with a voice which I took
to be of a child, which complained "it could not get out." -- I looked up and
down the passage, and seeing neither man, woman, or child, I went out without
further attention.

In my return back through the passage, I heard the same words repeated twice
over; and looking up, I saw it was a starling hung in a little cage. -- "I
cannot get out -- I cannot get out," said the starling.

I stood looking at the bird: and to every person who came through the passage
it ran fluttering to the side toward which they approached it, with the same
lamentation of its captivity -- "I cannot get out", said the starling -- God
help thee! said I, but I Will let thee out, cost what it will; so I turned about
the cage to get to the door; it was twisted and double twisted so fast with
wire, there was no getting it open without pulling the cage to pieces -- I took
both hands to it.

The bird flew to the place where I was attempting his deliverance, and
thrusting his head through the trellis, pressed his breast against it, as if
impatient -- I fear, poor creature! said I, I cannot set thee at liberty --
"No," said the starling -- "I cannot get out -- I cannot get out," said the
starling.

I vow, I never had my affections more tenderly awakened; or do I remember an
incident in my life, where the dissipated spirits, to which my reason had been
a bubble, were so suddenly called home. Mechanical as the notes were, yet so
true in tune to nature were they chanted, that in one moment they overthrew all
my systematic reasonings upon the Bastile; and I heavily walked up stairs,
unsaying every word I had said in going down them.

Disguise thyself as thou will, still slavery! said I -- still thou art a
bitter draught; and though thousands in all ages have been made to drink of
thee, thou art no less bitter on that account. -- it is thou, thrice sweet and
gracious goddess, addressing myself to LIBERTY, whom all in public or in
private worship, whose taste is grateful, and ever wilt be so, till NATURE
herself shall change -- no tint of words can spot thy snowy mantle, or chymic
power turn thy scepter into iron -- with thee to smile upon him as he eats his
crust, the swain is happier than his monarch, from whose court thou art exiled
-- Gracious heaven! cried I, kneeling down upon the last step but one in my
ascent -- grant me but health, thou great Bestower of it, and give me but this
fair goddess as my companion -- and shower down thy mitres, if it seems good
unto thy divine providence, upon those heads which are aching for them.

THE CAPTIVE.
PARIS.
THE bird in his cage pursued me into my room; I sat down close to my table,
and leaning my head upon my hand, I begun to figure to myself the miseries of
confinement. I was in a right frame for it, and so I gave full scope to my
imagination.

I was going to begin with the millions of my fellow creatures born to no
inheritance but slavery; but finding, however affecting the picture was, that I
could not bring it near me, and that the multitude of of sad groups in it did
but distract me. --

-- I took a single captive, and having first shut him up in his dungeon, I
then looked through the twilight of his grated door to take his picture.

I beheld his body half wasted away with long expectation and confinement, and
felt what kind of sickness of the heart it was which arises from hope deferred.
Upon looking nearer I saw him pale and feverish: in thirty years the western
breeze had not once fanned his blood -- he had seen no sun, no moon in all that
time -- nor had the voice of friend or kinsman breathed through his lattice --
his children --

-- But here my heart began to bleed -- and I was forced to go on with another
part of the portrait.

He was sitting upon the ground upon a little straw, in the furthest corner of
his dungeon, which was alternately his chair and bed: a little calender of
small sticks were laid at the head notch'd all over with the dismal days and
nights he had passed there -- he had one of these little sticks in his hand,
and with a rusty nail he was etching another day of misery to add to the heap.
As I darkened the little light he had, he lifted up a hopeless eye toward the
door, then cast it down -- shook his head, and went on with his work of
affliction. I heard his chains upon his legs, as he turned his body to lay his
little stick upon the bundle -- He gave a deep sigh -- I saw the iron enter
into his soul -- I burst into tears -- I could not sustain the picture of
confinement which my fancy had drawn -- I startled up from my chair, and
calling La Fleur, I bid him bespeak me a remise, and have it ready at the door
of the hotel by nine in the morning.

-- I Will go directly, said I, myself to Monsieur Le Duke de Choiseul.

La Fleur would have put me to bed; but not willing he should see any thing
upon my cheek, which would cost the honest fellow a heart ache -- I told him I
would go to bed by himself -- and bid him go do the same.

THE STARLING.
ROAD TO VERSAILLES.
I GOT into my remise the hour I proposed: La Fleur got up behind, and I bid
the coachman make the best of his way to Versailles.

As there was nothing in this road, or rather nothing which I look for in
traveling, I cannot fill up the blank better than with a short history of this
self-same bird, which became the subject of the last chapter.

Whilst the Honorable Mr. **** was waiting for a wind at Dover it had been
caught upon the cliffs before it could well fly, by an English lad who was his
groom; who not caring to destroy it, had taken it in his breast into the packet
-- and by course of feeding it. and taking it once under his protection, in a
day or two grew fond of it, and got it safe along with him to Paris.

At Paris the lad had laid out a a livre in a little cage for the starling, and
as he had little to do better the five months his master stayed there, he
taught it in his mother's tongue the four simple words -- (and no more) -- to
which I owned myself so much it is debtor.

Upon his master's going on for Italy -- the lad had given it to the master of
the hotel -- But his little song for liberty, being in an unknown language at
Paris -- the bird had little or no store set by him -- so La Fleur bought both
him and his cage for me for a bottle of Burgundy.

In my return from Italy I brought him with me to the country in whose language
he had learned his notes -- and telling the story of him to Lord A -- Lord A
begged the bird of me -- in a week Lord A gave him to Lord B -- Lord B made a
present of him to Lord C -- and Lord's C's gentleman sold him to Lord D's for a
shilling -- Lord D gave him to Lord E -- and so on -- half round the alphabet
-- From that rank he passed into the lower house, and passed the hands of as
many commoners -- But as all these wanted to get in -- and my bird wanted to
get out -- he had almost as little store set by him in London as in Paris.

It is impossible but many of my readers must have heard of him; and if any by
mere chance have ever seen him -- I beg leave to inform them, that that bird
was my bird -- or some vile copy set up to represent him.

I have nothing further to add upon him, but that from that time to this, I
have borne this poor starling as the crest to my arms. -- Thus:

blazon or coat of arms

-- And let the heralds officers twist his neck about if they dare.

THE ADDRESS.
VERSAILLES.
I SHOULD not like to have my enemy take a view of my mind, when I am going to
ask protection of any man: for which reason I generally endeavor to protect
myself; but this going to Monsieur Le Duc de C***** was an act of compulsion --
had it been an act of choice, I should have done it, I suppose, like other
people.

How many mean plans of dirty address, as I went along, did my servile heart
form! I deserved the Bastile for every one of them.

Then nothing would serve me, when I got within sight of Versailles, but
putting words and sentences together, and conceiving attitudes and tones to
wreath myself into Monsieur Le Duc de C*****'s good graces -- This will do --
said I -- Just as well, retorted I again, as a coat carried up to him by an
adventurous tailor, without taking his measure -- Fool! continued I -- see
Monsieur Le Duc's face first -- observe what character is written in it; take
notice in what posture he stands to hear you -- mark the turns and expressions
of his body and limbs -- And for the tone -- the first sound which comes from
his lips will give it you; and from all these together you will compound an
address at once upon the spot, which cannot disgust the Duke -- the ingredients
are his own, and most likely to go down.

Well! said I, I wish it well over -- Coward again! as if man to man was not
equal, throughout the whole surface of the globe; and if in the field -- why
not face to face in the cabinet too? And trust me, Yorick, whenever it is not
so, man is false to himself; and betrays his own succors ten times, where
nature does it once. Go to the Duc de C**** with the Bastile in thy looks -- My
life for it, thou will be sent back to Paris in half an hour, with an escort.

I believe so, said I -- Then I Will go to the Duke, by heaven! with all the
gaity and debonairness in the world. --

-- And there you are wrong again, replied I -- A heart at ease, Yorick, flies
into no extremes -- it is ever on its center. -- Well! well! cried I, as the
coachman turned in at the gates -- I find I shall do very well: and by the time
he had wheeled round the court, and brought me up to the door, I found myself
so much the better for my own lecture, that I neither ascended the steps like a
victim to justice, who was to part with life upon the topmost, -- nor did I
mount them with a skip and a couple of strides, as I do when I fly up, Eliza!
to thee, to meet it.

As I entered the door of the saloon, I was met by a person who possibly might
be the maitre d'hotel, but had more the air of one of the under secretaries,
who told me the Duc de C**** was busy -- I am utterly ignorant, said I, of the
forms of obtaining an audience, being an absolute stranger, and what is worse
in the present conjuncture of affairs, being an Englishman too. -- He replied,
that did not increase the difficulty. -- I made him a slight bow, and told him,
I had something of importance to say to Monsieur Le Duc. The secretary looked
toward the stairs, as if he was about to leave me to carry up this account to
some one -- But I must not mislead you, said I -- for what I have to say is of
no manner of importance to Monsieur Le Duc de C**** -- but of great importance
to myself. -- C'est une autre affair, replied he -- Not at all, said I, to a
man of gallantry. -- But pray, good sir, continued I, when can a stranger hope
to have access? In not less than two hours, said he, looking at his watch. The
number of equipages in the courtyard seemed to justify the calculation, that I
could have no nearer a prospect -- and as walking backwards and forwards in the
saloon, without a soul to commune with, was for the time as bad as being in the
Bastile itself, I instantly went back to my remise, and bid the coachman drive
me to the cordon bleu, which was the nearest hotel.

I think there is a fatality in it -- I seldom go to the place I set out for.

LE PATISSER.
VERSAILLES.
BEFORE I had got halfway down the street, I changed my mind: as I am at
Versailles, thought I, I might as well take a view of the town; so I pulled the
cord, and ordered the coachman to drive round some of the principal streets --
I suppose the town is not very large, said I. -- The coachmen begged pardon for
setting me right, and told me it was very superb, and that numbers of the first
dukes and marquises and counts had hotels -- The Count de B****, of whom the
bookseller at the Quai de Conti had spoke so handsomely the night before, came
instantly into my mind. -- And why should I not go, thought I, to the Count de
B****, who has so high an idea of English books, and Englishmen -- and tell him
my story? so I changed my mind a second time -- In truth it was the third; for
I had intended that day for Madame de R**** in the Rue St. Pierre, and had
devoutly sent her word by her fille de chamber that I would assuredly wait upon
her -- but I am governed by circumstances -- I cannot govern them: so seeing a
man standing with a basket on the other side of the street, as if he had
something to sell, I bid La Fleur go up to him and enquire for the Count's
hotel.

La Fleur returned a little pale; and told me it was a Chevalier de St. Louis
selling pates -- It is impossible, La Fleur! said I. -- La Fleur could no more
account for the phenomenon than myself; but persisted in his story: he had seen
the croix set in gold, with its red ribband, he said, tied to his button-hole
-- and had looked into the basket and seen the pates which the Chevalier was
selling; so could not be mistaken in that.

Such a reverse in man's life awakens a better principle than curiosity: I
could not help looking for some time at him as I sat in the remise -- the more
I looked at him -- his croix and his basket, the stronger they wove themselves
into my brain -- I got out of the remise and went toward him.

He was begirt with a clean linen apron which fell below his knees, and with a
sort of a bib went half way up his breast; upon the top of this, but a little
below the hem, hung his croix. His basket of little pates was covered over with
a white damask napkin; another of the same kind was spread at the bottom; and
there was a look of proprete and neatness throughout; that one might have
bought his pates of him, as much from appetite as sentiment.

He made an offer of them to neither; but stood still with them at the corner
of a hotel, for those to buy who chose it, without solicitation.

He was about forty-eight -- of a sedate look, something approaching to
gravity. I did not wonder. -- I went up rather to the basket than him, and
having lifted up the napkin and taken one of his pates into my hand -- I begged
he would explain the appearance which affected me.

He told me in a few words, that the best part of his life had passed in the
service, in which, after spending a small patrimony, he had obtained a company
and the croix with it; but that at the conclusion of the last peace, his
regiment being reformed, and the whole corpse, with those of some other
regiments, left without any provision -- he found himself in a wide world
without friends, without a livre -- and indeed, said he, without any thing but
this -- (pointing, as he said it, to his croix) -- The poor chevalier won my
pity, and he finished the scene, with winning my esteem too.

The king, he said, was the most generous of princes, but his generosity could
neither relieve or reward every one, and it was only his misfortune to be
amongst the number. He had a little wife, he said, whom he loved, who did the
patisserie; and added, he felt no dishonor in defending her and himself from
want in this way -- unless Providence had offered him a better.

It would be wicked to withold a pleasure from the good, in passing over what
happened to this poor Chevalier of St. Louis about nine months after.

It seems he usually took his stand near the iron gates which lead up to the
palace, and as his croix had caught the eye of numbers, numbers had made the
same enquiry which I had done -- He had told them the same story, and always
with so much modesty and good sense, that it had reached at last the king's
ears -- who hearing the Chevalier had been a gallant officer, and respected by
the whole regiment as a man of honor and integrity -- he broke up his little
trade by a pension of fifteen hundred livres a year.

As I have told this to please the reader, I beg he will allow me to relate
another out of its order, to please myself -- the two stories reflect light
upon each other, -- and it is a pity they should be parted.

THE SWORD.
RENNES.
WHEN states and empires have their periods of declension, and feel in their
turns what distress and poverty is -- I stop not to tell the causes which
gradually brought the house Do You**** in Britany into decay. The Marquis Do You****
had fought up against his condition with great firmness; wishing to preserve,
and still show to the world some little fragments of what his ancestors had
been -- their indiscretions had put it out of his power. There was enough left
for the little exigencies of obscurity -- But he had two boys who looked up to
him for light -- he thought they deserved it. He had tried his sword -- it
could not open the way -- the mounting was too expensive -- and simple economy
was not a match for it -- there was no resource but commerce.

In any other province in France, save Britany, this was smiting the root for
ever of the little tree his pride and affection wished to see reblossom -- But
in Britany, there being a provision for this, he availed himself of it; and
taking an occasion when the states were assembled at Rennes, the Marquis,
attended with his two boys, entered the court; and having pleaded the right of
an ancient law of the duchy, which, though seldom claimed, he said, was no less
in force; he took his sword from his side -- Here -- said he -- take it; and be
trusty guardians of it, till better times put me in condition to reclaim it.

The president accepted the Marquis's sword -- he stayed a few minutes to see
it deposited in the archives of his house -- and departed.

The Marquis and his whole family embarked the next day for Martinico, and in
about nineteen or twenty years of successful application to business, with some
unlooked for bequests from distant branches of his house -- returned home to
reclaim his nobility and to support it.

It was an incident of good fortune which will never happen to any traveller,
but a sentimental one, that I should be at Rennes at the very time of this
solemn requisition: I call it solemn -- it was so to me.

The Marquis entered the court with his whole family: he supported his lady --
his eldest son supported his sister, and his youngest was at the other extreme
of the line next his mother. -- he put his handkerchief to his face twice --

-- There was a dead silence. When the Marquis had approached within six paces
of the tribunal, he gave the Marchioness to his youngest son, and advancing
three steps before his family -- he reclaimed his sword. His sword was given
him, and the moment he got it into his hand he drew it almost out of the
scabbard -- 'twas the shining face of a friend he had once given up -- he
looked attentively along it, beginning at the hilt, as if to see whether it was
the same -- when observing a little rust which it had contracted near the
point, he brought it near his eye, and bending his head down over it -- I think
I saw a tear fall upon the place: I could not be deceived by what followed.

"I shall find, said he, some other way, to get it off."

When the Marquis had said this, he returned his sword into its scabbard, made
a bow to the guardians of it -- and, with his wife and daughter and his two
sons following him, walked out.

O how I envied him his feelings!

THE PASSPORT.
VERSAILLES.
I FOUND no difficulty in getting admittance to Monsieur Le Count de B****. The
set of Shakespears was laid upon the table; and he was tumbling them over. I
walked up close to the table, and giving first such a look at the books as to
make him conceive I knew what they were -- I told him I had come without any
one to present me, knowing I should meet with a friend in his apartment who, I
trusted, would do it for me -- it is my countryman the great Shakespeare, said
I, pointing to his works -- et ayez la bonte, mon cher ami, apostrophizing his
spirit, added I, de me fair cet honneur la. --

The Count smiled at the singularity of the introduction; and seeing I looked a
little pale and sickly, insisted upon my taking an arm-chair: so I sat down;
and to save him conjectures upon a visit so out of all rule, I told him simply
of the incident in the bookseller's shop, and how that had impelled me rather
to go to him with the story of a little embarrassment I was under, than to any
other man in France -- And what is your embarrassment? let me hear it, said the
Count. So I told him the story just as I have told it the reader --

-- And the master of my hotel, said I, as I concluded it, will needs have it,
Monsieur le Count, that I shall be sent to the Bastile -- but I have no
apprehensions, continued I -- for in falling into the hands of the most
polished people in the world, and being conscious I was a true man, and not
come to spy the nakedness of the land, I scarce thought I laid at their mercy.
-- It does not suit the gallantry of the French, Monsieur le Count, said I, to
show it against invalids.

An animated blush came into the Count de B****'s cheeks, as I spoke this -- Ne
craignez rien -- Don't fear, said he -- Indeed I don't, replied I again --
besides, continued I a little sportingly -- I have come laughing all the way
from London to Paris, and I do not think Monsieur le Duc de Choiseul is such an
enemy to mirth, as to send me back crying for my pains.

-- My application to you, Monsieur le Compte de B**** (making him a low bow)
is to desire he will not.

The Count heard me with great good nature, or I had not said half as much --
and once or twice said -- C'est bien dit. So I rested my cause there -- and
determined to say no more about it.

The Count led the discourse: we talked of indifferent things; -- of books and
politics, and men -- and then of women -- God bless them all! said I, after
much discourse about them -- there is not a man upon earth who loves them so
much as I do: after all the foibles I have seen, and all the satires I have
read against them, still I love them; being firmly persuaded that a man who has
not a sort of an affection for the whole sex, is incapable of ever loving a
single one as he ought.

Heh bien! Monsieur l'Anglois, said the Count, gaily -- You are not come to spy
the nakedness of the land -- I believe you -- ni encore, I dare say, that of
our women -- But permit me to conjecture -- if, par hazard, they fell in your
way -- that the prospect would not affect you.

I have something within me which cannot bear the shock of the least indecent
insinuation: in the sportability of chit-chat I have often endeavored to
conquer it, and with infinite pain have hazarded a thousand things to a dozen
of the sex together -- the least of which I could not venture to a single one,
to gain heaven.

Excuse me, Monsieur Le Count, said I -- as for the nakedness of your land, if
I saw it, I should cast my eyes over it with tears in them -- and for that of
your women (blushing at the idea he had excited in me) I am so evangelical in
this, and have such a fellow-feeling for what ever is weak about them, that I
would cover it with a garment, if I knew how to throw it on -- But I could
wish, continued I, to spy the nakedness of their hearts, and through the
different disguises of customs, climates, and religion, find out what is good
in them, to fashion my own by -- and therefore am I come.

It is for this reason, Monsieur le Compte, continued I, that I have not seen
the Palais royal -- nor the Luxembourg -- nor the Facade of the Louvre -- nor
have attempted to swell the catalogues we have of pictures, statues, and
churches -- I conceive every fair being as a temple, and would rather enter in,
and see the original drawings and loose sketches hung up in it, than the
transfiguration of Raphael itself.

The thirst of this, continued I, as impatient as that which inflames the
breast of the connoisseur, has led me from my own home into France -- and from
France will lead me through Italy -- it is a quiet journey of the heart in
pursuit of NATURE, and those affections which rise out of her, which make us
love each other -- and the world, better than we do.

The Count said a great many civil things to me upon the occasion; and added
very politely how much he stood obliged to Shakespeare for making me known to
him -- but, a-propos, said he -- Shakespeare is full of great things -- He
forgot a small punctillio of announcing your name -- it puts you under a
necessity of doing it yourself.

THE PASSPORT.
VERSAILLES.
THERE is not a more perplexing affair in life to me, than to set about telling
any one who I am -- for there is scarce any body I cannot give a better account
of than of myself; and I have often wished I could do it in a single word --
and have an end of it. It was the only time and occasion in my life, I could
accomplish this to any purpose -- for Shakespeare lying upon the table, and
recollecting I was in his books, I took up Hamlet, and turning immediately to
the grave-diggers scene in the fifth act, I laid my finger upon YORICK, and
advancing the book to the Count, with my finger all the way over the name --
Me, Voici! said I.

Now whether the idea of poor Yorick's skull was put out of the Count's mind,
by the reality of my own, or by what magic he could drop a period of seven or
eight hundred years, makes nothing in this account -- it is certain the French
conceive better than they combine -- I wonder at nothing in this world, and the
less at this; inasmuch as one of the first of our own church, for whose candor
and paternal sentiments I have the highest veneration, fell into the same
mistake in the very same case. -- "He could not bear, he said, to look into
sermons wrote by the king of Denmark's jester." -- Good, my lord! said I -- but
there are two Yorick's. The Yorick your lordship thinks of, has been dead and
buried eight hundred years ago; he flourished in Horwendillus's court -- the
other Yorick is myself, who have flourished my lord in no court -- He shook his
head -- Good God! said I, you might as well confound Alexander the Great, with
Alexander the Copper-smith, my lord -- 'Twas all one, he replied --

-- If Alexander king of Macedon could have translated your lordship, said I --
I Am sure your Lordship would not have said so.

The poor Count de B**** fell but into the same error --

-- Et, Monsieur, est il Yorick? cried the Count. -- Je le suis, said I. --
Vous? -- Moi -- moi qui ai l'honneur de vous parler, Monsieur le Compte -- Mon
Dieu! said he, embracing me -- Vous etes Yorick.

The Count instantly put the Shakespeare into his pocket -- and left me alone in
his room.

THE PASSPORT.
VERSAILLES.
I COULD not conceive why the Count de B**** had gone so abruptly out of the
room, any more than I could conceive why he had put the Shakespeare into his
pocket -- Mysteries which must explain themselves, are not worth the loss of
time, which a conjecture about them takes up: 'twas better to read Shakespeare;
so taking up, " Much Ado about Nothing," I transported myself instantly from
the chair I sat in to Messina in Sicily, and got so busy with Don Pedro and
Benedick and Beatrice, that I thought not of Versailles, the Count, or the
Passport.

Sweet pliability of man's spirit, that can at once surrender itself to
illusions, which cheat expectation and sorrow of their weary moments! -- --
long -- long since had ye numbered out my days, had I not trod so great a part
of them upon this enchanted ground: when my way is too rough for my feet, or
too steep for my strength, I get off it, to some smooth velvet path which fancy
has scattered over with rose-buds of delights; and having taken a few turns in
it, come back strengthened and refreshed -- When evils press sore upon me, and
there is no retreat from them in this world, then I take a new course -- I
leave it -- and as I have a clearer idea of the elysian fields than I have of
heaven, I force myself, like Eneas, into them -- I see him meet the pensive
shade of his forsaken Dido -- and wish to recognize it -- I see the injured
spirit wave her head, and turn off silent from the author of her miseries and
dishonours -- I lose the feelings for myself in hers -- and in those affections
which were wont to make me mourn for her when I was at school.

Surely this is not walking in a vain shadow -- nor does man disquiet himself
in vain, by it -- he oftener does so in trusting the issue of his commotions to
reason only. -- I can safely say for myself, I was never able to conquer any
one single bad sensation in my heart so decisively, as by beating up as fast as
I could for some kindly and gentle sensation, to fight it upon its own ground.

When I had got to the end of the third act, the Count de B**** entered with my
Passport in his hand. Mons. le Duc de C****, said the Count, is as good a
prophet, I dare say, as he is a statesman -- Un homme qui rit, said the duke,
ne sera jamais dangereuz. -- Had it been for any one but the king's jester,
added the Count, I could not have got it these two hours. -- Pardonncz moi,
Mons. Le Compte, said I -- I am not the king's jester. -- But you are Yorick?
-- Yes. -- Et vous plaisantez? -- I answered, Indeed I did jest -- but was not
paid for it -- 'twas entirely at my own expense.

We have no jester at court, Mons. Le Compte, said I, the last we had was in
the licentious reign of Charles the IId -- since which time our manners have
been so gradually refining, that our court at present is so full of patriots,
who wish for nothing but the honors and wealth of their country -- and our
ladies are all so chaste, so spotless, so good, so devout -- there is nothing
for a jester to make a jest of --

Voila un persiflage! cried the Count.

THE PASSPORT.
VERSAILLES.
AS the Passport was directed to all lieutenant governors, governors, and
commandants of cities, generals of armies, justiciaries, and all officers of
justice, to let Mr. Yorick, the king's jester, and his baggage, travel quietly
along -- I own the triumph of obtaining the Passport was not a little tarnish'd
by the figure I cut in it -- But there is nothing unmixt in this world; and
some of the gravest of our divines have carried it so far as to affirm, that
enjoyment itself was attended even with a sigh -- and that the greatest they
knew of, terminated in a general way, in little better than a convulsion.

I remember the grave and learned Bevoriskius, in his commentary upon the
generations from Adam, very naturally breaks off in the middle of a note to
give an account to the world of a couple of sparrows upon the out-edge of his
window, which had incommoded him all the time he wrote, and at last had
entirely taken him off from his genealogy.

-- It Is strange! writes Bevoriskius; but the facts are certain, for I have had
the curiosity to mark them down one by one with my pen -- but the cock-sparrow
during the little time that I could have finished the other half this note, has
actually interrupted me with the reiteration of his caresses three and twenty
times and a half.

How merciful, adds Bevoriskius, is heaven to his creatures!

Ill fated Yorick! that the gravest of thy brethren should be able to write
that to the world, which stains thy face with crimson, to copy in even thy
study.

But this is nothing to my travels -- So I twice -- twice beg pardon for it.

CHARACTER.
VERSAILLES.
AND how do you find the French? said the Count de B****, after he had given me
the Passport.

The reader may suppose that after so obliging a proof of courtesy, I could not
be at a loss to say something handsome to the enquiry.

-- Mais pass, pour cela -- Speak frankly, said he; do you find all the
urbanity in the French which the world give us the honor of? -- I had found
every thing, I said, which confirmed it -- Vraiment, said the count. -- Les
Francois sont poli. s -- To an excess, replied I.

The count took notice of the word excess; and would have it I meant more than
I said. I defended myself a long time as well as I could against it -- he
insisted I had a reserve, and that I would speak my opinion frankly.

I believe, Mons. Le Compte, said I, that man has a certain compass, as well as
an instrument; and that the social and other calls have occasion by turns for
every key in him; sothat if you begin a note too high or too low, there must be
a want either in the upper or under part, to fill up the system of harmony. --
The Count de B**** did not understand music, so desired me to explain it some
other way. A polished nation, my dear Count, said I, makes every one its
debtor; and besides urbanity itself, like the fair sex, has so many charms; it
goes against the the heart to say it can do ill; and yet, I believe, there is
but a certain line of perfection, that man, take him altogether, is empowered
to arrive at -- if he gets beyond, he rather exchanges qualities, than gets
them. I must not presume to say, how far this has affected the French in the
subject we are speaking of -- but should it ever be the case of the English, in
the progress of their resentments, to arrive at the same polish which
distinguishes the French, if we did not lose the politesse de coeur, which
inclines men more to human actions, than courteous ones -- we should at least
lose that distinct variety and originality of character, which distinguishes
them, not only from each other, but from all the world besides.

I had a few king William's shillings as smooth as glass in my pocket; and
foreseeing they would be of use in the illustration of my hypothesis, I had got
them into my hand, when I had proceeded so far --

See, Mons. Le Compte, said I, rising up, and laying them before him upon the
table -- by jingling and ribbing one against another for seventy years together
in one body's pocket or another's, they are become so much alike, you can
scarce distinguish one shilling from another.

The English, like ancient medais, kept more apart, and passing but few peoples
hands, preserve the first sharpnesses which the fine hand of nature has given
them -- they are not so pleasant to feel -- but in return, the legend is so
visible, that at the first look you see whose image and superscription they
bear. -- But the French, Mons. Le Compte, added I, wishing to soften what I had
said, have so many excellencies, they can the better spare this -- they are a
loyal, a gallant, a generous, an ingenious, and good tempered people as is
under heaven -- if they have a fault -- they are too serious.

Mon Dieu! cried the Count, rising out of his chair.

Mais vous plaisantez, said he, correcting his exclamation. -- I laid my hand
upon my breast, and with earnest gravity assured him, it was my most settled
opinion.

The Count said he was mortified, he could not stay to hear my reasons, being
engaged to go that moment to dine with the Duc de C****.

But if it is not too far to come to Versailles to eat your soup with me, I
beg, before you leave France, I may have the pleasure of knowing you retract
your opinion -- or, in what manner you support it. -- But if you do support it,
Mons. Anglois, said he, you must do it with all your powers, because you have
the whole world against you. -- I promised the Count I would do myself the
honor of dining with him before I set out for Italy -- so took my leave.

THE TEMPTATION.
PARIS.
WHEY I alighted at the hotel, the porter told me a young woman with a band-box
had been that moment enquiring for me. -- I do not know, said the porter,
whether she is gone away or no. I took the key of my chamber of him, and went
up stairs; and when I had got within ten steps of the top of the landing before
my door, I met her coming easily down.

It was the fair fille de chamber I had walked along the Quai de Conti with:
Madame de R**** had sent her upon some commissions to a merchande de modes
within a step or two of the hotel de Modene; and as I had failed in waiting
upon her, had bid her enquire if I had left Paris; and if so, whether I had not
left a letter addressed to her.

As the fair fille de chamber was so near my door she turned back, and went
into the room with me for a moment or two whilst I wrote a card.

It was a fine still evening in the latter end of the month of May -- the
crimson window curtains (which were of the same color of those of the bed)
were drawn close -- the sun was setting and reflected through them so warm a
tint into the fair fille de chambre's face -- I thought she blushed -- the idea
of it made me blush myself -- we were quite alone; and that super-induced a
second blush before the first could get off.

There is a sort of a pleasing half guilty blush, where the blood is more in
fault than the man -- it is sent impetuous from the heart, and virtue flies
after it -- not to call it back, but to make the sensation of it more delicious
to the nerves -- it is associated. --

But I Will not describe it. -- I felt something at first within me which was not
in strict unison with the lesson of virtue I had given her the night before --
I sought five minutes for a card -- I knew I had not one. -- I took up a pen --
I laid it down again -- my hand trembled -- the devil was in me.

I know as well as any one, he is an adversary, whom if we resist, he will fly
from us -- but I seldom resist him at all; from a terror, that though I may
conquer, I may still get a hurt in the combat -- so I give up the triumph, for
security; and instead of thinking to make him fly, I generally fly myself.

The fair fille de chamber came close up to the bureau where I was looking for
a card -- took up first the pen I cast down, then offered to hold me the ink:
she offered it so sweetly, I was going to accept it -- but I durst not -- I
have nothing, my dear, said I, to write upon. -- Write it, said she, simply,
upon any thing. --

I was just going to cry out, Then I will write it, fair girl! upon thy lips.
--

If I do, said I, I shall perish -- so I took her by the hand, and led her to
the door, and begged she would not forget the lesson I had given her -- She
said, Indeed she would not -- and as she uttered it with some earnestness, she
turned about, and gave me both her hands, closed together, into mine -- it was
impossible not to compress them in that situation -- I wished to let them go;
and all the time I held them, I kept arguing within myself against it -- and
still I held them on. -- In two minutes I found I had all the battle to fight
over again -- and I felt my legs and every limb about me tremble at the idea.

The foot of the bed was within a yard and a half of the place where we were
standingg -- I had still hold of her hands -- and how it happened I can give no
account, but I neither asked her -- nor drew her -- nor did I think of the bed
-- but so it did happen, we both sat down.

I Will just show you, said the fair fille de chamber, the little purse I have
been making today to hold your crown. So she put her hand into her right
pocket, which was next me, and felt for it for sometime -- then into into the
left -- "She had lost it." -- I never bore expectation more quietly -- it was
in her right pocket at last -- she pulled it out; it was of green taffeta,
lined with a little bit of white quilted satin, and just big enough to hold
the crown -- she put it into my hand -- it was pretty; and I held it ten
minutes with the back of my hand resting upon her lap -- looking sometimes at
the purse, sometimes on one side of it.

A stitch or two had broke out in the gathers of my stock -- the fair fille de
chamber, without saying a word, took out her little hussive, threaded a small
needle, and sewed it up -- I foresaw it would hazard the glory of the day; and
as she passed her hand in silence across and across my neck in the maneuver, I
felt the laurels shake which fancy had wreathed about my head.

A strap had given way in her walk, and the buckle of her shoe was just falling
off -- See, said the fille de chamber, holding up her foot -- I could not for
my soul but fasten the buckle in return, and putting in the strap -- and
lifting up the other foot with it, when I had done, to see both were right --
in doing it too suddenly -- it unavoidably threw the fair fille de chamber off
her center -- and then --

THE CONQUEST.
YES -- and then -- Ye whose clay-cold heads and lukewarm hearts can argue
down or mask your passions -- tell me, what trespass is it that man should have
them? or how his spirit stands answerable, to the father of spirits, but for
his conduct under them?

If nature has so wove her web of kindness, that some threads of love and
desire are entangled with the piece -- must the whole web be rent in drawing
them out? -- Whip me such stoics, great governor of nature! said I to myself --
Wherever thy providence shall place me for the trials of my virtue -- whatever
is my danger -- whatever is my situation -- let me feel the movements which
rise out of it, and which belong to me as a man -- and if I govern them as a
good one -- I will trust the issues to thy justice, for thou have made us --
and not we ourselves.

As I finished my address, I raised the fair fille de chamber up by the hand,
and led her out of the room -- she stood by me till I locked the door and put
the key in my pocket -- and then -- the victory being quite decisive -- and not
till then, I pressed my lips to her cheek, and, taking her by the hand again,
led her safe to the gate of the hotel.

THE MYSTERY.
PARIS.
IF a man knows the heart, he will know it was impossible to go back instantly
to my chamber -- it was touching a cold key with a flat third to it, upon the
close of a piece of music, which had called forth my affections -- therefore,
when I let go the hand of the fille de chamber, I remained at the gate of the
hotel for some time, looking at every one who passed by, and forming
conjectures upon them, till my attention got fixed upon a single object which
confounded all kind of reasoning upon him.

It was a tall figure of a philosophic serious, adust look, which passed and
repassed sedately along the street, making a turn of about sixty paces on each
side of the gate of the hotel -- the man was about fifty-two -- had a small
cane under his arm -- was dressed in a dark drab-colour'd coat, waistcoat, and
breeches, which seemed to have seen some years service -- they were still
clean, and there was a little air of frugal proprete throughout him. By his
pulling off his hat, and his attitude of accosting a good many in his way, I
saw he was asking charity; so I got a sous or two out of my pocket ready to
give him, as he took me in his turn -- he passed by me without asking any thing
-- and yet did not go five steps further before he asked charity of a little
woman -- I was much more likely to have given of the two -- He had scarce done
with the woman, when he pulled off his hat to another who was coming the same
way. -- An ancient gentleman came slowly -- and, after him, a young smart one
-- He let them both pass, and asked nothing: I stood observing him half an
hour, in which time he had made a dozen turns backwards and forwards, and found
that he invariably pursued the same plan.

There were two things very singular in this, which set my brain to work, and
to no purpose -- the first was, why the man should only tell his story to the
sex -- and secondly -- what kind of story it was, and what species of eloquence
it could be, which softened the hearts of the women, which he knew 'twas to no
purpose to practice upon the men.

There were two other circumstances which entangled this mystery -- the one
was, he told every woman what he had to say in her ear, and in a way which had
much more the air of a secret than a petition -- the other was, it was always
successful -- he never stopped a woman, but she pulled out her purse, and
immediately gave him something.

I could form no system to explain the phenomenon.

I had got a riddle to amuse me for the rest of the evening, so I walked up
stairs to my chamber.

THE CASE OF CONSCIENCE.
PARIS.
I WAS immediately followed up by the master of the hotel, who came into my
room to tell me I must provide lodgings else where. -- How so, friend? said I.
-- He answered, I had had a young woman locked up with me two hours that
evening in my bedchamber, and 'twas against the rules of his house. -- Very
well, said I, we'll all part friends then -- for the girl is no worse -- and I
am no worse -- and you will be just as I found you. -- It was enough, he said,
to overthrow the credit of his hotel. -- Voyez vous, Monsieur, said he,
pointing to the foot of the bed we had been sitting upon. -- I own it had
something of the appearance of an evidence; but my pride not suffering me to
enter into any detail of the case, I exhorted him to let his soul sleep in
peace, as I resolved to let mine do that night, and that I would discharge what
I owed him at breakfast.

I should not have minded, Monsieur, said he, if you had had twenty girls --
It Is a score more, replied I, interrupting him, than I ever reckoned upon --
Provided, added he, it hadbeen but in a morning. -- And does the difference of
the time of the day at Paris make a difference in the sin? -- It made a
difference, he said, in the scandal. -- I like a good distinction in my heart;
and cannot say I was intolerably out of temper with the man. -- I own it is
necessary, reassumed the master of the hotel, that a stranger at Paris should
have the opportunities presented to him of buying lace and silk stockings and
ruffles, et tout cela -- and it is nothing if a woman comes with a band box. --
OF my conscience, said I, she had one; but I never looked into it. -- Then,
Monsieur, said he, has bought nothing. -- Not one earthly thing, replied I. --
Because, said he, I could recommend one to you who would use you en conscience.
-- But I must see her this night, said I. -- He made me a low bow and walked
down.

Now shall I triumph over this maitre d'hotel, cried I -- and what then? --
Then I shall let him see I know he is a dirty fellow. -- And what then? -- What
then! -- I was too near myself to say it was for the sake of others. -- I had
no good answer left -- there was more of spleen than principle in my project,
and I was sick of it before the execution.

In a few minutes the Grisset came in with her box of lace -- I Will buy nothing
however, said I, within myself.

The Grisset would show me every thing -- I was hard to please: she would not
seem to see it; she opened her little magazine, laid all her laces one after
another before me -- unfolded and folded them up again one by one with the most
patient sweetness -- I might buy -- or not -- she would let me have every thing
at my own price -- the poor creature seemed anxious to get a penny; and laid
herself out to win me, and not so much in a manner which seemed artful, as in
one I felt simple and caressing.

If there is not a fund of honest cullibility in man, so much the worse -- my
heart relented, and I gave up my second resolution as quietly as the first --
Why should I chastise one for the trespass of another? if thou art tributary to
this tyrant of an host, thought I, looking up in her face, so much harder is
thy bread.

If I had not had more than four Louis d'ors in my purse, there was no such
thing as rising up and showing her the door, till I had first laid three of
them out in a pair of ruffles.

-- The master of the hotel will share the profit with her -- no matter -- then
I have only paid as many a poor soul has paid before me for an act he could not
do, or think of.

THE RIDDLE.
PARIS.
WHEN La Fleur came up to wait upon me at supper, he told me how sorry the
master of the hotel was for his affront to me in bidding me change my lodgings.

A man who values a good night's rest will not lay down with enmity in his
heart if he can help it -- So I bid La Fleur tell the master of the hotel, that
I was sorry on my side for the occasion I had given him -- and you may tell
him, if you will, La Fleur, added I, that if the young woman should call again,
I shall not see her.

This was a sacrifice not to him, but myself, having resolved, after so narrow
an escape, to run no more risks, but to leave Paris, if it was possible, with
all the virtue I entered in.

C'est deroger a noblesse, Monsieur, said La Fleur, making me a bow down to the
ground as he said it -- Et encore Monsieur, said he, may change his sentiments
-- and if (par hazard) he should like to amuse himself -- I find no amusement
in it, said I, interrupting him --

Mon Dieu! said La Fleur -- and took away.

In an hour's time he came to put me to bed, and was more than commonly
officious -- something hung upon his lips to say to me, or ask me, which he
could not get off: I could not conceive what it was; and indeed gave myself
little trouble to find it out, as I had another riddle so much more interesting
upon my mind, which was that of the man's asking charity before the door of the
hotel -- I would have given any thing to have got to the bottom of it; and
that, not out of curiosity -- it is so low a principle of enquiry, in general, I
would not purchase the gratification of it with a two-sous piece -- but a
secret, I thought, which so soon and so certainly softened the heart of every
woman you came near, was a secret at least equal to the philosopher's stone:
had I had both the Indies, I would have given up one to have been master of it.

I tossed and turned it almost all night long in my brains to no manner of
purpose; and when I awoke in the morning, I found my spirit as much troubled
with my dreams, as ever the king of Babylon had been with his; and I will not
hesitate to affirm, it would have puzzled all the wise men of Paris, as much as
those of Chaldea, to have given its interpretation.

LE DIMANCHE.
PARIS.
IT was Sunday; and when La Fleur came in, in the morning, with my coffee and
role and butter, he had got himself so gallantly arrayed, I scarce knew him.

I had convenanted at Montreal to give him a new hat with a silver button and
loop, and four Louis d'ors pour s'adoniser, when we got to Paris; and the poor
fellow, to do him justice, had done wonders with it.

He had bought a bright, clean, good scarlet coat and a pair of breeches of the
same -- They were not a crown worse, he said, for the wearing -- I wished him
hanged for telling me -- they looked so fresh, that though I knew the thing could
not be done, yet I would rather have imposed upon my fancy with thinking I had
bought them new for the fellow, than that they had come out of the Rue de
friperie.

This is a nicety which makes not the heart sore at Paris.

He had purchased moreover a handsome blue satin waistcoat, fancifully enough
embroidered -- this was indeed something the worse for the services it had
done, but 'twas clean scoured -- the gold had been touched up, and upon the
whole was rather showy than otherwise -- and as the blue was not violent, it
suited with the coat and breeches very well: he had squeezed out of the money,
moreover, a new bag and a solitaire; and had insisted with the fripier, upon a
gold pair of garters to his breeches knees -- He had purchased muslin ruffles,
bien brodees, with four livres of his own money -- and a pair of white silk
stockings for five more -- and, to top all, nature had given him a handsome
figure, without costing him a sous.

He entered the room thus set off, with his hair dressed in the first style,
and with a handsome bouquet in his breast -- in a word, there was that look of
festivity in every thing about him, which at once put me in mind it was Sunday
-- and by combining both together, it instantly struck me, that the favor he
wished to ask of me the night before, was to spend the day, as every body in
Paris spent it, besides. I had scarce made the conjecture, when La Fleur, with
infinite humility, but with a look of trust, as if I should not refuse him,
begged I would grant him the day, pour fair le galant vis a vis de sa
maitresse. Now it was the very thing I intended to do myself vis a vis Madame
de R**** -- I had retained the remise on purpose for it, and it would not have
mortified my vanity to have had a servant so well dressed as La Fleur was to
have got up behind it: I never could have worse spared him.

But we must feel, not argue in these embarrassments -- the sons and daughters
of service part with liberty, but not with Nature in their contracts; they are
flesh and blood, and have their little vanities and wishes in the midst of the
house of bondage, as well as their taskmasters -- no doubt, they have set
their selfdenials at a price -- and their expectations are so unreasonable,
that I would often disappoint them, but that their condition puts it so much in
my power to do it.

Behold! -- Behold, I am thy servant -- disarms me at once of the powers of a
master --

-- Thou shall go, La Fleur! said I.

-- And what mistress, La Fleur, said I, can thou have picked up in so little
a time at Paris? La Fleur laid his hand upon his breast, and said 'twas a
petite demoiselle at Monsieur Le Compte de B****'s. -- La Fleur had a heart
made for society; and, to speak the truth of him let as few occasions slip him
as his master -- so that some how or other; but how -- heaven knows -- he had
connected himself with the demoiselle upon the landing of the staircase,
during the time I was taken up with my Passport; and as there was time enough
for me to win the Count to my inteterest, La Fleur had contrived to make it do
to win the maid to his -- the family, it seems, was to be at Paris that day,
and he had made a party with her, and two or three more of the Count's
household, upon the boulevards.

Happy people! that once a week at least are sure to lay down all your cares
together; and dance and sing and sport away the weights of grievance, which bow
down the spirit of other nations to the earth.

THE FRAGMENT.
PARIS.
LA Fleur had left me something to amuse myself with for the day more than I
had bargained for, or could have entered either into his head or mine.

He had brought the little print of butter upon a current leaf; and as the
morning was warm, and he had a good step to bring it, he had begged a sheet of
waste paper to put betwixt the current leaf and his hand -- As that was plate
sufficient, I bad him lay it upon the table as it was, and as I resolved to
stay within all day I ordered him to call upon the traileur to bespeak my
dinner, and leave me to breakfast by myself.

When I had finished the butter, I threw the current leaf out of the window,
and was going to do the same by the waste paper -- but stopping to read a line
first, and that drawing me on to a second and third -- I thought it better
worth; so I shut the window, and drawing a chair up to it, I sat down to read
it.

It was in the old French of Rabelais's time, and for ought I know might have
been wrote by him -- it was moreover in a Gothic letter, and that so faded and
gone off by damps and length of time, it cost me infinite trouble to make any
thing of it -- I threw it down; and then wrote a letter to Eugenius -- then I
took it up again, and embroiled my patience with it afresh -- and then to cure
that, I wrote a letter to Eliza. -- Still it kept hold of me; and the
difficulty of understanding it increased but the desire.

I got my dinner; and after I had enlightened my mind with a bottle of
Burgundy, I at it again -- and after two or three hours poring upon it, with
almost as deep attention as ever Gruter or Jacob Spon did upon a nonsensical
inscription, I thought I made sense of it; but to make sure of it, the best
way, I imagined, was to turn it into English, and see how it would look then --
so I went on leisurely, as a trifling man does, sometimes writing a sentence --
then taking a turn or two -- and then looking how the world went, out of the
window; so that it was nine o'clock at night before I had done it -- I then
begun and read it as follows.

THE FRAGMENT.
PARIS.
-- Now as the notary's wife disputed the point with the notary with too much
heat -- I wish, said the notary, throwing down the parchment, that there was
another notary here only to set down and attest all this --

-- And what would you do then, Monsieur? said she, rising hastily up -- the
notary's wife was a little fume of a woman, and the notary thought it well to
avoid a hurricane by a mild reply -- I would go, answered he, to bed. -- You
may go to the devil, answered the notary's wife.

Now there happening to be but one bed in the house, the other two rooms being
unfurnished, as is the custom at Paris, and the notary not caring to lie in the
same bed with a woman who had but that moment sent him pell-mell to the devil,
went forth with his hat and cane and short cloak, the night being very windy,
and walked out ill at ease toward the pont neuf.

Of all the bridges which ever were built, the whole world who have passed over
the pont neuf, must own, that it is the noblest -- the finest -- the grandest
-- the lightest -- the longest -- the broadest that ever conjoined land and
land together upon the face of the terraqueous globe --

By this, it seems, as if the author of the fragment had not been a Frenchman.

The worst fault which divines and the doctors of the Sorbonne can allege
against it, is, that if there is but a cap-full of wind in or about Paris, it is
more blasphemously sacre Dieu'd there than in any other aperture of the whole
city -- and with reason, good and cogent Messieurs; for it comes against you
without crying guard d'eau, and with such unpremeditable puffs, that of the few
who cross it with their hats on, not one in fifty but hazards two livres and a
half, which is its full worth.

The poor notary, just as he was passing by the sentry, instinctively clapped
his cane to the side of it, but in raising it up the point of his cane catching
hold of the loop of the sentinel's hat hoisted it over the spikes of the
ballustrade clear into the Seine --

-- It Is an ill wind, said a boatsman, who caught it, which blows no body any
good.

The sentry being a gascon incontinently twirl'd up his whiskers, and levelled
his harquebuss.

Harquebusses in those days went off with matches; and an old woman's paper
lanthorn at the end of the bridge happening to be blown out, she had borrowed
the sentry's match to light it -- it gave a moment's time for the gascon's
blood to run cool, and turn the accident better to his advantage -- It Is an ill
wind, said he, catching off the notary's castor, and legitimating the capture
with the boatman's adage.

The poor notary crossed the bridge, and passing along the rue de Dauphine into
the fauxbourgs of St. Germain, lamented himself as he walked along in this
manner:

Luckless man! that I am, said the notary, to be the sport of hurricanes all my
days -- to be born to have the storm of ill language levelled against me and my
profession wherever I go -- to be forced into marriage by the thunder of the
church to a tempest of a woman -- to be driven forth out of my house by
domestic winds, and despoiled of my castor by pontific ones -- to be here,
bare-headed, in a windy night at the mercy of the ebbs and flows of accidents
-- where I am to lay my head? -- miserable man! what wind in the two-and-thirty
points of the whole compass can blow unto thee, as it does to the rest of thy
fellow creatures, good!

As the notary was passing on by a dark passage, complaining in this sort, a
voice called out to a girl, to bid her run for the next notary -- now the
notary being the next, and availing himself of his situation, walked up the
passage to the door, and passing through an old sort of a saloon, was ushered
into a large chamber dismantled of every thing but a long military pike -- a
breast plate -- a rusty old sword, and bandoleer, hung up equi-distant in four
different places against the wall.

An old personage, who had heretosore been a gentleman, and unless decay of
fortune taints the blood along with it was a gentleman at that time, lay
supporting his head upon his hand in his bed; a little table with a taper
burning was set close beside it, and close by the table was placed a chair --
the notary sat him down in it; and pulling out his ink-horn and a sheet or two
of paper which he had in his pocket, he placed them before him, and dipping his
pen in his ink, and leaning his breast over the table, he disposed every thing
to make the gentleman's last will and testament.

Alas! Monsieur le Notaire, said the gentleman, raising himself up a little, I
have nothing to bequeath which will pay the expense of bequeathing, except the
history of myself, which, I could not die in peace unless I left it as a legacy
to the world; the profits arising out of it, I bequeath to you for the pains of
taking it from me -- it is a story so uncommon, it must me read by all mankind
-- it will make the fortunes of your house -- the notary dipped his pen into
his ink-horn -- Almighty director of every event in my life! said the old
gentleman, looking up earnestly and raising his hands toward heaven -- thou
whose hand has led me on through such a labyrinth of strange passages down into
this scene of desolation, assist the decaying memory of an old, infirm, and
brokenhearted man -- direct my tongue, by the spirit of thy eternal truth, that
this stranger may set down naught but what is written in that Book, from whose
records, said he, clasping his hands together, I am to be condemned or
acquitted! -- the notary held up the point of his pen betwixt the taper and his
eye --

-- It is a story, Monsieur le Notaire, said the gentleman, which will rouse up
every affection in nature -- it will kill the humane, and touch the heart of
cruelty herself with pity --

-- The notary was inflamed with a desire to begin, and put his pen a third
time into his ink-horn -- and the old gentleman turning a little more toward
the notary, began to dictate his story in these words --

-- And where is the rest of it, La Fleur? said I, as he just then entered the
room.

THE FRAGMENT AND THE Nosegay.
BOUQUET.
PARIS.
WHEN La Fleur came up close to the table, and was made to comprehend what I
wanted, he told me there were only two other sheets of it which he had wrapped
round the stalks of a bouquet to keep it together, which he had presented to
the demoiselle upon the boulevards -- Then, prithee, La Fleur, said I, step
back to her to the Count de B****'s hotel, and see if you can get -- There is
no doubt of it, said La Fleur -- and away he flew.

In a very little time the poor fellow came back quite out of breath, with
deeper marks of disappointment in his looks than could arise from the simple
irreparability of the fragment -- Just ciel! in less than two minutes that the
poor fellow had taken his last tender farewell of her -- his faithless mistress
had given his gage d'amour to one of the Count's footmen -- the footman to a
young sempstress -- and the sempstress to a fiddler, with my fragment at the
end of it -- Our misfortunes were involved together -- I gave a sigh -- and La
Fleur echoed it back again to my ear --

-- How perfidious! cried La Fleur -- How unlucky! said I. --

-- I should not have been mortified, Monsieur, quoth La Fleur, if she had lost
it -- Nor I, La Fleur, said I, had I found it.

Whether I did or no, will be seen hereafter.

THE ACT OF CHARITY.
PARIS.
THE man who either disdains or fears to walk up a dark entry may be an
excellent good man, and fit for a hundred things; but he will not do to make a
good sentimental traveller. I count little of the many things I see pass at
broad noon day, in large and open streets. -- Nature is shy, and hates to act
before spectators; but in such an unobserved corner, you sometimes see a single
short scene of here is worth all the sentiments of a dozen French plays
compounded together -- and yet they are absolutely fine; -- and whenever I have
a more brilliant affair upon my hands than common, as they suit a preacher just
as well as a hero, I generally make my sermon out of 'em -- and for the text --
"Capadosia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphilia" -- is as good as any one in
the Bible.

There is a long dark passage issuing out from the opera comique into a narrow
street; it is trod by a few who humbly wait for a fiacre Hackney-coach.
, or wish to get off quietly o'foot when the opera is done. At the end of it,
toward the theater, it is lighted by a small candle, the light of which is
almost lost before you get halfway down, but near the door -- it is more for
ornament than use: you see it as a fixed star of the least magnitude; it burns
-- but does little good to the world, that we know of.

In returning along this passage, I discerned, as I approached within five or
six paces of the door, two ladies standing arm in arm, with their backs against
the wall, waiting, as I imagined, for a fiacre -- as they were next the door, I
thought they had a prior right; so edged myself up within a yard or little more
of them, and quietly took my stand -- I was in black, and scarce seen.

The lady next me was a tall lean figure of a woman of about thirty-six; the
other of the same size and make, of about forty; there was no mark of wife or
widow in any one part of either of them -- they seemed to be two upright vestal
sisters, unsapp'd by caresses, unbroke in upon by tender salutations: I could
have wished to have made them happy -- their happiness was destined, that
night, to come from another quarter.

A low voice, with a good turn of expression, and sweet cadence at the end of
it, begged for a twelve-sous piece betwixt them, for the love of heaven. I
thought it singular, that a beggar should fix the quota of an alms -- and that
the sum should be twelve times as much as what is usually given in the dark.
They both seemed astonished at it as much as myself. -- Twelve sous! said one
-- a twelve-sous piece! said the other -- and made no reply.

The poor man said, He knew not how to ask less of ladies of their rank; and
bowed down his head to the ground.

Poo! said they -- we have no money.

The beggar remained silent for a moment or two, and renewed his supplication.

Do not, my fair young ladies, said he, stop your good ears against me -- Upon
my word, honest man! said the younger, we have no change -- Then God bless you,
said the poor man, and multiply those joys which you can give to others without
change! -- I observed the elder sister put her hand into her pocket -- I Will
see, said she, if I have a sous. -- A sous! give twelve, said the supplicant;
Nature has been bountiful to you, be bountiful to a poor man.

I would, friend, with all my heart, said the younger, if I had it.

My fair charitable! said he, addressing himself to the elder -- What is it but
your goodness and humanity which makes your bright eyes so sweet, that they
outshine the the morning even in this dark passage? and what was it which made
the Marquis de Santerre and his brother say so much of you both as they just
passed by?

The two ladies seemed much affected; and impulsively at the same time they
both put their hands into their pocket, and each took out a twelve-sous piece.

The contest betwixt them and the poor supplicant was no more -- it was
continued betwixt themselves, which of the two should give the twelvesous piece
in charity -- and to end the dispute, they both gave it together, and the man
went away.

THE RIDDLE EXPLAINED.
PARIS.
I Stepped hastily after him: it was the very man whose success in asking
charity of the women before the door of the hotel had so puzzled me -- and I
found at once his secret, or at least the basis of it -- 'twas flattery.

Delicious essence! how refreshing art thou to nature! how strongly are all its
powers and all its weaknesses on thy side! how sweetly do thou mix with the
blood, and help it through the most difficult and tortuous passages to the
heart!

The poor man, as he was not straighten'd for time, had given it here in a
larger dose: it is certain he had a way of bringing it into less form, for the
many sudden cases he had to do with in the streets; but how he contrived to
correct, sweeten, concentre, and qualify it -- I vex not my spirit with the
inquiry -- it is enough, the beggar gained two twelvesous pieces -- and they
can best tell the rest, who have gained much greater matters by it.

PARIS.
WE get forwards in the world not so much by doing services, as receiving them:
you take a withering twig, and put it in the ground; and then you water it,
because you have planted it.

Mons. Le Compte de B****, merely because he had done me one kindness in the
affair of my passport, would go on and do me another, the few days he was at
Paris, in making me known to a few people of rank; and they were to present me
to others, and so on.

I had got master of my secret, just in time to turn these honors to some
little account; otherwise, as is commonly the case, I should have dined or
supped a single time or two round, and then by translating French looks and
attitudes into plain English, I should presently have seen, that I had got hold
of the couvert Plate, napkin, knife, fork, and spoon.
of some more entertaining guest; and in course, should have resigned all my
places one after another, merely upon the principle that I could not keep them.
-- As it was, things did not go much amiss.

I had the honor of being introduced to the old Marquis de B****: in days of
yore he had signalized himself by some small feats of chivalry in the Cour
d'amour, and had dressed himself out to the idea of tilts and tournaments ever
since -- the Marquis de B**** wished to have it thought the affair was
somewhere else than in his brain. "He could like to take a trip to England,"
and asked much of the English ladies. Stay where you are, I beseech you, Mons.
le Marquise, said I -- Les Messrs. Angloise can scarce get a kind look from
them as it is. -- The Marquis invited me to supper.

Mons. P**** the farmer-general was just as inquisitive about our taxes. --
They were very considerable, he heard -- If we knew but how to collect them,
said I, making him a low bow.

I could never have been invited to Mons. P****'s concerts upon any other terms.

I had been misrepresented to Madame de Q*** as an esprit -- Madam de Q*** was
an esprit herself; she burnt with impatience to see me, and hear me talk. I had
not taken my seat, before I saw she did not care a sous whether I had any wit
or no -- I was let in, to be convinced she had. -- I call heaven to witness I
never once opened the door of my lips.

Madame de Q*** vowed to every creature she met, "She had never had a more
improving conversation with a man in her life."

There are three epochas in the empire of a French-woman -- She is coquette --
then deist -- then devote: the empire during these is never lost -- she only
changes her subjects: when thirty-five years and more have unpeopled her
dominions of the slaves of love, she re-peoples it with slaves of infidelity --
and then with the slaves of the Church.

Madame de V*** was vibrating betwixt the first of these epochas: the color of
the rose was shading fast away -- she ought to have been a deist five years
before the time I had the honor to pay my first visit.

She placed me upon the same sopha with her, for the sake of disputing the
point of religion more closely. -- In short, Madame de V*** told me she
believed nothing.

I told Madame de V*** it might be her principle; but I was sure it could not
be her interest to level the outworks, without which I could not conceive how
such a citadel as hers could be defended -- that there was not a more dangerous
thing in the world, than for a beauty to be a deist -- that it was a debt I
owed my creed, not to conceal it from her -- that I had not been five minutes
sat upon the sopha besides her, but I had begun to form designs -- and what is
it, but the sentiments of religion, and the persuasion they had existed in her
breast, which could have checked them as they rose up.

We are not adamant, said I, taking hold of her hand -- and there is need of
all restraints, till age in her own time steals in and lays them on us -- but,
my dear lady, said I, kissing her hand -- it is too -- too soon --

I declare I had the credit all over Paris of unperverting Madame de V***. --
She affirmed to Mons. D*** and the Abbe M***, that in one half hour I had said
more for revealed religion, than all their Encyclopedia had said against it --
I was listed directly into Madame de V***'s Coterie -- and she put off the
epoch of deism for two years.

I remember it was in this Coterie, in the middle of a discourse, in which I
was showing the necessity of a first cause, that the young Count de Faineant
took me by the hand to the furthest corner of the room, to tell me my solitaire
was pinned too strait about my neck -- It should be plus badinant, said the
Count, looking down upon his own -- but a word, Mons. Yorick, to the wise --.

-- And from the wise, Mons. Le Compte, replied I, making him a bow -- is
enough.

The Count de Faineant embraced me with more ardour than ever I was embraced by
mortal man.

For three weeks together, I was of every man's opinion I met. -- Pardi! ce
Mons. Yorick a autant d'esprit que nous autres. -- Il raisonne bien, said
another. -- C'est un bon enfant, said a third. -- And at this price I could
have eaten and drank and been merry all the days of my life at Paris; but 'twas
a dishonest reckoning -- I grew ashamed of it -- it was the gain of a slave --
every sentiment of honor revolted against it -- the higher I got, the more was
I forced upon my beggarly system -- the better the Coterie -- the more children
of Art -- I languish'd for those of Nature: and one night, after a most vile
prostitution of myself to half a dozen different people, I grew sick -- went to
bed -- ordered La Fleur to get me horses in the morning to set out for Italy.

MARIA.
MOULINES
I NEVER felt what the distress of plenty was in any one shape till now -- to
travel it through the Bourbonnois, the sweetest part of France -- in the
hey-day of the vintage, when Nature is pouring her abundance into every one's
lap, and every eye is lifted up -- a journey through each step of which music
beats time to Labor, and all her children are rejoicing as they carry in their
clusters -- to pass through this with my affections flying out, and kindling at
every group before me -- and every one of 'em was pregnant with adventures.

Just heaven! -- it would fill up twenty volumes -- and alas! I have but a few
small pages left of this to crowd it into -- and half of these must be taken up
with the poor Maria my friend, Mr. Shandy, met with near Moulines.

The story he had told of that disordered maid affect'd me not a little in the
reading; but when I got within the neighbouthood where she lived, it returned
so strong into my mind, that I could not resist an impulse which prompted me to
go half a league out of the road to the village where her parents dwelt to
enquire after her.

It Is going, I own, like the Knight of the Woeful Countenance, in quest of
melancholy adventures -- but I know not how it is, but I am never so perfectly
conscious of the existence of a soul within me, as when I am entangled in them.

The old mother came to the door, her looks told me the story before she opened
her mouth -- She had lost her husband; he had died, she said, of anguish, for
the loss of Maria's senses about a month before. -- She had feared at first,
she added, that it would have plundered her poor girl of what little
understanding was left -- but, on the contrary, it had brought her more to
herself -- still she could not rest -- her poor daughter, she said, crying, was
wandering somewhere about the road --

-- Why does my pulse beat languid as I write this? and what made La Fleur,
whose heart seemed only to be tuned to joy, to pass the back of his hand twice
across his eyes, as the woman stood and told it? I beckoned to the postilion to
turn back into the road.

When we had got within half a league of Moulines, at a little opening in the
road leading to a thicket, I discovered poor Maria sitting under a poplar --
she was sitting with her elbow in her lap, and her head leaning on one side
within her hand -- a small brook ran at the foot of the tree.

I bid the postilion go on with the chaise to Moulines -- and La Fleur to
bespeak my supper -- and that I would walk after him.

She was dressed in white, and much as my friend described her, except that her
hair hung loose, which before was twisted within a silk net. -- She had,
superadded likewise to her jacket, a pale green ribband which fell across her
shoulder to the waist; at the end of which hung her pipe. -- Her goat had been
as faithless as her lover; and she had got a little dog in lieu of him, which
she had kept tied by a string to her girdle; as I looked at her dog, she drew
him toward her with the string. -- "Thou shall not leave me, Sylvio," said
she. I looked in Maria's eyes, and saw she was thinking more of her father than
of her lover or her little goat; for as she uttered them the tears trickled
down her cheeks.

I sat down close by her; and Maria let me wipe them away as they fell with my
handkerchief. -- I then sleep'd it in my own -- and then in hers -- and then in
mine -- and then I wiped hers again -- and as I did it, I felt such
undescribable emotions within me, as I am sure could not be accounted for from
any combinations of matter and motion.

I am positive I have a soul; nor can all the books with which materialists
have pestered the world ever convince me of the contrary.

MARIA.
WHEN Maria had come a little to herself, I asked her if she remembered a pale
thin person of a man who had sat down betwixt her and her goat about two years
before? She said, she was unsettled much at that time, but remembered it upon
two accounts -- that ill as she was she saw the person pitied her; and next,
that her goat had stolen his handkerchief, and she had beat him for the theft
-- she had washed it, she said, in the brook, and kept it ever since in her
pocket to restore it to him in case she should ever see him again, which, she
added, he had half promised her. As she told me this, she took the handkerchief
out of her pocket to let me see it; she had folded it up neatly in a couple of
vine leaves, tied round with a tendril -- on opening it, I saw an S marked in
one of the corners.

She had since that, she told me, strayed as far as Rome, and walked round St
Peter's once -- and returned back -- that she found her way alone across the
Apennines -- had traveled over all Lombardy without money -- and through the
flinty roads of Savoy without shoes -- how she had borne it, and how she had
got supported, she could not tell -- but God tempers the wind, said Maria, to
the shorn lamb.

Shorn indeed! and to the quick, said I; and wast thou in my own land, where I
have a cottage, I would take thee to it and shelter thee: thou should eat of
my own bread, and drink of my own cup -- I would be kind to thy Sylvio -- in
all thy weaknesses and wanderings I would seek after thee and bring thee back
-- when the sun went down I would say my prayers, and when I had done thou
should play thy evening song upon thy pipe, nor would the incense of my
sacrifice be worse accepted for entering heaven along with that of a broken
heart.

Nature melted within me, as I uttered this; and Maria observing, as I took out
my handkerchief, that it was steeped to much already to be of use, would needs
go wash it in the stream. -- And where will you dry it, Maria? said I -- I Will
dry it in my bosom, said she -- 'twill do me good.

And is your heart still so warm, Maria? said I.

I touched upon the string on which hung all her sorrows -- she looked with
wistful disorder for some time in my face; and then, without saying any thing,
took her pipe, and played her service to the Virgin -- The string I had touched
ceased to vibrate -- in a moment or two Maria returned to herself -- let her
pipe fall -- and rose up.

And where art you going, Maria? said I. -- She said to Moulines. -- Let us go,
said I, together. -- Maria put her arm within mine, and lengthening the string,
to let the dog follow -- in that order we entered Moulines.

MARIA.
MOULINES.
THOUGH I hate salutations and greetings in the marketplace, yet when we got
into the middle of this, I stopped to take my last look and last farewell of
Maria.

Maria, though not tall, was nevertheless of the first order of fine forms --
affliction had touched her looks with something that was scarce earthly --
still she was feminine -- and so much was there about her of all that the heart
wishes, or the eye looks for in woman, that could the traces be ever worn out
of her brain, and those of Eliza's out of mine, she should not only eat of my
bread and drink of my own cup, but Maria should lay in my bosom, and be unto me
as a daughter.

Adieu, poor luckless maiden! -- imbibe the oil and wine which the compassion
of a stranger, as he journieth on his way, now pours into thy wounds -- the
being who has twice bruised thee can only bind them up for ever.

THE BOURBONNOIS.
THERE was nothing from which I had painted out for myself so joyous a riot of
the affections, as in this journey in the vintage, through this part of France;
but pressing through this gate of sorrow to it, my sufferings has totally
unfitted me: in every scene of festivity I saw Maria in the back-ground of the
piece, sitting pensive under her poplar; and I had got almost to Lions before I
was able to cast a shade across her --

-- Dear sensibility! source inexhausted of all that is precious in our joys, or
costly in our sorrows! thou chainest thy martyr down upon his bed of straw --
and it is thou who lifts him up to HEAVEN -- eternal fountain of our feelings!
-- it is here I trace thee -- and this is thy divinity which stirs within me --
not, that in some sad and sickening moments, " my soul shrinks back upon
herself, and startles at destruction" -- mere pomp of words! -- but that I feel
some generous joys and generous cares beyond myself -- all comes from thee,
great -- great SENSORIUM of the world! which vibrates, if a hair of our heads
but falls upon the ground, in the remotest desert of thy creation. -- Touched
with thee, Eugenius draws my curtain when I languish -- hears my tale of
symptoms, and blames the weather for the disorder of his nerves. Thou giv'st a
portion of it sometimes to the roughest peasant who traverses the bleakest
mountains -- he finds the lacerated lamb of another's flock -- This moment I
beheld him leaning with his head against his crook, with piteous inclination
looking down upon it -- Oh! had I come one moment sooner! -- it bleeds to death
-- his gentle heart bleeds with it --

Peace to thee, generous swain! -- I see thou walk off with anguish -- but
thy joys shall balance it -- for happy is thy cottage -- and happy is the
sharer of it -- and happy are the lambs which sport about you.

THE SUPPER.
A SHOE coming loose from the fore-foot of the thill-horse, at the beginning of
the ascent of mount Taurira, the postilion dismounted, twisted the shoe off,
and put it in his pocket; as the ascent was of five or six miles, and that
horse our main dependence, I made a point of having the shoe fastened on again,
as well as we could; but the postilion had thrown away the nails, and the
hammer in the chaise-box, being of no great use without them, I submitted to go
on.

He had not mounted half a mile higher, when coming to a flinty piece of road,
the poor devil lost a second shoe, and from off his other fore-foot; I then got
out of the chaise in good earnest; and seeing a house about a quarter of a mile
to the left hand, with a great deal to do, I prevailed upon the postilion to
turn up to it. The look of the house, and of every thing about it, as we drew
nearer, soon reconciled me to the disaster. -- It was a little farm-house
surrounded with about twenty acres of vineyard, about as much corn -- and close
to the house, on one side, was a potagerie of an acre and a half, full of every
thing which could make plenty in a French peasant's house -- and on the other
side was a little wood which furnished wherewithal to dress it. It was about
eight in the evening when I got to the house -- so I left the postilion to
manage his point as he could -- and for mine, I walked directly into the house.

The family consisted of an old grey-headed man and his wife, with five or six
sons and sons-in-law and their several wives, and a joyous genealogy out of 'em.

They were all sitting down together to their lentil-soup; a large wheaten loaf
was in the middle of the table; and a flaggon of wine at each end of it
promised joy through the stages of the repast -- 'twas a feast of love.

The old man rose up to meet me, and with a respectful cordiality would have me
sit down at the table; my heart was sat down the moment I entered the room; so
I sat down at once like a son of the family; and to invest myself in the
character as speedily as I could, I instantly borrowed the old man's knife, and
taking up the loaf cut myself a hearty luncheon; and as I did it I saw a
testimony in every eye, not only of an honest welcome, but of a welcome mixed
with thanks that I had not seemed to doubt it.

Was it this; or tell me, Nature, what else it was which made this morsel so
sweet -- and to what magic I owe it, that the draught I took of their flaggon
was so delicious with it, that they remain upon my palate to this hour?

If the supper was to my taste -- the grace which followed it was much more so.

THE GRACE.
WHEN supper was over, the old man gave a knock upon the table with the haft of
his knife -- to bid them prepare for the dance: the moment the signal was
given, the women and girls ran all together into a back apartment to tie up
their hair -- and the young men to the door to wash their faces, and change
their sabots; and in three minutes every soul was ready upon a little esplanade
before the house to begin -- The old man and his wife came out last, and,
placing me betwixt them, sat down upon a sopha of turf by the door.

The old man had some fifty years ago been no mean performer upon the vielle --
and at the age he was then of, touched it well enough for the purpose. His wife
sung now-and-then a little to the tune -- then intermitted -- and joined her
old man again as their children and grandchildren danced before them.

It was not till the middle of the second dance, when, from some pauses in the
movement wherein they all seemed to look up, I fancied I could distinguish an
elevation of spirit different from that which is the cause or the effect of
simple jollity. -- In a word, I thought I beheld Religion mixing in the dance
-- but as I had never seen her so engaged, I should have looked upon it now, as
one of the illusions of an imagination which is eternally misleading me, had
not the old man, as soon as the dance ended, said, that this was their constant
way; and that all his life long he had made it a rule, after supper was over,
to call out his family to dance and rejoice; believing, he said, that a
cheerful and contented mind was the best sort of thanks to heaven that an
illiterate peasant could pay --

-- Or a learned prelate either, said I.

THE CASE OF DELICACY.
WHEN you have gained the top of mount Taurira, you run presently down to Lions
-- adieu then to all rapid movements! It Is a journey of caution; and it fares
better with sentiments, not to be in a hurry with them; so I contracted with a
Voiturin to take his time with a couple of mules, and convey me in my own
chaise safe to Turin through Savoy.

Poor, patient, quiet, honest people! fear not; your poverty, the treasury of
your simple virtues, will not be envied you by the world, nor will your valleys
be invaded by it. -- Nature! in the midst of thy disorders, thou art still
friendly to the scantiness thou have created -- with all thy great works about
thee, little have thou left to give, either to the scithe or to the sickle --
but to that little, thou grantest safety and protection; and sweet are the
dwellings which stand so sheltered.

Let the way-worn traveller vent his complaints upon the sudden turns and
dangers of your roads -- your rocks -- your precipices -- the difficulties of
getting up -- the horrors of getting down -- mountains impracticable -- and
cataracts, which roll down great stones from their summits, and block his up
road. -- The peasants had been all day at work in removing a fragment of this
kind between St. Michael and Madane; and by the time my Voiturin got to the
place, it wanted full two hours of completing before a passage could any how
be gained: there was nothing but to wait with patience -- 'twas a wet and
tempestuous night; so that by the delay, and that together, the Voiturin found
himself obliged to take up five miles short of his stage at a little decent
kind of an inn by the road side.

I forthwith took possession of my bedchamber -- got a good fire -- ordered
supper; and was thanking heaven it was no worse -- when a voiture arrived with
a lady in it and her servant-maid.

As there was no other bedchamber in the house, the hostess, without much
nicety, led them into mine, telling them, as she ushered them in, that there
was no body in it but an English gentleman -- that there were two good beds, in
it and a closet within the room which held another -- the accent in which she
spoke of this third bed did not say much for it -- however, she said, there
were three beds, and but three people -- and she durst say, the gentleman would
do any thing to accommodate matters. -- I left not the lady a moment to make a
conjecture about it -- so instantly made a declaration I would do any thing in
my power.

As this did not amount to an absolute surrender of my bedchamber, I still
felt myself so much the proprietor, as to have a right to do the honors of it
-- so I desired the lady to sit down -- pressed her into the warmest seat --
called for more wood -- desired the hostess to enlarge the plan of the supper,
and to favor us with the very best wine.

The lady had scarce warmed herself five minutes at the fire, before she began
to turn her head back, and give alook at the beds; and the oftener she cast her
eyes that way, the more they returned perplexed -- I felt for her -- and for
myself; for in a few minutes, what by her looks, and the case itself, I found
myself as much embarrassed as it was possible the lady could be herself.

That the beds we were to lay in were in one and the same room, was enough
simply by itself to have excited all this -- but the position of them, for they
stood parallel, and so very close to each other as only to allow space for a
small wicker chair betwixt them, rendered the affair still more oppressive to
us -- they were fixed up moreover near the fire, and the projection of the
chimney on one side, and a large beam which crossed the room on the other,
formed a kind of recess for them that was no way favorable to the nicety of
our sensations -- if any thing could have added to it, it was, that the two
beds were both of 'em so very small, as to cut us off from every idea of the
lady and the maid lying together; which in either of them, could it have been
feasible, my lying besides them, though a thing not to be wished, yet there was
nothing in it so terrible which the imagination might not have passed over
without torment.

As for the little room within, it offered little or no consolation to us;
'twas a damp cold closet, with a half dismantled window shutter, and with a
window which had neither glass or oil paper in it to keep out the tempest of
the night. I did not endeavor to stifle my cough when the lady gave a peep
into it; so it reduced the case in course to this alternative -- that the lady
should sacrifice her health to her feelings, and take up with the closet
herself, and abandon the bed next mine to her maid -- or that the girl should
take the closet, etc. etc.

The lady was a Piedmontese of about thirty, with a glow of health in her
cheeks. -- The maid was a Lyonoise of twenty, and as brisk and lively a French
girl as ever moved. -- There were difficulties every way -- and the obstacle of
the stone in the road, which brought us into the distress, great as it appeared
whilst the peasants were removing it, was but a pebble to what lay in our ways
now -- I have only to add, that it did not lessen the weight which hung upon
our spirits, that we were both too delicate to communicate what we felt to each
other upon the occasion.

We sat down to supper; and had we not had more generous wine to it than a
little inn in Savoy could have furnished, our tongues had been tied up, till
necessity herself had set them at liberty -- but the lady having a few bottles
of Burgundy in her voiture sent down her Fille de Chamber for a couple of them;
so that by the time supper was over, and we were left alone, we felt ourselves
inspired with a strength of mind sufficient to talk, at least, without reserve
upon our situation. We turned it every way, and debated and considered it in
all kind of lights in the course of a two hours negotiation; at the end of
which the articles were settled finally betwixt us, and stipulated for in form
and manner of a treaty of peace -- and I believe with as much religion and good
faith on both sides, as in any treaty which as yet had the honor of being
handed down to posterity.

They were as follows:

First. As the right of the bedchamber is in Monsieur -- and he thinking the
bed next to the fire to be the warmest, he insists upon the concession on the
lady's side of taking up with it.

Granted, on the part of Madame; with a proviso, That as the curtains of that
bed are of a flimsy transparent cotton, and appear likewise too scanty to draw
close, that the Fille de Chamber, shall fasten up the opening, either by
corking pins, or needle and thread, in such manner as shall be deemed a
sufficient barrier on the side of Monsieur.

2dly. It is required on the part of Madame, that Monsieur shall lay the whole
night through in his robe de chamber.

Rejected: inasmuch Monsieur is not worth a robe de chamber; he having nothing
in his portmanteau but six shirts and a black silk pair of breeches.

The mentioning the silk pair of breeches made an entire change of the article
-- for the breeches were accepted as an equivalent for the robe de chamber, and
so it was stipulated and agreed upon that I should lay in my black silk
breeches all night.

3dly. It was insisted upon, and stipulated for by the lady, that after
Monsieur was got to bed, and the candle and fire extinguished, that Monsieur
should not speak one single word the whole night.

Granted; provided Monsieur's saying his prayers might not be deemed an
infraction of the treaty.

There was but one point forgot in this treaty, and that was the manner in
which the lady and myself should be obliged to undress and get to bed -- there
was but one way of doing it, and that I leave to the reader to devise;
protesting as I do it, that if it is not the most delicate in nature, it is the
fault of his own imagination -- against which this is not my first complaint.

Now when we were got to bed, whether it was the novelty of the situation, or
what it was, I know not; but so it was, I could not shut my eyes; I tried this
side and that, and turned and turned again, till a full hour after midnight;
when Nature and patience both wearing out -- O my God! said I --

-- You have broke the treaty, Monsieur, said the lady, who had no more slept
than myself. -- I begged a thousand pardons -- but insisted it was no more than
en ejaculation -- she maintained 'twas an entire infraction of the treaty -- I
maintained it was provided for in the clause of the third article.

The lady would by no means give up her point, though she weakened her barrier by
it; for in the warmth of the dispute, I could hear two or three corking pins
fall out of the curtain to the ground.

Upon my word and honor, Madame, said I -- stretching my arm out of bed, by
way asseveration --

-- (I was going to have added, that I would not have trespassed against the
remotest idea of decorum for the world) --

-- But the Fille de Chamber hearing there were words between us, and fearing
that hostilities would ensue in course, had crept silently out of her closet,
and it being totally dark, had stolen so close to our beds, that she had got
herself into the narrow passage which separated them, and had advanced so far
up as to be in a line betwixt her mistress and me --

So that when I stretched out my hand, I caught hold of the Fille de Chambre's

END OF VOL. II.

