THE DESIDERATUM: OR, ELECTRICITY Made PLAIN and USEFUL.

By a Lover of Mankind, and of Common Sense.

LONDON: Prin^ed: And sold by W. Flex^ey, under Gray's Inn Gate, Holbourn; E.
Cabe, Ave-mary Lane; George Cla^k, in Litt^e Carter L^ne; George Kei^h,
Grace-Church Street; T. Smith* under the Change* and a^ the Founde^y, in
Moorfields.

MDCCLX.

THE PREFACE.
1. IN the following Tract, I have endeavored to comprize the Sum of what has
been hitherto published, on this curious and important Subject, by Mr.
Franklin, Dr. Hoadly, Mr. Wilson, Watson, Lovett, Freke, Martin, Watkins, and
in the Monthly Magazines. But I am chiefly indebted to Mr. Franklin for the
speculative Part, and to Mr. Lovett, for the practical: Though I cannot in every
Thing subscribe to the Sentiments either of one or the other.

2. Indeed I am not greatly concerned for the philosophical Part, whether it
stand or fall. Of the Facts we are absolutely assured: Although they are of so
surprising a nature, than a man could not have asserted them a few Years ago,
without quite giving up his Reputation. But who can be assured of this or that
Hypothesis, by which he endeavors to account for those Facts? Perhaps the
utmost we have reason to expect here, is an high Degree of Probability.

3. I am much more concerned for the physical Part, knowing of how great
Importance this is: How much Sickness and Pain may be prevented or removed, and
how many Lives saved by this unparalled Remedy. And yet with what Vehemence
has it been opposed? Sometimes by treating it with Contempt, as if it were of
little or no Use: Sometimes by Arguments, such as they were; and sometimes by
such Cautions against it is ill Effects, as made thousands afraid to meddle with
it.

4. But so it has fared with almost all the simple Remedies, which have been
offered to the World for many Years. When Sir John Floyer published his
excellent Book on Cold bathing, many for a Time used and profited by it. So did
abundance of People by Cold Water, when it was publicly recommended by Dr.
Hancock. The ingenious and benevolent Bishop of Cloyne, brought Tar-Water
likewise into Credit for a Season; and innumerable were the Cures wrought
thereby, even in the most desperate and deplorable Cases. Nor was it a little
Good which was done by the Use of Seawater, after Dr. Russel had published his
Tract concerning it. Indeed each of these did Wonders in it is turn. But alas!
their Reign was short. The vast Party which were on the other Side, soon raised
the Cry, and ran them down. In a few Years they were out of Fashion, cut of
Use, and almost out of Memory: And the foul; hard named Exotics took Place
again, to the utter Confusion of Common Sense.

5. Must not Electricity then, whatever Wonders it may now perform, expect soon
to share the same Fate? And yet it is absolutely certain, that in many, very
many Cases, it seldom or never fails. "I can truly say, (says Mr. Lovett) I
scarce ever knew any who made the Trial and did not succeed. Not that all
Disorders will yield thereto. Neither in this any more than the common Way,
will the same Treatment of the same Disorder in different Persons have always
the same Success." Indeed there cannot be in Nature any such Thing as an
absolute Panacea: A Medicine that will cure every Disease incident to the human
Body. If there could, Electricity would bid fairer for it, than any Thing in
the World: As it takes Place in such a vast Number of Disorders, some of them
so widely different from the others.

6. And yet there is something peculiarly unaccountable, with regard to its
Operation. In some Cases, where there was no Hope of Help, it will succeed
beyond all Expectation. In others, where we had the greatest Hope, it will have
no Effect at all. Again, in some Experiments, it helps at the very first, and
promises a speedy Cure: But presently the good Effect ceases, and the Patient
is as he was before. On the contrary, in others it has no Effect at first: It
does no good; perhaps seems to do hurt. Yet all this Time it is striking at the
Root of the Disease, which in a while it totally removes. Frequent Instances of
the former we have in Paraslytic, of the latter, in Rheumatic Cases.

7. But still one may upon the whole pronounce it the Desideratum, the general
and rarely failing Remedy, in nervous Cases of every Kind (Palsies excepted);
as well as in many others. Perhaps if the Nerves are really perforated (as is
now generally supposed) the Electric Either is the only Fluid in the Universe,
which is fine enough to move through them. And what if the Nervous Juice
itself, be a Fluid of this Kind? If so, it is no Wonder that it has always
eluded the Search of the most accurate Naturalists.

8. Be this as it may, Mr. Lovett is of Opinion, "the electrical Method of
treating Disorders, cannot be expected to arrive at any considerable Degree of
Perfection, till administered and applied by the Gentlemen of the Faculty." Nay
then, quanta de spe decidi! All my Hopes are at an End. For when will it be
administered and applied by them? Truly, ad Graecas Calendas. Not till the
Gentlemen of the Faculty have more regard to the Interest of their Neighbors
than their own. At least, not till there are no Apothecaries in the Land: Or
till Physicians are independent of them.

9. Therefore without waiting for what probably never will be, and what indeed
we have no Reason to expect, let Men of Sense do the best they can for
themselves, as well as for their poor, sick, helpless Neighbors. How many may
they r^lieve from racking Pain or pining Sickness, by this unexpensive and
speedy Remedy? Restoring them* to Ease, Health, Strength, generally in a few
Minutes, frequently in a Moment! And if a few of these Lovers of Mankind, who
have some little Knowledge of the Animal Economy, would only be diligent in
making Experiments, and setting down the more remarkable of them, in order to
communicate them to one another, that each might profit by the other's Labor:
I doubt not, but more nervous Disorders would be cured in one Year, by this
single Remedy, than the whole English Materia Medica will cure, by the End of
the Century.

10. It is not impossible, but the Gentlemen Reviewers may bestow a Compliment
on me as well as on Mr. Lovett. If they are so kind, I would only beg them, not
to plume themselves upon a Discovery, which I have helped them to myself:
Namely, that the following is little more than an Extract from others: I
intended it so to be. I designed only to collect together the Substance of the
most celebrated Writings on the Subject; and to place them in one connected
View, for the Use of those who have little Time or Money to spare. I only wish,
some who has more Leisure and Ability than me, would consider it more deeply,
and write a full Practical Treatise on Electricity, which might be a Blessing
to Many Generations.

Nov. 1, 1759.
THE DESIDERATUM: OR ELECTRICITY made PLAIN.
I. 1. FROM a thousand Experiments it appears, that there is a fluid far more
subtle than Air, which is every where diffused through all Space, which surrounds
the Earth and pervades every Part of it. And such is the extreme Fineness,
Velocity and Expansiveness of this active Principle, that all other Matter
seems to be only the Body, and this the Soul of the Universe. This we might
term Elementary Fire; but that it is hard for us to separate the Ideas of Fire
and Burning: Although the latter is in reality but a preternatural and violent
Effect of the former.

2. It is highly probable this is the general Instrument of all the Mo^ion in
the Universe: From this pure Fire, (which is properly so called) the vulgar
Culinary Fire is kindled. For in Truth there is but one Kind of Fire in Nature,
which exists in all Places and in all Bodies. And this is subtle and active
enough, not only to be, under the Great Cause, the secondary Cause of Motion,
but to produce and sustain Life throughout all Nature, as well in Animals as in
Vegetables.

3. To this effect the learned Bishop of Cloyne observes, "The vital Flame is
supposed to be the Cause of all the Motions in the Body of Man, whether natural
or voluntary. And has not Fire the same Force to animate throughout, and actuate
the whole System of the World? Cherishing, heating, fermenting, dissolving,
shining, and operating in various Manners, as various Subjects offer, to
employ, or to determine it is Force? It is present in all Parts of the Earth and
Firmament, though latent and unobserved, till some Accident produces it into Act,
and renders it visible in it is Effects."

4. This great Machine of the World requires some such constant, active and
powerful Principle, constituted by it is Creator, to keep the heavenly Bodies in
their several Courses, and at the same Time give Support, Life and Increase to
the various Inhabitants of the Earth. Now as the Heart of every Animal is the
Engine which circulates the Blood through the whole Body, so the Sun, as the
Heart of the World, circulates this Fire through the whole Universe. And this
Element is not capable of any essential Alteration, Increase or Diminution. It
is a Species by itself; and is of a Nature totally distinct from that of all
other Bodies.

5. That this is absolutely necessary both to feed common Fire, and to sustain
the Life of Animals, it seems may be learned from an easy Experiment. Place a
Cat, together with a lighted Candle, in a cold Oven: Then lute the Door close,
having fixed a Glass in the Middle of it: And if you look through this, you may
observe, at one and the same Instant, the Candle goes out, and the Animal dies.
A plain Proof, that the same Fire is needful to sustain both culinary Fire and
animal Life: And a large Quantity of it. Some doubtless pervades the Oven Door;
but not enough to sustain either Flame or Life. Indeed every Animal is a kind
of Fire-Engine. As soon as the Lungs inspire the Air, the Fire mingled with it
is instantly dispersed through the pulmonary Vessels into the Blood: Thence it is
diffused through every Part of the Body, even the most minute Arteries, Veins and
Nerves. In the mean Time the Lungs inspire more Air and Fire, and so provide a
constant Supply.

6. The Air seems to be universally impregnated with this Fire, but so diluted,
as not to hurt the Animal in Respiration. So a small Quantity of a Liquor dropped
in Water, may be friendly to an human Body, though a few Drops of the same
Liquor, given by themselv^s, would have occasioned certain Death. And yet you
cannot conceive one Particle of the Water, without a Particle of the Medicine.
It Is not impossible, this may be one great Use of Air, by adhering so closely
to the elementary Fire, to temper and render salutary to the Body, what would
otherwise be fatal to it.

7. To put it beyond dispute, that this Fire is largely mixed with the Air, you
may make the following Experiment. Take a round Lump of Iron, and heat it to a
Degree called a welding Heat: Take it out of the Fire, and with a Pair of
Bellows blow cold Air upon it. The Iron will then as effectually melt, as if it
were in the hottest Fire. Now when taken out of the Forge, it had not Fire
enough in it to conquer the Cohesion of it is Parts: But when this Fire is
joined with that which was mixed with the Air, it is sufficient to do it. On the
same Principle we account for the Increase of a Coal or Wood Fire by blowing it.

8. And let none wonder that Fire should be so connected with Air, as hardly to
be separated. As subtle as Fire is, we may even by Art attach it to other
Bodies; yea, and keep it Prisoner for many Years: And that either in a solid or
a fluid Form. An Instance of the first we have in Steel: Which is made such,
only by impacting a large Quantity of Fire into Bars of Iron. In like Manner we
impact a great Quantity of Fire into Stone, to make Lime. An Instance of the
second Kind we have in Spirits, wherein Fire is imprisoned in a fluid Form.
Hence common Spirits will burn all away. And if you throw into the Air Spirits
rectified to the highest Degree, not one Drop will come down again, but the
universal Fire will take hold of and absorb it all.

9. That this Fire subsists both in Air, Earth, and Water; that it is diffused
through all and every Part of the Universe, was suspected by many of the ancient
Naturalists, and believed by the great Sir Isaac Newton. But of late Years it
has been fully demonstrated: Particularly, by Mr. Stephen Gray, a Pensioner at
the Charterhouse; who some Years since presented to the Royal Society, an
Account of many Experiments he had made, whereby this subtle Fluid became
clearly perceptible both to the Sight and Feeling. Because the Glass Tube, by
Means of which those Experiments were made, was observed when rubbed to attract
Straws and other light Bodies (a known Property of Amber, called in Latin
Electrum) these Experiments were termed electrical: A Word which was soon
affixt to that subtle Fluid itself, and every Thing pertaining to it. But
improperly enough: Seeing the attracting (or seeming to attract) Straws and
Feathers, is one of the most inconsiderable of all the Effects, wrought by this
powerful and universal Cause.

10. It was afterward found, that a Glass Globe was on some Accounts
preferable to a Glass Tube: Particularly, as it was less Labor to turn the one
for some Hours together, by means of a small Wheel, in the mean Time rubbing it
with a dry Hand, or a little Cushion, than to rub the Tube for so long a Time.
It was likewise observed, that a greater Quantity of ethereal Fire might be
collected by this Means than by the other. I say collected; for that Fire is no
more created by rubbing, than Water is by pumping. The grand Reservoir thereof
is the Earth, from which it is diffused through all the other Parts of common
Matter. Accordingly in these Experiments, the Globe rubbing against the
Cushion, collects Fire from it. The Cushion receives it from the Frame of the
Machine; the Frame of the Machine from the Floor. But if you cut off the
Communication with the Floor, no Fire can be produced, because none can be
collected.

11. In the Year 1746, Mr. de Muschenbroek, Prof^ssor of natural Philosophy at
Leyden, was led by a casual Experiment, into many new Discoveries. These were
chiefly made by Means of a large but thin Glass Phial. The best way to prepare
which is, to coat it with thin Lead; to line it on the inside with Leaf-Gold,
to within two Inches of the Top, and to fasten some Tinsel Fringe to the
Bottom, (or to the End of the Wire within the Phial) so as to touch the Gold
Lining. By this Wire going through the Cork, the Phial is hung on any metallic
Body, which communicates by a Wire, with the Globe or Tube. This metallic Body
has been termed, the prime Conductor, as it conducts or conveys the Fire
collected by the Tube or Globe, either into the Phial, or into any other Body
communicating therewith.

12. But all Bodies are not capable of receiving it. There is in this Respect
an amazing Difference between them. The Excrements of Nature, as Wax, Silk,
Hair, will not receive the ethereal Fire, neither convey it to other Bodies: So
that whenever in circulating it comes to any of these, it is at a full stop.
Air itself is a Body of this Kind; with great Difficulty either receiving or
conveying this Fire to other Bodies: So are Pitch and Rosin (Excrements, as it
were, of Trees). To these we may add Glass, Amber, Brimstone, dry Earth, and a
few other Bodies. These have been frequently styled Electrics per se; as if
they alone contained the electric Fire: An eminently improper Title, founded on
a palpable Mistake. From the same Mistake, all other Bodies, which easily
receive and readily convey it, were termed Non electrict; on a Supposition,
that they contained no electric Fire: The contrary of which is now allowed by
all.

13. That this Fire is inconceivably subtle, appears from it is permeating even
the densest Metals, and that with such Ease, as to receive no perceptible
Resistance. If any one doubt, whether it pass through the Substance, or only
along the Surface of Bodies, a strong Shock taken through his own Body, will
prevent his doubting any longer. It differs from all other Matter in this, that
the Particles of it repel, not attract, each other. And hence is the manifest
Divergency in a Stream of electrical Effluvia. But though the Particles of it
repel each other, yet are they attracted by all other Matter. And from these
thr e, the extreme subtlety of this Fire, the mutual Repulsion of its Parts,
and the strong Attraction of them by other Matter, arises this Effect, that if
a Quantity of electric Fire be applied to a Mass of common Matter of any
Bigness or Length, (which has not already got its Quantity) it is immediately
diffused through the whole.

14. It seems, this Globe of Earth and Water, with its Plants, Animals,
Buildings, have diffused through their whole Substance, just as much of this Fire
as they will contain. And this we may term their natural Quantity. This is not
the same in all Kinds of Matter: Neither in the same Kind of Matter in all
Circumstances. A solid Foot of one Kind of Matter (as Glass) contains more of
it than a solid Foot of another Kind. And a Pound Weight of the same Kind of
Matter, when rarefied, contains more than it did before.

15. We know that this Fire is in common Matter, because we can pump it out, by
the Globe or Tube: We know that common Matter has near as much of it as it can
contain, because if we add a little more to any Portion of it, the additional
Quantity does not enter, but forms a Kind of Atmosphere round it. On the other
Hand, we know that common Matter has not more of it than it can contain.
Otherwise all loose Portions of it would repel each other; as they constantly
do, when they have such Atmospheres. Had the Earth, for Instance, as much
electric Fire in Proportion, as we can give to a Globe of Iron or Wood, the
Particles of Dust and other light Matter, would not only repel each other, but
be continually repelled from the E^rth. Hence the Air being constantly loaded
therewith, would be unfit for Respiration. Here we see another Occasion to
adore that Wisdom, which has made all Things by Weight and Measure.

16. The Form of every electric Atmosphere, is that of the Body which it
surrounds: Because it is attracted by every Part of the Surface, though it cannot
enter the Substance already replete. Without this Attraction, it would not
remain round the Body, but dissipate into the Air.

17. The Atmosphere of an electrified Sphere, is not more easily drawn off,
from any one Part of it than from the other, because it is equally attracted by
every Part. But it is not so with Bodies of other Figures. From a Cube it is
more easily drawn off at the Corners than at the Sides: And so from the Corners
of Bodies of any other Form, and most easily from the sharpest Corners. For the
Force with which an electrified Body retains it is Atmosphere, is proportioned
to the Surface on which that Atmosphere rests. So a Surface four Inches square
retains it is Atmosphere, with sixteen Times the Force that one of an Inch
square does. And as in pulling the Hairs from an Horse's Tail, a Force
insufficient to pull off an Handful at once, could easily pull it off Hair by
Hair: So though a blunt Body cannot draw off all the Atmosphere at once, a pointed
one can easily draw it off, Particle by Particle.

18. If you would have a sensible Proof, how wonderfully pointed Bodies draw
off the electric Fire, place an Iron Shot of four Inches Diameter on the Mouth
of a dry Bottle. Suspend over it a small Cork-Ball by a silken Thread, just so
as to rest against the Side of the Shot. Electrify the Shot, and the Ball will
be repelled four or five Inches from it. Then present to the Shot six or eight
Inches off the Point of a sharp Bodkin. The Fire is instantly drawn off; so the
Repulsion ceases, and the Ball flies to the Shot. But a blunt Body will not
produce this Effect, till it is brought within an Inch of the Shot. If you
present the Point of the Bodkin in the Dark, you may see sometimes at a Foot
Distance, a Light gather upon it like a Glowworm, which is manifestly the Fire
it extracts from the Shot. The less sharp the Point is, the nearer it must be
brought, before you can see the Light. And at whatever Distance you see the
Light, you may draw off the electric Fire.

19. To be convinced that pointed Bodies throw off, as well as draw off the
Fire, you may lay a long sharp Needle on the Shot. It cannot then be
electrified, so as to repel the Ball, because the Fire thrown upon it,
continually runs off, at the Point of the Needle: From which in the Dark you
may see such a Stream of Light, as in the preceding Instance.

20. While the electric Fire, which is in all Bodies, is left to itself,
undisturbed by any external Violence, it is more or less dense, according to
the Nature of the Body which it is in. In dense Bodies it is more rare: In rare
Bodies it is more dense. Accordingly every Body contains such a Quantity of it,
rare or dense, as is suitable to it is Nature. And there is some Resistance to
every Endeavor of altering it is Density, in the whole of any Body, or in any
Part of it. For all Bodies resist either the Increase or Diminution of their
natural Quantity. And on the other Hand, when it has been either increased or
diminished, there is a Resistance to it is Return to it is natural State.

21. With regard to the different Resistance made by different Bodies, in
either of these Cases, it is an invariable Rule, that Glass, Wax, Rosin,
Brimstone, Silk, Hair, and such like Bodies, resist the most: And next to
these, the Air, provided it be dry, and in a sufficient Quantity. That this
Resistance is least in Metals, Minerals, Water, Quicksilver, Animals and
Vegetables: Which we may rank together, because the Difference in their
Resistance is very inconsiderable: And that in these Bodies the Resistance is
greater, when their Surface are polished, and extended in length, than when
their Surfaces are rough and short, or end in sharp Points.

22. When a Body has more electric Fire forced into it, than it has naturally,
it is said to be electified positively. When Part of the natural Quantity is
taken away, it is said to be electrified negatively. Now when an Iron Bar is
negative'y electrified, the Fire drawn out, does not go in again as soon as the
Experiment is over, but forms an Atmosphere round it, because of the Resistance
it finds in it is Endeavor to dilate itself, either into the Air or into the
Bar. And when it is electified positively, the same Kind of Atmosphere is
formed, by the Fire accumulated upon it. Whether therefore Bodies are
electrified negatively or positively, and remain so when the Experiment is
over, there are similar Atmospheres surrounding them, which will produce
similar Effects.

23. But we can electrify no Body beyond a certain Degree: Because when any is
electrified to that Point, it has an Atmosphere round it sufficiently strong to
balance any Power that endeavors to electrify it farther. Nor is the electric
Fire either from the Tube or the Globe, able to force its Way through this.

24. And in the ordinary Course of Nature, this subtle, active Fluid, which not
only surrounds every gross Body, but every component Particle of each, where it
is not in absolute Contact with it is neighboring Particle, can never be idle,
but is ever in Action, though that Action be imperceptible to our Senses. It is
ever varying it is Condition, though imperceptibly, in all Parts of all Bodies
whatever; and electrifying them more or less, though not so forcibly as to give
sensible Signs of it. All Bodies then, and all their component Particles, when
in their natural Situation, have round their Surfaces, where they are not in
absolute Contact with other Surfaces, an imperceptible Atmosphere sufficient to
balance the smaller Force with which they are attacked: Every Way similar to
the perceptible Atmosphere of Bodies forcibly electrified. In these
imperceptible Atmospheres is placed the Power which resists their being
electrified to an higher Degree than they are naturally. And this Power lies in
the Elasticity of the subtle Fluid, every where dispersed both round all Bodies
and in them.

25. Glass is very difficultly electified, which seems (...) prove it has a
very dense electric Atmosphere. Metals are easily electrified. Consequently
they have rare and therefore weakly-resisting Atmospheres. But as Heat rarefies
all Bodies, so if Glass be heated to a certain Degree, even below melting, it
will give as free a Passage to the electric Fire, as Brass or Iron does: The
Atmosphere round it being then rendered as rare as that of Metals. Nay, when
melted, it makes no more Resistance than Water. But it is Resistance increases,
as it cools. And when it is quite cold, it resists as forcibly as ever.
Smoothly-polish'd Wax resists as much as Glass. But even the small Heat raised
by rubbing, will render it is Atmosphere as rare as that of Metals, and so
entirely destroy it is Resistance. The same is true of Rosin and Brimstone. Even
the Heat arising from Friction, destroys the Resistance which they naturally
make to being electrified: A strong Proof, that the Resistance of all Bodies
thereto, is exerted at their Surfaces, and caused by an electric Atmosphere of
different Densities, according to different Circumstances.

26. Most Experiments will succeed as well with a Globe of Brimstone, as with
one of Glass. Yet there is a considerable Difference in their Nature. What
Glass repells, Brimstone (as also Rosin) attracts. Rubbed Glass emits the
electric Fire: Rubbed Brimstone, Rosin and Wax receive it. Hence if a Glass
Globe be turned at one end of a prime Conductor, and a Brimstone one at the
other, not a Spark of Fire can be obtained; one receiving it in, as fast as it
is given out by the other. Hence also if a Phial be suspended on the prime
Conductor, with a Chain from it is Coating to the Table, and only one Globe
turned, it will be electrified (or charged, as they term it) by twenty turns of
the Wheel: After which it may be discharged, that is, unelectrified, by twenty
Turns of the other Wheel.

27 The Difference between Non Electrics (vulgarly speaking) and Electrics per
se, is chiefly this. 1. A Non Electric easily suffers a Change, in the Quantity
of Fire it contains. It Is whole Quantity may be lessened by drawing out a Part,
which it will afterward resume. But you can only lessen the Quantity contained
in one of the Surfaces of an Electric: And not that, but by adding at the same
Time an equal Quantity to the other Surface. So that the whole Glass will
always have the same Quantity in it is two Surfaces And even this can only be
done in Glass that is thin: Beyond a certain Thickness we know no Power that
can make this Change. 2. The ethereal Fire freely moves from Place to Place, in
and through the Substance of a Non Electric. But through the Substance of an
Electric it will by no Means pass. It freely enters an Iron-Rod, and moves from
one End to another, where the Overplus is discharged. But it will not enter, or
move through a Glass-Rod. Neither will the thinnest Glass which can be made,
suffer any Particle of it entering one of it is Surfaces, to pass through to the
other.

28. Indeed it is only Metals and Liquids, that perfectly conduct (or transmit)
this Fire. Other Bodies seem to conduct it, only so far as they contain a
Mixture of these; accordingly, moist Air will conduct it, in Proportion to it is
Moistness. But dry Air will not conduct it at all: On the contrary, it is the
main instrument, in confining any electric Atmosphere, to the Body which it
surrounds. Dry Air prevents it is dissipating (which it does presently when in
vacuo) or passing from Body to Body. A clear Bot^le full of Air, instead of
Water, cannot be electrified. But exhausted of Air, it is electrified as
effectually as if it was full of Water. Yet an Electrical Atmosphere and Air,
do not exclued one another. For we breath in it freely, and dry Air will blow
through it, without altering it at all.

29. When a Glass Phial is electrified, whatever Quantity of Fire is
accumulated on the inner Surface, an equal Quantity is taken from the outer.
Suppose, before the Operation begins, the Quantity of Fire contained in each
Surface, is equal to twenty Grains: Suppose at every Turn of the Globe, one
Grain is thrown in: Then after the first Stroke there are twenty one within,
nineteen only without: After the second, the inner Surface will have
twenty-two, the outer but eighteen: And so on, till after twenty Strokes, the
inner will have forty, the outer none. And the. Operation ends: For no Power or
Art of Man can throw any more on the inner Surface, when no more can be taken
from the outer. If you attempt to throw more in, it is thrown back through the
Wire, or flies cut in Cracks through the Sides of the Phial. The Equilibrium
cannot be restored in this Phial, but by a Communication formed between the
inner and outer Surface, by something external, touching both the outer, and
the Wire which communicates with the inner Surface. If you touch these by
Turns, it is restored by Degrees: If both at once, it is restored instantly.
But then there is a Shock occasioned by the sudden passing of the Fire through
the Body, in it is Way from the inner to the outer Surface. For it moves from
the Wire to the Finger, (not from the Finger to the Wire, as is commonly
supposed). Thence it passes through the Body to the other Hand, and so to the
outer Surface.

30. The Force with which this Shock may be given, is far greater than one
would conceive. It will kill Rats, Hens, or even Turkeys in a Moment: Others,
that are not quite killed, it strikes blind. It will give Polarity to a fine
Needle, making it point North and South, as if touched by a Loadstone. It will
invert the Polarity of a Compass, and make the North Point turn to the South.
At the same Time the Ends of the Needles are finely blued like the Spring of a
Watch. It will melt off the Heads and Points of Pins and Needles: And sometimes
the whole Surface of the Needle is run and appears as it were blister'd, when
examined by a magnifying Glass. It will melt thin Gold or Silver, when held
tight between two Panes of Glass, together with the Surface of the Glass
itself, and incorporate them in a fine Enamel. Yea a strong Spark from an
electrified Phial, makes a fair Hole through a Quire of Paper doubled: Which is
thought good Armor against the Push of a Sword, or even a Pistol Bullet. And
it is amazing to observe in how small a Portion of Glass, a great Electrical
Force may be. A thin Glass-Bubble, about an Inch Diameter, being half filled
with Water, partly gilt on the outside, when electrified gives as strong a
Shock as a Man can well bear: Allowing then that it contains no more Fire after
charging than before, how much Fire must there be in this small Glass! It seems
to be a Part of it is very Substance. Perhaps if that Fire could be separated
from it, it would be no longer Glass. It might in losing this lose its most
essential Properties, it is Transparency* Brittleness, and Elasticity.

31. Some have not improbably supposed, that all Electric Bodies, so called,
are by their original Constitution, thro'ly saturated with Electric Fire: That
it remains fixed in them, (unless while the Texture of those Bodies is quite
altered by Liquefaction) that Fire fixed in a Body constitutes an Electric, and
all Bodies where it is not fixed are Non Electries. Agreeably to which they
suppose that in all Non Electrics, the Original Fire, loosely inhering, is
easily driven on by the new collected Fire, which then possesses its Place: But
that in Electrics the Original Fire being impacted into their Substance, and
therefore more firmly inhering, will not give Way to, or be driven on by, the
new collected Fire. Such is Air in particular; with the Particles of which the
original Fire is closely incorporated. Dry Air seems to be so fully saturated
with it, that it is scarce capable of receiving any more: Whereas all
n^w-collected Fire is continually endeavoring to return into the Earth. Let
Wires be electrified ever so strongly, yet the Moment any Part of them is
touched by a Person standing on the Floor, they are electrified no longer; all
the Fire escaping through him into the Earth.

32. Upon the Principles of Electricity, we may give a more rational Account,
of many Appearances in Nature, than has yet been done: Of Thunder and Lightning
in particular. In order to which we may observe, all electrified Bodies retain
the Fire thrown into them, till some Non-electric approaches: To which it is
then communicated with a Snap, and becomes equally divided. Electric Fire is
strongly attracted by Water, and readily mixes with it. And Water being
electrified, the Vapors arising from it, are equally electrified. As these
float in the Air, they retain the additional Fire, till they meet with Clouds
not so much electrified. Then they communicate it with a Shock.

33. The Ocean is compounded of Water, and Salt; one an Electric, the other
not. When there is a Friction among the Parts near its Surface, the Fire is
collected from the Parts below. It is then plainly visible in the Night, at the
Stern of every failing Vessel. It appears from every Dash of an Oar: In Storms
the whole Sea seems on Fire. The Particles of Water then repelled from the
electrified Surface, continually carry off the Fire as it is collected. They
rise and form Clouds which are highly electrified, and retain the Fire till
they have an Opportunity of discharging it.

34. Particles of Water rising in Vapors, attach themselves to Particles of
Air. One Particle of Air may be surrounded by twelve Particles of Water as
large as itself, all touching it, and by more added to them. Particles of Air
thus loaded would be drawn nearer together by the mutual Attraction of the
Particles of Water, did not the Fire, Common or Electric, included therein,
assist their mutual Repulsion. Hence they continue suspended. But if Air thus
loaded, be compressed by adverse Winds, or by being driven against Mountains,
or if it be condensed by the Loss of it is Fire, it will continue suspended no
longer, but will descend in Dew. And if the Water surroun ing one Particle of
Air comes into contact with that surrounding another, they naturally coalesce
into a Drop, and so descend in Rain.

35. The Sun supplies common Fire to all Vapors, rising either from Sea or
Land. Vapors having both this and Electric Fire, are better supported than
those which have this only. For when Vapors rise into the coldest Region, the
common Fire may fail. But the Cold will not diminish the Electric: This is
always the same. Hence Clouds raised from fresh Waters, from moist Earth, or
growing Vegetables, more easily descend and deposite their Waters, as having
but little Electric Fire, to keep the Particles separate from each other. So
that the greatest Part of the Water raised from the Land, falls on the Land
again. But Clouds raised from the Sea, having both Fires, and much of the
Electric, support their Water far more strongly, and being assisted by Winds,
may bring it from the Middle of the widest Ocean to the Middle of the broadest
Continent. And yet a Way is provided whereby these also are readily brought to
deposite their Water. For whenever they are driven against Mountains by the
Winds, those Mountains take away their Electric Fire: And being cold, the
common also: Hence the Particles immediately close. If the Air was not much
loaded, the Water falls in Dew on the Top and the Sides of the Mountain. If it
was, the Electric Fire being taken at once from the whole Cloud, it flashes
brightly, and cracks loudly. And the Particles instantly coalescing for want of
that Fire, fall in an heavy Shower.

36. When a Ridge of Mountains stops the Clouds, and draws the Electric Fire
from the Cloud first approaching it, the next when it comes near the first, now
deprived of it is Fire, flashes into it, and deposites it is own Water. The third
Cloud approaching, and all that succeed, act in the same Manner; as far back as
they extend, which may be for several hundred Miles. Hence the continual Storms
of Thunder, Lightning and Rain, on the East Side of those va^t Mountains, the
Andes, which running North and South, intercept all the Clouds brought against
them from the Atlantic Ocean. In a plain Country, there are other Means to
make them drop their Water. For if an electrified Cloud coming from the Sea,
meets in the Air a Cloud coming from the Land, and therefore not electrified,
the first will give it is Flash into the latter, and thereby both will be made
to deposite their Water. The Concussion of the Air contributes also to shake
down the Water, not only from those two Clouds, but from others near them. When
the Sea and Land Clouds would pass at too great a Distance from each other,
they are mutually attracted till within the Distance. For the Sphere of
Electrical Attraction is far beyond the flashing Distance. And yet where a
Cloud contains much Fire, it may strike at a considerable Distance. When a
Conductor has but little Fire in it, you must approach very near before you can
draw a Spark. Throw into it a greater Quantity of Fire, and it will give a
Spark at a greater Distance. But if a Gun Barrel, when electrified, will strike
and make a Noise, at the Distance of an Inch, at what a Distance, and with how
great a No^se, may ten thousand Acres of electrified Cloud strike? No Wonder
that this should melt Metals (which our artificial Flash does in some Degree)
though perhaps not so properly by it is Heat, as by insinuating into the Pores,
and creating a violent Repulsion between the Particles of the Metal it passes
through. This overcomes the Attraction whereby they cohere, and so melts the
metallic Body. And this accounts for its melting a Sword in the Scabbard, or
Gold in the Pocket, without burning either.

37. But Thunder Clouds do not always contain more than their natural Quantity
of Electric Fire. Very frequently they contain less. And when this is the Case,
when they are negatively electrified, although the Effects and Appearances are
nearly the same, yet the Manner of Operation is different. For in this Case, it
is really the Fire from the Mountains, or other Part of the Earth which strikes
into the Cloud; and not, as we imagine, Fire from the Cloud which strikes into
the Earth. And we may easily conceive, how a Cloud may be negatively
electrified. When a Portion of Water is rarefied into a thin Vapor, the Fire
it contains is rarefied too. Consequently it has then less than it is natural
Quantity of Fire. Such a Cloud therefore coming within a due Distance of the
Earth, will receive from it a Flash of Electric Fire; which Flash, to supply a
great Extent of Cloud, must often contain a great Quantity of Fire. Such a
Cloud also passing over Woods of tall Trees, may silently receive some Supply,
either from the Points of the Boughs, or from the sharp Ends and Edges of the
Leaves. The Cloud thus supplied, flashes into other Clouds that have not been
so supplied; and those into others, till an Equilibrium is produced, among all
that are within a striking Distance of each other. And hence are repeated
Strokes and Flashes, till they descend in Showers to the Earth, their Original.
Rain, especially when in large Drops, generally brings down the Electric Fire:
Falling Snow often: Summer Hail, always, though silently. Consequently, any of
these may prevent Thunder and Lightning; or at least, abate it is Violence. Rain
is helpful in another Respect likewise. By wetting Men or Beasts, it saves many
Lives. For if your Cl athes are thro'ly wet, and a Flash of Lightning strikes
the Top of your Head, it will run in the Water over the Surface of your Body
into the Ground: Whereas if your Cl aths were not wet, it would go through your
Body. Hence a wet Chicken cannot be killed by a Stroke from the Phial; whereas
a dry one is killed in an Instant. See here also the Wisdom and Goodness of
Him, who sends forth Ligh^ning^ with the Ra^n! It should likewise be
observed, that wherever electrified Clouds pass, Spires, Towers, Chimneys, and
high Trees, as so many Points, draw the Electric Fire, and the whole Cloud
frequently discharges there Therefore it is highly dangerous in such a Storm,
to take Shelter under a Tree.

38. Common Fire (if it be any thing more, than a different Modification of the
same Element) is more or less in all Bodies, as well as Electrical. If there be
a sufficient Quantity of either in any Body, it is inflamed. But when the
Quantity of common Fire therein is small there needs more Electric Fire to
infl^me it. Where the Quantity of common Fire is greater, less of the Electric
will suffice. So if Spirits are heated, a small Spark inflames them. If they
are not, the Spark must be greater. Sulphurous Vapors, whether rising from
the Earth, or from Stacks of moist Hay or Corn* or any other heated and reeking
Vegetable, contain ab ndance of common Fire. A small Addition of Electric then
will inflame them. Therefore they are easily kindled by Lightning.

39. Any who would be clearly convinced of the Nature of Lightning, may make
the following Experiment. Make a small Cross of two thin Strips of Wood, the
Arms being just so long, as to reach the four Corners of a large, thin Silk
Handkerchief when extended. Tie the Corners of this to the Extremities of the
Cross; and so you have the Body of a Kite: Add to this a proper Tail, Loop and
String, and it will rise in the Air like one made with Paper: But this is
fi^ter to bear the Wind and Wet in a Storm without tearing. To the Top of the
Cross fix a sharp pointed Wire, rising a Foot above it. Tie a Silk Ribbon to
the End of the Twine next the Hand; and where the Silk and Twine join, fasten a
Key. Raise this Kite when a Thunder-Storm is coming on: But he that holds the
String, must stand in a Porch, or under some other Covering, that the Ribbon
may not be wet. He must likewise take particular Care, that the Twine do not
touch the Top or Side of the Porch. As soon as the Thunder-Cloud comes over the
Kite, the pointed Wire draws the Electric Fire from it. The Kite and all the
Twine are then electrified, as plainly appe^rs by this, that the loose
Filaments of the Twine stand out every way, and are attracted by an approaching
Finger. And when the Kite and Twine being wet, conduct the Fire freely, it will
stream from the Key, on the Approach of the Knuckle. By this Key the Phial may
be charged, and all other Experiments made, as by the Globe. And this is a
Demonstration, that the Electric Fire thereby obtained, is the very same with
that of Lightning.

40. May not the Knowledge of this Power in pointed Bodies, of drawing off the
Fire contained in these Clouds, suggest to us a very probable Method, of
preserving ^ouses, Churche^, Ships from the Stroke of Lightning? Might we not
fix on the highest Part of them, upright Rods of Iron made sharp as Needles,
and gilt, to prevent rusting, which otherwise would hi der their free
Conveyance of the Electric Fire? From the Foot of those Rods (which need not be
above half an Inch diameter) a Were may pas^ down the Outside of the Building
into the Ground; or down ^ound one of the Shrouds of a Ship, and down her Side,
till it reaches the Water. Would not these Rods silently draw off ^he Electric
Fire, before the Cloud was nigh enough to strike? And thereby in a good Measure
secure us from that most sudden and terrible Mischief! Let it not be objected,
that the using this probable Means of preventing a threatening Danger, would
imply any Denial of, or Distrust in, Divine Providence Not at all: We know the
Creator of the Universe, is likewise the Governor of all Things therein. But we
know likewise that he gove ns by second Causes; and that accordingly it is his
Will, we should use all the probable Means he has given us, to attain every
lawful End. It is therefore no more an Impeachment of his Providence, when we
foresee a Storm of Lightning and Rain, to shelter our House (as far as we are
able) from the one, than to shelter ourselves in that House from the other. Is
it not just as innocent (if it be possible) to keep our Rooms tight from
Lightning, as from Wind and Water?

41. It may not be improper to add one or two Observations, before we proceed
to what is of more Importance. Scarce any Phenomenon in Nature has been
esteemed more difficult to be accounted for than those luminous Appearances in
the Sky, termed Aurora Borealis, or Northern Lights. But these also may be
rationally explained, upon the Principles of Electricity. We often see Clouds
at different Heights, passing different Ways, North and South at the same Time.
This manifestly proves different Currents of Air, one of them under the other.
Now as the Air between the Tropics is rarefied by the Sun, it rises; the denser
Air pressing into it is Place. The Air so raised, moves North and South, and if
it has no Opportunity before, must descend in the Polar Regions. When this Air
with it is Vapors descends into contact with the Vapors arising there, the
Electric Fire which it brought begins to be communicated, and is seen in clear
Nights; being first visible where it is first in Motion, namely in the most
Northern Parts. But from thence the Streams of Light seem to shoot Southerly,
even to the Zenith of Northern Countries.

42. Another Phenomenon of a totally different Kind, may be accounted for on
the same Principles, although Mr. Prior supposes Solomon himself to ask, as a
Question which he could not answer, "Whence does it happen, that the Plant
which well
We name the Sensitive, should move and feel?
Whence know her Leaves to answer her Command,
And with quick Horror fly the neighboring Hand?"


Allowing for Poetical Amplification the plain Fact is this. The Sensitive
Plant, as it were, shrinks away, as soon as your Hand approaches it. And from a
turgid and vivid Appearance, instantly droops and hangs it is Leaves. Now
suppose this Plant to contain more Electric Fire than any other Plant or
Animal, it must or Course communicate that Fire, to any other that touches it.
And if so, it is Leaves and Branches must be in a languid State, till they have
recovered their natural Quantity. To illustrate this, set any small Tree in a
Pot on a Cake of Brimstone. Electrify it and it grows extremely turgid, so as
to erect it is Leaves. But the Moment you touch one of them, the whole Tree
droops, and hangs all it is Leaves and Branches.

To throw all the Light I can on the Subject, I subjoin a few Extracts from
several other Writers.

An Extract from Mr. Watson's Experiments and Observations.
1. When two Plates, the one electrified, the other not, were brought near each
other, the Flashes of bright Flame were so large, that in a dark Room, I could
distinctly see the Faces of 13 Persons. P. 6.

2. A Piece of large blunt Wire was hung to the Conductor. To the End of this
when electrified a black Surface not electrified being brought near, (though not
near enough to cause a Snap) a Brush of Blue Flame, quite different from the
former, issued of more than an Inch long, and an Inch thick. P. 7.

3. If a Person strongly electrified lays his Hand on the Clothes of one that
is not, especially if they are thin Woollen or Silk, they both feel as it were
many Pins pricking them, as long as the Globe is in Motion.

4. If Oil of Turpentine be set on Fire in a Vessel held by one electrified,
the Smoke arising therefrom, received against a Plate held at a Foot Distance
from the Flame, by one standing on Rosin, will enable him to Fire warm Spirits
of Wine. The Electric Strokes have been likewise felt, upon touching the second
Man, when the Plate he held in the Smoke has been between seven and eight Feet
above the Flame. P. 8.

5. Take burning Spirits of Wine instead of Oil of Turpentine: And if the
second Man hold the End of an Iron Rod at the Top of the Flame, he may k ndle
other warm Spirits held near his Finger. Hence we find that either Smoke or
Flame conducts the Electric Fire, and does not perceptibly diminish it is Force.
P 9.

6. If the Wire of the Phial be not touched, the electrified Water or Steel
Dust will retain it is Force many Hours, may be conveyed several Miles, and will
afterward exert it is Force upon touching the Wire. P. 16.

7. If an Egg is hung on the Conductor, and a Person grasping the electrified
^hial with one Hand, brings the Palm of his other near the Bottom of the Egg,
he receives a smart ^troke on the Hand, as with a Ferula, and his Hand seems
full of a more red Fire than is usually observed. P. 24.

8. Any Number of Persons communicating with each other, the first of whom
grasps the Phial, and the last touches the Conductor, receive the same Shock as
if it was ^ne only. P. 25.

9. The Electric Force always describes a Circuit, and moves in the straitest
Line it can, between the Conductor and hial. P. 26

10. To prove th^s, while the Machine stood on Wax, I stood upon the Floor; and
putting one Hand on the Machine, touched the Gun Barrel with the other. Upon
this Fire issued, and the snapping continued as long as I held my hand on the
Machine, but no longer This showed at once, that the Electric Fire past from
the Floor through my Body t^ the Machine. P 36.

11. If the Electric Fire is ^ot stopped, no Sign of it is Presence is observable
in the Bodies suspended to the Globe. Though it throws ever so much of this Fire
upon them, it passes from them to the Floor whence it came. But if it is stopped,
it is then accumulated in or upon these Bodies: Although this can be done only to
a certain Degree, after which it continually disperses. If when it is
accumulated, a Man standing on the Floor touc^es those Bodies, the Snap is
felt, and the Fire is seen. But this snapping is not* when the Fire passes off
continually, as from a Piere of blunt Wire hung to the Barrel, and a Han^
brought near it. Then it appears li^e a blue Cone of Flame, with it is Point
toward the Wire. When the Hand is held at a proper Distance* there is a Blast
therefrom, as of cold Air. If you ^o not determine the Electric Fire to a
Point, it is dispersed from all ^art^ of the electrified Body: But if you do,
by thus holding your Hand near the Fire, you see ^ow it passes to the Floor,
and so into the Earth. The Globe therefore only circulates this Fire, which is
collected by it is Friction against the Hand or Cushion, and which is constantly
supplied to these from the Earth. And accordingly the ^ngr^ss of it, as well as
the Egress is visible. For, if while any unele^^rified Body touches the B^rrel,
you bring your Finger near the Wood-Work of the Machine, you will see the Brush
of Blue Flame set in from it to the Wood-Work. And this Flame passes diverging
into the Machine, and continues as long as the Barrel is touched. P. 44.

12. That the Electric Atmosphere which surrounds all electrified Bodies,
extends to a considerable Distance, appears from their attracting a fine
Thread, at the Distance of some Feet. If no unelectrified Body is near, this
Atmosphere seems to be equally spread over that which is electrified. But if
one unelectrified is brought near, the greatest Part of it is determined that
Way; whence the Attraction of the other Parts of the electrified Body is
considerably diminished. This is the Cause of Electric Repulsion, which does
not operate, till the Electric Either is sufficiently accumulated. This
Repulsion is strongest in those Parts of the electrified Body, where
unelectrified Bodies are brought near it. For by these the Electric Blast,
which otherwise is general, is particularly determined. P. 46.

13. When the Machine is placed upon Rosin, if a Man standing likewise on
Rosin, touches the Barrel while the Globe is turning, he will receive a Snap or
two, and no more. But if he touch the Wood-Work of the Machine with one Hand,
and the Barrel with the other* he receives Snaps again, which continue as long
as he touches the Machine, and no longer. Here the Man by touching the Machine
with one Hand, becomes a Part thereof; and by turning the Globe, Part of the
Electric Fire inherent in his Body, is transmitted to the Barrel; but it is
restored to him, on his touching the Barrel with his other Hand. If instead of
touching the Machine or Barrel he holds his Finger near either, or both, you
see the Fire go out and return. P. 64.

14. May we not gather from the preceding Experiments, 1. That the Attrac^ion
and Repulsion of electrified Bodies, is owing to the Flux of Electric Either? 2.
That this Either is no other than pure Fire? 3. That this Fire appears in
different Forms, according to it is different Modifications? When brought
toward a Point is it not a lambent Flame? When nearer still, may we not both
hear and feel it? And does not it is lighting up Spirits demonstrate, that it is
real Fire? 4. That this Fire is intimately connected with all Bodies, though
least of all with pure, dry Air? We have extracted it from Water, Flame, Smoke,
red hot Iron; and from a Mixture 30 Degrees colder than the freezing Point. 5.
That it is extremely subtle and highly Elastic? 6. That the Electric Machine
may as properly be termed a Fire-Pump, as Mr. Foyl^'s Machine, an Air Pump? And
lastly, that Fire is not Mechanically producible from other Bodies, but is an
original, distinct Principle?

An Extract from Mr. Wilson 's Dissertation on Electricity.
Prop. 1. When two Bodies equally replete with Electric Matter approach each
other, no Flame or Snap will ensue. P. 5.

Prop. 2. Two Bodies equally electrified repel each other. P. 6.

Prop. 3. An Electric Body interposed between a Person and the Earth, prevents
his exciting Electricity in another Body by Friction. P. 11.

Prop. 4. If there is originally a certain Quantity of Electric Matter in a
Body of a given Magnitude and Density; and that Matter be equally distributed
therein, by it is Elastic Force, according to the Density of the Parts: Upon
increasing the Quantity of Matter by adding other Bodies of the same Kind, the
Quantity of Electric Matter will be increased in the same Proportion. P. 14.

Prop. 5. As Electric Bodies act on light Bodies that are not electrified, so
unelectrified Bodies act on the Electric Matter contained in electrified
Bodies. P. 16.

Let a Wire be electrified in the Dark, and if you hold any unelectrified Body
7 or 8 Inches from the End of it, a Stream of Fire will issue from it, which
will diverge to that Body. But the Divergency will lessen as it approaches it,
till the Rays become parallel. If the Body be held not directly before the End
of the Wire, but wide of it at about two Inches Distance, the Fire will
describe curvilinear Rays toward that Body. P. 17.

Hence it appears, that unelectrified Bodies act in like Manner with
electrified: Only the acting Force of the one* being increased by Friction, is
greater than that of the other.

Prop. 6. When two equally Electric Atmospheres are brought so near as to
touch, they repel each other with a Force equal to their Densities. P. 19.

Prop. 7. If while a Fluid surrounds a Globe which is electrified and turned
round an Axis passing through it is Center, an unelectrified Body be held near the
Equator of it, the Fluid will rise successively toward that Body, as it turns
round, in like Manner as the Sea is affected by the Moon. P. 23.

The Shock given by the Phial is in Proportion to the Size of it, the thinness
of the Glass, and the Number of Points in contact with it is Surface. P. 25.

An Extract from Mr. Martin's Essay on Electricity.
1. The Electric Matter is emitted from some sort of Bodies when rubbed, which
are called Electrics. P. 9.

2. By other Sorts of Bodies, therefore termed Non-Electrics, it is not emitted.

3. It will run off to all Non-Electrics, but it restrained by all Electrics.

4. It shines like a Flame, and is emitted with a Snap: If toward a Non
Electric, the Fire is condensed, less or more, and so appears of a bluish,
Purple, Yellow, or White Color.

When the Electric Fire is not so much condensed as to explode, as in Thunder
and Lightning it goes off in a dilated Stream of purple Flame, greatly
resembling that Part of the Aurora Borealis, which appears in Streams of Light.

When it is little condensed, it appears bluish, as all other faint Lights do:
When a little denser, it appears Purple: When denser still, it looks Yellow,
like Candle Light: When highly condensed, it is clear and white, like the Light
of the Sun. So the White Lightning is of all others most fierce. So Phosphorus
rubbed a little, spends itself in an harmless Blue Flame: But upon a greater
Attrition, kindles into a White Flame, and burns with an outrageous and
unquenchable Fire. p. 17.

And as Lightning pervades soft Substances unhurt, but dissolves hard and
compact Bodies, so Electric Fire pervades the soft, muscular Parts of the Body,
but violently strikes the Bones and Tendons. Again, as those denser Parts of
Lightning which we call Thunderbolts, striking against hard Bodies, glance by
Reflection to different Parts, so this Fire, striking against the Elbow, is
reflected from thence across the Breast, to the other Elbow. p. 18.

Indeed different Persons are affected thereby in a very different Manner. Some
are extremely capable of it, some not: And some are not susceptible of it at
all: A Person, for Instance, who has the Smallpox, cannot be electrified by
any Means whatever. p. 20.

Experiment 1. On the Axis, in the Center of my Globe, is fixed a circular
String of Threads. When the Globe is at rest, they all hang down: When it is in
Motion, they all extend themselves from the Center, strait toward the inner
Surface of the Globe (like the Spokes of a Coach-Wheel) which they nearly
touch. Thus they continue till the Electric Virtue ceases, and then gradually
fall down, as at first. p. 22.

Exp. 2. While they are extended, if you move your Hand toward the Surface of
the Globe, they move every Way toward the Hand. Hence we see the amazing
Subtlety of this Fire, which pervades Glass as readily as if nothing were in
the Way.

Exp. 3. Place a Hoop of Fine Threads round the Globe in Motion, and all of
them will stand perpendicular to the Surface. Hence we learn that the Electric
Power acts equally, both within and without the Globe, and in Directions
perpendicular to it is Surface.

Exp. 4. If the Room be then darkened, the Ends of the Threads on the Outside,
will be all tipped with Fire. But those within are not, which shows that this
Power acts only ab intra outwardly. p. 23.

Exp. 5. An Iron Rod being hung on Silken Strings, with one End about of an
Inch from the Globe, will at the other End (which terminates in a conical
Point) emit a Purple Flame diverging every Way. Hold your Finger within of an
Inch, and the Fire will issue more largely. p. 24.

Exp. 6. Hold your Finger still nearer, and the Rays will be so condensed as to
run to it in a Stream of Yellow Flame; which is also sensible to the Feeling,
as a gentle Wind, and smells like the Fire of Phosphorus.

Exp. 7. If you put your Finger on the Rod, the Flame instantly disappears, the
Fire all running off upon the Finger. But take it off, and the Flame appears
again.

Exp. 8. Apply your Finger near a Tin Tube so suspended, and you may see the
Fire, and both hear and feel the Snap. p. 25.

Exp. 14. Under an electrified Plate, put some Leaf-Gold or other light
Substances on another Plate unelectrified: And it will be attracted and
repelled alternately, between the two Plates. For, each Time it touches the
lower Plate, it discharges he Electric Fire, and so becomes again attractble.
p. 28.

Exp. 18. If to a Gun Barrel you adapt a small Tin Cup, and pour in Water; a
Person holding his Finger perpendicular over the Water, within of an Inch of
it is Surface, will find the Water rise in Form of a Cone to meet his Finger,
and from the Top of it, a Stream of Fire will issue to the Finger and snap as
usual p. 30.

Exp. 19. A dry Sponge is an Electric. But if it be dipped in Water, and then
hung on the Barrel, put your Finger near it, and the Fire issues out, and the
Drops which before fell very slowly, will now fall very fast. If the Room be
darkened, they will appear as Drops of Fire. p. 3^.

Exp. 20. A Siphon hung on the Cup, drops very gently till it is electrified;
but then the Water runs in a Stream, which in the Dark is like a Stream of Fire.

Exp. 21. Open a Vein in a Person standing on the Rosin, and the Blood will fly
out to a certain Distance. But let him be electrified, and it will spin out
with a much greater Force, and to a far greater Distance.

Exp. 24. If Mercury be put for Water, the Electric Force is something greater,
but in no Proportion to it is Density.

Exp. 25. When the Mercury is saturated, the Electric Streams will issue through
the Wire more copiously than from the Phial of Water, and will snap of
themselves, which the Streams issuing from the Water never do.

Exp. 27. The electrified Phial will not retain the Fire very long: But if you
hold it up in a dark Room, it will be seen to go off from the Point of the
Wire, in a small white Flame. p. 34.

Exp. 30. A Cup of Water held by an electrified Person will emit Fire more
forcibly than his Body. p. 35.

Exp. 32. A Person standing on the Ground, cannot easily kiss an electrified
Person standing on the Rosin. p. 36.

Exp. 38. If a square Piece of Leaf Gold be placed between two Plates, about
two Inches asunder, one of them electrified, the other not* at first it will be
attracted, and repelled alternately, till in a while it will lose its Motion,
and remain suspended between them. p. 39.

Exp. 42. If the Globe be exhausted of Air, and then turned, the electric Fire
will act wholly within the Globe, where it will appear (in a dark Room) as a
Reddish or Purple Flame, filling the whole Globe. But this, as the Air is
readmitted into it, will gradually disappear. In this Case, the electric Fire
is confined within, by the elastic Air on the Outside. p. 4^.

An Ext^act from Mr. Watkins's Account of electrical Experiments.
When the Machine is to be used, the Globe should be wiped clean, with a clean,
dry, warm Flannel, it is Pivots oil'd, and the Cushion and Phial warmed. In damp
Weather, there should be a Fire in the Room. p 4.

Exp. 4. Let an unelectrify'd Plate, with scouring Sand upon it, be held 5 or 6
Inches under an electrify'd Plate, and the Sand will be so attracted and
repelled, as to resemble a stormy Shower. p. 16.

Exp. 7. If a Glass Ball, of 4 or 5 Inches diameter, be hung by a Wire to the
Gun-barrel, and a Ball of of an Inch diameter, exceeding thin, placed on a
smooth Plate, be brought near it, this will not only be attracted by the large
Ball, but will perform continual Revolutions round it, exactly as the Planets
do round the Sun. p. 22.

Exp. 9. Hang a Loadstone on the Barrel, and a Key on the Armature of it: And
if you bring your Finger near the Key, it will snap and emit Fire. A plain
Proof that the electric and magnetic Power no way hinder each other. p. 25.

Exp. 35. A Sparrow killed by the electric Shock, was found livid without, as
if killed with a Flash of Lightning, and most of the Blood Vessels within were
burst. Animals shocked on the Head, if not killed, are commonly struck blind.
p. 55.

Exp. 41. Ice held by an electrify'd Person, will fire warm Spirits of Wine. p.
61.

Exp. 43. Mr. Watson put an Ounce of Oil of Vitriol, an Ounce of Iron Filings*
and four Ounces of Water, into a Flask. An Ebullition ensued. An electrify'd
Person applied his Finger to the Mouth of the Flask. The Vapor took fire, and
burnt out of the Neck a long Time. p. 63.

From an Experiment made by Mr. Watson, and others, it appeared, that the
electric Fire circulated, without Interruption, from the Surry Side of the
Thames over Westminster Bridge, to the Westminster Side, and thence through the
River to the Surry Side again, which is upwards of 800 Yards. Spirits of Wine
also were fired at the same Distance.

From this, and several other Experiments, it appeared, that Distance, simply
considered, did little, if at all, impair the Force of the electric Shock.

They afterward conveyed this Shock through a Circuit of four Miles, and sound
the Motion of the electric Fire to be nearly, if not quite, instantaneous.

II. I have been hitherto endeavoring to make Electricity plain: I shall
endeavor, in the second Place, to make it useful.

1. This ethereal Fire, in its unmixt State, seems too violent an Agent for the
human Body to bear. Therefore the wise Author of Nature has provided the Air to
temper and adapt it to our Use. So tempered, it is the grand Instrument of
Life: "It gives and preserves," says Bishop B^rkeley, "a proper Tone to the
Vessels. It promotes all Secretions, keeping every Part in Motion: It pervades
the whole Animal System, producing great Variety of Effects, various Vibrations
in the Solids, and Ferments in the Fluids." Indeed from many Experiments we
know, it communicates Activity and Motion to Fluids in general, and
particularly accelerates the Motion of the Blood in an human Body. This is
quickened three or four Pulses in half a Minute, by a Person only standing on
Glass, and being electrified. And it is certain many bodily Disorders may be
removed, even by this safe and easy Operation.

2. But because plain Matters of Fact weigh more than nice speculative
Reasoning with all who do not obstinately steel themselves against Conviction,
I shall first, briefly specify several Disorders wherein Electrification has
been found eminently useful, and then subjoin a few particular Instances.

3. The Disorders in which it has been of unquestionable Use, are, Agues, St.
Anthony's Fire, Blindness, even from a Gutta Serena, Blood extravasated,
Bronchocele, Chlorosis, Coldness in the Feet, Consumption, Contractions of the
Limbs, Cramp, Deafness, Dropsy, Epilepsy, Feet violently disordered, Felons,
Fistula Lacrymalis, Fits, Ganglions, Gout, Gravel, Headache, Hysterics,
Inflammations, King's Evil, Knots in the Flesh, Lameness, Leprosy,
Mortification, Pain in the Back, in the Stomach, Palpitation of the Heart,
Palsy, Pleurisy, Rheumatism, Ringworms, Sciatica, Shingles, Sprain, Surfeit,
Swellings of all Kinds, Throat sore, Toe hurt, Toothache, Wen.


It will be easily observed, that a great Part of these are of the nervous
Kind; and perhaps there is no nervous Distemper whatever, which would not yield
to a steady Use of this Remedy. It seems therefore to be the grand Desideratum
in Physic, from which we may expect Relief when all other Relief fails, even in
many of the most painful and stubborn Disorders to which the human Frame is
liable.

I have scarce known an Instance wherein a few Shocks all over the Body, have
failed to cure either a Quotidian or Tertian Ague.

Anne Heathco^, Daughter of Mr. Heathcote Brasier, in Long Alley, near
Moo^fields, was seized, in May last, with what is commonly called an Ague in
the Head, having a violent Pain in her Head, Face, and Teeth. After trying
abundance of Remedies, to no purpose, she was, in August, electrified through the
Head. Immediately the Pain fixed in her Teeth. She was electrified four Times
more, and has felt nothing of it since.

4. "Having observed," says Mr. Lovet, "the great Efficacy of electrical Either,
in soon relieving most Kind of Inflammations, I was inclined to think the same
Efficacy would appear when it was applied to St. Anthony's Fire. But when a
Case offered, the Inflammation was so great, that at first I almost despaired
of Success. About Noon I made the first Trial, by drawing off Sparks while the
Person was electrified, on the Rosin. Before Night, the angry Swelling was much
appeased, and in a few Days quite cured."

5. A Boy about seven Years old (says Mr. Floyer, a Surgeon in Dorchester) was
taken blind suddenly in both his Eyes, without any previous Pain or Fever.
Three or four Days after, he was brought to me. He was as blind, as if his Eyes
had been cut out. Taking the Case to be a perfect Gutta Serena in both Eyes, I
told his Parents, it was my Opinion he would never see again. However I
determined to try the Electric Shock: And the next Morning, fastening a Wire
coming from the Phial to his Leg, and another round his Head, I brought the
Latter near the Conductor, and gave him four Shocks successively. That Day he
was put to Bed, and continued there, sweating profusely, till the next Morning,
when he agreeably alarmed his Father by crying out, he could see the Window.
When he was brought to me the second Time, he could see when I put my Hand
between his Eyes and the Light of the Sun. This gave me Encouragement to repeat
what we had done the Day before. The next Day he could a little contract and
dilate his Eyes; the Third Day he could distinguish Objects; the Fourth,
Colors. The Fifth Day, after repeating the Experiment, his Sight was perfectly
restored, and the Eyes, in every Respect, as well as if no Disorder had
happened to them.

6. From a Gentleman in Newcastle upon Tyne, I have the following Account. Last
Week a poor Man in Sandgate, that had been blind twenty-four Years, was led to
the Machine. I set him upon the Electrical Board, and drew Sparks for about
twenty Minutes from the Pupil of his Eye. After he had rested himself a little,
and was able to look up, he told us he could see Sidgate, which he had not seen
for many Years before. He could also distinguish Objects in the Room, and was
able to walk home without a Guide. He came a Second Time, and was so much
better, that I imagine he did not think it necessary to come any more.

7. He adds, About the Time I wrote last, a young Woman was cured of a fourteen
Years Blindness. She was able, before she went home, to distinguish one Letter
from another.

8. From the same Person, a few Days afterward, I received the following Lines.

"The Cure of the blind Man of Newcastle, has spread through all the Country; in
consequence of which, I am, much against my Will, become an Oculist.

"I have had several in Hand, and among the rest a Girl, about Seventeen, has
been with me about three Weeks. Her Case is owing to a Film, or Skin, grown
over her Eyes. It came by the Smallpox about twelve Years ago. Her Friends
have had all the Advice, and used all the Means in their Power, but to no
Purpose; except that she has lost her Left Eye irrecoverably by one of the
Persons they applied to.

"When she came to me, the Iris of the Right Eye also was very near covered
with a very thick Skin, so that she could do very little more than distinguish
Day from Night. It was grown much worse this Winter, and was so Blood-shot and
angry, that I told her Mother I could do nothing for her. However she made such
a lamentable Complaint, that I consented to try.

"The Method I have taken, is drawing Sparks from her Eye, and sometimes giving
Shocks from her Head or Neck, down her Arm, to carry off the frequent
Complaints of Pain and Dizziness in her Head; which never fails of succeeding
in about ten Minutes. We have electrify'd her about half an Hour twice every
Day. The Skin wastes gradually, and grows thinner and less every Day; so that
now the Color of the Eye appears through it, except in the Middle, and toward
the Nose, where the Film at first seemed twice as thick as the rest. The other
Day, as I had her under Hand, she saw the Buttons of my Shirt-sleeve, and of my
Coat; and Yesterday saw the Teeth of one of her Companions that was laughing at
her. But her Eye is so weak, that I advise her to make very little Use of it
yet."

9. "A Person having a dark, livid Spot under his Eye from a Blow three Days
before, it was, in less than a Quarter of an Hour, quite taken away, by drawing
the Sparks from the Parts." Mr. L.

Here extravasated Blood was manifestly dissolved and resorbed into the
Vessels. I have lately known an Instance of this Kind. One, whose Eyes were
almost beat out, as they term it, by the same Operation lost all the Swelling,
and the Blackness too, in twelve Minutes.

10.

"A Woman troubled with a Bronchocele, the most obstinate of all Swellings,
whose Neck was eighteen Inches and one Half about, is already so far relieved,
that the largest Part of her Neck is but fifteen Inches and an Half about the
smallest not thirteen. And the Swelling now wa^^es so fast, that there is Hopes
of a perfect Cure." Mr. L.

"She applies the Wire from the Phial to one Side of the Swelling, and laying
one E^d of another Wire to the other Side of it, then guides the other End of
that Wire to the electrical Apparatus."

11. William Jones, a Plaisterer, living at Mr. Frazer's, in King Street, Seven
Dials, sell from a Scaffold on Thursday, Feb. 15 last. He was grievously
bruised, both outwardly and inwardly, and lay in violent Pain, utterly
helpless, till Saturday in the Afternoon, when he was brought (carried) by two
Men to be electrified. After a few Minutes he walked home alone, and on Monday
went to work.

Mary Osgath^rp had her Foot bruised by a Stone falling on it, which occasioned
a running Sore. It continued, though frequently healed for a Time, upwards of
eight Years: But was entirely healed a Month ago by Electrifying, and has never
broke out since.

12. A Number of moderate Shocks daily repeated for some Time, effectually cure
Coldness in the Feet. It does not fail.

13. Angus M'Innon, of Fuller's Rents in Holborn, was afflicted with a violent
Cough, till his Strength wasted away, and he had all the Symptoms of a true
Consumption. He was electrified three Times about eighteen Months ago, and
restored to perfect Health.

Elizabeth Collis, a Child of twelve Years old, living with Mrs. Wragg in
Windmill Street, was so far gone in a genuine Consumption, that she was judged
to be quite past Recovery. This Summer she was electrified four Times, and has
been quite well ever since.

14. A Man at Upsal in Sweden, whose Knee-Joint had been contracted above five
Years, (originally from an ill-cur'd Rheumatism) was quite restored by drawing
off Sparks for a few Weeks.

15.

"Mrs. M -- D --, of Worcester, was long afflicted with a most violent Cramp in
her Legs. This Disorder seized her before she was twenty Years of Age, and
continued till she was upwards of Seventy. This was most violent when she was
in Bed; at which Time she was forced to tumble out on the Floor, sometimes
twice or thrice in the same Night. It was attended with exquisite Pain,
bursting the small Blood Vessels, which afterward appeared of a livid Hue for
a considerable Time.

She was entirely cured in a few Days, by being electrified once a Day, thus.
Having taken off her Shoes, she put one Foot on the End of the Chain, which
came from the charged Phial, putting the Lower End of a Wire to the other Foot;
so that this being touched, both Legs might receive the Shock at once." Mr. L.

I never once knew it fail in this Disorder.

16. Deaf^ess rising from hardened Wax, or following a Fever, is cured by only
drawing off Sparks. This was frequently tried at Upsal. At Stockh^lm, a
Gentleman of Distinction, who had been almost deaf a considerable Time with a
Singing in his Ears, was perfectly cured in three or four Minutes.

A young Man, who had almost lost his Hearing for six Months, by violent
Vomitings, which forced Blood out of his Ears, was perfectly cured in a few
Minutes.

Samuel Jones, Gardener, at Lambeth Marsh, in the Year of the great Frost,
leaped into the Thames to save a Man from drowning. Hereby he became so deaf of
both Ears, that he could not hear any Sound at all, were it ever so near, or
ever so loud. In February last, after being once electrified, he could hear the
Noise of a Coach at some Distance. After the Third Time, he could hear the
Sound of the Machine. He came no more; so it is supposed he is well.

A Man, fifty-seven Years old, who had been deaf for thirty-two Years, was so
far relieved in a few Days, as to hear tolerably well.

A Girl of Seven, born deaf, (who consequently could not-speak) began presently
to hear Words which were spoken very loud in her Ear, and could repeat some of
them in a few Days.

I have known Hearing hereby given to a Man born deaf.

17.

"In May 1748, came to me one Mary Smargins, born in the Island of Nevis in the
West Indies, 28 Years old. She had been so deaf (from a Cold at first) for
seventeen Years, as not to hear any one, unless they were very near and spoke
loud. Her Deafness had no Intervals. She always heard the least with the left
Ear. On Saturday May 28, the Phial being electrified by two Turns of the Wheel
only, I applied one Wire to the left Temple, just above the Ear, the other to
the opposite Temple. She felt a small Warmth in her Head, chiefly from Ear to
Ear. I repeated it four Times, a little stronger each Time. The Warmth
increased at each Shock, and though I struck her at each Ear alternately, she
always felt most Warmth at the deafest Ear. At last she complained of small
Twitchings in her Ears, chiefly in that Ear, and cross her Head. No other Part
of her Body felt the Shocks. The Warmth increased all Day with Twitchings at
Intervals. The next Morning I repeated the Experiments, which then affected her
Arms and Body also. The Twitchings were more violent; the Warmth greater round
the Ears, chiefly the deafer Ear. These Effects continued all the Day, and she
heard considerably better. But toward Evening, by sitting man open Window, she
catched Cold; on which the Warmth left her, and she felt very chill all over
her Body. On Monday she was extremely ill, with Pains all over her. On Tuesday
she was much better, and felt the same Kind of Warmth round each Ear again. On
Wednesday the Noise and beating in her Head, which she had had from the first
of her Deafness, much abated. In the Evening a violent shooting went across
her Head, from the left to the right Ear. On Thursday I repeated the
Experiment. Some Minutes after, blowing her Nose, there issued corrupted Matter
with a small Quantity of clotted Blood. From this Time she had little Noise or
beating in her Head, and heard perfectly well.

She had a great Cold, and her Eyes were much inflamed, when I began the
Experiment. But after the first Day's Experiment the Inflammation decreased,
and after the second, was wholly removed.

I was able at first to bear the strongest Shocks. But after repeating them
some Weeks, I could hardly bear a small shock: And a strong one occasioned a
violent Convulsion of the Muscles of my Arm and Body.

Upon rubbing with my Hand a Globe, while turning, I have several Times felt a
violent Headache. But it always went off upon discontinuing the rubbing. I have
known many Persons, who found an unusual Pain for some Days after receiving the
Shock."

Thus far Mr. Wilson.

I am surprised at this. For I never yet knew any Person, Man, Woman, or Child,
sick or well, who found any such Inconvenience. Only I have known Rheumatic
Pains increase on the first or second Trial, which were afterward perfe^tly
cured.

Mary Baker, Chairwoman, aged 27, living at Mrs. Hunt's, in Neal's Yard, near
the Seven Dials, having been long ill of a Dropsy, was admitted last Year into
St. George's Hospital. But on Nov. 28, she was discharged out of it as
incurable, as she was also from the Westminster Infirmary. In Spring last she
was electrified, and soon after parted with several Gallons of Water. After
being twice more electrified she was well, and able again to earn her Living.

18. It is of great Use in the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness; unless it be
hereditary, and then it does at least no harm.

The following Case seems to have been of the Epileptic Kind. E -- T -- of
Worcester was troubled with a very uncommon Disorder, for ten or eleven Years.
The Contraction usually began under her left Breast, and darted thence to her
right, and back again to her left Breast and Shoulder. It then struck down to
her Elbow, Wrist and Fingers, which were instantly so contracted, that if she
had not Time to catch up something in her Hand, the Nail of the Forefinger
would so wound the Thumb, as to make the Blood run down. The Contraction
likewise twisted and drew her Hand beh^nd her, turning it up again to the
Shoulder. The Intervals of this terrible Disorder were uncertain: Sometimes she
had ease for a Month; sometimes she was taken twice in a Day. It would yield to
no Medicine, but was by this Method entirely cured in a few Weeks, She stood on
the Wire, coming from the Phial, and then touched the Apparatus with a Finger
of the Hand affected. By this Means the Fire circulated the n^arest Way, through
the Body to the Arm and Fingers. This was several Times repeated to each
Finger. Mr. L.

19. Sarah Bettesworth, aged 22, then living in Cow-Lane, was some Years since
seized with so violent Fits, that five or six Men were scarce able to hold her.
In Autumn 1756, while she was in one of them, the Apothecary being asked by her
Master if he should electrify her? made light of it. However he did so,
applying the Bottle to one Shoulder, as she lay on the Ground, and the Wire to
the other On the first Shock her struggling ceased, and she lay still. At the
second her Senses returned. After two or three more, she rose in good. Health.
Some Months after she relapsed, and was electrified again, and again entirely
cured. Last Easter she fell into a Fit again, through a Fright: But by a few
Shocks was cured and restored to Health.

William Matthews, Schoolmaster aged thirty two, living at the Foundery, near
Moorfields, had Epileptic Fits (supposed to be hereditary) from his Birth, till
he was six Years old. Thence he was free till Thirteen. They then returned on
occasion of a Fright, and continued so to do twice or thrice in a Year, till he
was seventeen. From that Time they came almost every Month, till the Year 1753:
Since then they usually returned about once in ten or eleven Weeks. In the
Middle of March last he began to be electrified, both through the Head* and from
Head to Foot. April 4. He had a slight Fit, but from that Time to this, Nov. 1,
has had none at all. Can all England afford such a Cure as this, wrought by a
Course of Medicines?

20.

" John Webb of Worcester, seventy Years of Age, was much disordered in his
Fe^t for ten or twelve Years. The Pain resembled that of the Gout: And such a
Coldness attended it as was scarce supportable. If he warmed them by the Fire,
they raged still more, as also when they began to be warm in Bed. The Nails of
his Toes very frequently dropped off: The Toes in general appeared livid; and
frequently large black or bluish Spots were formed at the End of them, or on
the Top and Sides of his Feet. These, when they first came, were exceedingly
painful; but after a Time grew dry and hard. His Heels likewise were gener^lly
puffed up like blown Bladders."

All these Complaints gradually decreased, till they totally went away, by his
being electrified once a Day for some Time, and afterward twice a Week. At
first only Sparks were drawn. Afterward the Chain was brought from the Phial
to the Part affected of one Foot; then one End of a Wire was laid to the Part
affected of the other Foot, and the other End of it brought to the Conductor."
Mr. L.

21. Felons are speedily cured by drawing Sparks. If any Disorder be
superficial this Operation suffices: But if it lie deeper, then the giving of
Shocks is found to be more effectual.

22.

" Ann T -- had a Fistula near the inner Corner of her Eye, which healed and
broke again seven Times. The last Time it healed, it continued well for some
Time. After which it began with a small swelling, till it was as big as a
Filbird. From the Time she was electrified, by drawing off Sparks, it gradually
decreased, till it was entirely dissipated." Mr. L.

Eliz. Johnson, Daughter of Mr. Johnson, Gunmaker in the Tow^r, was taken on
New-Years-Day last, with sharp Pains in her Bowels, which soon threw her into
Convulsion-Fits. These returned five or six Times a Day, for ten or eleven
Days. She was electrified all over, and had no Fit for eight Months. She was
then frighted into a Fit. She was again electrified, and continues well.

23.

"A young Lady had been affected with Fits near seven Years, which seized her
without any Warning, and threw her flat on her Face, quite insensible. These
frequently returned twice in a Day. This was attended with almost a continual
Coldness in her Feet. Her Stomach also was much affected. She stood upon a Wire
coming from the Coat of the Phial, and to complete the Circuit, another Wire
was laid upon her Head, by which Means the Fire was conveyed to that Part. By
this Means both the Fits and Coldness were gradually removed, and a complete
Cure effected." Mr. L.

24.

" Elizabeth B -- near the Old Hills, a few Miles from Worc^ster, had for fifty
Years been afflicted with severe Fits. They threw her down to the Ground, quite
insensible, sometimes twice or thrice a Day. She had tried many Remedies, but
to no Purpose. From the latter End of the Year 1752, she received several
Shocks. An inveterate Headache, which attended her, quickly decreased, and in
some Months her Fits too totally ceased." Mr. L.

25. Electricity was tried at Upsal in three Cases of a Ganglion, which it
perfectly dispersed.

26. Slight Attacks of the Gout are suddenly and effectually removed, by
drawing Sparks from the Part affected.

"A Person, who within the Space of two or three Years, had had several Attacks
of the Gout, since the first of which, he had always a Stiffness and Pain in
the Joint of one of his great Toes, and for a considerable Time in both, was
quite cured, by setting him on Rosin, while one on the Floor drew Sparks from
the diseased Parts." Mr. L.

William Sinnock, Cabinet-maker, in Lombard-Court, Seven Dials, was in Feb.
1758, seized with sharp Pains in his Feet, which continued three Months, and
for six Weeks disabled him from doing any Work. They returned in February last.
He was electrified twice, and has felt no Pain since.

Thomas Willis, Chairmaker, aged 44, was for many Years afflicted with the
Gravel in the Kidneys. In July last he was electrified twice. After the second
Time he parted with a large Quantity of Gravel. He was electrified twice more,
and has not found the least Complaint since.

27. In very bad Fits of the Headache, I have often, says Mr. L. used this
Remedy with surprising success.

"A Man of Bromsgrove, afflicted for near a Fortnight with a violent and
constant Headache, was twice electrified by a few light Shocks, with half an
Hour's Interval, and entirely cured." Mr. L.

A -- T -- of White-Chappel had a violent Head ach which continued for seven or
eight Weeks. After she was electrified the Pain increased for three Hours. It
then gradually decreased, till she was quite well. This proves that it may
remove even a Disorder, which at first it seems to increase.

28. Samuel Rennee, aged seven, the son of Richard Rennee, Weaver, living in
York-Street, by taking Cold, was seized with a violent Headache, which
continued with short Intermissions for above a Year. Tuesday March 8, 1757, he
was moderately electrified all over. The Pain lest him from that Hour.

29.

"A Man who had a fixed Pain just above his Eye-brow for several Days, was by
little Shocks at the Part cured in a few Minutes: So was Mr. Higgins of
Worcester, of a periodical Headache, which commonly began at five or six in the
Evening, and affected him from the Top of his right Temple to his Ear, till he
went to bed. This was cured only by drawing Sparks." Mr. L.

" M -- t D -- s was afflicted with an almost constant, as well as violent Pain
in the hinder Part of her Head for near three Quarters of a Year; especially
when she lay down in Bed, being then so intolerable, she could not forbear
shrieking. Having used many other Means with no Effect; she was electrified
once a Day. This presently relieved (sometimes by Sparks, sometimes light
Shocks) and in some Weeks perfectly cured her." Mr. L.

" E -- T -- was troubled for eleven Years with a severe Headache, which
baffled all the Efforts of Medicine. By moderate Shocks applied to her Head,
she was cured in a few Weeks." Mr. L.

30. Abigail Brown, aged 22, then living in Red-Cross-Street, was from a Child
frequently afflicted with a violent Headache. In Octob^r 1757, she was
electrified five Days successively, having one Wire applied to the fore Part,
another to the hinder Part of the Head, and receiving seven or eight Shocks
each Time. Hereby she was entirely cured, nor has found any Pain in her Head
since, unless occasionally for want of Sleep.

Sarab Webb, Wife of Mr. Webb, Tallowchandler in Grub-Street, aged 46, was from
20 Years old subject to a violent Pain on the Top of her Head. This frequently
obliged her to keep her Bed, nor could any Remedy for it be found. In December
last she received gentle Shocks from Temple to Temple, and from the Forehead
to the back of the Head. This was done three-Days successively, and she was
entirely cured.

31. Richard Outen, Rope-Maker, aged 23, living in Bunhill-Row, was troubled
with a violent Headache over the Eyes, before he was ten Years old, arising
from a Blow on the Head. He was scarce free from it a Month together for above
12 Years. It used to throb and shoot through the Head, so that often he was
almost distracted. In December 1756 he was electrified once, receiving three
Shocks, by one Wire applied to the Forehead, and another to the back of the
Head. He was worse than ever for some Hours, till he went to Bed, but awaked in
the Morning perfectly well: And has continued so ever since.

32. In deep Hysterical Cases, the Person ought to sit on the Rosin at least
half an Hour every Morning and Evening. At first Sparks may be drawn off; and
afterward Shocks given, more or less, as the Disorder requires. This would
seldom fail of the desired Effect, as may well be supposed from the following
Instances.

"A Young Gentlewoman, about 10 Miles from Worcester, sometime after she
recovered from a Fever, was seized with violent Hysterics, which soon deprived
her both of Memory and Understanding. The Fire was conducted through her Head by
Sparks and Shocks several Times a Day, during the Week she stayed at Worcester:
In which Time not only her Memory, but her Understanding was perfectly restored.

"Mrs. Higgins of Worcester was troubled for above ten Years with an Hysterical
Disorder, and a Coldness in her Feet. From these that Coldness moved gradually
up to her Head, in half a Minute's Time, which then seemed a Palsy in the Head.
Soon after her Teeth would chatter as in a violent Ague. Thence the shaking
proceeded to her Arms, and whole Body, and was so violent, (as Hysterics mim^c
most Distempers) as to resemble St. Vitus's Dan^e.

"Sometimes Sparks were drawn, sometimes Shocks were given; and she stood near
half an Hour daily on the Rosin. In less than a Fortnight the Fits went
entirely off: And in a While after, the Coldness of her Feet." Mr. L.

33. A Person had rigid Knots in the Thigh like what appear in violent Cramps,
but not so hard or painful. These were entirely dissipated in a Minute or two,
only by drawing Sparks.

34. One at Upsal who had lost the Use of his Limbs from cold, for several
Years, was in some Weeks quite restored.

One at Stockholm, who had used Crutchets for seven Years, could walk without
them in thirteen Days.

Eliz. Buttle, Nurse, aged 31, living in Feather-stone Street, in May last,
such a Pain round her Ankle-bone, that she could scarce set her Foot to the
Ground. This grew worse and worse for about a Month. In June she was
electrified seven Times round the Ankle, and thrice upon the Knee. Immediately
her Lameness ceased, with the Pain that occasioned it.

35. Mary Lallo, aged 25, then living in St. Th^mas the Apostle's, when she was
a Child, was taken with a Pain in the Bone of the left Leg from the Knee to the
Bottom of the Foot, which then felt as if a great Weight had been fastened to
it. This continued by Intervals for many Years. Frequently she could not walk
without holding some one, and then in great Agony. In Feb^uary 1757 she
received several small Shocks on the Knee, within four or five Minutes. The
Pain instantly ceased. She walked home quite well, and has continued so ever
since.

A Girl also of 13, who after the small Pox had been lame from four Years old,
having been electrified about twenty Times, walked without a Staff.

"A young Lady from a Strain in the Knee-Joint, or rather the crural Ligament,
was quite disabled from walking. About three Quarters of a Year after, when she
came to me, the muscular Part of the Leg was much fallen away, and a continual
Coldness attended the Foot."

"I ordered her to sit on the Rosin at least half an Hour daily, and to receive
several Shocks through the disordered Part of the Knee. The first Month there was
little Effect. In the next there was a visible Alteration for the better: The
third, she could walk a few Steps without any Crutch or Staff. In the following
Month, she seemed quite well, and left off electrif^ing; but after a Time
relapsed. After the Relapse, the Progress of the Cure was more tedious, and it
was four or five Months before she could leave her Remedy quite off."

She was then totally cured. Mr. L.

36.

"A young Woman drinking at a cold Spring when very hot, was seized with a Kind
of Fever for a Quarter of a Year. Many red Spots then appeared on her Arms, and
soon after a thin dry crusty Substance which appeared rather as Scales than
Scabs, from her Elbows down to her Fingers. This leprous Disorder (which many
call a Surfeit) continued near three Years. Indeed it lessened the first and
second Winter; but the third was the same as in Summer."

"By drawing Sparks once a Day from the Parts affected, in three Weeks or a
Month all the Scales disappeared." Mr. L.

37.

"A Gentleman in Worcester had a Mortification, which began in his Toe, and in
spite of all the Means used, gradually increased. He was shocked, and the
Mortification stopped: But on his neglecting this, it began again; and
increased so far that the Case seemed desperate. Yet on his being Sh^cked again
through the Mortified Part, such a Change appeared as astonished the Surgeon, who
owned it had done more good in two Days than had been done in six Weeks
before." Mr. L.

38. A Clergyman near London had from a Child almost a constant Pain in the
lower Part of his left Side. He was once electrified by standing with his left
Foot on the Chain, and has never felt the Pain since.

James Kitely, of Lambeth, had a sharp Pain in his left Side about three Years.
After being electrified three or four Times, the Pain left him and came no more.

Mary Burges living at the Tu^ in Knaves-Ac^e, had a Pain in her Side for seven
Years. In May last, she was entirely cured the first Time of electrifying.

Michael Hayes, of King Street, Westminster, aged 86, had a violent Pain in his
left Ankle for near four Years. This sometimes disabled him from walking, which
otherwise he could do without any Difficulty. He was electrified through the
Part, and perfectly cured before he left the Room.

39. Elenor Story, living in Clerkenwell Churchyard, catching Cold, was seized
with Pain and Weakness in the small of her Back, as if it had been broke. By
following the Prescriptions of Dr. L. the Pain after a Fortnight settled in her
Shoulder. There it continued so violent, that often she had scarce any Use of
her Arm. She afterward used abundance of Remedies for above two Years, but all
to no Effect. On Tuesday March 21, 1757, she received two strong Shocks on each
Shoulder, which made the Skin red and sore. That Night she was in more Pain
than usual, trembled all over, and could get little Sleep. The next Morning she
received several Shocks all over, and so on Thursday Morning and Evening. After
the second Time her Pain was gone, and she had the full Use of both her Arms.

John Reed, Cabinet-maker in Ward^r-street, was for six Years afflicted with
violent Pains in the back of his Neck. In Spring 1758, he was electrified about
thrice a Week for a Month, and quite cured.

40. Joseph Jones was taken about March 12, 1757, with a violent Pain in the
Stomach. He received the same Day a few gentle Shocks. The Pain went off, and
returned no more.

Mary Peltecree, Warper, living in Primrose-street, was troubled six Months
with a Pain in her Stomach and Back, accompanied with extreme Weakness and
Faintness, which made her incapable of her Work. By the Advice of a Physician,
she took many Medicines, but with no Effect, Five Weeks ago she was
electrified, receiving the Shock through the Stomach. This was done for five Days
successively. She has been perfectly well ever since.

H -- W --, Throwster, aged 23, living in Fleetstreet, Bednal Green, not being
regular, was taken a Year ago with a violent Pain in her Stomach. She had the
Advice of a Physician, and took many Medicines; but to no Purpose. At length
she was electrified, nine or ten Days, and is in perfect Health.

Ann Wild, of Round Court, by taking Cold in Childbirth, contracted a violent
Pain in her Stomach. After it had continued four Years, she was perfectly cured
by twice electrifying.

Mrs. Edwards, living in Nottingham Court, Shorts-Gardens, was ill of a Pain in
her Stomach for eight Years. It often took away her Rest, as well as Appetite,
and brought her to the Gates of Death. By once electrifying she was cured.

Elenor Tailor, Mantuamaker, aged 48, living in King Street, Oldstreet-square,
was taken in September 1758, with a violent Disorder in her Stomach, which felt
as if it was ready to burst, and often made her sweat to her Fingers' Ends.
This continued for upwards of four Months, and gave her little Rest, Day or
Night. In February following she was seized with the Rheumatism, throughout the
left Side. For this, having quite lost the Use of her left Arm, she came to be
electrified. She felt the Shock chiefly in her Stomach, and her Disorder there
was cured. After three Days she was electrified again, and cured of the
Rheumatism also.

A Gentlewoman in London had an almost continual Pain in her Stomach, more or
less for eight Years. She received one Shock on her Stomach, and was well from
that Moment.

41. Silas Told, Schoolmaster, aged 48, living in Christopher's Alley,
Moorfields, in the Year 1741, had a Pleuritic Pain, for which he lost an
unusually large Quantity of Blood. Immediately he was seized with a strong
Palpitation of the Heart, which continued, more or less, without the
Intermission of one Day, for more than sixteen Years. In February 1757 while I
was electrifying for a Pain in my Stomach (which was wholly removed by one
shock) he came in and said, "My Heart is very bad, and I think I will try it
too." He did so, receiving a Shock through the Breast, and has been ever since
perfectly well.

42. A Citizen of Upsal, who was thoroughly Paralytic, was perfectly cured only
by drawing Sparks.

April 18th, 1756, a remarkable Case happened at Edinburgh. Robert Moubray, in
the beginning of January was struck with a Palsy of the Tongue, and soon after
entirely lost the use of his Speech. Last Week he began being electrified, and
by Saturday he was able to put out his Tongue, which before was dead and
motionless. On Monday he could speak a little, and on Tuesday he could speak as
well as ever.

Thomas Dobson, Leatherpipe-maker, aged 27, living in Barnabystreet, was seized
with a Palsy in the Tongue, on July 24th last. It grew worse and worse till
Saturday 28, and then quite deprived him of his Speech. He was electrified for
five Days, by drawing Sparks from the Tongue, and shocking him all over. And
hereby not only his Palsy was cured, but Convulsions also, which he had had for
four Years.

"Mr. P. had a Year or two ago a slight Touch of a Palsy. On a sudden his Arm
dropped down, quite without Strength; and though after chafing it well, he
recovered the Use of the upper and middle Joint, yet the lower Part was still
so weak, that he could by no Means write his Name. But by a few Shocks in the
Arm he was effectually relieved.

"The same Person had lately a much worse Stroke. All his right Side was so
affected, that he could not walk without two to support him. After he had been
electrified three Times, he could walk with the Support of one only, and in a
short Time he was perfectly well." He used to stand on the Chain with the right
Foot, and touch the Apparatus with his right Hand." Mr. L.

I have not yet known any Instance of this Kind. Many Paralytics have been
helped: But, I think, scarce any Palsy of a Year standing has been thro'ly
cured.

43. A Gentlewoman in London, who for several Years was never long together
without sharp Pains in her Knee, which seemed chiefly Rheumatical, was freed
from them in a Moment by one single Shock.

John Ramsay, Cabinetmaker, living in the Strand, by being very wet, catched a
violent Cold, in the latter End of June 1756. This occasioned a Rheumatic Pain,
which fixed in his left Knee. From this he was seldom free for a Week together
till November. He was then very ill till February, being seldom able to do
above half a Day's Work, sometimes none for a Week together. He was for ten
Weeks an Out-Patient of St. George's H^spital; but received no Benefit. On
Monday 21st March he was electrified through the Knee, and four Times more within
seven Days. The Pain was removed, and his Sleep, which had been long lost
returned, as before he was first taken.

Ann Walter, Servant, aged 22, then living in Brick-Lane, Spittlefields, was
cured entirely of a violent Rheumatism in her left Arm, by being electrified
five Times.

A Stone-cutter at Stockholm, whose Knees and Joints of his Toes had been
rendered stiff, and his Fingers crooked by a Mixture of Gout and Rheumatism,
after being electrified a few Days, was able to go to Work. It has been found
to remove or greatly abate all Rheumatic Pains.

Ann Cambell, living in Queenstreet, Seven Dials, had a severe Rheumatism
fourteen Weeks. For nine Weeks she could not dress herself, nor get out of Bed
without Help. She had the Advice of several Physicians, but in vain. In Spring,
1758, she was electrified five Times, and thereby restored to full Health.

William Tyler, living at the Sun in Longlane, Smithfield, was on March 9th
last, about three in the Morning, seized with Rheumatic Pains, chiefly on his
right Side, so violently, that he was as helpless as an Infant, and was
frequently constrained to shriek out, like a Woman in Labor. I came before
Nine. After the second Shock he felt some Change: After the third he was able
to raise himself a little. After two more he rose and walked about the Room,
and before Noon he was quite easy and well.

Sarah Guilford, aged 37, living on Saffron-hill, was for upwards of seven
Years so afflicted with the Rheuma ism in her right Side, that the Knee and
Ankle were wasted exceedingly. January 2d last she was electrified, and
perfectly cured in one Day. But it threw her into a profuse Sweat, particularly
from those Parts which had been most affected.

Ann Cardiff, Servant, at the Golden Head, Islington, aged 40, about sixteen
Years ago, was taken with a violent Rheumatism, by catching Cold in lying in.
It returned every Year, and the last Winter took away the Use of her Limbs. She
followed the Advice of several Physicians, till they pronounced her incurable,
October 15 last she was electrified, first by general Shocks, then through the
Parts most affected. The first and the second Time it made her extremely weak
and faint. The third Time she was better, and after nine Times all her Weakness
and Pains were gone.

Margaret Virgin, Silk-Winder, aged 39, living in White-Horse-Yard,
Seethin-Lane, was troubled with the Rheumatism before she was ten Years old,
and more and more till when she was about twelve she was confined to her Bed
for near 21 Weeks. From that Time she was seldom free from it, so that many
Times she was quite incapable of Business. Last Winter she was so ill as to be
forced to quit her Work, not being able to lift an Arm to her Head. In January
she was electrified twice: The first Time all over: The second Time through the
left Arm. The use of her Arm was immediately restored. Her Pains entirely left
her, and ever since she has been more capable of any Kind of Work than she had
been for twenty Years.

Mary Trumbel, of White-Cross-street, aged 49, began to be afflicted with the
Rheumatism before she was 30 Years of Age. It returned in her Shoulders or Head
every Winter: And for the three Winters last past so increased, that she could
by no Means turn either Arm behind her, and was extremely painful. Last Winter
it was worse than ever. A little before Christmas she received five or six
small Shocks. Immediately she was easy, recovered the full Use of both Arms,
and has retained it ever since.

William G. of the Little Minories, London, had been violently afflicted with
the Rheumatism for many Years. For several Winters he was not able to work. But
after having received a few Shocks, in a Quarter of an Hour, all his Complaints
vanished away, and he was afterward as well in Winter as in Summer.

44. Almost all Kind of Inflammations, Ringworms, Tetters, Shingles, as well as
most Kinds of Swellings may be totally cured by drawing Sparks only.

45. A Lad at Stockholm, who had a severe Sciatica in the right Hip, so as not
to bear being touched, was cured in a few Days.

John Ellison, then an Officer of Excise, living in Hunt-street, Spittlefields,
was upon catching Cold, seized with a violent Sciatica, which held him several
Months without Intermission, and frequently almost took away the Use of his
Limb. In August 1754 he was electrified, receiving two Shocks. His Pain raged
the more for four or five Hours; but afterward entirely ceased. And from that
Time to this he has been perfectly well, without the least Relapse.

"Mr. R -- S -- of Worcester, troubled with a Suitica for some Years, was cured
at once by Shocks conveyed to the Parts affected. Mr. L.

Mary Butler, aged 86, living in Eaglestreet, Redlien-square, having been
afflicted with the Sciatica for more than twenty Years, was last Month
electrified ten or twelve Times, and has been easy ever since.

It seems the Electric Fire in Cases of this and of many other Kinds, dilates
the minute Vessels, and capillary Passages, as well as separates the clogging
Particles of the stagnating Fluids. By accelerating likewise the Motion of the
Blood, it removes many Obstructions.

46. Thomas Nevil, Weaver, aged 26, living at the Bottom of Vine-Court,
Spittlefields; when about 16 Years of Age, sprained his Loins so violently,
that from that Time he found a continual Weakness, frequent Pains and an
Inability to do any hard Work. On Thursday March 10th, 1757, he was
electrified, receiving five or six Shocks through the Parts affected. When he
went home he felt no Pain, but much Soreness on the Part, on which a red Spot
appeared, like a small Pin's Head. But the next Morning he was perfectly well,
and has been ever since stronger than before the first Hurt.

Francis Halfpenny, Tailor, aged 30, living in Redcross-street, Southwark, when
about 18 Years old had a Fall from a Tree. By this he received such a Sprain,
that he could not walk twenty Yards, unless exceeding slow, without a gnawing,
aching Pain down his Thigh. About the Middle of September last he was
electrified through the upper Part of the Thigh. This was repeated at five or six
different Times. The first Shock removed the Pain down to the Knee. At the
third electrifying it went quite away. And since that Time he has been full as
well as he was before his Fall.

47.

E -- H -- of Tedny, had a very painful swel^ing in the Ball of her great Toe
for some Years. Having made use of many other Means in vain, she was at length
electrified. After the first Operation (by drawing Sparks) the Pain was much
abated: And in a short Time the swelling disappeared and the Pain left her."

"Mr. Joshua W -- of Pershore, was troubled for seven or eight Years with a
Pain in his second Toe. Though nothing was to be seen, it was as tender as a
Boil, and the Pain was so great, particularly in walking, that he at length
determined to have it cut off. By drawing Sparks he was cured in an Hour."

"A Gentleman of Worcester ran a Bodkin into the Side of his Hand, near the
fore and middle Fingers. The Wound was no more than the Prick of a large Pin,
yet in three or four Days a swelling came both in the Palm and on the Back of
the Hand.

"The fifth Day a Surgeon was called, who for three Months dressed both the
Inside and the Outside of the Hand to no Purpose. A Caustic was then applied;
but with no more Success than all the other Means.

"Finding no Alteration, nor Likelihood of any, he was electrified twice (by
drawing off Sparks) on the Inside of his Hand, at the Bottom of the middle
Finger. In four Days it broke, and in about three Weeks healed. Mr. L.

Jane Davison, Quilter, aged 26, living in Quaker street, had about six Years
ago a violent Toothache, which occasioned a swelling in her right Cheek. This
continued gradually increasing on the Inside of the Cheek, till it grew into an
hard fleshy Lump. Despairing of any Help, she let it alone, till last Month she
was persuaded to be electrified. She received several strong Shocks through the
Part. After this was done the first Time, the swelling not only increased
exceedingly, but was violently painful. The next Day, the other Cheek likewise
swelled, and that swelling spread through the upper Lip, across the Mouth.
Nevertheless she was electrified again. Two or three Days after it broke, and
for two Days together, discharged abundance of purulent Matter mixed with Blood.
But in a few Days the Wound was entirely healed, and all the swelling gone.

48. " E -- T -- taking cold, was seized with a sore Throat, which grew worse
and worse for six Days. She then could not swallow even a Bit of Bread soaked
in Tea. The same Morning she was electrified, so as to direct the Shock in a
right Line through the Part affected. By the Time she got home she could eat any
Thing. Two Shocks more made a perfect Cure."

49.

"The Toothache, if proceeding from a scorbutic Habit, from hollow Teeth, or
from a Defluxion of Rheum, is presently assuaged or totally removed by this
Remedy.

"This may frequently be done by drawing Sparks from the Tooth or Check: In
mo^e stubborn Cases, by moderate Shocks. The sooner you touch the Phial, the
weaker the Shock: So that you may lessen or increase it at Pleasure.

"In giving the Shock the most effectual Way, is, to bring one Wire under the
Chin and Tooth, (if it be on the under Side) and lay the End of the other Wire
on the Top of the Tooth. If it be on the upper Side, bring one Wire to the Top
of the Head over the Tooth, and apply the other to the Bottom of it. Mr. L.

Sarah Ellison, the Wise of John Ell^son abovementioned, catched Cold in lying
in, which fixed a sharp Pain in her Teeth, and the Side of her Face. She used
all Manner of Means to remove this for upwards of six Years. Among many others
she had at several Times, three Teeth draw^, and was fourteen Times blistered,
but without Effect. In July 17^4, she received six Shocks through her Head. The
Pain ceased immediately, and returned no more.

50

"A Person had a swelling, supposed to be a Wen, between the Neck and the
Shoulder Blade as big as an Egg, and nearly as hard, which had been growing to
that Size for several Years. She had not been electrified many Times (by
drawing Sparks for five or six minutes every Day) before it began to soften.
Soon after it discharged a thin Humor through a small Orifice, and continued
discharging and softening more and more, till it was entirely dissipated." Mr.
L.

51. Whoever desires to see a more circumstantial Account of many of the
preceding Cases, with the Names of most of the Patients and their Places of
Abode, may consult Mr. Lov^tt's Treatise. It is wrote not only with admirable
Judgment, but with an excellent Spirit. A Principle of Benevolence to Human
Kind may be easily observed to breathe through the whole: Nor can any lightly
condemn it, but those whose Interest naturally leads them to decry whatever
would lessen their own Gain.

52. After relating these Cures, Mr. L. himself adds, "I cannot deny but I was
much astonished, at seeing such mighty Things performed by Electricity. But
after having attentively considered the Nature of Electric Either, its great
Subtilty and Power, its active and enlivening Qualities, and its mighty
Tendency to accelerate the Motion of the Fluids in general, and of the Blood in
particular:" (I would add, and to pervade the finest Arteries and Nerves, to
dilate their obstructed or contracted Orifices; as well as to restore the Tone
of any Muscle or Fiber, which is either impaired or destroyed:) "I concluded
that all those surprising Effects were no more than the necessary Consequences
of so powerful an Agent, when thus determined, and directed. And the helping us
in our bodily Infirmities, was one great End it was ordained to serve,"
(probably the great End) "after it had been thus fully and plainly discovered
to us."

53. It were greatly to be wished, that the Gentlemen of the Fa^ulty would
strictly examine the Nature, Properties, and Effects of this sovereign Remedy.
For such it unquestionably is, particularly in nervous Cases: Even in those
Cases, which the common Materia Medica will in no wise reach. But it is not to
be expected. They must not disoblige their good Friends the Apothecaries.
Neither can it consist with their own Interest, to make (although not every Man)
yet so many Men their own Physicians, which would be the unavoidable
Consequence, if a regular System of practical Rules were formed from a Process
of Experiments, whereby a sensible Man might judge in what Cases it would cure,
and in what not: And in what Manner it might be most effectually applied in any
Case wherein it was proper.

In order to prevent any ill Effect, these two Cautions should always be
remembered. First, let not the Shock be too violent; rather let several small
Shocks be given. Secondly, do not give a Shock to the whole Body, when only a
particular Part is affected. If it be given to the Part affected only, little
Harm can follow even from a violent Shock.

For Instance. In a Palsy of the Tongue, the Shock may be given to the Tongue
only by applying one Wire to the hinder Part of the Neck, and another to the
Tongue. And if in any Case there be Danger of too great a Shock, it may easily
be prevented.

It is highly probable, a timely use of this Means might prevent before they
were thro'ly formed, and frequently even then remove some of the most painful
and dangerous Distempers: Cancers and scrophulous Tumors in particular; though
they will yield to no other Medicine yet discovered. It is certain, nothing is
so likely, by accelerating the contained Fluids, to dilate and open the
Passages, as well as divide the coagulated Particles of the Blood, that so the
Circulation may be again performed. And it is a Doubt, whether it would not be
of more use, even in Mortifications, than either the Bark or any other Medicine.

Before I conclude, I would beg one Thing (if it be not too great a Favor)
from the Gentlemen of the Faculty, and indeed from all who desire Health and
Freedom from Pain, either for themselves or their Neighbors. It is, That none
of them would condemn they know not what: That they would hear the Cause,
before they pass Sentence: That they would not peremptorily pronounce against
Electricity, while they know little or nothing about it. Rather let every
candid Man take a little Pains, to understand the Question before he determines
it. Let him for two or three Weeks (at least) try it himself in the abovenamed
Disorders. And then his own Senses will show him, whether it is a mere
Play-thing, or the noblest Medicine yet known in the World.

FINIS.

