ANIMADVERSIONS ON A LATE TREATISE ON THE KINK-COUGH.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

ERRATA.
Preface, p. v. line 6, after it, add ever. Page 2, line 19, for taffis, read
tuffis. Page 7, -- for AVICENNA, read AVICENNAE. Page 14, line last, after an,
read external. Page 18, line 27, for taffim, read tuffim. penult. for Avicenna,
read AVICENNAE. Page 22, line 16, after would, add often. Page 23, line 19, for
the, read though. line 20, after given, put a, instead of (...) Page 33, line
6, for n, read In. Page 39, line 3, for con, read consult. Page 46, line 12,
for irritated, read irritating. Page 47, line 8, after in, add the. line 18,
read Sir. e mecon. Page 53, line 28, for when, read whence.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON A LATE TREATISE ON THE KINK-COUGH.

To which is annexed, An ESSAY on that DISORDER.

Nil praeter gelidas ausus confer Cicutas. LONDON, Printed for R. BALDWIN,
and J. BEW, in Paternoster Row, MDCCLXXIV.

PREFACE.
AUDI ALTERAM PARTEM. IT is now well known with what little truth hemlock was
recommended as a cure for cancers, Dr. De Haen of Vienna, physician in the same
hospital with Dr. Storck, having given us a fair account of this matter.

In a letter to a physician in England, published in the third volume of the
Medical Museum, he says, speaking of the Cicuta, "I am now able to explain this
matter to you, from the many experiments I have made in consequence of an order
received from high authority. The first thirty patients it absolutely failed
me, but confiding in the good faith of others, that they might happen to be
such only as were incurable, I advanced to make further trials, as well
publicly in the hospital, as privately in the city and suburbs, to the number
of one hundred and twenty; but, unhappily for me, after so much trouble, the
result was, that not one person was cured or relieved by it; that many grew
worse, and that seven unhappy women with cancers in their breasts perished
under my hands, of whom I could have saved some of them by the knife, and in
all probability others might have been preserved a long time by the palliative
methods."

"I must own, sir, I am ashamed of this affair. How did I entreat those to whom
it belonged to use more precaution, and at least to suspend for some time the
printing of those books that praise the Cicuta, till repeated trials had been
made, and by several hands, lest the public faith should be abused by a
premature publication, and the author rendered ridiculous in the face of the
universe. But my remonstrances were fruitless; and, to my great concern, my
best friends abruptly fell out with me, and I have incurred the disgrace of the
best of sovereigns."

Wherefore, three years after, in 1766, he published his Epistola de Cicuta,
wherein he denies the cures which Dr. Storck said he had accomplished by this
remedy, and maintains it, "that many, or most of those very patients Dr. Storck
asserts to have been perfectly cured, died while they were taking this
medicine; and that there was proved in reality, on a candid enquiry, no more
than one that could be said to be cured by hemlock; that although five hundred
pounds weight of Dr. Storck's extract of Cicuta had been sent to different
places abroad, yet there has not been received one authentic account of a real
cure of a true cancer having been ever yet performed by it in any instance
where it was used." Which perfectly agrees with general experience; and indeed
it is amazing, that it should ever have been received as a specific in this
disorder, when we reflect, that upon enquiry, by dissection, into the nature of
a confirmed schirrhus, the vessels ate found to be perfectly destroyed and
obliterated, and the whole to be one confused mass; wherefore, any medicine
capable of restoring a part thus diseased, must have a power of creating a new
set of vessels, and of making a new gland of the old one; and we may as well
believe that it has a power of removing any inconvenience from amputation, by
creating a new limb, as that it cured a true schirrhus Those who will take the
trouble of examining schirri with a good microscope, will look with indignation
upon the accounts he meets with in Dr. Storck's books, and will be convinced,
that unless we can discover a medicine that will penetrate into, correct the
cancerous virus, and dissolve all the diseased parts into matter, we must still
continue to remove cancers in time by the knife, or what is more tedious and
painful, the caustic, if we think of curing the patient.
.

But when we reflect how destitute we were of any medicine capable of curing a
cancer, we shall see the reason why physicians and surgeons should seek with
avidity after a medicine recommended for this purpose by a physician of
eminence and character; and finding it give ease in some instances, its use has
been continued, not considering that it is an opiate, and that the same
advantage might have been received from small doses of opium; and that both
opium and hemlock lull the patient into a fatal security, while the necessary
and proper methods are neglected, and the disease makes an incurable progress.

Nevertheless, the writer of the Essay on the Kinkcough is a true disciple of
Dr. Storck; and if this publication is well received, we have reason given to
expect a more extensive account of the virtues of hemlock; wherefore it must be
a thankful office to enquire, how far what is already said by this writer
merits attention, and whether, as he asserts, "it is a specific in the
kinkcough, according to the most proper interpretation of that word," to
prevent our being again hastily led, in giving preference to a medicine,
perhaps no ways entitled to the encomiums bestowed on it.

Although by showing that the cases Dr, B -- has given are insufficient to
recommend hemlock, and that he himself does not believe what he has said in
favor of this medicine to be true, we might answer all the ends proposed; yet,
as theory is apt to affect practice, it will be proper to examine his doctrine
previous to his cases, and more especially as it will show this imitator of
THESSALUS The reader who is not acquainted with medical history, must be
informed, that THESSALUS lived in the time of NERO, and with madness railed in
open invectives against all physicians. He even had the vanity to direct, that
the word IATRONICES should be written upon his tombstone, in hopes of having
it believed, that he was superior in his profession to any physician that ever
lived. Plin. Hist.Not. lib. xxix. cap. 1.
, that he, like other men, is not quite free from imperfection; that there must
be a great amendment to make, as he expects his name greater in the next
century than any man that ever lived; and knowing himself, he may see the
necessity of still improving.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON A LATE TREATISE on the KINKCOUGH.
To Dr. B*****.
SIR,
I HAVE read your Treatise on the Kinkcough, and willingly point out to you
some oversights in this work, in hopes of improving your medical knowledge, and
thereby enabling you better to support the character you have so long assumed,
of being "second in the profession to no man."

Indeed, sir, your stricture upon DOCTOR FOTHERGILL, in the beginning of your
Preface, seems not only to be unnecessary, but a little unlucky to yourself;
because, I dare say, you might have gone on in your system-building quietly,
and without notice; whereas, from what you have there said, people will
naturally be led to make a comparison between the two writers that cannot
possibly turn out to your advantage.

They will at once plainly see that you have obscured and perplexed your
subject, by treading in the path he has avoided. Those conversant with medical
books will discover, that you have served your HEMLOCK up in a hash of old
materials; and that you have not advanced one new observation, or even one new
thought, except some new errors, which it was quite unnecessary to add to the
theory and practice of physic. Besides, I apprehend, your book will be thought
to border a little upon quackery; while it must be confessed, that the DOCTOR
has written like a man of science.

Whoever looks over the 30th article, in the third volume of the Medical
Observations and Inquiries, will find that he recommends, from the success of
himself and many of his medical acquaintance, a powder composed of crabs claws
and emetic tartar, as a very useful medicine in the tassis convulsiva, and in
preference of oxymel of squills and ipecacuanha, which have so often afforded
most relief, by emptying the stomach of its contents; and he has mentioned the
manner of giving it, and the diet he has found most useful on this occasion.
And, surely, there can be no impropriety in his confirming, by the experience
of himself and many physicians, the usefulness of a medicine which has been
advised by preceding writers. And why is his giving directions about the manner
of its being taken, and laying down rules for diet, unworthy of him, when so
great a man as yourself has imitated him in these particulars Treatise on the
Kinkcough, p. 169.
?

But he says, the remedy he recommends is not a certain cure in all cases; he
would not be understood to suppose, that it will alone complete the cure of the
whooping-cough; says he, "I know it will not; and that this, as well as any
other medicine, is useful or otherwise, just as it is indicated:" whereas you
happen not to trouble your head about indications, but recommend hemlock as a
specific in the disorder under consideration.

A specific in the whooping-cough is a desirable remedy, if it could be
obtained; but whether that you have advised is better than the flesh of fried
mice, which has been in vogue as a specific for the same purpose; may be much
doubted; for such is the difference of constitutions, the variations in the
same disease, and in the combinations of diseases; that no one remedy has
hitherto been found out, capable of invariably curing any one disorder. Quacks,
therefore, only talk of curing diseases under various circumstances by a
specific: they, indeed, from a poverty of knowledge, recommend one remedy in
all sorts of complaints, and bring testimony of their use from every recovery
which happens where they are given. You, in like manner, have, for several
years, been prescribing hemlock in almost all the cases which have come before
you, and now ascribe effects to it of which there is no evidence. I will point
out an instance, which may serve for the present. You say, it may be given in
the smallpox with advantage, because it was taken by an healthy boy and girl,
in the beginning of the eruptive fever of this disease, after emptying their
bowels by senna tea, and the smallpox turned out a very distinct good sort.
Now, if there had never before been a very distinct good sort of smallpox, in
an healthy boy and girl, especially after purging, the hemlock might have
gained some credit; but if, upon enquiry, it should be discovered, that a
distinct good sort of smallpox is not unfrequent where hemlock is not given, I
rather think, no other conclusion can be drawn from these instances than that,
like a chip in pottage, it neither did good nor harm.

Nor can Dr. STORCK shelter you, I am fearful, from the appearance of having
made a random experiment, if even what he says be true; for, supposing hemlock,
in some instances, to have promoted a kindly suppuration where the Peruvian
bark failed; yet it does not follow, that it will promote a kindly suppuration
in the smallpox; because different kinds of acrid matter require different
correctives: though we no way accuse you of making a random experiment by
design, but innocently, without knowing that matter in sores and the matter in
the smallpox may require different remedies.

However, though you have been a little out in these things, yet your
declaration of not being answerable for other peoples experiments with hemlock,
unless made with the very preparation you always use No one will doubt, though
Dr. B -- has published his methods of preparing hemlock, that he means, by this
caveat, the preparation made by his own apothecary, when they know that he is
provided with a sufficient quantity to serve the whole kingdom.
, may screen you from reproach where you are not known, in case it is not found
so successful in curing the kinkcough as you have represented it to be; for, in
justification of yourself, you may have recourse to your old practice, and say,
that the blockhead of a compounder scorched the herb in drying, that he stirred
the juice with a wooden skewer instead of a bit of hemlock stalk, or that there
was certainly an ebullition while it was over the fire; which, if you are as
successful as you have been with no better arguments, may effectually stop any
clamor. And who can say, though they took the utmost care, that two or three
bubbles did not arise? which would be sufficient for your purpose; or you may
further insist upon it, that no one can so exactly perform the method you have
described, of making experiments upon people that are ill, as yourself. Nor
will the prescriptions being written in English, hinder your forcing a trade
and carrying on business, as they will be understood by every good woman, who
will not have any thing to do, but, as they have already experienced, to
consult you, pay their fee, and receive, with directions, in a pot sealed up,
your " agreeable, certain, and expeditious cure for the kinkcough."

ARNAUD wrote a book, to prove that GOULARD'S extract of lead is the best and
most universal topic in surgery, and may very properly be substituted in the
place of all others prescribed; that it could only be made by GOULARD himself;
and that he, ARNAUD, was the only person in England entrusted with the sale of
this preparation; in hopes, no doubt, of getting the whole trade in chirurgical
applications to himself. You, in imitation, have written a book, to prove that
hemlock is a remedy against almost all diseases; that it may properly be
substituted for all others generally prescribed for the kinkcough; and that
they must have the very preparation you use.

An anonymous writer lately attempted to explode, by chemical investigation,
all the febrifuge powders hitherto invented, in hopes of recommending the sale
of his own medicine for the cure of fevers. You have endeavored to decry, for
the same purpose, the practice recommended by other physicians, and as much as
lay in your power, by patching together ^hreds from different authors, have
dressed out your performance with a scientifical air, in hopes, no doubt, of
seeing your doctrine and medicines more greedily swallowed. And if, by these
means, you can persuade the public to believe, that whatever has been written
upon the subject is erroneous, you may, perhaps, drive a great trade, and we
shall then, without doubt, have the whole of your experience of hemlock as a
medicine. Nevertheless, we will now see whether your book and list of cures
will stand the test of inquiry; and the following are the heads of the chapters
in which we shall discuss this matter.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of the synonyma, description, and prognostics of the kinkcough. CHAP.
II. Of the nature of the kinkcough. CHAP. III. Of the seat of the kinkcough.
CHAP. IV. Of the causes of the kinkcough. CHAP. V. Of the history of hemlock,
as a cure for the kinkcough. CHAP. VI. Of the cure of the kinkcough, both
simple and complicated, supported by your own reason. CHAP. VII. On hemlock,
and its preparations.
CHAP. I. Of the synonyma, description, and prognostics of the kinkcough.
Of the synonyma.
The different names by which a disease is distinguished being placed in one
view is undoubtedly useful; but your synonymes, sir, would have been much more
perfect, if you had looked back to an earlier period, and informed us by what
name the Greeks and Arabians distinguished what the English call the
Whooping-cough; for both HIPPOCRATES and AVICENNA gave it a name. And besides,
there are several other synonyma (...), tussis perennis, infantum, suffocativa,
puerile; chink-cough, chine-cough, king's cough, and many others.
, which ought to have been taken into the catalogue to have made it complete;
so that, upon the whole, the first is a very superficial section.

Of the description.
Nor is your description of the disease, and of the manner of its terminating,
as we shall presently show, less imperfect, as the most alarming and dangerous
stage of it is unnoticed, and seems entirely to be unknown to you.

Of the prognostics,
Which have been again and again published, and now eked out by the sagacious
information, "that a pulmonary haemorrhage may terminate in a consumption, etc.
and that the kinkcough, when complicated with another disorder, is more
hazardous than when single and by itself."

CHAP. II. Of the nature of the kinkcough.
It seems as unnecessary to prove, that this may be complicated with other
disorders, as that light and darkness exist; and the reader will therefore
readily believe, that, perchance, you may have seen it conjoined with the
measles, peripneumonic symptoms, etc. but if he pays any regard to your book,
he cannot coincide with you in opinion, that these varieties merit the most
attentive consideration of physicians; because, hemlock it is said is a
specific against the kinkcough, both when simple and when complicated with the
diseases specified; but you will have wonderful satisfaction, in reading former
writers upon this subject, because you will find yourself supported by their
authority concerning your opinion, that it is contagious; that a fever is not
essential to it; that it is not an inflammatory disease, and the like: and the
only misfortune in this chapter is, that, according to your own account, you
have drawn a very erroneous conclusion from these premises, for you do not
hesitate to pronounce, that the kinkcough is a nervous spasmodic disease Dr.
Hillary has been before you, and called it a nervous cough and convulsive
spasms.
. That a morbid irritability is the primary, and the spasms only a secondary
affection; and yet afterward you say, "under certain circumstances of the air,
etc. the various humors composing the intestinal contents, may undergo an
uncommon degree of fermentation. The fermenting mass, by its unnatural
stimulus, will produce a vitiated secretion into that bowel. And this
additional mixture will probably render the whole more and more active and
exalted, till at length there are generated particles of a deleterious nature,
operating on the mucous glands of the intestines in particular, whereby that
secretion is increased and vitiated, and so the kinkcough is produced Instead
of miasma being generated in the guts, Dr. Hillary, with more reason, thought,
that some peculiar disposition in the air generated miasma, that were recived
into and infected the habit.
." From all which it follows:

1st, That the air under certain circumstances, is the primary cause of the
disease. 2dly, That the various humors composing the intestinal contents, are
primarily affected. 3dly, That the affection of the mucous glands, is not a
primary but a secondary affection, from deleterious particles operating upon
them. 4thly, That the kinkcough happens in consequence of a disease thus
brought on.
And lastly, That the kinkcough is not a disease, but the symptom of a disease;
of all which together with the story of fermentation, we shall take notice of,
in their proper place; and shall only now observe, that if you had been so
lucky, as to consider the kinkcough as a symptom, instead of a disease, your
wonderful penetration in discovering it to be nervous and spasmodic, could not
have been disputed; because coughs of all kinds, whether with or without a
kink, are symptoms arising from nervous irritation and spasms; and whether by
this formal declaration you have not discovered that you are not well versed in
the nature of coughs in general, the reader will readily determine.

CHAP. III. Of the seat of the kinkcough.
Though you assert that arguments are fallacious, yet you are so destitute of
plain proof, that you have not produced one fact in support of your opinion,
that the intestinal canal is the primary seat of the disease.

That particular diseases affect particular parts, is known to every one; but
you will find it a difficult matter to prove, "the measles chiefly affect the
membrane investing the lungs, the smallpox that of the stomach, and agues that
of the duodenum." -- That the intestines of children are more irritable than
the other parts of the body, will be equally difficult to prove. Dentition
renders all the nerves in the body praeternaturally irritable; and the
colic-pains, and the like, do not seem to arise from the nerves of the
intestines being more irritable, but from their being more irritated, by an
acid first generated in the stomach. Nor has Dr. Harris proved, that almost all
the diseases of children depend on an affection of the first passages; or who
would believe that the CROUP for instance, had its seat in the intestines,
because he said the complaints of infants spring from an acid, their common
source; and though it be allowed that a disease in the intestines can affect
the whole, or any part of the nervous system, and that worms lodging in the
intestines can produce a cough, yet it does not follow, that all coughs
happening to children have their primary seat in the same place: we could
incontestably prove, that a violent cough took its rise from an inflammatory
tumor in the hand; but, are we therefore to conclude, that the kinkcough ever
had its primary seat in this member of the body?

Vomits being more serviceable, when they render the body soluble, only seems
to prove, that the disease is not confined to the stomach; and if it be true,
that such patients bear the action of vomits better than purges, the only
conclusion that can be drawn is, that purges weaken by making a general drain
from the whole body, whereas vomits do not cause so great an evacuation.

Nor is the king's evil, and rickets, being the consequence of an obstinate
kinkcough, any more to your purpose. You acknowledge the king's evil to have
its seat in the conglobate glands; and supposing, (though it is far from being
certain) that those of the mesentery are first affected, yet this is no clear
proof in your favor, this disease being in another bowel. And can the
kinkcough simply considered, any more produce the king's evil, than the
king's evil the kinkcough? The rickets have followed the smallpox, which you
say is a disease of the stomach; and any disorder at a certain period in life,
that greatly weakens and relaxes the fibers of children, predisposed to the
rickets, will bring them on. You confess, that both these disorders are in
consequence of the kinkcough's continuing a long time, and to the intestines
thereby losing their contractile power. And we also think, as these disorders
never follow the kinkcough, till it has long continued, that they are brought
on by its obstinacy causing a general weakness and relaxation, in habits
previously disposed to these complaints, and not to its primary seat being in
the intestines.

But surely you are much mistaken about your fourth, and what you think your
most powerful argument, p. 25. For if we are to conclude from the periodical
returns, that the kinkcough and intermitting fevers have both their seat in the
same place, you prove that instead of the intestines, the kinkcough may have
its primary seat in the eyes, or in one of the teeth, because you have given us
a clear instance of an intermittent thus situated; for the black stools we
imagine were owing to their being tinctured with extract of bark; and we should
have received equal information about the nature of the disease, if we had been
told that the patient had black stools after eating bilberries. If you did not
think the seat of this intermittent to be in the tooth, why did you direct it
to be drawn? and are not local intermittents common? We believe that
intermitting fevers have often their seat in the abdomen, yet we think the
opinion of their proximate cause being in the liver, mesentery, etc. more
probable than that it lodges solely in the guts; nor do your two cases prove
the contrary. You have before said, p. 23. that an enlarged belly and colic are
the symptoms of obstructed glands in the mesentery; and might not the pain in
the first boy's belly, p. 26. arise from a similar cause, and the cure chiefly
to be owing to the fomentation removing the obstruction, because his colic was
cured before the worms were entirely eradicated? Might not the cure of the
second boy be accomplished by the purges producing the same effect; and would
the belly have been large and hard, if the intestines only had been diseased?

In regard to the intestines being the most likely place for generating an
infectious disease, we must observe, that however plausible the arguments in
favor of this opinion may appear, they are very far from being conclusive; and
though the dysentery and putrid fever, etc. spread by contagion, yet it is not
a clear point, that the miasmata bring on the succeeding disease by first
affecting the alimentary canal. The viperine poison, though deadly when infused
into a wound, taken by the mouth produces no bad effect; nor will the variolous
matter create a disease swallowed in the same manner, provided in its passage
it touches not an excoriated part, though even a single atom is fully
sufficient for the purpose when the cuticle is removed, and it comes in contact
with the absorbent vessels, seated on the surface of the body. A poor lad had a
large tumor in his mouth, arising from the upper jaw, which was very foul, and
from which a large quantity of very offensive putrid matter was swallowed in
the nightime, when he was asleep. It purged him gently, and, at the end of
three weeks or a month, his blood seemed to be dissolved by the vibices which
appeared in the skin; yet he never had the least fever, though he lived at
least six or eight weeks, and at last died of extreme weakness; whereas, had
the same quantity of matter been absorbed from an ulcer, a colliquative fever
would soon have been the consequence. From all which we would infer, that the
juices in the primae viae correct and reader less active infectious matter; and
that this does not seem to be the only way by which infection is communicated.
The opinion that the miasms which propagate infection, enter the habit by the
lymphatics in the lungs, and other absorbents, seems more likely to be true;
for in this way, by such time as the disease makes its appearance When we
inoculate for the smallpox, it is evident that the variolous matter enters the
intestines before any fever comes on, by its destroying worms. See the
following essay.
, they will in all probability have contaminated the bile, and the variety of
humors blended in the intestines.

But to return to the resemblance betwixt the kinkcough and intermitting
fevers, which seem to arise from an accumulation and discharge of phlegm; for
when the stomach is unloaded by coughing and vomiting, the patient becomes easy
till a fresh quantity of phlegm is collected in the stomach sufficient to
excite another fit of coughing; which, surely, notwithstanding your arguments
to the contrary, is a full proof, that this bowel is immediately affected, and
that unloading it is the cause of the intermission. You indeed think
differently; but may we not suppose, that in intermitting fevers obscure
intermissions are rendered distinct, by those medicines which remove the
offending cause from the affected part? And why then are we not to believe a
disorder, that has periodical returns, to be seated in the stomach, because
vomiting affords relief? -- Why truly, say you, "It would seem that the
interfering cause, a foulness of stomach, being thus removed, the pure
intestinal symptom of intermission becomes evident and distinct:" which is a
most futile argument, because you have not in one instance proved, that
intermittents are seated in the intestines; and we may therefore conclude, that
WALDSCHMID, when he said this cough proceeded from the stomach, was guided by
commonsense, which you, sir, have deserted; and through the whole of this
chapter have had recourse to mere conjecture and hypothesis.

CHAP. IV. Of the causes of the kinkcough.
How full and true your description of the kinkcough is, we have already
observed, and shall farther make appear; and how far your observations have
established the true seat of the disease, let every man judge. However, you
have given us a clear instance, that you remember what you learnt at lecture,
in so very learnedly explaining what is the predisposing, and what the
proximate cause of a disease; and to be sure it required a masterly hand to
point out that a disease is present, while its cause is present: but we do
insist upon it, that a disease often remains after its proximate cause is
removed. But wonderful information must accrue to the public from their now
being shown the necessity and use of being acquainted with the cause of a
disease; we may add, when it can be accomplished; "but so great are the
difficulties of tracing out the hidden causes of the evils to which this frame
of ours is subject, that the most candid of the profession have ever allowed
and lamented how unavoidably they are in the dark;" and the abortiveness of
your attempt in this respect, is one clear proof how justly they have reasoned.

Few or none will think with you in regard to the kinkcough being peculiar to
childhood, because it sometimes seizes grown people; and it may with truth be
affirmed, that the story about the irritability of children, both in health and
when diseased, has been long known and applied; and certain it is, that this
disorder more commonly affects children, without being preceded by any other
disease.

You say, "an enumeration of the effects of the specific miasms, which produce
the kinkcough, will sufficiently point out their true nature;" but not such a
perplexed enumeration as you have given us. In one place you assert, p. 51.
that they act upon the nervous powers, and increase the irritability of the
system, a few lines after, "that as far as your senses can discover, they act
chiefly on the mucus;" and then again, a few lines below, you say, "it appears
that the kinkcough answers to the definition of pestilential disorders, etc.
since its miasms are contagious, and act chiefly on the nerves;" and lastly,
after this confused account, "you hope you have sufficiently cleared up the
nature of the contagious particles." But in what manner? For do not miasms, as
different in their nature as possible, act upon the nervous power, and increase
the irritability of the system, of which the miasms producing the smallpox,
measles, etc. are an instance? or why do they produce different diseases?
Suppose what you have said to be true, it only proves that they have an
irritating property, which is far from exploring their nature: but all these
little mistakes every considerate man will excuse, when he reflects that you do
not pretend to go deeper into this matter than the limits of your understanding
will permit.

But to have been consistent with yourself, you should have omitted enquiring
into the origin of the contagious particles which give rise to the kinkcough,
as this is certainly wading out of your depth. Indeed in this inquiry you set
out very aukwardly; for not having examined into the matter yourself, you are
led into a mistake by copying a former writer, in regard to our not having any
very early account about this disorder; for Hippocrates prescribed ad tassim
pueri (...) nota finem lib. Morb. Mulier.
, and Avicenna describes, according to the Latin translation, the method of
curing the tussis infantum De Aegritudinibus quae infantibus accidunt, cap.
iii. lib. i. Fien. Dort. 1. p. 157. vol. i.
. No conclusion, therefore, can be drawn as to the place of the growth of these
particles, except it be true that they are bred in people's guts; and they then
may be natives of Europe, and every other quarter of the globe. Even when they
revisited Barbados. According to your account they must escape from the guts,
and we may readily suppose that some passenger carried a belly-full over, and
letting fly as soon as he landed, infected the whole island. Indeed Dr. Hillary
observes, that the hooping-cough appeared in Barbados in the month of July
1753, after a good deal of rain, often with thunder and lightning, though the
intermediate days were hot and dry; and he could not find upon the strictest
enquiry, that any child or elder person brought it thither, which you may
conclude is in favor of your doctrine; but you must be told, that fermentation
destroys the cohesion of all bodies upon which it acts. That tough viscid
phlegm is always discharged in the first stage of the kinkcough; that there is,
therefore, no fermentation in the case, and that the whole of what you have
said about creating deleterious particles in the guts is of course chimerical,
and seems to be no better supported than the opinion that Spanish mares become
pregnant by ascending high mountains, and swallowing with open mouth the
western wind.

If so, the remainder of what you have said in this chapter, except its being
sometimes propagated by contagion, falls to the ground, and requires no farther
comment; though, I must confess, I much admire your arguments against the
removal of children in this disorder; because, if they were removed from Derby,
and its environs, the writing of your book might not answer the end designed;
and yet it may be difficult to disprove the truth of the opinion, that pure air
assists in recovering the patient. For, if "the air under certain circumstances
is the primary cause of this disorder," how comes it to pass that the kinkcough
does not depend upon the state of the atmosphere, like many epidemic diseases?
Will not an air capable of producing the kinkcough be a constant fomes morbi?
and, consequently, removing the patient to a place where the air is pure must
be rational at least.

And, though you have not only a priori, but likewise a posteriori, come to the
same determination, yet I question whether you have satisfactorily cleared up
this matter; for the mucous glands of the stomach, and those of the intestines,
are both of the same kind; and will it be believed that the air under certain
circumstances, when taken in by the mouth, can pass through the stomach without
affecting it; and is not the stomach loaded with phlegm from the beginning? So
that you have no way of maintaining your ground in regard to the guts being the
primary seat of this disease, unless you give up your prior, and adhere to your
posterior arguments, by proving that the fomes morbi does not enter by the
mouth but per parts posteriores.

CHAP. V. Of the history of hemlock, as a cure for the kinkcough.
What you say, sir, has been asserted about the cure of the kinkcough, may with
equal truth be asserted of every disorder known, as we have not a certain cure
for any of them. Where there it a multiplicity of indications in diseases (for
methods of cure are not indications), it is impossible for them all to give way
to specific treatment; for various circumstances will always require a
combination of various remedies. Nor is the unsuccessful treatment of the
kinkcough the reason why Dr. Willis's observation, "that old women are oftener
consulted in this disorder than physicians," holds true in our own times; for
people seldom apply to physicians, on account of the expense, as they do not
apprehend danger, and they know the disease will commonly get well of itself in
time. Nevertheless, if you can make people believe that we have as yet no
certain and effectual cure for the kinkcough, nor any one medicine that ought
to be used in many cases that occur, that every method hitherto followed is at
best but a palliative, and that hemlock is a specific in every case that can
happen, your business is done.

But whether your being convinced that the disease is spasmodic, and that
hemlock is one of the best antispasmodics, will assist in recommending it to
the notice of practitioners in medicine, may be much doubted; because, as we
have already observed, what you have said tends to persuade other people, that
the disease is not spasmodic, but a morbid alteration of the intestinal
contents; and it will easily be discovered whether medicines that clear the
primae viae, and lessen irritability, or a medicine which acts as an
antispasmodic only, are most likely to prove palliatives.

However, though your reasoning may have perplexed this matter, and though you
may be mistaken about the nature and the seat of the diforder in question, yet
it does not follow that you have not found out a remedy that will cure it, the
use of medicine being often discovered by accident. The Indian who discovered
that the bark would cure an intermitting fever, knew nothing probably of the
nature of the disease; and as you have confined your practice in almost all
diseases to the use of hemlock, you may by chance have found out a cure for the
kinkcough, and we must, therefore, see whether the evidence you produce will
supuort the character you give it.

A specific should be able to cure the disease to which it is appropriated
without any assistance; and, in order to have a clear proof of the efficacy of
any medicine, it should be given simply and alone; and it is therefore
impossible to say how far hemlock, and how far the other remedies might
contribute to the cure in your first and fifth cases. Cantharides have always
been found of great efficacy in the hooping-cough, whether taken inwardly, or
outwardly applied; nor have purging medicines, especially emetic tartar, etc.
by clearing the primae viae, been found less serviceable.

Who can, therefore, say in Mrs. Hodgkinson's case, that the blister and emetic
tartar did not attenuate and remove the viscid phlegm, which was manifestly the
cause of the cough? Hemlock might then be serviceable, by acting as an opiate,
and allaying that increased irritability, which the cause of every cough in a
greater or less degree produces, and which often will occasion frequent
coughing for some time after the primary disease is removed.

A. B. was better from the application of the first blister, and the effects of
his purging mixture, which brought away slime, before hemlock was given.
Lancing the gum too would lessen the increased irritability of the whole habit,
especially the second operation, which let out three teeth at once, and yet the
hemlock was constantly given: we find he coughed a good deal till a second
blister was applied, and then the fits were much milder, and returned scarcely
once in two hours. Besides, the bowels were unloaded of slime daily, either
with syrup of roses or manna; he was vomited with oxymel of squills, which
rendered his breathing free; and after five weeks and four days had elapsed, in
which time six teeth were bred, (and I suppose came to light) the patient was
well. And it may be asked, with what pretensions could it be said in the third
corollary, that "that hemlock certainly prevented spasms, and probably
convulsions, in this child?" Must not there be a strange partiality in favor
of hemlock to make such a conclusion; and will not corollaries thus drawn lead
to error?

But to go back to your writing to your friend in Scotland, p. 63. we may
observe, that it was unlucky that the children were got well before your letter
of advice arrived, otherwise hemlock might have got the whole credit of the
cure; and, though this anecdote does not throw great light upon the subject,
yet perhaps it may forestall any claim a pretender may make to hints given; and
you will thereby avoid that censure you have before experienced In the Reviews.
, in publishing as your own a method of curing the stone by injection, when the
hint came from Dr. Whytt.

The second case not being insisted on as evidence, I pass it over; and the
third does not seem much to your purpose, because hemlock was not given by
itself; and who will be hardy enough to say, that lemon juice, salt of tartar,
and syrup of sugar, did not alter the properties of this remedy? and that the
good effects were not produced by the manna, and a medicine very different from
hemlock when given alone? But the complete recovery seems to have been
accomplished, as often happens in this disease, by time, as nine or ten weeks
elapsed before the patient was in perfect health.

Indeed, you inform us, that she was in a manner well in a much shorter time;
but this we imagine was nothing more than the natural decline of the cough,
which always happens after a certain period.

You say, "a fever is not essential to the kinkcough;" but in the cough
following the measles, a fever, with a white tongue, quick pulse, and sediment
in the urine, is a common attendant: and are not this fever and cough
frequently increased and renewed by eating things of hard digestion, or upon
taking a slight cold? whence there is reason to imagine, that a great part of
this child's illness was owing to acrid matter remaining after the measles,
upon, and irritating the lungs. It is common for saline medicines, without the
assistance of hemlock, to make the phlegm looser in the cough thus produced;
and this hectic fever and cough have often been cured by the same remedies, and
gentle purging, in a short space of time: so that, upon the whole, you may see
this is not so clear a case in your favor as you have imagined.

The fourth case too, communicated to you by Mr. Smith, is liable to the same
objections, as not hemlock alone, but a medicine of a very different nature was
given; and from a serious perusal of the first five cases, the reader will
judge, whether you had any good reason to be perfectly convinced that you had
discovered "an agreeable, certain, and expeditious cure for the kinkcough:"
when, not having patients enough of your own, you wrote to Mr. York to furnish
you with some for your purpose.

But the first of these cases will do you very little service; for, upon
enquiry, the child did not take the medicine except a few days. The mother not
dreading the event of the disorder, did not choose to give it her by force,
though it was regularly brought every evening about six o'clock, to be taken
next day, but it was constantly thrown away. The mother says "the smell of the
humlucks scented the whole house, and was so very disagreeable, that the child
could not bear it; and, she believes, it would have thrown her daughter into
fits if she had persisted in the use of this medicine." She, therefore, bought
manna The mother says, "those days she was purged with manna she was much
better than when she took the humlucks."
at different places, with which she kept her bowels open, and the disorder
terminated, as often happens, in the space of six weeks.

It is very common for the lower class of people to omit taking medicines, even
when they are to pay for them, because they are unpalatable; and, I have so
often discovered, that the medicines during a whole illness have been secreted,
and not taken, that I am very cautious in ascribing effects to them, unless I
am very certain they have been given. The parents of these children had not
thought of calling in any assistance, but were sent to, and desired to make
trial of some medicine that should be given them; and common civility obliged
them not to refuse the offer; but when we reflect, that giving medicines to
children is always troublesome, and requires great resolution to accomplish;
that the common people do not look upon this disorder as dangerous, and that
they have no doubt of it in general going off of its own accord, it is
reasonable to imagine, that they would not be equally vigorous with the
prescriber in pursuing his method of cure, otherwise the parents of HELE See
Treatise on the Kinkcough, p. 159.
would not have disused the bark shift which was given her; and, in my opinion,
I think none of these cases are to be depended upon, where either the
prescriber or apothecary did not see the medicines given. However, supposing
them to be taken, the case of ELIZABETH and JOHN PAGE are exceptionable,
because lemon-juice and salt of tartar were joined with hemlock; besides,
ELIZABETH PAGE had the disorder from first to last near seven weeks; and does
not it often terminate of itself in this time? We may conclude, that JOHN PAGE
had the disorder very slightly, otherwise he would have kinked oftener than
twice in the night.

Mary Green was not cured.

Mr. Smith, for all that we know, joined juice of lemon and salt of tartar with
hemlock, in the manner he had before done; and his cases, as they at present
stand, are therefore no evidence.

Thomas Newdale, who had the disorder near seven weeks, had sal polychrest and
magnesia given to assist the cure.

Magnesia and sal polychrest were also given in MARY HELE'S case, but she had
no permanent relief till she wore a bark shift; and after taking hemlock a
month, a violent diarrhea, with purulent stools streaked with blood, and a
tenesmus came on, and she was very restless, and vomited up her food; but, upon
the hemlock mixture being omitted, and three drops of laudanum being given, and
repeated every night and morning, her looseness was abated and cured, she had
good nights, and her cough, which the hemlock could not subdue, was entirely
removed; and, we are told, she got well: but of this hereafter.

WILLIAM TOPLIS had a variety of medicines joined to hemlock, notwithstanding
which he died, though, it is said, his kinkcough was cured a few days before
his death, and at a time when he appears to have been very ill; but in the
following Essay we shall have occasion to take notice of hemlock, and we shall
then review this case.

Mary Langley had the disorder in all seven weeks, and magnesia and nitre were
joined with hemlock; and, upon the whole we may observe, that there are only
seven cases out of the twenty, in which hemlock can possibly have all the
credit of the cure, because other medicines were joined along with it; and if
it was imagined they would give no assistance, why were they prescribed? And
even in all these seven cases, will not the sugar of sugar candy rob the
hemlock of its honor and glory, because sugar, vegetable juice, and water will
ferment? I know that this hemlock mixture will, in a few hours become ropy, and
afterward a fermentation ensues, and it becomes vinous; and, though it may,
like cowslip wine, retain something of its narcotic quality, yet it will be
greatly altered. Perhaps it may be said, that the mixture being to be taken in
the space of twenty-four hours, it has not time to ferment; but in the heat of
May and June, when these children were ill, every body knows that this
alteration will take place in a very few hours. Besides, ANNE ARCHER and ROBERT
TRUSSEL were ill five weeks.

SAMUEL ARCHER one month.

ANCOR SARAH WADDLE and ELIZABETH TRUSSEL about two months. And you yourself
are so well satisfied that these cases are not satisfactory, that you think it
necessary to explain some circumstances in some of them:

We join you in opinion, p. 157, that the fifth case may be as remarkable as
any of the rest, and yet not very remarkable in favor of hemlock. Any man must
be strangely biassed in favor of this medicine, who could conclude, when so
many other medicines had given relief, that it saved this patient's life; and
from what has been said, it is plain you were mistaken in ascribing the cure of
all the six patients to hemlock. But you seem to be easily convinced, otherwise
you would not have attempted to persuade others it was effectual where the
disease was not cured; for you have artfully numbered Mary Green among those
made well by this remedy, though her case proves the contrary; and her mother
says, she did not get well of at least six months after she had quite done
taking this medicine. You say, "I saw all the four patients cured by Mr. York
(Mary Green being one of them), and some of them before they were well; and I
enquired very minutely into their several symptoms, and this was only that I
might have every possible testimony for facts, which I desired to deliver to
the world with the utmost consciousness of their reality." Surely this is
straining a point, to say no worse of it, to give credit to hemlock; and how
are we to believe you, when you thus solemnly attempt to impose upon us?

Curing Thomas Newdale twice in a fortnight was really extravagant; once well
done would have been quite sufficient, as the disorder seizes a person but once
in his life. But notwithstanding what may have been said to the contrary, (see
case 17) HELE does not seem to have been cured once. Poor child! She indeed
suffered much hardship, seemingly from being trifled with, when the use of the
bark was so early indicated You knew an ague had been cured by the bark when
complicated with the kinkcough, (see Treat. Kink. p. 172.) why then was the use
of this medicine deferred near seven weeks? and was not giving hemlock in this
instance experiment making? because an approved remedy was at hand. See Home
Princip. Med. p. 122.
, and if this remedy had been sooner given, she now probably might have been
numbered among the living instead of the dead, as her constitution might not
have been ruined, and she might have been able to bear a blast of wind. But you
were consistent with yourself in adhering to your opinion, that hemlock does
not only cure the kinkcough, but the ague also; and the consequence was, that
she together with TOPLIS are in heaven; and, it may be insisted on, that
hemlock did good service in these instances, by standing in the place of proper
remedies, and suffering the disorder to carry these infants into happiness.

You see, sir, how willing I am to help you out at a dead lift; and in the
Essay annexed, the looseness which probably assisted in carrying HELE to her
grave, will be accounted for, without having recourse to conjecture, and the
necessity of killing and destroying worms for the purpose; though I admire your
ingenious theory of these vermin, being obliged by uncommon heat to seek their
way out of the body by a voluntary effort, in the same manner. I suppose, as
people make a voluntary effort to get out of a window, or a back door, when a
house is on fire. But there is another way of explaining this matter; and the
reader will presently judge whether it ought not to have been known to one who
is a fellow of a royal college of physicians.

But after all, I find you have been endeavoring to make us give credit to
what you yourself do not believe; for, if you had been perfectly convinced,
that in hemlock you had discovered a certain and expeditious cure for the
kinkcough, you would not in the last case but one, "have been perpetually
wavering between the influence of a great name, and the suggestion of your own
reason and experience." From this declaration it is evident, you wanted inward
conviction from plain proof; for a man must be an errant fool indeed, who gives
up a plain matter of fact, of which he is perfectly convinced, to the influence
of any name how great soever. And we ask the opinion of those unconcerned in
this matter, whether they think you were perfectly convinced or not?

Your laying the death of HELE to the misconduct of her parents, and excusing
the want of speedy success to a smoaky house, etc. in TOPLIS'S, LANGLEY'S This
is a curious excuse, it being confessed, that they were not confined within
doors, p. 161.
, and WADLEY'S cases, will avail but little in favor of your remedy, when it
is called to mind, that you have long insensibly fallen into this way of
excusing yourself by the most trifling evasions, when, having promised a
recovery, death, by victory, has shown the feebleness of the weapons by which
you endeavored to keep him at a distance.

From the whole it must appear to every unbiassed reader, that hemlock has not
always been successful in the kinkcough; that other medicines were required,
both when it was simple and when the disease was complicated, and that you have
said more in the praise of this remedy than is true.

CHAP. VI. Of the cure of the kinkcough, both when simple and complicated,
supported by your own reasons.
^n this chapter it was reasonable to expect, that the different indications in
all the varities arising from complication with other disorders would have been
pointed out; but if we except the measles, in which you have never given this
remedy, and lancing the gums in dentition, however complicated the disorder,
there is but one indication which is to give hemlock; and giving hemlock, we
imagine, is no indication at all, but we guess what you mean. And this
principle, I observe, you first lay down when you speak

Of the simple kinkcough.
And yet, two pages, after you forget yourself, and recommend a variety of
purging medicines to be taken, if the patient has not two stools a day; so that
the contents of the bowels being retained is another indication: and what is
very curious, it seems very immaterial with you whether the patient takes
hemlock in a mixture, or in powder, bolus, or pills; and yet, if what we have
said about sugar, vegetable juice, and water fermenting be true, the mixture
and the powder, etc. may be as different medicines as nitre and salt of
wormwood; and this will be looked upon as one instance, how well you consider
what effect combination may have upon the medicines you prescribe.

Of the cure of the kinkcough with worms.
The very same means is recommended in this complication as for the simple
kinkcough; because a child who used to part with a great number of round worms,
had some come away while it was taking this medicine (see case 11.) and, for
this reason, we are to believe, that hemlock will, in such cases, often
supersede the use not only of laxatives, but of any other medicines whatever in
the cure of both disorders.

Of the cure of the kinkcough with a dysentery.
Hemlock is here the best remedy, because opium saved a child's life under
these circumstances, when the stools had acquired a pretty natural appearance
from the use of gentle vomits, laxatives, blisters, the Peruvian bark, etc. But
we will ask the advice of those skilled in medicine, whether, notwithstanding
the idle theory about the hemlock removing clotty feculent accumulations
lurking in the guts, either it or opium can be given with safety, without
previous evacuations, or purging medicines joined along with them? Hemlock is
allowed to act the part of an astringent in diarrhoeas; and will it not, if the
advice here given is pursued, confine the fomes morbi in the intestines, and
for the most part be the death of the patient?

The cure of the kinkcough with dentition.
In this variety too hemlock is to be depended upon, because, if both diseases
are urgent, by lancing the gum you relieve the patient.

The cure of the kinkcough with an ague.
Again, hemlock is the fac totum, because "it does not appear that the bark was
more efficacious than hemlock in poor HELE's case" (17); only that the bark
shift entirely removed the ague, which was not cured while the hemlock was
depended on as a febrifuge. Indeed, on the ninth of March it appears from the
case, that she had neither ague nor fever, but on the tenth it returned; and on
the twelfth, things were in such a state, that recourse was immediately had to
the bark shift, and opium, with a good effect. But supposing the ague fit to be
removed for a little time previous to the use of the bark, why is this to be
attributed to hemlock? The child's belly was hard and full at the onset of the
disease; magnesia and sal polychrest were joined with hemlock, and purged the
patient: and have not agues thus circumstanced been cured by purging medicines?
There is scarce a practitioner living who has not cured the ague, accompanied
with a big belly in children, with a few doses of calomel and jalap; and so
powerful a medicine is sal polychrest and rhubarb in this very case, that Dr.
William Fordyce is of opinion, he might have made a fortune by using it as a
nostrum; and I am astonished that any man should have his head so turned, as to
draw a conclusion in favor of hemlock from such premises; and what is worse,
poor HELE is dead, perhaps because earlier recourse was not had to the bark.

Of the kinkcough with the smallpox; which we have already taken notice of.

Of the cure of the kinkcough with the measles,
Which you have never treated, and therefore your recommendation of hemlock in
this case does not require any comment. And we shall hereafter mention a plain
fact, which may perhaps determine whether it or other medicines ought to have
the preference in cases of pregnancy See page 37 forward.
.

The corrollaries we shall hereafter have occasion to refer to; and as to the
preparations of hemlock we think them unnecessary, because we have already much
safer and better medicines of the same class. Indeed it may be much questioned,
whether your stewing this medicine over the fire does not render it nea^^y
effete People in Derby say, the smell arising from the Cicuta while it is over
the fire is so offensive, as to be a common nuisance. Must not then its most
volatile parts fly off? and does not the chief effect of the hemlock pill arise
from the powder of hemlock, which happily for the patient is only one fifth of
the whole? See case in the Essay where the patient took powdered hemlock.
; for a surgeon gave some of the extract a considerable time without the least
alteration in the patient, but a few spoonfuls of the juice of hemlock, being
taken had a most violent and dangerous effect; and, though you are willing to
have it believed, that you have availed yourself of the rule given by CELSUS,
yet you have not proved that hemlock cures the kinkcough safely, certainly,
expeditiously, and pleasantly, or even that it cures it at all. I shall,
therefore, take the liberty of instructing you in the use and abuse of this
medicine; and if a mind which cannot bear contradiction, should become
boisterous upon this occasion, we will, as time and opportunity permit, explain
and amend any representations in these animadversions that may displease you;
and, perhaps, we may be able to present you with a dialogue from the dead
betwixt SOCRATES, HELE, and TOPLIS, who all had, while living, sufficient
experience of the medicine you so earnestly recommend, and who went out of the
world nearly in the same manner.

I am, Sir, Your most humble servant, The AUTHOR.
Dec. 31st, 1773.
AN ESSAY ON THE HOOPING-COUGH.
WHOEVER has a mind to see what has been said by former writers upon this
subject, a few of the ancients excepted, may con-Dr. MILLAR's late observations
on the hoopingcough, where they will find that physicians before the days of
Dr. B --, had employed successfully some of their thoughts on the nature and
cure of this disorder; and the following short Essay is intended to show
whether the method and medicines they recommend, or that advised by Dr. B --,
is most likely to relieve the patient.

For this purpose, we will begin by taking an abstract from notes made in 1749,
when the hooping-cough prevailed in this place and neighborhood; and we choose
to relate the symptoms attending those children where the disorder took its
course without help from medicine, as from hence we shall learn its regular
progress, and these we had many opportunities of seeing, as the common people
knowing that the disorder commonly wears off of itself in time, were not
solicitous about medical assistance, but relied on such trifling remedies as
themselves thought most proper.

Early in the spring, which was moist and very cold, many children in the space
of four or five miles round this place were seized with the hooping-cough,
about the same time, which first began with a little dry cough, and sometimes
the same kind of indisposition as accompanies taking cold, but soon after ropy
phlegm was coughed up. After this the lungs and stomach were daily loaded with
a larger quantity of phlegm, which in some became immoderate.

After some, or all of this phlegm was discharged by a fit of coughing and
vomiting, the child became easy till a sufficient quantity was again
accumulated to excite another fit of coughing, etc. during which, strong
children often bled at the nose, and were black in the face: the phlegm
discharged was sometimes streaked with blood, and the countenance in a little
while acquired a lucophlegmatic appearance.

Those children who had sense enough to spit out the phlegm at the time of
coughing, got safely over the disorder; sometimes, where it was not very
troublesome, in about six weeks; where more violent, in about two months, and
sometimes it was three months, or longer, before it terminated. But some
younger children fared not so well, for instead of throwing the phlegm out of
their mouth they swallowed it; a griping and loose stools followed, and all the
parts about the anus were excoriated. At this time they became dry, had a quick
small pulse, and all the other symptoms accompanying a fever. They now daily
got weaker, their legs and body became more or less oedematous, the cough
gradually ceased, the difficulty of breathing became more urgent, sleepiness,
etc. came on; and when the parents thought their children getting better, death
convinced them of their mistake, by closing the scene with all the symptoms of
a spurious peripneumony.

During the progress of this disease it often happened in different parts of
the neighborhood, that the cough was better for two or three days "It is
worthy of remark, that the convulsive cough in Edinburgh, after being milder in
January 1735, suddenly became much worse in the first week in February, and
continued so the greater part of that month, gradually decreasing afterward as
the spring and summer advanced." Ed. Med. Ess. vol. iv.
, and then returned again with its usual violence, but toward the latter part
of summer it wholly disappeared.

These symptoms give us every reason to conclude, with other writers, that the
disorder is caused by some morbid disposition of the air, because not only one,
but many children several miles asunder were seized nearly at the same time.
Nor can we account for the sudden abatement and return of the cough, but from
sudden alterations in this element. Perhaps it becomes replete with miasma,
which render the serous and lymphatic juices acrid; whence a larger quantity of
them than ordinary is secreted in consequence of their irritating the vessels
which secret them; or perhaps the air may have the power of weakening the
muscular fibers, and of rendering the fluids viscid and ropy. But Dr. B --
says, miasms irritate the mucous glands alone, and cause a greater secretion of
viscous matter.

In support of the first of these opinions, it may be said, that whenever the
serous or lymphatic juices are extravasated, and deposited in any cavity in the
body, they become viscid and ropy, witness the lymph which stagnates in the
nose; and why, therefore, will not lymph become ropy in the same manner, when a
greater quantity than ordinary is deposited upon the lungs in the stomach and
in the intestines?

In support of the second opinion, it may be said, that we know a particular
state of the air under a lax habit, and such are children, will render the
lymph ropy, witness the spurious peripneumony which children we see in this
disorder fall into when the offending matter is not expelled in coughing. And
in favor of both these opinions it may be said, the disease is not confined to
the lungs, or to the alimentary canal, but that it is extended to the whole
body; the fibers in general being relaxed, and an oedematous appearance
evinces, that the lymph in general has acquired a pituitous disposition Some
writers have asserted, that the juices never acquire this disposition; they
should have added while they were circulating in the vessels; for upon
dissecting an oedematous leg, I found the fluids which had stagnated in the
cellular membrane gla^^y and resembling the white of an egg.
; and, besides, it does not appear that mucus but thickened lymph is discharged.

In support of the last opinion, nothing can be said till we are certain that
it is mucus alone which is discharged in the fit of coughing, and then there
could be no doubt but in this disease the mucous glands are chiefly first
affected. These different opinions we mention to show what uncertainty there is
in fixing the manner in which the immediate cause of this disorder acts, and
what parts of the body are first affected; and, therefore, all the plain truth
we can collect is, that in consequence of a particular state in the air, the
stomach and lungs are loaded with a tough viscid phlegm, and that there is a
weakness and a general tendency to relaxation in the fibers, and to a ropy
disposition of the lymph and serum; that an affection of the stomach and lungs
is the immediate cause of the cough, because the patient immediately becomes
easy by vomiting and expectoration.

That the lungs and stomach are chiefly, and more immediately affected in the
first stage of the disease than the intestines, seems to be plain, because the
phlegm does not wholly pass off by stool, but is discharged by the mouth.
Besides, when it is not evacuated upwards, a new train of symptoms will arise;
for accumulating in the stomach, it passes into the intestines, putrifies, and
becomes very acrid; and the question is, whether if the intestines were the
primary seat of the disease, this putrefaction and a consequent diarrhaea would
not always take place, and whether the phlegm would not all pass downward
instead of upward? Whereas the truth is, unload the stomach and lungs as of ten
as an accumulation of viscid phlegm takes place, and the bowels will not seem
to be much affected.

However, it is not matter of much consequence in practice, whether phlegm
first resides in the stomach or intestines, as the whole alimentary canal from
its connection must be more or less affected with phlegm during the progress of
the disease; and seeing that the patient becomes easy upon its being
discharged, and that a general weakness and viscidity prevails, the true
intentions of the cure must be, to clear repeatedly the lungs and prime viae,
to attenuate viscid phlegm, to invigorate the blood, and to preserve the
strength of the solids; and, by taking a view of preceding writers, we shall
find, that the medicines which have answered these ends, have been found most
serviceable in curing this disorder If this hereafter appears to be true, those
who insist on hemlock's being a specific, because it is antispasmodic, do not
seem to have seen this matter in its true light.
.

Vomits and purges, and medicines which both vomit and purge, have been
recommended as principal remedies; and can there be any doubt of these
medicines relieving the patient, as they take away the immediate cause of the
cough? General consent evinces, that blisters, or cantharides taken inwardly,
have here been remarkably serviceable; and the cure of the hooping-cough, by
inoculation for the smallpox, also show that attenuants are proper assistants
in the cure. And do not all agree, that the bark is in this case a most useful
medicine?

Nevertheless, particular symptoms require farther assistance, till these
medicines have had time to act upon and remove the disease itself, the
principal of which is the COUGH; and this Dr. B -- has, with great
deliberation, declared to be nervous and spasmodic. We shall, therefore, for
the information of this gentleman, observe, that there is an increased degree
of irritability in the nerves in every cough, though but of short standing;
that all coughs are brought on by the nerves of particular parts being
irritated; and that, in consequence, a spasm of the diaphragm, and other
muscles subservient to respiration, follow to shake off and expel the
irritating matter, by an increased force of the air which passes out of the
lungs in respiration Those who have read Hoffman, etc. are well acquainted with
this doctrine; but they will please to remember, that I am not attempting to
instruct those who have enquired properly into the nature of coughs.
. So that every cough is a convulsive cough, and only differs from the
hooping-cough in its degree of violence; for, though in this last there is a
vomiting and coughing mixed, yet when we reflect upon the action of coughing,
and the parts concerned, we shall discover it to be a minor vomiting, and that
of course a deeper inspiration and greater force in coughing will ensue, when
the cause is seated in the stomach than when it only resides about the lungs.

Nevertheless, there is a difference in the nature of the cause of coughs, some
being entirely the consequence of irritated matter, while others arise from a
disease in the nerves themselves, which render them so very irritable that a
fit of coughing comes on from any slight accident that may happen to effect the
nerves of the lungs This kind of cough is cured by removing the cause of the
disease in the nerves, and by medicines which have a power of taking off
increased irritability, such as myrrh, gum ammoniacum, opium, camphire, bark,
and the like.
; but the cough of which we are now treating, is acknowledged to arise from the
former of these causes. Nor could it ever be cured by irritating medicines if
it was entirely nervous; and we shall, therefore, proceed to observe, that
every cough is an effort of nature to expel the irritating matter, and though,
when violent, it may always be mitigated with safety and advantage, yet
wherever it is accompanied with an accumulation of phlegm, or the like, it
ought never to be suppressed entirely, unless we can also at the same time
remove this preternatural flux. "Opiates rather did hurt in the hooping-cough
which raged at Edinburgh in 1734," probably because they were given in the
usual dole, and caused a retention of that phlegm which would have been
discharged, if the coughing had not been much suppressed. Poor TOPLISS See case
xviii. p. 131.
had his cough suppressed by hemlock, which is an opiate; and he died of his
other complaints, in same manner probably as those children we have taken
notice of, where the cough was suppressed by weakness and an overload of phlegm.

Nevertheless, when we give only one, two, of three drops of laudanum in a day,
without entirely suppressing the cough, it sufficiently lessens the
irritability of the whole habit, and gives the patient relief, by preventing
the nerves from being so violently affected. Dr. Hillary says, "a little sir.
mecon. or elix. paregoric." (joined with other medicines), seldom fails to
render the disease more moderate, and in time takes it off: and the only
deficiency I can see in the practice of physicians in general is, that they
have omitted to join very small doses of opium along with the medicines they
have given to remove the cause of the disease. Whereas Dr. B -- gives an opiate
joined to purges; for we shall presently show, that hemlock, by his manner of
mixing it, may be converted into a purge; and when this does not happen, he
joins other purges along with it, so that while he is crying up hemlock as a
specific, he is in a great measure carrying off the disease by medicines
recommended by former writers.

We have already observed the necessity of keeping the primae viae and lungs
clear of phlegm, and this we are not to expect from hemlock, unless by
accident, for though it sometimes purges, "yet it often does not sensibly
affect any secretion;" and, therefore, is not in this case to be solely
depended upon. When it is just mixed with sugar and water, or given in extract
or powder, it, like other opiates, stops immediate secretion, and promotes
sweat; but when the hemlock mixture has stood till it ferments, it opens the
bowels in the same manner as sugar candy and the juice of pennyroyal when they
have stood together some time, so that this purgative quality is not inherent
in hemlock, but arises from its being in a state of fermentation; nor does it
any way appear that it has an attenuating property, or that it is capable of
invigorating the blood and solids, or of unloading the lungs when they are
overcharged with phlegm; whence, though hemlock like opium may suppress the
cough and vomiting, yet the disorder is long in terminating under its use The
patients would probably have been well in the same time if they had not taken
any medicines at all.
, because it is destitute of other properties which are necessary to complete a
cure. Peripneumonic symptoms, bleeding at the nose and eyes, and the phlegm
being streaked with blood, are surely symptoms which sometimes require the use
of the lancet, admitting it to protract the disease, for as hemlock, by Dr. B
-- 's own account, is a week at least in making a cure, may not in this time a
rupture of a vessel in the lungs or brain happen, and destroy the patient? It
is confessed, that accidental bleedings have sometimes done good; and is it not
amazing, that a man who has seen peripneumonic symptoms complicated with the
hooping-cough) should in all cases trust the life of the patient entirely to a
favorite antispasmodic?

It must evidently appear from what has been said, that various remedies will
here ever be necessary; and as an opiate of some kind or other will in this
cough always be a useful ingredient, it remains for us to enquire, whether
small doses of laudanum or hemlock ought to have the preference. For this
purpose we will relate a case or two, which have fallen under our own
inspection, and the reader himself may judge which is the safest and best
remedy to cure the cough by lessening irritability.

A gentlewoman having an incurable schirrus, took, by the advice of two eminent
physicians, seven grains of hemlock twice a day, which in a little time brought
on an itching of the whole body. This was succeeded by innumerable small
blisters, attended by a very angry kind of inflammation, pain, and soreness;
but upon leaving off this medicine these symptoms entirely disappeared.

Another lady took fourteen grains of the leaves of hemlock made into a powder
twice a day, and a poultice of the same herb was applied to an indolent tumor,
occasioned by milk stagnating in the upper part of her breast; the same kind of
itching and blisters we have mentioned followed accompanied by an inflammation
resembling a malignant erysipelas, which swelled her more or less all over, but
in particular her head; her eyes were affected; she sometimes complained of a
vertigo; the breast, upon which the poultice was laid, was spread over with
fiery eruptions, and indeed her whole body seemed to be poisoned. She was full
of pain, had restless nights, and a fever; but upon leaving off this dangerous
remedy, and taking proper remedies, she narrowly escaped death, and was
restored to perfect health. I have seen other similar cases; but, perhaps it
may be said, it does not often produce these effects, which must be owing to
some idiosyncrasy in these patients. Be it so; but may not this idiosyncrasy
happen in a child, the darling of a tender mother; and would not a premature
death thus brought on be inexcuseable Can this medicine then be given always
with safety in pregnant women?
, when a drop or two of laudanum; or a few drops of the elixir paregoricum,
will effectually ease the cough, by lessening increased irritability, without
the least degree of hazard or inconvenience?

Dr. BURTON, in order attenuate and dissolve the phlegm, to corroborate and
strengthen the fibers, and to prevent any farther viscidity, after clearing the
primae viae with oxymel of squills and detersive purges, gave a medicine
composed of cantharides, camphire, and extract of bark. "By this medicine,"
says he, "I performed the cures very soon, some in five or six days, as I can
produce many vouchers to witness Dr. B -- has only two to vouch for him, here
are many.
; particularly Mr. Dent, apothecary in Selby, who has used it in the present
epidemic chincough, according to my prescription;" which is in a much shorter
time than Dr. B -- r pretends to have cured by his method; and I can easily
believe what Dr. Burton says to be true, because tincture of cantharides alone
has cured this disorder. Because camphire, which the doctor added to correct
the cantharides, lessens increased irritability; and because I have seen bark
and attenuants equally successful in a more advanced period. For my own part, I
have in some measure followed Dr. Burton's method in the first stage of the
disease, except, that instead of cantharides I have chosen antimony as an
attenuant, and I have given laudanum in very small doses The rule is to give as
much laudanum as will lessen the cough without suppressing of it entirely; one
drop I find it commonly enough for the purpose, taken in the space of
twenty-four hours in a child of half a year old; two drops in one of a year
old; three drops, two or three years old; four drops, four years old, etc. but
it is not necessary to continue increasing the dose according to the age of the
patient, a less quantity, in proportion, being sufficient, which is probably
owing to the very irritable state of young children.
for the purpose already mentioned.

If the child is plethoric and bleeds at the nose, or if the phlegm discharged
is streaked with blood, I take some blood away from the arm to prevent any
farther rupture of the vessels. But I agree with Dr. Burton and others, that
blood must be taken away with great caution; for, as we see this disorder
renders the fibers weak, and the juices ropy, so bleeding, by still weakening
them, will increase the complaint, and therefore, too large a discharge of
blood will be greatly injurious. Only so much blood must be then taken away as
is sufficient to prevent a rupture of the vessels, and this must be judged from
the violence of the cough, together with the strength of the patient.

Where the stomach, etc. are much loaded, I give a vomit of oxymel of squills,
or rather some of the preparation of antimony; afterward the child is purged
gently every day with rhubarb and sal polychrest; and, at the same time, is
taken three or four times a day, a dose proportioned to the strength and age of
the patient, of a medicine composed of the bark decoction, essence of antimony,
syrup of pennyroyal, and laudanum, which very soon lessens, and shortly
entirely removes the whole of this complaint.

Where the child is very young, a medicine composed of syrup of pennyroyal,
essence of antimony, and laudanum, will be more readily got down; and provided
the syrup is made of expressed juice without boiling, and given while it is in
a fermenting state, it will purge sufficiently; and, I will venture to affirm,
sooner relieve the patient than the poison with which the malefactors of the
Athenians were destroyed; and if the child wears at the same time a bark shift,
a complete cure will soon be the consequence; though it may be sometimes
requisite to add oxymel to this mixture, where a quantity of phlegm upon the
lungs makes its use necessary.

Hitherto then we have only considered the cure of the first stage of the
disease, and shall now proceed to the second, which generally arises from
neglect in not clearing the primae viae by art, when the efforts of nature to
expel the offending matter by the mouth are not accomplished.

In this stage we have full evidence, that the lungs, the stomach, and the
intestines are all affected, because a spurious peripneumony invades the little
patient, at the same time that the phlegm, which passes from the stomach into
the intestines, brings on a diarrhoea that may end in a dysentery, if the child
happens to live. Nevertheless, this symptom is not without its advantages,
where the child happens to be troubled with worms, for the matter which causes
it is a, most powerful vermifuge. The mucus with which children's bowels are
lined, is a proper nidus for the breeding and increase of these vermin, and
there is not any thing more powerfully dissolves and destroys this asylum than
putrid matter, when they are expelled along with the faeces.

The coming away of worms is often the consequence of inoculation, when the
variolous matter has contaminated the whole mass of humors, and part of it
enters the intestines. A boy accidentally broke a penknife blade in the nates,
where part of it remained some time, and formed a sinous ulcer, which collected
and retained a considerable quantity of matter, that became putrid by
stagnation. The more active parts of this matter being absorbed, brought on a
diarrhoea, in which an incredible number of worms both dead and living came
away, and thus entirely cured the lad of a disease under which he had long
labored. I could indeed produce many similar instances, but these are
sufficient to show those unacquainted with these things, that the, slimy matter
which comes away in fevers is not the skins of dead worms; nor are we to
believe, without farther evidence, that the child has the worms, but that it is
the mucus of the intestines set at liberty by putrid matter, and then
discharged in the common manner.

However, though we look upon putrid matter in the intestines as a remedy in
some cases, we are not to forget that it is a disease; and, therefore, rhubarb
and spermaceti should be given as often as necessary, to clear the bowels,
which may afterward be defended from acrid matter, and healed by taking
starch, mutton suet dissolved in milk, or the pulv. c. chele. e. and spermaceti
mixed; and the common saline julep, with essence of antimony in it, will be
found serviceable in abating the fever: but above all things, blisters are most
useful, for when the load of phlegm upon the lungs has been excessive great,
the cough ceased, and an oedema has appeared all over the body, I have
frequently seen, after they have discharged a little, the cough return with a
large expectoration of phlegm, and the little patient thereby snatched from the
jaws of death. Nevertheless, medicines proper for the spurious peripneumony
may, if needful, here take place; and when the fever is abated, and the
difficulty of breathing removed, the blood and fibers must be invigorated, by
having recourse to the bark, to which bees wax or spermaceti may be added, if
an excoration of the bowels still require their use. But if the hooping-cough
does depend upon some peculiar disposition in the air, surely the child should
be removed into an air where this disposition does not prevail, any thing said
to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.

