A DISSERTATION ON THE GOUT, AND ALL CHRONIC DISEASES.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

A DISSERTATION ON THE GOUT, AND ALL CHRONIC DISEASES, JOINTLY CONSIDERED, As
proceeding from the same CAUSES; What those CAUSES are; AND A rational and
natural METHOD of CURE proposed.

Addressed to all INVALIDS.

By WILLIAM CADOGAN, FELLOW of the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS.

THE SECOND EDITION.

Quod petis in te est. LONDON: Printed for J. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall. M.DCC.LXXI.

PREFACE.
TO enjoy good health is better than to command the world, says a celebrated
practical philosopher St. Evremond.
, who understood the use and value of life and health better than most men; for
in exile, with a small income, and no very good constitution, he cultivated an
uncommon length of days into a rational series of pleasures; and what is much
more, an uninterrupted course of happiness. But, as far as I can find, he was
almost the only man that did so. The generality of men seem to me not to bestow
a thought upon either, till it be too late to reap the benefit of their
conviction; so that health, like time, becomes valuable only when it is lost;
and we can no longer think of it but with retrospect and regret.

That men in good health, the young and gay in their career, should be
negligent of it, or abuse it, refusing to stop and listen to, or take warning
from others, is no great wonder; but it is very surprising that mankind in
general should be mistaken and misled for ever in the same perpetual round of
fruitless attempts to repair and establish it; not the ignorant vulgar only,
but the sensible, the judicious, men of parts, and knowledge in other things,
in this case equally blind, should pursue, with the same vain hope, after
repeated disappointments, the thousand and ten thousand idle arts and tricks of
medication and quackery; never once lifting up their eyes to Nature, or
consulting her book, open as it lies for the perusal, conviction and benefit of
all.

Some industrious men, fancying that whatever is valuable must lie deep, have,
with the greatest alacrity in sinking, plunged into the immense abyss of
ancient, Greek, Roman and Arabic learning, in hopes to find good precepts of
health, and sure remedy for disease. But after all their pioneering into
endless heaps of rubbish, what have they found at last but this? That some of
the ancients were very ingenious in guessing wrong; for guess was all they did;
they never studied Nature at all, and therefore knew nothing of her; but either
blindly followed or combated each other's opinions. School against school, and
sect against sect, waged equal and endless war. In the art of physic it was
impossible for them to know much; for before our immortal HARVEY'S discovery of
the circulation, there could be no physiology at all, nor any knowledge either
of the internal structure or action of any one part of the body. Before the
justly celebrated ASELLIUS and PEQUET there could be no idea of nourishment;
nor was it known how our food passed into the blood, whether it went there or
not, or what became of it. But now, since these lights have shone in upon us,
all the ancient conjectures, reasonings, and systems, must vanish like morning
clouds before the sun. Besides all this, there are some of our diseases which
the ancients had not, nor have we all theirs: some few, and very few useful,
discoveries they made in medicine, which have descended to us, and with some
late tricks in chemistry are the chief foundation of modern quackery. Thus have
men of deep learning, if the knowledge of ancient errors can be called so, sunk
far out of sight of truth, which in things of general use and necessity,
particularly the health of mankind, lies most commonly upon the surface.

It has been of great disservice, as well as discredit to the art of Physic,
and every fair practiser of it, that men's expectations have been raised by the
ignorant and presuming, or the dishonest and artful, to hope for too much from
it, more than it ever did, or can do. Respite and relief may be had in most
chronic cases; remedy, I fear, but in very few, if it be expected from art
alone. But a skilful and honest Physician (unless he be sent for too late and
dismissed too soon, which is generally the case) will employ those intervals of
relief to introduce the powers of life and nature to act for themselves, and
insensibly withdrawing all his medicines, and watching carefully over his
patient's whole conduct, leave him confirmed, from conviction of their
necessity, in such good and salutary habits, as cannot fall to establish his
health for life.

Possibly, if men were better informed of the real causes of their diseases,
they might be less unreasonable in their demands, and learn to be contented
with present relief; submitting with patience to that plan of life which alone
can lead them to, and preserve them in, permanent health. With this view of
engaging men's attention to their own happiness, and undeceiving them in their
vain and groundless hopes of remedy, and diverting them from the delusions of
art to the realities of nature, I have ventured to publish the following
Dissertation; which I must beg the Reader to consider as, what it really is, a
hasty extract of a much larger work, intended to take in the whole circle of
Chronic Diseases, here comprehended only in their representative the Gout. If
what I have said may seem to want farther illustration, or more demonstrative
proof, he will look upon it only as a sketch to furnish hints for his own
thoughts and reflections, either to improve mine or reject them entirely, as
may seem good unto him. If he thinks, from what I have said here, or in the
brochure itself, that I mean to impeach the practice of physic in general; I
say, that it is not my intention. I would decry all quacks, from Aesculapius to
the present, either as ignorant fools, or self-convicted impostors, advertising
daily lies; whether mounted on stages, or riding in chariots. But the art of
physic fairly and honestly practiced I honor as the first of professions,
comprehending the most useful, the most extensive and universal knowledge of
nature. I think a real Physician the most liberal of characters upon earth; by
which I do not mean every Doctor that goes about taking guineas, but him who
will neither flatter the great nor deceive the ignorant, and who would prefer
the satisfaction of making one invalid a healthy man, to the wealth of Radcliff
or the vogue of Ward. But there is an evil spirit of quackery gone forth, that
has possessed all orders of men among us. I would lay it, if I could, together
with every demon of superstition and error, and restore the world to Truth and
Nature.

A DISSERTATION ON THE GOUT, etc.
HOWEVER common it may be for men that suffer to complain of the evils of life,
as the unavoidable lot of humanity; would they stop but for a moment to
consider them in the light of reason and philosophy, they would find little or
no foundation for them in nature; but that every man was the real author of all
of most of his own miseries. Whatever doubts may be entertained of moral evils,
the natural, for the most part, such as bodily infirmity, sickness, and pain;
all that class of complaints which the learned call chronic diseases, we most
undoubtedly bring upon ourselves by our own indulgences, excesses or mistaken
habits of life; or by suffering our ill-conducted passions to lead us astray or
disturb our peace of mind. Whatever notions men have been taught or have
received of other causes, such as accidental colds, or particularities of
constitution, this or that thing disagreeing or surfeiting, etc. these are too
trifling to produce diseases that commonly last for life: there must be
something more substantial, something more constant and permanent in our daily
habits, to produce such inveterate evils. Though if you read authors or consult
practitioners, what do you find, but that you have taken cold, though you know
not how, or that your complaints are gouty, rheumatic, bilious, nervous, etc.?
words that satisfy, though they give no kind of idea, and seem to have gained
credit and assent only by the politeness of physicians, who, while they are
taking their patients money, are too well bred to tell them disagreeable
truths, and that it is by their own faults they are ill. To enquire a little
further into this matter may be well worth our trouble; the task seems to have
been left for me, and I will perform it most sincerely.

I have long had it in my mind to write upon chronic diseases in general, in
the hope of giving mankind, what most assuredly they have never yet had, a few
rational ideas about them; thinking that, if the true original causes of them
were fully and fairly set forth, men could not be so capitally mistaken to
impute them, as they do, to the false and imaginary, and therefore apply false
and imaginary remedies; nor think that the general health of mankind were to be
overset by every trifle, and the recovery of it lay hid in a few drops or
powders of any kind. Did they better understand the nature of chronic diseases
in general, and whence they proceed, they could not be so unreasonable to think
they might live as they list with impunity, expecting repeated remedy from art;
or, did they know any thing of the nature of medicine, they would find that,
though fits of pain have been relieved, or sickness cured by it for a time, the
establishment of health is a very different thing, depending upon other powers
and principles: the first may be and often is done by medicine, the other
never. That their opinion of medicine is vain and ridiculous must appear, I
think, very evidently to any one who recollects collects that the art of physic
has now been practiced, more or less regularly, above two thousand years; and
most assuredly there is not yet discovered any one certain remedy for any
disease. Ought not this to make us suspect that there is no such thing? How can
it be, when different degrees of the very same disease require various means
and methods, and the same thing that in one degree would relieve, or perhaps
cure, in another might kill? It is by plan, by regimen, and successive
intention, that diseases must be cured, when they are curable; or relieved and
palliated when they are not. The skilful in medicine, and learned in nature,
know well that health is not to be established by medicine; for its effects are
but momentary, and the frequent repetition of it destructive to the strongest
frames; that if it is to be restored, it must be by gently calling forth the
powers of the body to act for themselves, introducing gradually a little more
and more activity, chosen diet, and, above all, peace of mind, changing
entirely that course of life which first brought on the disease: medicine
cooperating a little. That this is the truth, all who know any thing of nature
or art must know: and I may safely take upon me to say, that, though I firmly
believe health may be restored in most cases that are not absolutely mortal, I
am very sure that no invalid was ever made a healthy man by the mere power of
medicine. If this be the case, how must the initiated, according as their
humanity is touched, either laugh at or pity the poor foolish world,
surrendering at discretion to the most ignorant of quacks, pretending to
infallible remedies which are not in nature. But what is still more ridiculous,
the patients themselves are often so ashamed to own they have been deluded,
that they favor the cheat, by pretending to relief which they never felt.

I have collected a few materials for this work, which I intend to put in
order, as soon as I can find time and industry enough to set about it in
earnest; and, if I can finish it to my own satisfaction, perhaps I may some
time or other trouble the world with it. At present I think myself particularly
called upon to say something of the gout, as that disease was to make a
considerable part of my plan; and, as I see now so many, and hear of more, who
are throwing away, not only their money very foolishly, but, as I verily
believe, the future health of their lives also, in hopes of a medical cure for
it, to show that such hopes are chimerical, and contradictory to every idea of
true philosophy and common sense.

I shall therefore take a few extracts from this general plan, sufficient to
show the real original causes of all chronic diseases; which, though they have
been multiplied without end, and numberless causes been assigned them, are
certainly not many, and their first causes very few. I think they may very
fairly be reduced to these three: Indolence, Intemperance, and Vexation.

From one or more of these three causes, I have undertaken to prove that all or
mos^ chronic diseases are produced; for different diseases may have the same
original cause, the difference proceeding from the various degree^ of strength
and vigor in bodies; so that wha^ would be gout in one, in another might b^
rheumatism, stone, colic, jaundice, palsy, etc* The gout is manifestly, and I
think confessedly, a disease of the best constitution, and man therefore fairly
stand as a representative of a^^ the rest: as such I shall consider it for the
present, and speak of these causes in their order: but it may be necessary to
say a word or two of the gout itself before we enquire into its cause.

The gout is so common a disease, that there is scarcely a man in the world,
whether he has had it or not, but thinks he knows perfectly what it is. So does
a cook-maid think she knows what fire is as well as Sir Isaac Newton. It may
therefore seem needless at present to trouble ourselves about a definition, to
say what it is: but I will venture to say what I am persuaded it is not, though
contrary to the general opinion. It is not hereditary, it is not periodical,
and it is not incurable.

If it were hereditary, it would be necessarily transmitted from father to son,
and no man whose father had it could possibly be free from it: but this is not
the case, there are many instances to the contrary: it is therefore not
necessarily so; but the father's having it inclines or disposes the son to it.
This is the causa proegumena or praedisponent of the learned, which of itself
never produced any effect at all; there must be joined the causa procatarctica,
or active efficient cause, that is, our own intemperance or mistaken habit of
life, to produce it; and accordingly, as this operates more or less, so will
the gout be. Our parents undoubtedly give us constitutions similar to their
own, and, if we live in the same manner they did, we shall very probably be
troubled with the same diseases; but this by no means proves them to be
hereditary: it is what we do ourselves that will either bring them on, or keep
us free.

If it were hereditary, it would appear in infancy and in women, which in
general it does not. I may be told of some women who have had it. I believe
never very young, nor till they had contributed to it themselves; for women, as
well as men, may abuse a good constitution. I have heard likewise of a boy or
two out of a million that had it, or something like it; but these boys had been
suffered to sip wine very early, and been fed and indulged every way most
unwholsomely.

Those, who insist that the gout is hereditary, because they think they see it
so sometimes, must argue very inconclusively; for if we compute the number of
children who have it not, and women who have it not, together with all those
active and temperate men who are free from it, though born of gouty parents;
the proportion will be found at least a hundred to one against that opinion.
And surely I have a greater right from all these instances to say that it is
not hereditary, than they have from a few to contend that it is. What is all
this, but to pronounce a disease hereditary, and prove it by saying that it is
sometimes so, but oftener not so? Can there be a greater absurdity?

No diseases are hereditary but those of taint or infection, and maleformation;
the gout is none of these, and therefore is not hereditary.

If the gout be a disease of indigestion, and therefore of our own acquiring,
we must reason very ill, or rather not reason at all, when we say it is
hereditary; for surely no man will say that indigestion is hereditary, any more
than intemperance. There are whole nations of active people knowing no luxury,
who for ages have been free from it, but have it now since the Europeans have
brought them wine and spirits.

If the gout be thought hereditary because it is incurable by medicine, the
same may be s^^d of every other chronic disease, none of which ever are cured
by it, I mean, so as not to return again. When was there a man who, having had
one fit of rheumatism, stone, colic, etc. however happily relieved by art for a
time, had it not again and again, or something worse in the place of it; till
he became a confirmed invalid, and died long before his time; unless some very
remarkable alteration took place in the course of his life to confirm his
health? So it is in the gout: a man gets a fit of it, and by abstinence,
patience, time, and nature, the crude acrimony producing it is subdued and
exhausted, and he is relieved for that time; (he might be so much sooner, and
very safely too, by the assistance of art judiciously employed) he recovers
however, and in a few months is taken again. Why? Not from any thing inherent
in his constitution, but because he returned to his former habit of life that
produced it at first, and will for ever produce it, while the strength of his
body lasts.

The truth is, we breed it at first, we renew it again and again, and bring it
on ourselves by our own mistakes or faults, which we would fain excuse by
throwing them back upon our parents, that our complaints may be more justly
founded. And as bankrupts, undone by idleness and extravagance, for ever plead
losses and misfortunes; so do we inheritance to exculpate ourselves.

It is natural enough for those who believe the gout hereditary to think it
also periodical, as if something innate and inherent in our constitutions
produced it at certain times: but this is a great nistake; for, if it were
periodical, it must be regularly so. The only periodical disease I know is the
intermittent fever, which, till it be disturbed by the bark or any other
febrifuge, is as regular as a good clock. The returns of the gout are always
very uncertain, according to the quantity or quality of accumulated indigestion
within, and the strength of our bodies.

I come now to show that the gout is not incurable. If by the cure of it be
meant the administering a pill or a powder, or medicine of any kind to do it, I
fear it is and ever will be incurable. It has been long and often attempted in
vain, from the origin of physic to this day, from the first quack to the
present. Indeed there is a most glaring absurdity at first sight, that must
stop any man of common sense, who has the least insight into nature, or
knowledge of the human frame: for, if the gout be the necessary effect of
intemperance, as I hope to show very evidently that it is, a medicine to cure
it must be something that will enable a man to bear the daily intemperance of
his future life unhurt by the gout or any other disease; that is, something
given now that will take away the effect of a future cause. As well might a
medicine be given now to prevent a man's breaking his leg or his neck seven
years hence. One would think the utmost that any rational man could expect from
medicine was, that it should have power to relieve and remove present
disorders, leaving the body quite free, without pretending to insure it from
future injuries. Here lies the error: men think the gout to be something latent
in the body now, which, once well eradicated, would never return; not
suspecting it to be no more than each day's indigestion accumulated to a
certain pitch; that, as long as the vigor of life lasts, always brings on every
fit, which once well over, the man has no more gout, nor seeds of gout in him
than he who never had it; and, if he did not breed it again, most certainly
would never have it again. A proof of this is, that the gout has been often
cured by a milk diet, which, as long as it lasted, has generally kept the
patient free. But this method of cure I cannot approve, because it relaxes and
enervates the man, and does not sufficiently support the health and vigor of
his body.

Though I think the gout incurable by medicine, it is so far from being
incurable in its nature, that I am firmly persuaded it may be more easily and
more perfectly cured than almost any other chronic disease; and this is another
strong argument that proves it not hereditary. My reason is, that it is
confessedly a disease of the strongest and best constitution relieving itself
by throwing off harsh and bad humors from the vitals, and out of the blood upon
the extremities, where they do least harm to the powers and principles of life
and health; and as these humors can be nothing more than the daily
accumulations of indigestion, if a man can live without breeding constantly
this indigested acrimony, he may most undoubtedly live free, not only from the
gout, but every other chronic disease also. And that he may live so, not in a
perpetual state of mortification and self-denial, but with great ease and
comfort to himself, in the truest, most philosophic luxury, I shall endeavor
to prove, I hope to the satisfaction of all thinking, reasonable men.

I have said, that Indolence, Intemperance, and Vexation, are the original
causes of all or most of our chronic diseases: perhaps a few accidents must be
excepted, to which the strongest and healthiest are most liable; and the
effects of fevers not happily ended; and which I except, to obviate all cavil
and dispute with the men of art. I believe, to every considerate man, whose
eyes have been opened so as to give him the least insight into nature, the
truth of this proposition will be so self-evident, that he must instantly
perceive it; and every invalid that will be candid enough to do it, may fairly
trace all his complaints up to one or other of these causes. But it may require
some explanation to the generality of men, who are so short-sighted as never to
look back or forward far beyond the ken of their nose, and therefore never see
either distant causes or effects; and when they are sick seldom enquire more
than for some cold or surfeit of yesterday, and to some such trifling cause
impute diseases that last for life. An accidental cold or even debauch that
happens but seldom can have no such effect; and men otherwise healthy, living
in good habits, soon get rid of both. It is the constant course of life we
lead, what we do, or neglect to do, habitually every day, that if right
establishes our health, if wrong, makes us invalids for life.

Men ignorant of the ways of nature in the production and support of animals,
not knowing what she requires to preserve them in health and vigor to their
utmost period, have conceived very strange and most assuredly very false ideas
of diseases in general, and seem to think every disease a distinct kind of
being or thing, and that there are medicines opposed to each, that will
certainly remove and cure it. This makes them so solicitous to know the name of
their complaint, which once ascertained, they think the remedy not far off*
Poor men! Is not the gout sufficiently distinguished? But where is the remedy?
Certainly not in the precarious skill of prescribing doctors, or the secret of
ignorant and enterprizing quacks. They fancy too that there is great variety of
constitution, with diseases unavoidably peculiar to each: that certain times of
life must produce many, and that it is impossible to grow old without sickness
of some kind or other. There is certainly no foundation in nature for any of
these opinions, nor is there any real essential difference of constitution, but
of strong or weak, and this is produced more by habit than nature. The strong
by bad habits will become weaker, and by good the weak stronger. But the most
delicate frames may be as healthy as the strongest, for the same reason that a
squirrel may be as healthy as an elephant. There is no disease necessarily
peculiar to any time of life, however the changes into the different stages of
it may affect the valetudinary. And it is possible for men to live to great age
without any disease at all, for many have lived to upwards of an hundred with
uninterrupted health.

Not from the natural defects of our constitutions therefore, but the abuse of
them, proceed all our chronic diseases. That is, from Indolence, Intemperance,
or Vexation.

Let us now proceed to enquire what must be the necessary effect of one or more
of these causes acting daily upon the body; whether in the strongest and most
vigorous frames it must not be the gout; in weaker, rheumatism, colic, stone,
palsy, etc. or any, or all of the nervous and hysterical class.

First, of Indolence, by which I do not mean insensibility, but an inactive
habit of life, taking the word in the general common sense it is now used.

Of INDOLENCE.
IT seems to have been the design of Providence that all men should labor,
every one for himself: that some are rich enough to purchase the labor of
others is a mere accident with regard to individuals, in which the care of
Providence appears to be no otherwise concerned, than having unequally
distributed those powers and abilities by which active and fiery spirits rise
uppermost to preserve the harmony of subordination, without which society could
never exist. The rich and great have so far forgot this first principle of
nature, that they renounce all bodily labor as unworthy their condition, and
are either too lazy or too inattentive to substitute exercise instead of it:
thus sacrificing health to indulgence and dignity, they do not enjoy those
advantages their superior stations and fortunes give them; but in happiness
fall often below the laboring hind. I remember to have seen a very ingenious
little book upon the origin of evil, in which labor is considered as a great
evil. The agreeable author must surely mean when it is excessive, and urged on
to the wearing and wasting the body; for in general labor is the first
principle of good to mankind, and to none more than the laborious themselves.
Does he mean that it would be better for us all, did the earth spontaneously
bring forth her fruits in such abundance, that we should no more labor or
contend for them than we do for the air, and have nothing to do but bask in
ease, and riot in enjoyment? If so, I can by no means agree with him; for soon,
very soon, in such a state of things, there would not be one healthy man upon
the earth, and the whole race must quickly perish. Indeed, I am afraid,
notwithstanding all our unreasonable and unphilosophical complainings, the
utmost wit of man cannot remove the least evil out of nature, without taking
with it all the good. But begging pardon for this little digression, and to
come back to my own purpose, I think he had been nearer the truth, had he put
Indolence in its stead, which is a source of great evil. Nothing undermines the
foundation of all our happiness, the health and vigor of the body, like it, or
lays such a train of diseases to come. But I must endeavor to show in what
manner.

It is upon the minutest and almost invisible parts of the body, our best
health, strength, and spirits depend: these fine parts, commonly called
capillaries, are little pipes or tubes, the extended continuations of the
larger blood vessels, through which the finest parts of the blood must
constantly pass, not only to keep these very small channels always free and
open, but also that the particles of the blood may in their passage be
attenuated, broken, and rubbed into globules perfectly smooth and round, and
easily divisible into still less and less, till they escape the sight assisted
even by the microscope; which gives ocular demonstration of this most amazingly
minute circulation. I have observed myself, and any curious patient man may see
with a good microscope, in the pellucid membrane of any living animal, this
surprising minuteness. He may select and observe one single vessel, the
smallest of those that convey red blood, many of which would not equal the
smallest hair in size, through which the blood may be seen passing, not like a
fluid, but a number of little red solid balls pushing one another on till they
come to the extremity or ramification of the vessel where it divides into two
still less. There the first globule, stopping a little, and recoiling, is
pushed on again till it divides into two, and, losing its red color, passes on
in the smaller pipes fitted only to receive the serum; which undergoes the same
circulation till it be refined into lymph, and this into still finer fluids;
which, being thus prepared, escape into a subtility beyond all possible
observation. Now the strength of the heart and arteries alone, in a sedentary
course of life, is by no means sufficient to keep up and perpetuate this motion
through these capillaries, but requires the assistance and joint force of all
the muscles of the body to act by intervals, compress the veins, propel and
accelerate the circulation of the whole mass of blood, in order to force and
clear these pipes, and to triturate, cribrate, and purify the fluid passing
through, forming every particle of it into a perfect globule, which is the form
all the atoms of matter must take from much agitation. Without this
extraordinary occasional aid, the little vessels would, by their natural
elasticity, close up into fibers, or be obstructed by rough angular particles
sticking in them, and stopping all passage. Numberless evils of the chronic
kind, especially all nervous diseases, owe their origin to this cause alone.
Accordingly we see most of those who have lived for any time in a state of
indolence, grow emaciated and pale by the drying up of these fine vessels; or,
if they happen to be of a lax habit, having a good appetite, and nothing to vex
them, they may be loaded with fat; but they grow pale withal, many of those
fine pipes being nevertheless closed up; so that they appear bloated, and their
fat unwholesome, having much less blood in their veins than thinner people.
Hence we may learn why these languid pale persons upon the least motion become
faint and breathless, the blood hurrying through the larger vessels yet free,
and, like a crowd obstructing its own passage, causing a dangerous suffocation.
Or, if they have not been long in this state, nor the capillaries quite closed,
they glow, especially young women, with a momentary red, the fine vessels being
for that time expanded. Thus inactivity first forms obstructions in these
exquisitely fine parts, upon which the health and vigor both of body and mind
depend entirely, and lays the foundation of many diseases to come; which other
concomitant circumstances, such as a violent cold, excess of any kind,
infection from without, or a particular disposition of the body within, make
often fatal to many in this habit of life; and which the industrious and active
never feel.

Now I would ask any reasonable person, capable of considering this operation
of nature with the least glimmering of philosophy, or even the attention of
common sense, and most assuredly it concerns every man to consider it well,
whether he can conceive it possible to substitute any medicine to be swallowed,
that shall act upon the blood and vessels like the joint force of all the
muscles of the body, acting and reacting occasionally in a regular course of
moderate daily labor or exercise. Unless this can be done, I will venture to
pronounce that there is no such thing as a lasting cure either for the gout, or
any other chronic disease. Yes, Sir, says a common practitioner, cordials,
volatiles, bracers, strengtheners, will do this, will keep up an increased
circulation. Possibly they may for a few hours, by doing mischief for many
days: but their action soon subsides, and the stimulus ceases; they must
therefore be repeated and repeated for life. Woe be to him that takes them; and
to him that leaves them off, unless it be done with great judgment. While they
act, they coagulate the juices and corrupt the whole mass of blood; and when
omitted, the patient must feel all the languors and horrors of a crapulary
fever after repeated debauch; and must have recourse to them again and again,
like a dram-drinker, who cannot bear his existence but in a state of
intoxication. No, art can never come up to nature in this most salutary of all
her operations.

But these obstructions from crude particles of the blood, and this inanition
of the capillaries, are not all the evils produced by indolence. That sprightly
vigor and alacrity of health which we feel and enjoy in an active course of
life, that zest in appetite, and refreshment after eating, which sated luxury
seeks in vain from art, is owing wholly to new blood made every day from fresh
food prepared and distributed by the joint action of all the parts of the body.
No man can have these delightful sensations who lives two days with the same
blood, but must be languid and spiritless. To introduce new juices the old must
be first thrown off, or there will be no room, there will be too great a
plethora or fullness; the first cause of disease in many cases. In a state of
inactivity the old humors pass off so slowly, the insensible perspiration is so
inconsiderable, that there is no void to be filled; consequently by degrees the
appetite, which is the last thing that decays, that is, the desire of supply,
must daily diminish, and at last be totally lost. Here art can do wonders; it
can procure evacuations; we can bleed, purge, and vomit; but then, to do any
good by these, the case must be recent, before the humors are vitiated by too
long a stay in the body, which will be the case very soon, for they are all in
a perishable state, which makes their daily renewal so essentially necessary to
health: but then these artificial evacuations discharge all alike; the new, the
middle, and the old juices; that is, the chyle, the blood, the serum, and
lymph; and by this indiscriminate action make strange confusion in those that
remain: whereas in nature's course there is a constant regular transmutation
and succession from one state to another; that is, from chyle into blood, and
blood into serum, serum into lymph, and so on, till they are all in their turn,
like wave impelling wave, having done their office in various shapes,
elaborated and ground to such a minute subtility and fineness, that they pass
off in the vapor of insensible perspiration. In a state of indolence they do
not pass off either so soon or so regularly as they ought, because there is not
motion, nor consequently heat enough to throw off the vapor: they lodge in the
body too long, grow putrid, acrimonious, and hurtful many ways, like the matter
formed in an ulcer, which, while it is yet sweet, is more healing than any
balsam the surgeon can apply; but when confined, it soon becomes corrosive, and
like a caustic eats it is way all round in fistulas to find vent. This shows the
virulent acrimony of these confined and stagnating humors: hence the breath and
perspiration, what there is of it occasionally, of indolent people is never
sweet; and hence in jails, where these noxious vapors are collected and
condensed from crowded wretches languishing in indolence, very malignant and
pestilential fevers arise.

Perpetual blisters have been often thought, and sometimes found, to be
serviceable in draining off some of these superfluous juices before they are
much corrupted, and making, by a faint resemblance of nature's action, a little
more room for new; and it is for this reason they do any good at all, by
increasing the general circulation, and forcing off a few of those humors that
had circulated too long in the body, and were becoming acrid: for the quantity
they discharge is so trifling, that there could be no physiology, nor even
common sense, in supposing the evacuation to be the benefit procured. By a
vomit or a purge the discharge is a hundred fold more, but the good obtained
not always so great, because by these the humors are indiscriminately thrown
off, and much more of the new than the old. Many have used frequent bleeding to
renew their blood, and I have known it answer very well to some, especially old
people who had been long accustomed to it, whom it preserved to great age: but
then it must be begun in time, before the whole mass of humors be vitiated, and
continued for life. Is it not strange that men should seek and prefer these
violent artificial methods to the simple, easy, pleasant and constant action of
nature, and choose rather to take a vomit or a purge than a walk, and wear a
perpetual blister than make the least use of their limbs?

Thus indolence must inevitably lay the foundation of general disease, and
according to the constitution and a few concomitant circumstances will be the
kind of the disease: in the very best it may be gout or rheumatism; in the
weaker habits colic, jaundice, palsy, stone, etc. with all of the hysterical
and hypochondriacal class. In vain have ingenious men of reading and study,
mental labor and sedentary life, who are more subject to disease in general
than the gay and thoughtless, endeavored to obviate the evil by abstinence, an
excellent means of remedy in many cases, and which few practice but true
philosophers, who are not the most likely to want it. But yet even they do not
find it answer, and for the reasons which I have just given; that we cannot
live two days in health and spirits with the same blood; there must be a new
daily supply of that ethereal part of our food called up to the brain to
support its own, as well as the labor of the whole body. By this I mean the
most elaborated refined part of all our juices, which constantly repairs and
nourishes the smallest vessels and fibers; whether I may be allowed to call it
animal spirits or not, is not material. Whenever this ether fails, we must
necessarily feel languor and lassitude both of body and mind. With this
difference, that in weariness of the limbs from much action the lees and
coarser parts are thrown off also, and the first meal and first sleep soon
supplies the defect. In mental labor the feculence remains to obstruct all
appetite; there is no room, and therefore no call for supply; the whole man
suffers and sinks.

Of INTEMPERANCE.
I COME now to speak of Intemperance, for Indolence, blunting all our
sensations, naturally leads us to Intemperance: we want the whip and spur of
luxury to excite our jaded appetites. There is no enduring the perpetual moping
languor of indolence: we fly to the stimulating sensualities of the table and
the bottle, friend provokes friend to exceed and accumulate one evil upon
another; a joyous momentary relief is obtained, to be paid for severely soon
after: the next morning our horrors increase, and in this course there is no
remedy but repetition. Thus whoever is indolent is intemperate also, and partly
from necessity; and the evils necessarily following both these causes often
make the rich and great more wretched than the poor, and the balance of
happiness is held more equally between them; for however other things may be
distributed, happiness like water always finds its level among men. I wish this
observation might cure these of their envy, and teach the others how to enjoy
their wealth.

Before I return to my subject, I fear I must make an apology for what I am
going to say, and hope no one will be offended, when I venture to say that nine
in ten of all the chronic diseases in the world, particularly the gout, owe
their first rise to intemperance. Many a good man, who piques himself upon
being the most sober regular creature alive, and never eats but of one or two
plain dishes, as he calls them, nor exceeds his pint of wine at any meal; keeps
good hours, and never sleeps above eight or nine, may be surprised, if not
affronted, to have his diseases imputed to intemperance; which he considers as
a great crime. And yet he is often ill, sick in his stomach, troubled with
indigestion, and crippled by the gout. The case is, we judge of temperance and
intemperance from our own habits, without any just idea of either. What we are
used to do, and see others do, we think right, and never go up to nature for
our knowledge. The best way to explain what I mean by intemperance, may be to
inquire what is nature's law of temperance, and to deviate from that must be
considered as intemperance. And here I must beg leave to observe, that
temperance is a thing of which no Englishman has or can have the least idea, if
he judges from his own or his neighbors habits. To form some notion of it he
must have seen other countries, particularly Spain, Portugal, or Italy, and
observed how men live there. What they call temperance, or even tolerable
living, with us would be thought downright starving. In this view temperance is
local and comparative; but what I mean is natural temperance not depending upon
place or custom (for I do not mean fasting or abstinence, which can never be
salutary but after repletion) and we must not judge of it from countries where
a piece of bad bread and an onion with a draught of water is thought a
tolerable meal; nor from our own, where beggars live better than the nobles of
some countries, and where we riot in the choice of plenty native and exotic
every day.

To come then to my idea of it: I think there is an absolute, determined
temperance, to be measured by every man's natural unprovoked appetite,
digestion and consumption, while he continues in a good state of health, and
right habit of life. As long as a man eats and drinks no more than his stomach
calls for, and will bear without the least pain, distention, eructation or
uneasiness of any kind; nor than his body consumes and throws off to the last
grain; he may be said to live in a very prudent well-regulated state of
temperance, that will probably preserve him in health and spirits to great old
age.

This is nature's law: and the reverse of it, or indeed any great deviation
from it, must be intemperance. When we eat without appetite, or urge beyond
moderate satiety, provoked by incentives of any kind: when we drink without
thirst for the sake of the liquor. Indeed I cannot allow him to be strictly
temperate who drinks any wine or strong liquor at all, unless it be
medicinally, or now and then for the sake of society and good humor, but by no
means every day.

Now let us compare this simple idea of temperance with the common course of
most men's lives, and observe their progress from health to sickness: for I
fear we shall find but very few who have any pretensions to real temperance. In
early youth we are insensibly led into intemperance by the indulgence and
mistaken fondness of parents and friends wishing to make us happy by
anticipation. Having thus exhausted the first degrees of luxury before we come
to the dominion of ourselves, we should find no pleasure in our liberty did we
not advance in new sensations, nor feel ourselves free but as we abuse it. Thus
we go on till some friendly pain or disease bids, or rather forces, us to stop.
But in youth all the parts of our bodies are strong and flexible, and bear the
first loads of excess with less hurt, and throw them off soon by their own
natural vigor and action, or with very little assistance from artificial
evacuations. As we grow older, either by nature in due time, or repeated
excesses before our time, the body is less able to free itself, and wants more
aid from art. The man however goes on, taking daily more than he wants, or can
possibly get rid of; he feels himself replete and oppressed, and, his appetite
failing, his spirits sink for want of fresh supply. He has recourse to
dainties, sauces, pickles, provocatives of all sorts. These soon lose their
power; and though he washes down each mouthful with a glass of wine, he can
relish nothing. What is to be done? Send for a physician. Doctor, I have lost
my stomach; pray give me, says he, with great innocence and ignorance,
something to give me an appetite; as if want of appetite was a disease to be
cured by art. In vain would the physician, moved by particular friendship to
the man, or that integrity he owes to all men, give him the best advice in two
words, quaere sudando, seek it by labor. He would be thought a man void of all
knowledge and skill in his profession, if he did not immediately, or after a
few evacuations, prescribe stomachics, bitter spicy infusions in wine or
brandy, vitriolic elixirs, bark, steel, etc. By the use of these things the
stomach, roused to a little extraordinary action, frees itself, by discharging
it is crude, austere, coagulated contents into the bowels, to be thence
forwarded into the blood. The man is freed for a time, finds he can eat again,
and thinks all well. But this is a short-lived delusion. If he is robust, the
acrimony floating in the blood will be thrown out, and a fit of gout succeeds;
if less so, rheumatism or colic, etc. as I have already said. But let us
suppose it to be the gout, which if he bears patiently, and lives moderately,
drinking no madeira or brandy to keep it out of his stomach, nature will
relieve him in a certain time, and the gouty acrimony concocted and exhausted
by the symptomatic fever that always attends, he will recover into health; if
assisted by judicious, mild, and soft medicines, his pains might be greatly
assuaged and mitigated, and he would recover sooner. But however he recovers,
it is but for a short time; for he returns to his former habits, and quickly
brings on the same round of complaints again and again, all aggravated by each
return, and he less able to bear them; till he becomes a confirmed invalid and
cripple for life, which, with a great deal of useless medication, and a few
journies to Bath, he drags on, till, in spite of all the doctors he has
consulted, and the infallible quack medicines he has taken, lamenting that none
have been lucky enough to hit his case, he sinks below opium and brandy, and
dies long before his time. This is the course I have lived to see many take,
and believe it to be the case of more whom I have never heard of, and which any
one may observe in the circle of his acquaintance: all this chain of evils is
brought on and accumulated by indolence and intemperance, or mistaken choice of
diet. How easily might they have been remedied, had the real causes been known
and attended to in time.

I believe I must here explain a little more fully what I mean by provoking the
appetite, which I take to be the general mode of intemperance among men; for
custom has made all kinds of incentives to excess so common, that those of
daily use, far from being considered in the class of intemperance, are by most
people thought to be not only salutary but necessary; and they never suspect
the least evil from the common decoraments of the table, salt, pepper, mustard,
vinegar; and yet, however extraordinary it may seem, I will venture to
pronounce that excess in any of these must be doubly prejudicial to health;
hurtful in themselves by their acrimony, they provoke the appetite beyond
natural satiety to receive an oppressive load, which the stomach itself would
soon feel, were it not artificially stimulated to discharge it into the blood
by wine and strong liquors immediately after. Thus one error brings on another,
and when men have eaten too much, they drink too much also by a kind of
necessity. He will certainly be a healthier man, who is very moderate in the
use of these things, than he who exceeds; they may he sometimes useful as
medicines; but can never add to the wholsomeness of our daily food. To give
some weight to what I say, there are whole nations in the world that have never
known any of them, and are healthy, strong, and vigorous.

If this be true of the common provocatives at every poor man's board, who is
there that exceeds not nature's law? who is truly temperate? What shall we say
of that studied, labored, refined extravagance at the tables of the rich, where
the culinary arts are pushed to that excess, that luxury is become false to
itself, and things are valued, not as they are good and agreeable to the
natural and undebauch'd appetite; but high, inflammatory, rare, out of season,
and costly; where, though variety is aimed at, every thing has the same taste,
and nothing it is own. I am sorry and ashamed, that men professing luxury should
understand it so little, as to think it lies in the dish or the sauce or
multitude of either; or that urging beyond natural satiety can afford any real
enjoyment. But this they do by all the researches of culinary and medical art,
introducing all the foreign aids to luxury, every stimulating provocative that
can he found in acids, salts, fiery spices, and essences of all kinds, to rouse
their nerves to a little feeling; not knowing the more they are chafed and
irritated the more callous they still grow; and the same things must now be
more frequently repeated, increased in quantity, and exalted in quality, till
they know not where to stop, and every meal they make serves only to overload
and oppress the stomach, to foul and inflame the blood, obstruct and choke all
the capillary channels, bring on a hectic fever of irritation, that though it
raise the spirits for the evening, leaves behind it all the horrid sensations
of inanition and crapula the next morning; and but that nature is so kind as to
stop them in their career with a painful fit of gout or some other illness, in
which she gets a little respite, they would soon be at the end of their course.

Men bring all these evils upon themselves, either not knowing or not attending
to two things: the one, that pleasure is a coy coquet, and to be enjoyed must
not always be pursued; we must sometimes sit still, that she may come and court
us in her turn: the other, that pleasure and happiness are as distinct things
as riot and enjoyment: besides, pleasure is not infinite, and our sensations
are limited: we can bear but a certain measure, and all urging beyond it,
infallibly brings pain in it is stead. Let the men of high experience bear me
testimony, that this is true of all the luxuries of the table, wine, music,
women, and every sensuality.

These men may tell me, perhaps, that I have made a mighty fine declamation
against luxury and intemperance; but what is this to the purpose? they desire
not to be told of their faults, nor to hear disagreeable truths which they know
already. Have I no art or skill to reconcile health and luxury, no remedy, no
rare secret to repair and restore sensation and vigor worn to rags? No Medea's
kettle to boil anew? If not, do not describe to us a life of moderation,
temperance, and exercise: it is not worth having upon these terms. I am aware
of the unreasonable expectations of many, that their demands would rise high,
some of them to the impossible. At present I am only setting forth the causes;
when I come to talk of remedy, I will endeavor to convince them that the
artificial helps they expect are not in nature, but that there are in nature
ways and means by which many gouty, broken constitutions, that have been
despaired of, might be repaired and restored to a very desirable degree of
health and enjoyment. But I must first say a word or two to the intemperate or
mistaken in the middle class of life.

In England all degrees of men are furnished with the means of intemperance,
and therefore it is no wonder that most men are intemperate. If they are less
so in other countries, it is not that they have more virtue, but they want the
means: their oppressive governments, the precarious state of property, and
their superstitious religion, keep them so poor that luxury is not in their
power. They have however this advantage from their poverty, that they are much
less afflicted with chronic diseases than we are. I verily believe there are
more gouts in England, than in all the rest of Europe: a proof that good living
is more universal. But not to the advocates for this good living do I wish to
address myself; I fear they will be as incorrigible as their superiors in
higher and more refined luxury. But there are some not intemperate from choice,
but example, habit, custom, mistake, not knowing their daily diet to be
unwholesome and productive of their diseases. To these it may be of some use to
have the unwholesome pointed out, and their choice directed to better things.
Men of laborious occupations, who work in the open air, can and do bear great
excesses and much unwholesome diet without much hurt: I never knew a sick or
gouty gardener that was not a remarkable sot. But men of sedentary trades and
business, shopkeepers of all kinds, feel much sooner and more heavily the ill
effects of intemperance or mistaken choice in their meat and drink. Their first
care therefore ought to be, not to add the diseases of intemperance to those of
inactivity, but proportion what they take as well in quantity, as in quality,
to their consumption. But let us see how well they do this. They all say they
live upon plain things, and never indulge in made dishes; but they will eat
heartily of a goose or duck, with a large quantity of sage, onion, pepper and
salt, a pig with similar preparation, and a hare with higher and more
compounded seasoning. Do they ever eat veal without stuffing, or even a leg of
mutton without caper-sauce? If ever they eat a steak or a chop, if it is
sometimes without pepper, I believe it is never without pickles, the worst of
all poisons. They are surprised that such meals should rise on their stomachs
with flatulence, sour and bitter hiccups and eructations, which if they did not
keep them down with a sufficient quantity of wine or sometimes a dram, they
would be troubled with all the time of digestion. If this method succeeds so
far as to quiet their stomachs for the present, they go on with it, regardless
or ignorant of future and distant consequences. Thus are these sharp, harsh,
hot and inflammatory things forced out of the stomach into the blood, before it
has had time to dilute and subdue, or reject them, and the superfluous load
they bring along with them. And thus is laid the foundation of every disease,
that appears when these acrid and fiery particles are accumulated in the blood
to a certain degree.

There are others whose pretensions to plain diet may seem better founded, but
who nevertheless eat, and are fond of things unwholesome, and very unfit for men
of sedentary lives, such as salted and smoked flesh and fish of all kinds,
hams, tongues, heavy flour puddings, toasted cheese, etc. all which are of such
hard and indissoluble texture, that they never dissolve well in the stomach of
a plowman: the same salt, seasoning, and smoke, which harden and preserve them
from putrefaction before they are eaten, keep them from dissolution afterward,
so that they never are digested at all; nor is it possible any good nourishment
should ever come from them: the salts they contain are indeed melted in the
intestinal juices, and get into the blood, producing, in the best
constitutions, those tettery, itchy, or scaly eruptions, commonly but very
erroneously called the scurvy, which is quite another kind of disease. To this
kind of food is owing the bad health of country people, and their children's
rickety heads and limbs, and big and hard bellies.

Another capital mistake many people fall into, who in other respects are very
moderate in their diet, is, that the flesh-meat they eat is always over-done;
if boiled too much, the juices are lost; if over-roasted, fried, or broiled,
the action of the fire, continued too long, changes the mild animal flesh into
something of another quality; the fat is made bitter and rancid, which fire
will always do by the sweetest oil; and the scorched outside of the lean, dry
and acrimonious: the less therefore all flesh-meat undergoes the power of fire,
the milder and wholsomer it is. I do not mean by this to recommend the customs
of Cannibals and Tartars who eat raw flesh; or beasts of prey, that devour
animals alive: but it may be observed, that the first are free from our
diseases, and the others amazingly strong and vigorous. We may learn this from
them at least, that our meat cannot be the wholsomer for being, as some call
it, thoroughly done; and that we should learn to like it with some of its red
juices unspoiled by the fire. Upon this principle the English cookery is to be
preferred to the French, who stew and roast to rags; and of English cookery
broiling must be the best.

This leads me to another observation, which perhaps none but physicians, or
those who have studied well the nature of man and his aliments, are able to
make. It is this: that man being born to devour most of the fruits and animals
of the earth and water, there ought to be a certain proportion of animal and
vegetable substances in his food; the animal tending spontaneously to
putrefaction, the vegetable correcting that tendency from going too far: thus
from the due mixture of both qualities results that neutral property, equally
distant from acid as alkali, that is essentially necessary to produce good
blood. This is so manifest, that whoever will observe attentively may see,
whenever either of these prevails in the body, there is so strong a desire and
longing for things of the other sort, as well as pleasing sensation in the
palate and stomach when they are taken, as plainly indicate the natural want.
Let a man have lived long upon flesh-meat wholly, he will have a most eager
appetite for fruit and vegetables; and if kept too long without them, as is the
case with those who have lived some time at sea, will grow sick of the real
scurvy; but if before they are too far gone they reach the land, they will eat
the first common grass they can come at, with more avidity than a horse or ox,
and be perfectly cured by it. In like manner they who have lived long upon
vegetables (which regimen is often prescribed to invalids, especially in the
gout) will have great craving for flesh-meat. We ought to learn from all this
to attend diligently to the calls of nature, and balance the mixture with due
proportion, not only that our vitals may have the less labor in preparing and
making our juices fit for nourishment, but to prevent the diseases that are
peculiar to the predominancy of either. And here I may observe, that the error
of most men's diet in every class of life is, that the acid, crude and austere,
almost always abound; not that they do not eat flesh-meat enough, but they
spoil it in the preparation and cookery, changing its animal nature into
something worse than vegetable, taking off entirely all its tendency to
dissolution and putrefaction by salting, smoking, pickling, potting, and
preserving things that in their own simple nature would soon corrupt and
dissolve; but by these preparations are hardened and embalmed to keep for years
like mummies. The same may be said of every kind of made dishes; the salts,
spices, hot herbs, and acids, with which they are seasoned and compounded,
preserve and harden them to keep for ever: the sauces and gravies they swim in
have the same effect as so much pickle. The things we feed upon ought all to be
in a perishable state, or they will never furnish the materials of good blood;
and whatever is hardened or seasoned so as to keep long before it be eaten,
ought not to be eaten at all, for it will never dissolve in the stomach.

The nature of most chronic diseases, and their first symptom heartburn, as it
is commonly called, plainly show the original cause to be acid crudity
prevailing in the juices; producing coagulations, concretions and obstructions
of various kinds; all which are very manifest in the gout, rheumatism, stone,
and most nervous cases: the remedies also, that sometimes relieve and palliate,
confirm this; such as the volatile alkalies, hartshorn, salt ammoniac,
testaceous powders, soap, etc. Many may be surprised at this, and say it cannot
be; for, though they have these diseases, they take little or no acids: but
there are many things they take that are acescent, that is, liable to become
acid, especially by the heat of the stomach. This they are not aware of; but
they are in their nature much more prejudicial than things already sour; for,
besides that people take not these in any quantity, the acescent never become
sour but by the act of fermentation, which, being raised in the stomach where
it ought never to happen, produces strange tumults, wind, vapor, gas, that is,
that fume arising from fermenting liquors of any kind, which has been known
sometimes to kill at a stroke. It may here be necessary to enumerate some of
those things called acescent. These are sweets of every kind, puddings, cakes,
pastry, creams, confections, etc. and every thing made of flour, especially
fermented; bread in particular, so far from being the wholesome thing many
imagine, is not only unwholesome by its acescency, but, by the strong ferment it
contains, it forces into fermentation every thing capable of it, that it meets
with in the stomach Whoever requires proof of this, may have it by the
following experiment: Put a common toast into half a pint of water, and let it
stand six or eight hours near the fire, so as to be kept in the heat of the
human stomach, and it will be sour as vinegar.
: the bread of London I fear is particularly so; partly by being robbed of its
bran, which in some degree would soften and correct it, but chiefly by having
in it, besides its usual ferment, a great quantity of sour alum, most absurdly
added to make it unnaturally white To be convinced of this, boil a pound of
common London bread in a sufficient quantity of water to make it thick as
gruel. Let it stand to subside; pour off the clear, and boil away all the
water; the alum will be found at bottom.
In this light we must also consider most sorts of seasonings, stuffings,
force-meats, and compounded sauces. But the greatest acescent, or rather bane
of all, high and low, rich or otherwise, whoever they are that take it
constantly, is wine: wine alone produces more diseases than all the other
causes put together. All men allow that wine taken to excess is hurtful: they
see the immediate evils that follow; but distant effects, that require more
attentive and deducive observation, very few see or believe; and, judging from
present and agreeable feelings, they say that a little wine is wholesome, and
good for every one, and accordingly take it every day, give it their children,
and teach them to like it by debauching their natural taste in the earliest
infancy: thus they come to relish it by habit, and to be uneasy without it,
like snuff-takers without their tobacco; the want is equally habitual and
unnatural in both cases; for the stomach wants wine no more than the nose does
snuff: the immediate sensation of both, after a little use, is pleasant; but
the remote effect of the wine taken constantly infinitely more pernicious than
of the snuff. This hurts the nose only; the other accumulating a little
indigestion every day, corrupts all the juices of the body most essentially.
And though it be often taken with a view to promote digestion and assist the
operations of the stomach, it manifestly does harm to both. Instead of
digesting and dissolving, it hardens, and prevents dissolution, and curdles and
corrupts the milky chyle and first juices produced from our food. It warms
indeed and stimulates the stomach to greater exertion than is natural or
necessary, and thereby enables it to discharge it is contents the sooner; whence
that agreeable feel of warmth and comfort from it is immediate action. But by
this extraordinary action it forces our food out of the stomach too soon,
before it is softened, dissolved, and properly prepared, and sends it into the
bowels crude, hard, and austere, in that state to be carried into the blood,
there to produce every kind of disease. Whatever therefore the advocates for a
little wine every day may think, or argue in favor of it; they are most
undoubtedly in a very great error, and it were certainly much better and safer
to drink a bottle and get a little merry once a week, drinking water only or
small beer at all other times: in which interval nature might totally subdue
it, and recover entirely. Water is the only liquor nature knows of or has
provided for all animals; and whatever nature gives us, we may depend upon if,
is safest and best for us. Accordingly we see that when we have committed any
excesses or mistakes of any kind, and suffer from them, it is water that
relieves. Hence the chief good of Bath, Spa, and many other medicinal waters,
especially to hard drinkers. It is the element that dilutes and carries off
crudities and indigestions, etc. the mineral virtues they contain may make them
tolerable to the stomach in their passage, but do, as I believe, little more in
the body: it is the water that cures. Wine, if it be not one of our own
inventions, was given us as a cordial in sickness, weariness, sorrow, and old
age, and a most salutary charm it would be for most of these evils, did we not
exhaust it is power by daily use, and instead of taking it as such, drink it up
as common draught in youth and health to make us mad. I know this is a very
tender topic to touch upon, and too favorite a pleasure to argue against, with
any reasonable hope of convincing; most men having so indulged themselves in
this bewitching habit, that they think they cannot live without a little wine
every day, and their very existence depends upon it; their stomachs require it,
nature calls for it, St. Paul advises it, it must be good. Thus men catch at
every shadow of an argument that favors their inclinations. St. Paul advises it
as a medicine sometimes, but certainly not every day. There is no medicine I
know of, that, taken every day, will not either cease to act entirely, or by
acting too much do harm. It will be said, that many drink wine every day
without gout, stone, or any disease at all in consequence of it. I believe not
many, or I should know some of them. If any are so strong as to bear it to old
age unhurt, they must be very active as well as strong to subdue it. But I have
nothing to say to these; my business is with invalids who complain, and
certainly ought not to measure constitutions with those above their match. The
same arguments will hold equally in favor of every other bad habit. Your nose
will want it is snuff, your palate it is spices; and when the fashion was for
women to be small waisted, their galled sides grown callous by the long
compression of the stays wanted their support. Nature, like a true female,
cries out at the first violence, but submits in time, is reconciled, and grows
fond of the ravisher. But it is the business of philosophers to distinguish
carefully between the real wants of nature and the artificial calls of habit;
and when we find these begin to hurt us, we ought to make the utmost
persevering efforts to break the enchantment of bad customs; and though it cost
us some uneasy sensations at first, we must bear them patiently; they will not
kill; and a very little time will reconcile us to better modes of life.

There is another capital mistake many labor under in the choice of their wine,
preferring the strong, hot, and coarse sorts, Madeira, Port, Mountain, etc. to
the milder, more elegant, and certainly less unwholesome French and Italian
wines, accounting them better for the stomach, and good against wind, etc. My
observation has been, that they who use these strong stomach wines to cure wind
are never free from it, and all the gouty disorders of indigestion. Indeed, it
cannot well be otherwise; for there is nothing so repugnant to natural
digestion as the use of these strong liquors, which instead of dissolving
harden every thing; and thus for ever, when the first warmth is gone off, leave
a crapulary, crude, sour load of yesterday to ferment, fret, and irritate the
stomach and bowels every day.

Thus have I endeavored to point out two of the true, primary, capital causes
of the gout, and most other chronic diseases; and most sincerely wish that what
I have said may engage those whom it mostly concerns, the gouty, the infirm and
valetudinary of every class, to observe, reflect, and think for themselves upon
the hints I have thrown out; in which light what I have said, must be
considered, rather than as logical or demonstrative proof. I know the reasoning
and arguments may be much improved and carried farther, and if I had more
leisure I might have attempted it: but I am well aware of the unsurmountable
difficulty of convincing men against their will by any arguments at all. I
choose therefore at present to invite them to self-conviction from their own
observations and experience. I flatter myself they will find it well worth
their pains, to reason a little more than they do with and for themselves; and
it will be a great point gained for them, if it turn their misled opinions from
all that imaginary power of restoring health in any of that multitude of
ridiculous and most truly contemptible medicines, that are daily obtruded upon
the public, with endless lies to recommend them, by a set of the poorest, most
ignorant and paultry rogues in the nation; and engage their attention to their
true remedy, a right institution of life. In judging of which, if they find
themselves unequal to the task, they may be assisted by men of humanity, skill,
and honesty.

Of Vexation.
I COME now to the last general cause of chronic diseases, Vexation. A very
fruitful parent of many bodily evils, producing generally diseases of
inanition, much more difficult, not only to be cured, but relieved, than those
we suffer either from indolence or intemperance. But as it is not so common a
cause of the gout as the other two, it may not be necessary to consider it very
minutely at present. I shall not therefore enter deeply into the regions of
metaphysical conjecture, nor run wild after my own conceits, or theirs who have
gone astray before me, in guessing at the incomprehensible union of soul and
body, and their mutual powers of acting upon each other. I shall content myself
with observing only, what may be of some use, that every great degree of
vexation, whether in the shape of anger, envy, resentment, discontent or
sorrow, has most destructive and deleterious effects upon the vitals of the
body, whether sudden and violent, or slow and lasting.

The first immediate effect of violent grief or vexation is to take off the
action of the stomach entirely. Let us suppose a man, in the best health, the
highest good humor and spirits, as well as good stomach, sitting down to dinner
with his friends, receives suddenly some very afflicting news. Instantly his
appetite is gone, and he can neither eat nor swallow a morsel. Let the same
thing happen after he has made a hearty, cheerful meal, as suddenly the action,
of his stomach, the whole power of digestion is out off totally, as if it were
become paralytic; and what he has eaten lies a most oppressive load. Perhaps as
the excess of weakness is often convulsion, it may be rejected by a violent
vomit, or do greater mischief. For which reason such strokes of distress are
less hurtful received upon an empty than a full stomach. But why is this? what
connection is there between a piece of bad news and a man's stomach full or
empty? Whatever the cause be, the effect is certain and invariable. Is it
because the animal spirits, or the action of the nerves, whatever be the secret
cause of their power, is called off to supply and support the tumultuous
agitation of the brain, and the stomach, with all its appendages and their
secretions, is left powerless and paralytic, and must therefore either act
convulsively or not at all?

Besides this pernicious effect of perverting the natural action of the stomach
and intestines, the whole circulation of the blood is disturbed. The
contraction and dilatation of the heart, that is, the alternate action by which
it opens to receive the blood from the veins, and closes again to force it out
through the arteries; which operation ought to be as true and certain as the
vibrations of a pendulum; are broken and uneven: the heart flutters,
palpitates; now is overloaded with blood and in danger of suffocation, now
receives none at all: consequently all the secretions must be as irregular,
some of the glands receiving too abundant a supply, that either hurries
through, or oppresses and overpowers them, others none at all. Hence that hasty
gushing of pale limpid urine in amazing quantities, those sudden bursts of
unmeaning tears: sometimes great dryness and choking thirst, sometimes the
overflowing of the mouth with water instead of saliva, and many other nervous
and hysterical affections, fits, syncope, epilepsy, etc. all which indicate the
greatest tumults and perturbations in the inmost recesses of the nervous and
vital frame. Many kinds of disease have sprung from this fountain, of such
unaccountably horrid and terrifying appearances, that formerly they could no
otherwise account for them, but by the malefice of sorcery, and the immediate
possession of devils.

In slower, more silent, but longer continued grief, the effects are similar,
but not so violent. Many little strokes repeated will do the same thing in time
that a great blow does at once. The function of the stomach will be more gently
disturbed and perverted, its juices vitiated, and all its contents will for
ever turn sour, bitter or rancid; so that no mild milky chyle, or wholesome
material of nourishment, can ever come into the blood. The patient must
languish with cachectic inanition, universal bad habit of body, or pine and
waste with atrophy, the want of nourishing supply; whence arise complications
of various diseases succeeding each other always from bad to worse: and unless
he can subdue his anxiety, and restore peace of mind, he must in time sink
under it, and die, as it is said, of a broken heart.

Whoever vexes long, must certainly want nourishment; for, besides the
disturbed state of the stomach, it is broken appetite and bad digestion, from
whence what supply there is must come not only ill-prepared, but vitiated into
the blood; there can be no sleep in this state of mind: the perturbed spirit
cannot rest; and it is in sleep that all nourishment is performed, and the
finer parts of the body, chafed and worn with the fatigue of the day, are
repaired and restored to their natural vigor. While we are awake this cannot so
well be done; because the incessant action of the body or mind, being always
partial and irregular, prevents that equal distribution of the blood to all
parts alike, from which each fiber and filament receives that share or portion
that suits it best. In sleep, when it is quiet and natural, all the muscles of
the body, that is, all its active powers that are subject to our will, are
lulled to rest, composed and relaxed into a genial, temporary kind of palsy,
that leaves not the least obstruction or hindrance of the passage of the blood
to every atom. Accordingly the pulse is always slower and more equal, the
respiration deeper and more regular, and the same degree of vital warmth
diffused alike through every part; so that the extremities are equally warm
with the heart.

Vexation operating in this manner upon the organs of digestion and concoction,
and disturbing and obstructing the natural progress of nutrition, must often
produce diseases similar to those of long-continued intemperance; it is first
effect being indigestion with all it is symptoms, wind, eructation, heart-burn,
hiccup, etc. It is no wonder therefore it should sometimes bring on a fit of
gout, which, as I have said, is manifestly a disease of crudity and
indigestion; and often the gout in the stomach and bowels. Indeed most cold
crude colics are of this kind. Schirrous concretions will also be formed in the
spleen, liver, glands of the mesentery, and throughout the whole system of the
belly. Many of these indurated tumors will appear outwardly, so as to be felt
by the hand; these in time will degenerate into cancers and cancerous
ulcerations, and many fatal evils, not the least of which, in my opinion, is,
that the patient will suffer a long time before he dies.

All the passions, when they are inordinate, may have injurious effects upon
the vital frame: excessive joy has sometimes given a fatal blow, and sudden
bursts of laughter done great mischiefs, especially to delicate or weakly
people, who have often been thrown into spasms, cramps, convulsions, hysteric
sits and haemorrhages by them. But as I think the word Vexation comprehends the
chief of those passions that hurt us most, and mean not to make a metaphysical
enquiry about them, it is needless to be particular upon each. It may suffice
to have shown the immediate and remote influence of vexation upon die human
body.

Whatever men may think of their diseases, their strange symptoms and
appearances, and their unaccountable causes, these are the three original great
sources of most of the chronic diseases of mankind; which I have endeavored to
set forth and explain in so familiar a manner, that I hope I have been
perfectly intelligible to every one who will venture to think and judge for
himself. To such rational people only I address myself; and to enable them to
do this the better, I have furnished these hints and observations, which may be
extended, improved and applied to particular cases. I want not, nor wish to
obtrude my ideas upon any man, however warranted I may think myself from the
observation and experience of my whole life: my principal aim has been only to
make men stop a little in their career, and consider with themselves whether it
may not be possible for them to be mistaken, even in that course of diet and
those habits of life which they never suspected. If they are ill, and for any
time, there must be a more substantial cause for it, than they are in general
willing to allow. It is not always catching cold, for we do not catch cold so
often as we think we do; and when a healthy, robust person takes cold, which
can happen but rarely, if this be the whole of the disease, it cannot last
long. But the truth is, when the crudity, superfluity and acrimony of an
indolent, intemperate life have accumulated to such a degree as to make us
sick, then we say we have taken cold, or complain of a bad constitution, when
we have spoiled perhaps a very good one; or with Sydenham, that the epidemic
constitution of the air has infected us, or that this or that trifle has
disagreed. I am fully and firmly persuaded, that whoever will reflect with some
degree of intelligence and sanity, be just to himself, and candid with his
physician, will in general be able to trace his complaints and diseases up to
one or other of these three causes. And whoever does this, must infallibly see
how vain and idle all his hopes and expectations of lasting remedy and
established health must be from any kind of quack medicines, or indeed the
common and too general practice of physic, when the whole is rested upon
something given to swallow; how inadequate the means are to the end proposed
and hoped for; how ill vomiting and purging can supply the place of temperance;
bleeding, blistering and all artificial evacuation, of activity; cordials and
opium, of peace of mind. Is not this to fill the body with harsh and unwholesome
juices, and then tear it to pieces to get them out again? To make artificial
holes and sores in the skin to renew the blood and discharge superfluities,
instead of employing muscular motion to rub off and grind down all the acrimony
of angular aculeated particles, and make them smooth and round, and easily
divisible; and to employ intoxication and stupefaction to take off the sense of
pain, and leave the cause where it was, or fix it faster? Can any reasonable
person hope for health or long life by any of these unnatural methods, when
these only are employed? Let him look round among his neighbors and
acquaintance, and tell me whether, not only all the gouty, but rheumatic,
colicky, jaundiced, paralytic, dropsical, hysterical people he has ever seen,
are not either always so, or by fits so; and whether those returning paroxysms
or sits of these disorders do not always grow worse and worse, in spite of all
their medication and quackery, till a complication or apoplexy comes on, that
at last, though long before their time, puts an end to their miserable lives.
These evils are considered as the inheritance of human nature, unavoidable and
incurable, and submitted to in absolute despair; though there has not one
rational attempt, that I know of, ever yet been made to remedy them in earnest.
All the methods hitherto employed have only been to relieve, and those often so
perniciously, that the future health has been sacrificed to obtain present
relief or ease. This must for ever be the case when in chronic cases it is
obtained by art, and nature has no share; or where the physician does all, and
the patient nothing for himself.

Of the Cure of the Gout and all other Chronic Diseases, and the Repair of a
broken Constitution.
HAVING set forth the real causes of the gout, and all it is congenial diseases,
I come now to the most essential part, to administer all possible comfort to
those whom great pain and long suffering may have made attentive and docile,
and willing to take health upon the terms it is possible to have it. To the
young and voluptuous, who are yet in their career, and declare for a short life
and a merry one, I have nothing to say but this, that a short life is very
seldom a merry one; on the contrary, is generally made up of a few years of
riotous pleasure without happiness, to be severely paid for by as many more of
pain, sickness, regret and despair.

Having shown that the gout is not hereditary, not inherent in our
constitutions, but produced by the daily accumulations of indigested, unsubdued
acrimony and superfluity, which, when they abound to a certain degree, must end
either in a fit of the gout, or some other disease, according to the
constitution, as long as any vigor is left in the body; for nature will for
ever free, or endeavor to free itself, and purge the blood of its impurities by
gout, by fever, by pain of one kind or other, that takes off the appetite, and
for a time gives respite, and prevents the pouring in of more and more enemies
to disturb it is operation, and make it ineffectual. Thus young people, after a
fit of gout is happily and well gone off, are as free from it, as if they had
never had it; and if they would take warning and be careful not to breed it
again, most certainly would for ever remain free. How absurd therefore, how
ridiculously ignorant must be every attempt to cure the gout in futuro by
medicine, before it be yet formed, before it has any existence! Can such a
medicine give supernatural strength, and enable an old man living in indolence
to digest and consume, or discharge the superfluities of his daily
intemperance? that is, to give him more vigorous powers than nature gave him at
one-and-twenty, or when the gout came first upon him. The Duke of Portland's
powder promised to do something like this, and most certainly kept off the gout
for two or three years. But what was it? and what did it really do? It was a
strong spicy bitter taken in substance, in a large quantity, for a long time;
it is effect was to keep up a constant fever as long as it was taken; this kept
the gouty matter always afloat, and prevented it is fixing any where. But there
was no living long with a constant fever; accordingly many of those who took it
died very soon. I myself observed between fifty and sixty of it is advocates,
some my patients, some my acquaintance or neighbors, who were apparently cured
by it for a little while; but in less than six years time, omnes ad
internecionem caesi, they all died to a man.

Many similar attempts have been made with other medicines to cure not only the
gout, but most other chronic diseases, and with the same fatal effects.
Antimony and Mercury elaborated into poisons by chemistry have been
administered, particularly the solution of sublimate has torn many a stomach to
rags, so that it could never bear common food afterward. The deadly
nightshade, and hemlock, and many such dreadful poisons, have been given as
alteratives to restore health. The intention here seems to be, kill or cure, to
raise a violent agitation or fever in the body, in hopes it may prove strong
enough to throw off the disease and medicine together. The effect has ever
been, notwithstanding a little apparent and deceitful relief may have been
perceived from the first efforts, that it has sunk under both loads, and,
exhausted by repeated straining, much sooner than by the disease alone.

Can any one in his senses suppose that diseases a man has been his whole life
contracting, and to which he is adding every day by perseverance in unwholesome
diet, and bad habits, are to be thus removed by a coup de main ou de baguette?
or that they will not return, be they cured or conjured away ever so often,
whilst he continues the same mode of life that brought them on at first?

What then is to be done? how and in what manner are chronic diseases and
cachexies to be cured, and health restored and estableshed? I have already
shown that the causes of these evils are Indolence, Intemperance, and Vexation;
and if there be any truth or weight in what I have said, the remedies are
obvious. Activity, Temperance and Peace of Mind. It will be said, the remedies
are obvious, but impracticable. Would you bid the feeble cripple, who cannot
stand, take up his bed and walk? the man who has lost all appetite, abstain?
and the sleepless wretch racked with pain enjoy peace of mind? No certainly; I
am not so absurd. These must be assisted by medicine; and if they have not
exhausted all it is power already, a little respite, a favorable interval may
be obtained, that, with other artificial aids cooperating, may be greatly
improved to their advantage, and if rightly employed they may get on from
strength to strength, till they recover into perfect health. But it is not my
design at present to expatiate upon that particular kind of medical relief
which every chronic case may require; it would lead me into too wide a field,
and too far from my present purpose, which is to show that the gout, in most of
it is stages and degrees, may be cured, a present paroxysm or fit relieved, its
return for ever safely prevented, and the patient estableshed in perfect health.

Let us suppose the case of a man from forty to fifty years of age, who has had
at least twenty fits of gout; by which most of his joints have been so clogged
and obstructed, as to make walking or any kind of motion very uneasy to him:
let him have had it sometimes in his stomach, a little in his head, and often
all over him, so as to make him universally sick and low-spirited, especially
before a regular fit has come to relieve him. This I apprehend to be as bad a
case as we need propose, and that it will not be expected that every old
cripple whose joints are burnt to chalk, and his bones grown together and
united by anchilosis, who must be carried from his bed to his table and back
again, should be proposed as an object of medication and cure; and yet even he
might perhaps receive some relief and palliation in pain, if he has any great
degree of it, which is not very common in this case. Let us therefore suppose
the first example.

If the point be to assuage the violent raging of a present paroxysm; this may
be safely done by giving some soft and slowly-operating laxative, neither hot
nor cold, but warm, either in small doses repeated so as to move the patient
once or twice in twenty-four hours, or by a larger dose oftener in less time,
according to the strength and exigency. This may be followed by a few lenient
absorbent correctors of acrimony or even gentle anodynes: proper cataplasms may
also be safely applied to the raging part, which often assuage pain
surprizingly; with as much mild and spontaneously-dissolving nourishment as may
keep the spirits from sinking too low: but I would wish them to sink a little,
and exhort the patient to bear that lowness with patience and resignation, till
nature, assisted by soft and succulent food, can have time to relieve him. This
easy method of treating a fit of the gout would answer in any age; and if the
patient was young and vigorous, and the pain violent, there could be no danger
in taking away a little blood. Thus in two or three days time I have often seen
a severe fit mitigated and made tolerable: and this is a better way of treating
it with regard to future consequences, than bearing it with patience and
suffering it to take it is course: for the sooner the joints are relieved from
distension and pain, the less danger there is of obstructions fixing in them,
or their being calcined and utterly destroyed. But instead of this, the general
practice is quite the reverse. Oh! keep up your spirits, they cry; keep it out
of your stomach at all events, where, whenever it rages in a distant part, it
is not at all inclined to come. As you cannot eat, you must drink the more
freely. So they take cordials, strong wines, and rich spoon-meats. By urging in
this manner, a great fever is raised, the pain enraged and prolonged and a fit,
that would have ended spontaneously in less than a week, protracted to a month
or six weeks; and when it goes off at last, leaves such obstruction and
weakness in the parts, as cripple the man ever after. All this I hope will be
fairly and heartily understood; for there is doubtless a great variety of gouty
cases, but no case that will not admit of medical assistance judicioussly
administered.

But the most capital point of all, and what is mostly desired by all, is to
prevent it is return, or changing into any other disease, and to establish
health. Most men would be very well pleased and happy could this be done by any
medical trick or nostrum, with full liberty of living as they list, and
indulging every appetite and passion without control. Some poor silly
creatures, ignorant of all philosophy and the nature of causes and effects,
have been led into experiments of this kind by a few artful rogues, very much
to the prejudice of their future health, and danger of their lives also;
expecting from medicine, what it never did or can perform alone, the cure of
chronic diseases.

I think it needless here to take any pains to show the inefficacy of all the
common modes of practice, vomiting, purging, bleeding, blistering, issues, etc.
They have been found ineffectual not only in the gout, but all other chronic
cases. All sensible practitioners must know their effects to be but temporary,
and that they are meant and used only as means of present relief. Let us see
therefore by what practicable plan or regimen the person here described, when a
fit of the gout is happily ended, may for ever prevent it is return, and so
confirm his general health that it shall not again be overset by every slight
cold or trifling accident.

I have already shown that a certain degree of activity or bodily motion is
necessary at intervals every day, to raise the circulation to that pitch, that
will keep the fine vessels open and the old blood pure, and also make new from
the fresh juices. If the patient cannot be brought to this, he has no chance of
recovering to perfect health. If therefore he can neither walk nor ride at all,
he must by degrees be brought to do both by the assistance of others, which may
be given him in the following manner: Let a handy active servant or two be
employed to rub him all over as he lies in bed with flannels, or flannel
gloves, fumigated with gums and spices, which will contribute greatly to brace
and strengthen his nerves and fibers, and move his blood without any fatigue to
himself This may seem but a trifling prescription to those who have never tried
it sufficiently, but is of the utmost consequence, and it is effects are
amazing; especially to all those who are too weak to use any muscular motion
themselves. A little friction may have little or no effect, but long continued,
and repeated often, with fumigated flannels, it will do more to recover health,
and support it afterward, than most other things or methods. It promotes
circulation and perspiration, opens the pores, forces the fine vessels, strains
and purisies the blood, and this without the assistance of any internal
stimulation. It is this that keeps horses in tolerable health with very little
exercise.
. This may take up from five to ten minutes at first, but must be repeated five
or six times a day, supposing him totally unable to help himself. But if he can
walk a hundred yards only, it will forward him greatly to walk those hundred
yards every two hours, and if he can bear a carriage, let him go out in it
every day, till he begins to be tired. The first day or two all this may
disturb and fatigue him a little; but if he has patience to persevere to the
fourth, I dare promise him some amendment and increase of strength; which he
must employ, as young merchants do a little money, to get more. Thus he must go
on rubbing, walking, and riding a little more and more every day, slopping
always upon the first sensation of weariness to rest a little, till he be able
to walk two or three miles at a stretch, or ride ten without any weariness at
all. This is recommended with an intention to dislodge and throw off all
remains of crude gouty concretions that may have obstructed his joints, or lain
concealed in any of the lacunae or recesses of his body; to free the
circulation in minimis, and all it is secretions, perspirations, and discharges
whatever: and though this intention can never be but very defectively answered
by medicines, it may certainly be assisted and greatly promoted by a few
well-chosen mild antimonial, absorbent or saponaceous deobstruents and
sweetners, that, like putting shot or gravel into a bottle, with a good deal of
agitation will greatly help to make it clean, but without agitation will do
nothing The Asiatics, understanding luxury much better than we do, and knowing
that it is not to be had without some degree of delicate health, do just enough
to keep them, in this languid effeminate state, free from pain. Those who are
rich among them employ people called Champers to rub, chase and pat them all
over at least twice a day, to move their blood and keep their vessels free
without any labor or exertion of their own powers. This daily practice in hot
countries, where they live in the most slothful indolence, is not only
necessary to them, but a great luxury. The Greeks and Romans too, when they
became luxurious, fell into habits of this kind, and were strigill'd, and
curried, and bathed, and oiled, almost every day.
.

While we are thus endeavoring to resolve all old obstructions, to open the
fine vessels, and strain and purify the blood, and by degrees to enable the man
to use a certain degree of exercise or labor every day; great care must be
taken in the choice of his diet, that no new acrimony be added to the old, to
thwart and frustrate this salutary operation. His food must be soft, mild, and
spentaneously digesting, and in moderate quantity, so as to give the least
possible labor to the stomach and bowels, that it may neither turn sour, nor
bitter, nor rancid, nor any way degenerate from those qualities necessary to
make good blood. Such things are, at first, new-laid eggs boiled so as not to
harden the white creamy part of them, tripe, calves, feet, chicken, partridge,
rabbits, most sorts of white mild fish, such as whiting, skate, cod, turbot,
etc, and all sorts of shellfish, particularly oysters raw. Very soon he will
be strong enough to eat beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork, venison, etc. but these
must all be kept till they are tender, and eaten with their own gravies without
any compounded sauces or pickles whatever: instead of which, boiled or stewed
vegetables, and sallads of lettuce and endive, may be used: and the luxury that
is not unwholesome may be allowed, light puddings, custards, creams,
blanc-manger, etc. and ripe fruits of all kinds and seasons. But because I have
made what inquiries I could upon this capital article from living witnesses;
for I do not always pin my faith upon books, knowing it to be no uncommon thing
for authors, instead of framing their system from observation and experience,
to wrest and explain both to support their opinions. I have been assured by a
physician who practiced above thirty years in Turkey, that from the Danube to
the Euphrates he had never seen a gouty Turk. I have also been informed by some
of our ministers who had resided many years at Constantinople, that the gout,
and other diseases of the same class, were not uncommon at court; but the
courtiers, it seems, were not as good Mahometans as those who lived in the
country; for they drank wine, drams, liqueurs of all sorts, without restraint.
I have also been very creadibly informed, that the Gentoos or Marratas, a
people of India living in the most temperate simplicity, chiefly upon rice,
have no such thing as the gout, or indeed any other chronic disease among them.


wine undoubtedly produces nine in ten of all the gouts in the world, wine must
be avoided, or taken very sparingly, and but seldom. How is this to be done?
Can a man used to it every day, who thinks he cannot live without it, and that
his existence depends upon it, leave it off safely? If he thinks he must die of
the experiment, doing it all at once, he may do it by degrees, and drink but
half the quantity of yesterday till he has brought it to nothing. But the
danger of attempting it in this manner is, that it will never be done; and,
like a procrastinating sinner, he will for ever put off his penitential
resolution till tomorrow. If he did it all at once, I would be hanged if he
died of the attempt; he would be uneasy for three or four days, that is all. He
may change his liquor, and drink a little good porter, or soft ale, and by
degrees come to small beer, the wholsomest and best of all liquors except good
soft water. I do not mean that this rigorous abstinence from wine is to last
for life, but only during the conflict with the disease. As soon as he has
recovered health and strength to use exercise enough to subdue it, he may
safely indulge once a week, or perhaps twice, with a pint of wine for the sake
of good humor and good company, if they cannot be enjoyed without it; for I
would not be such a churl as to forbid, or even damp, one of the greatest joys
of human life.

If any man should say it is better to have a little gout than take all these
pains, and submit to this discipline: this is not the alternative, perhaps it
may be more eligible to live at large, and have but a little gout now and then,
that goes off well, and leaves no trace behind; but this is very seldom the
case. The misfortune is, that a little gout most commonly comes again and again
more severely, till it becomes a great gout, till it cripples the man, and
shortens his life at least twenty years, embittering all the latter part of it.
If any one thinks this description of it, which is the real state of the case
nine times in ten, preferable to that gradual exertion of his own powers and
strictness of regimen, or rather attention to himself, with very moderate
abstinence or self-denial for a year or two, as here recommended; I have no
reply to make him, but must give him up to his own choice.

The severity of these efforts and this abstemious care need be continued no
longer than the disease or the effects of it remain. When by perseverance in
the practice of them, together with the medical aids here recommended, the
patient shall have recovered his strength and locomotive powers, he may
preserve and perpetuate them, and make good his title to longevity, upon the
following plan.

He must never lose sight of the three great principles of health and long
life, Activity, Temperance, and Peace of Mind. With these ever in view, he may
eat and drink of every thing the earth produces, but his diet must be plain,
simple, solid and tender, or in proportion to his consumption; he must eat but
of one thing or two at most at a meal, and this will soon bring him to be
satisfied with about half his usual quantity; for all men eat about twice as
much as they ought to do, provoked by variety: he must drink but little of any
liquor, and never till he has done eating: the drier every man's diet is, the
better. No wine oftener than once or twice a week at most; and this must be
considered as a luxurious indulgence, If he be sometimes led unawares into a
debauch, it must be expiated by abstinence and double exercise the next day,
and he may take a little of my magnesia and rhubarb as a good antidote: or if
he cannot sleep with his unusual load, he may drink water, and with his finger
in his throat throw it up. I have known some old soldiers by this trick alone,
never taking their dose to bed with them, live to kill their acquaintance two
or three times over. One moderate meal a day is abundantly sufficient;
therefore it is better to omit supper, because dinner is not so easily avoided.
Instead of supper, any good ripe fruit of the season would be very salutary,
preventing costiveness, and keeping the bowels free and open, cooling,
correcting, and carrying off the heats and crudities of his indigestion.

His activity need be no more than to persevere in the habit of rubbing all
over night and morning for eight or ten minutes, and walking three or four
miles every day, or riding ten, or using any bodily labor or exercise
equivalent to it. In bad weather I can see no great evil in throwing a cloak
round his shoulders and walking even in the rain; the only difficulty is to
summon resolution enough to venture out; and a little use would take off all
danger of catching cold, by hardening and securing him against the possibility
of it upon that and all other occasions. If he dares not risque this, some
succedaneum must be used within doors; more especially when bad weather
continues any time. I recommend it to all men to wash their feet every day, the
gouty in particular, and not to lie a-bed above seven hours in summer, and
eight in winter.

Whoever thinks there cannot be luxury enough in this course of life, I am
persuaded will not find more in any other: for good health, with all it is
natural appetites and sensations in perfect order, is the only true foundation
of luxury. And whoever cultivates it upon the false principles of culinary or
medical art, urging to excess by stimulating provocatives of any kind, instead
of pleasure and enjoyment, will meet with pain and disgust.

Some pehaps may be reasonable enough to observe and say, This plan of yours is
very simple; there is nothing mavelous in it; no wonderful discovery of any
of the latent powers of medicine; but will a regimen, so easy to be complied
with as this, cure the gout, stone, dropsy, etc.? Will it repair broken
constitutions and restore old invalids to health? My answer is, that if I may
trust the experience of my whole life, and above all the experience I have had
in my own person, having not only got rid of the gout, of which I have had four
severe fits in my younger days, but also emerged from the lowest ebb of life,
that a man could possibly be reduced to by cholic, jaundice, and a complication
of complaints, and recovered to perfect health; which I have now
uninterruptedly enjoyed above ten years: I say, if I may rely upon all this I
may with great safety pronounce and promise that the plan here recommended,
assisted at first with all the collateral aids of medicine peculiar to each
case, correcting many an untoward concomitant symptom, pursued with resolution
and patience, will certainly procure to others the same benefits I received
from it, and cure every curable disease. If this be thought too much to
promise, I beg it may be considered, that a life of bad habits produces all
these diseases: nothing therefore so likely as good ones long continued to
restore or preserve health.

What can the best physician do more than discover and point out to his
patients the real causes of their diseases? You will say, he must find a
remedy: this he will do for you also as long as he can. But I will tell you a
secret: his remedies are chiefly evacuations; and as long as your body can bear
scouring and cleansing Paracelsus was a good chemist, but a miserable
physician: he invented that medicine which he most ridiculously called Elixir
proprietatis; and from it is efficacy, sot as he was, promised himself the years
of Methusalem. At first it did wonders, scoured and carried off all his
crapulary indigestions, and kept him some time in health and spirits; but
trusting to it too long, and repeating it too often, it not only lost all it is
power of doing good, but hurt him greatly, and he died I think at
six-and-thirty, notwithstanding his Elixir.
he will do you some temporary apparent service: but when it begins to wear
out, his remedies will answer no longer; you must try better methods; you must
not repeat the cause so often; for he cannot for ever build up as fast as you
can pull down. In short, you must reform your life, and change all your bad
habits for good ones; and if you have patience to wait the slow operations of
nature properly assisted, you will have no reason to regret your former
luxuries.

We are all so much the creatures of habit, which forms and fashions us to good
or ill almost as much as nature itself, that we ought to be very attentive and
careful that our daily habits may ever tend to the confirmation, not the
destruction of health. It is not what we do now and then that can injure us
greatly, but what we do every day must either do us great good or harm; either
establishing our health, or fixing our diseases, for life.

If, after all, any man should say, these restraints, this care in choosing what
is wholesome, this constant watching over all we do, would make life so
grievous, that health were not worth having upon these terms; I wish him to
slop a little, and consider them well before he rejects them entirely; and
whether there be any better for him. It can do him no great harm to try a month
or two; if he does, I flatter myself he will find that custom will take off the
greatest part of the grievance, and perseverance make them not only tolerable
but pleasant. If he thinks health may be enjoyed upon easier terms, I fear he
will be miserably deceived; for health, like beauty, may be won by our own
attention, efforts, and assiduities, but cannot be had by purchase. Whoever
thinks to buy either, will have the misfortune to find it not long his own,
though he has paid for it.

But there may be others whom long suffering has made more patient and
reasonable; these may be glad to hear that a little health is to be had on any
terms; and it may be very comfortable to them to know that there is scarcely
any state of weakness so low, supposing the vitals not mortally hurt, from
which they may not recover into very desirable health and strength, and by
these means, exerted with persevering patience. I say this to invalids in
general: for thus may be cured not only the gout, but very bad rheutisms,
ischiaticas, rickets, stone, jaundice, dropsy, asthma, cachexies, and
complications of many kinds; not excepting even cancers, if they are not too
far gone: for a cancer is nothing more than a place where nature deposits the
bad humors of the blood, as appears by its almost constant return to some other
part after extirpation. Whatever chronic disease will not give way to this
system of medication, will be found, I greatly fear, too hard for any other.
And should there be a particular case, in which some fortunate violence or
chance may have apparently succeeded for a time, the return of the evil, or
change to something worse, can no way be so well guarded against and prevented,
as by some such rational and natural institution of life.

Thus have I endeavored to set forth the real causes of chronic diseases in
general, and the true principles of convalescence, health, and longevity. If I
have hazarded any thing new, or contrary to received opinions, it has been from
a thorough conviction of it is truth, however dangerous to fame and fortune;
both which I know are more easily acquired by complying with the world, than
attempting to reform it: but it must be somebody equally indifferent to both,
as I am, who will venture to tell such truths as are more likely to recoil and
hurt the author, than to convince and conciliate the bulk of mankind.

THE END.

