THE Sincerity of the Dissenters VINDICATED, From the Scandal of Occasional
Conformity, WITH Some Considerations on a late Book, Entitled, Moderation a
Virtue.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCCIII.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE Defenders of Occasional Conformity are at last come to a Point. They have
given up the Cause so far as ever the first Opposer pusht it at them. The
Author of a Book, called, Moderation a Virtue, has very ingenuously
Acknowledged all that was desired.

And, indeed, a Man of his Candor could do no less, since he is of too
penetrating a Judgment not to know, and of too much Honesty of Principles, not
to own that it is impossible to be Defended.

Wherefore I think it cannot give Offense either to him, or to any Body else,
to Publish the Conclusion of the Argument in his own Words, and to let all Men
know,

That it is Granted by the Dissenters,

That to Conform to the Church of England, and receive the Sacrament, merely to
Qualify for a Civil Employment, is a scandalous Practice, a Reproach to
Religion, and Offensive to all good Christians.

If therefore, for the future, any Dissenter shall be Guilty of this
scandalous, reproachful Practice, let no Man reflect upon the Body of the
Dissenters for an Error of a single Member, he is to bear the Burden himself,
for his Mistake is his own, the Party disowns the Practice.

But the Defenders of this Occasional License are like a resolute Garrison, who
being Beaten out of a Town retire to the Castle; the open and scandalous
Conformity of such People who too notoriously used it as a Qualification for
Civil Employments, appearing too low a Step to bear a Defense, they have
politickly drawn in a great many honest, well-meaning Gentlemen to side with
the thing, on account of a General Charity, and its being Lawful in its own
Nature.

The Meaning is, that having brought People to be Reconciled to the thing in it
self, it may look the less odious in the other Circumstances of it.

But for what yet appears this Shift will fail too, and all that has been yet
said, does not seem to me to clear it up.

God forbid that I should say Conforming to the Church of England, abstractedly
and singly considered, is a Sin. But I cannot see the least Argument to prove
what I allege to be untrue, viz. That it is a Sin in a Dissenter to Conform to
the Church of England, or else his Dissenting is a Sin, and he ought to Repent
of one, or of the other.

This, I think, will appear, when all the Authorities for this Occasional
Compliance are Examined, and, as I trust they shall be, fairly Confuted.

This is what none of our Opponents have yet replied to, but continue to fetch
a compass round it, and Reply to Things which really are not of so much
Consequence in the Case.

THE Sincerity of the Dissenters VINDICATED, etc.
IN the Argument against Occasional Conformity, it is not improper to observe,
There are two Sorts of People blame the Dissenters. 1. Their Brethren
Dissenters, who cannot Satisfy themselves in the same Latitude of Principles.
2. The Strict Conformist.


To me it seems as necessary to Examine the Different Reasons of these
Opponents, as it is to Examine the Lawfulness of the Fact; and as it is a part
of the Dispute which has not yet been brought upon the Stage, it may be very
useful to bring Parties to a right Understanding.

It Is most certain, That these two Parties do not Cavil at the Occasional
Conformity of the Dissenters from the same Principle, nor with the same End and
Design.

The Stricter Dissenter Argues against it from a Conscientious Dislike of the
Practice; the Militant Churchman, from a Dislike of the Consequence; the
Dissenter is against the Communicating, as a Religious Error; the Churchman,
as a Politic One; the Dissenter Explodes it as a Sin against the Reputation
and Interest of the Dissenter; the Churchman, as a Sin against the Interest of
the Church; the Dissenter, as it weakens the Dissenters, and prepares their
Members to fall off, and Posterity to Conform totally, to what their Fathers
Conformed to Occasionally; the Churchman dislikes it, as it lets the Whigs
into Places, and State Employments, and weakens the Party that are to carry on
other Designs.

As the difference of Design is manifest, so the Arguments on both sides
exceedingly differ.

The Dissenter Charges the Occasional-Man with Breach of his relative
Engagements to Church Societies, deserting his first Principles, Condemning his
first Dissent, and the like: But the Churchman, with Hypocrisy, Tricking and
Undermining the Government, Defeating the Laws, and the like.

As to the last I cannot but blame the Heat of these Men, who cry out upon the
Dissenters, as Cheats and Hypocrites; though, at the same time, I cannot approve
the practice of Occasional Conformity as such.

As to the Trick put upon the State by the Dissenters, it is either an unjust
Charge, or it is but a Return in kind, since it is plain that the Test was it
self a Trick, being pretended to be not against them, but the Papists, and is
by a strain of Words bent at the Dissenters to serve a Turn: And allow it had
been the Sense of the Law, it is plain, by the Consequence, it was not made to
bring the Dissenters to Church, but to keep them out of the Government, which
since the Dissenters have prevented by complying, they are angry the Trick is
discovered.

The Author of these Sheets freely owns himself an Opposer of Occasional
Conformity, but it is because he would have the Dissenters preserve what he has
often advanced in their Favor, viz. That they are really Dissenters for
Conscience Sake, and this he conceives cannot be reconciled to an Occasional
complying with that from which they had before Dissented, and on account
whereof they could justify a Separation from the Established Church.

This being premised, the Defenders of this Practice are manifestly in an Error
in their manner of Justifying it, since they seem to bend the strength of their
Replies against the Friendly Opposer, and not against the furious Assaults made
upon their Integrity, though the last will appear the much easier Enemy to be
overcome.

This seems to be observed in the late Author of a Book; Entitled, Moderation
a Virtue, and I cannot but let that Gentleman know, that from his Title the
World expected an Answer to those Hot Gentlemen who rally the Dissenters with
Hypocrisy, and State Tricks, in this Case, while the principal Part of his
Argument lies only against the stricter Dissenter, as such, though pointed at the
Churchman, lessening the Difference between them and the Church, in order to
make Conformity seem a thing of less Moment than it is, forgetting that the
less the Difference is, the less the Reasons for a Schismatical Separation will
appear, and the Grounds and Reasons by which their Dissenting is to be
defended, appear the less justifiable.

Of seven Heads of his Arguments I am therefore ready to leave the last four
for some body else to answer, and only observe a little on the first Three what
the Arguments amount to, which Vindicate the Occasional Communion of a
Dissenter, as in its self Lawful.

And first, as to his Precedents, he is pleased to prove that this Occasional
Conformity is no new thing, but has the Warrants of uncontestable Precedents.

Nor indeed, is his Argument new, any more than the Communion, but what has
been before started, and lately very happily answered: But as this Author is
far from being unworthy an Answer so as he writes both strenuously, and yet
modestly, he deserves an Answer of Respect.

I have already noted a very honest Concession granted by this Author, that he
does not justify such as Conform merely for a Place, but owns it as a
scandalous Practice.

This is granting all the real Ground of the Dispute. For, as strictly
speaking, it may be possible that a Man may really Conform Occasionally to the
Church, without offense to his Conscience, yet to run it up to the Extremest
Nicety, and avoid the real Offense taken at the Practice, is waving the
Argument, and falling upon another never proposed.

Before therefore we come to the Argument, I must observe that a Man may do a
thing without Offense to his Conscience, which may be really Sinful, and his
Conscience not being duly informed, does not make the thing Lawful in Practice,
what ever it may be to him.

But as the first Occasion of this Dispute was chiefly bent at such, who really
Conform to qualify themselves for State Employments, it remains to Examine,
whether these Gentlemen charged, have really done so, or no; and since naming
of Names is very improper, and not absolutely necessary in this Case, I shall
only lay down one Case in which, I think, without Breach of Charity, a Man may
be allowed to guess, that a Conforming is merely for the Qualification.

When a Man, who is a professed Dissenter, joined in Communion with a separate
Congregation, and either never, or not for a long time, did Communicate with
the Church, but upon some prospect of Preferment, some Election, Place, Profit,
or Perquisit, shall Conform to the Church of a sudden, and so very remarkably,
as to time, viz. the Eve of an Election, or the like, that all Men must guess
at the reason of doing it, and after this the Person never to Conform again,
but upon like Occasion.

Shall any Man be judged for believing such a Man Conforms for the Place; shall
this be called the Moderate Conscientious Dissenter, who this Character will
distinguish from others, let them find out among his Neighbors who know him, I
shall go no farther.

To justify this Conformity much time has been spent, and labor lost, for I
must account it lost, and this Author has granted me the Clause, which is a
Token of his Honesty, for really it is not to be defended. But here seems to
lie an opportunity now to cover this scandalous Practice with the pretense of
Conscience, and it is but being a little wary as to Circumstances, and we may
all, for the future, be Conscientious Occasional Conformists, and Conscientious
Dissenters, both together.

And to make way for this, Endeavors are used first to prove the general
Practice Lawful; I confess the particular practice above named was always the
principal Design, but since it is come so far, as that one must be defended, or
at least concealed by the other, I shall endeavor to show this covering will
be too short for the Bed, and the Shame and Nakedness will appear; and as the
particular Conformity we are upon is fairly suppressed, I shall Enquire, if the
General will hold water by it self. And first for Precedents, I cannot but
wonder at those which our Author present us with, John the Baptist, and our
Savior.

John the Baptist, says he, was an Occasional Conformist to the Jewish Church,
he went to Jerusalem thrice a Year to Worship, but held separate Assemblies in
the Wilderness, and Taught and Baptized.

It Is plain John the Baptist was no Dissenter at all, he was a Preacher of
Righteousness, and the Jews approved him, for all Men held him for a Prophet,
but held all the Parts of the Established Worship entire; he Preached, in the
Wilderness, but what did he say, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand:
He neither Dissented from the Jewish Worship, nor taught others to do so, but
as a Forerunner, who went to prepare the way, told them the Gospel, the
Messiah, and Savior was at hand; the finishing of the old Worship was at the
Door, and the Son of God coming to Erect his Kingdom in the World. What was all
this to Dissenting? He preached neither a-against their Doctrine nor
Ceremonies, he Conformed to them all himself, only such as would receive his
Baptism, which was only a Token of their Faith in the Blessed Tidings he
brought them, received it; but they were not taught, in the least, to Dissent
from the Established Worship.

With what reason can it be concluded from hence, that Christianity had its
Rise in Occasional, Conformity, the Conclusion of this Argument savours of more
Levity than this Author any where else discovers, and seems a little too much a
Sophism, for a Man, of his Judgment, to offer, in reasoning upon a Subject so
serious.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, says he, the Author of our Holy Religion, was also an
Occasional Conformist, God forbid I should dare to write so. Our Lord was a
strict complete Conformist to the Ceremonial Institution, in every part of it
that was Divine, but abhorred the Innovations of the Jews. And he continued
Conforming even to the last Passover, which he Eat with his Disciples, and not
only was so himself, but he instructed his Disciples in the like, They sit in
Moses Seat, whatsoever therefore they bid ye do, that do ye. Think not I am
come to Destroy the Law, I am not come to Destroy the Law, but to fulfill. It Is
true, our blessed Lord did preach against the Innovations which the Traditions
of the Elders, and the several divided Sects had brought into their Religion:
he reproached them with making his holy House of Prayer a Den of Thieves; with
teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of Men, and the like; but this was no
more Dissenting from the Legal Institution, which was the Established Worship,
than the Prophet Elijah's over-turning the Altars of Baal, and slaying their
Priests, was a Dissenting, for if purging the Church from Idols be Dissenting,
such it was; our Savior taught, but all his Teachings were full of Expositions
of the Law, and Comments upon the Prophets, and quoting them where they led
unto himself. Nor did he omit the Worship of their Temple and Synagogues, though
he took all other Opportunities; indeed, to teach the People in all places, but
he submitted to Circumcision, Eat the Passover at the Appointed time, and his
Mother performed her proper Offerings of Purification.

At the Death of our Lord, he pronounced the great Work of Redemption finished;
the Law was thence resolved into the Gospel; the Veil of the Temple rent in
twain, and the Levitical Institution began to cease; I do not say entirely
ceased.

Our blessed Lord having Offered up himself a Sacrifice Once for all, the
Apostles never were found seeking to any Propitiation, but that of Faith in his
Blood.

But in the Interval between the Establishing Christianity, and the entire
Dissolution of the Jewish Rites, as a Religion the Apostles, as Jews born, are
found in a promiscuous Occasional Exercise of both; but what is to be gathered
from it, only this, That it remains to Examine, whether the Law expired at
once, or by Gradations: If it Expired at once, when that Time was; if
Gradually, when it arrived to a total Demise.

If the Levitical Institution expired at once, and that point of Time was when
our Lord said, It is Finished, then it is as Lawful to Conform to the Jewish
Worship, on Occasion, now, as it was then.

If not at this Time, but Gradually, then the first Institution being all of
Divine Original, and One only a shadow of the Other, the Gospel being the thing
Typified, and the Law the Type; it was neither a Dissent, nor a Conforming, for
the Jews to Exercise religious Worship in either, because the Religion was but
the same thing, and the Ceremonies of the New were not yet Settled. But I do
not say so of the Christians who were Gentiles.

But our Author, who has said all this, comes off again with this Caution, I am
not concerned to prove the Case of our Dissenters to be Parallel with these;
but it appears that Occasional Communion may, in some Cases, be Lawful.

But, in my Opinion, if our Case is not Parallel, any one might be allowed to
Ask, What Is this to us? If the Cases are not alike, the Arguments are not alike.

I cannot think it is just to infer, That because Occasional Conformity may, in
some Cases, be Lawful, therefore it is Lawful in our Case, unless our Case, and
those some Cases, agree: For, if so, then it is as Lawful for us Occasionally to
Conform to the Romish Church, or to the Jewish Church. For, by our Author's
Argument, a Christian has nothing to do but to Examine, whether he thinks it
Lawful in his Case, or no.

But not one Man has yet attempted to Explain this Question, How the Dissenting
can be Justified, when we can so easily Conform: The making a Breach in the
Established Church, a Schism in the General Union; The Breaking off from a
General Communion; The Erecting private Churches, a separate Discipline; and
all this for Things which Occasionally we can Comply with.

If any Occasion can justify a Conformity, no Occasion can be of greater moment
than Peace, Union, Charity, Order, Obedience to Princes, Laws, and the like. If
we have not thought these sufficient Occasions; Let us see which are Greater.

But after all, pray let us Examine this Great Article of Conformity in the
Apostles, and I am of Opinion it shall come out fairly, that really the
Apostles were not Occasional Conformists at all.

And first in General, I Affirm none of the Apostles are ever found Conforming
to any thing which they had declared their, dissent from before; but let us
Examine, wherein they did actually Conform, and why.

If any Man will but give himself leave to Distinguish a little in the Case, he
may arrive at the Truth of this Matter with a small difficulty: He need only
distinguish between the Practice of the Apostles as Jews, born under the
Obligation of the Levitical Law, and continuing still under more Obligations
than Christian Proselytes, and observe, that as Jews they found themselves
under some Legal Duties which the Gentile Christians were absolutely Free from:
And therefore all that we call Occasional Conformity, was only doing what they
were bound in Conscience to do, and had never Dissented from.

The Circumcising of Timothy, and the several Parts of the Law St. Paul
Conformed to, were nothing but what, as Jews, they were obliged to, and their
Faith in the Savior did not at all take off the Obligation from those who were
Hebrews born, and were then alive, they were still Zealous of the Law, Acts
21.20. and the Obligation to be so continued to them. For this Reason the
Circumcision of Timothy is justified, because his Mother and Grandmother were
Hebrews, whereas it is expressly said St. Paul refused to Circumcise Titus,
because his Father was a Greek.

By this it appears, that Circumcision was Administered in Timothy, not as an
Occasional Conformity, but as a Duty, and a Thing which Timothy, as a Son of
Jewish Parents, ought to do; and it rather seems strange it was not done before.

To Prove this, see what is, in the same Case, said to the Christians, who were
Gentiles by Birth, even the same Apostle says, If they were Circumcised, Christ
should profit them nothing.

The Matter therefore rested upon such a Conformity as was required of them as
Jews, and which the Death of Christ could not Dissolve the Obligation of, to
them who were then alive, because the Force of them began in their being Born
of the Stock of Abraham.

But if the Opponent, in this Matter, can show me one Instance in the whole
Scripture, of any Christian, whether Apostle, or Elder, who being born a
Gentile, did, by this Authority, Conform to the Jewish Ceremonies, even in the
least Article, then I Will throw up this Point; and if not, then I should be glad
to meet with the same Candor, either to have my Argument Answered or Granted.

This Matter will further appear, if any Man will but take the pains to Examine
the Scriptures in the Case: The History of the Apostles coming to Jerusalem,
seems to me to make it plain, in the 21 st. of the Acts v. 20. the Brethren
come to St. Paul, and tell him, That the Multitude of Converted Hebrews had
Entertained a Scandal at his Conversation, from Reports raised upon him, That
he taught the Jews to forsake Moses's Law.

Now it appears, that this was really a false Report, by the care taken to
Convince the Jewish Believers of it, Verse the 23.24. Do therefore this that we
say unto thee. We have four Men which have a Vow on them, them take and Purify
thy self with them, and be at charges with them that they may shave their Heads.

It remains to Enquire what was all this for: It was not, as is pretended, a
Conforming on Occasion to prevent giving Offense, but it was a Practicing that
which was still Lawful, that the scandalous Report might be Confuted, and the
next Words make it out, viz. That all may know that those Things whereof they
are Informed concerning thee are nothing, that is, that it is all false and
scandalous, and that those Jews, who Believed, were still to walk orderly, and
to keep the Law.

That therefore the Christians, who were Converted from the Jews, were thus
obliged to keep the Law is plain, and it is clear the keeping the Law could be
no Sin, because of its Divine Original.

But let us look to the Gentiles, and let them show me one Act of Occasional
Conformity among them, Verse the 25th. as concerning the Gentiles, who believe
we have written, and concluded that they observe no such thing; and at the same
time that the Apostle Circumcised Timothy, because his Mother was a Hebrew, as
is Noted before, he refused to Circumcise Titus because his Parents were
Greeks, having said of the Gentiles, That if they are Circumcised, Christ shall
be to them of no effect.

Thus, I think, this mighty Difficulty is over, the Occasional Conformity of
the Apostles at an end, and the Uniformity of the Christian Church in its first
Institution, Vindicated.

Our Commentators, say, God indulged the Jews the liberty of Using, or not
Using, the Ceremoniale of the Law, as a thing wholly Indifferent; and as what,
upon the general Revolution which Religion came under at the Death of our Lord,
was necessary to Reconcile the Jews to the Change.

Others are of Opinion, it was a Burden on the Jewish Believers, which the
Gentiles were freed from, but they obliged to.

And this seems plain from Acts 15.28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to
us, to lay upon you no greater Burden than this, that ye abstain from meats
offered to Idols, and from Blood. This was to the Gentiles, but the keeping of
the Law was a Burden yet lest on the Jews, who were turned Christians, and
then in being.

But be which of these Opinions we will in the Right, both allow that it only
respected the Jews, and them no further than those then alive; and that the
Gentile Converts were not allowed the least Shadow of a Compliance, or
Occasional Conformity; No, not to the least, and most Indifferent Ceremony. And
though the Connection between Circumcision and Baptism was plain, and they were
equally Seals of the Covenant, yet for a Gentile Christian to have accepted
Circumcision, had been to make the Death of Christ of no effect to him.

And, indeed, as the Death of Christ had a positive Effect upon the Law to
Abrogate and Disannul it, the Jews, then in being, might be under Vows and
Orders, which their Embracing the Faith of Christ did not Destroy; but if after
the Death of Christ any Christian, who was not a Jew born, might, on occasion.
Conform to the old Law of Moses, it can never be Answered why it is less Lawful
now.

The Inference therefore drawn by the Author p. 9. that by this it appears
Occasional Communion, in some Case, may be Lawful, where Constant Communion
would be a Sin, cannot be true; that is, it cannot be true from those Premises,
because the Fact of those Premises does not appear to be true, either that John
the Baptist, our Lord Jesus Christ, or any of the Apostles, were Occasional
Conformists.

As to the Sacrifices and Supplications offered up at the Temple for foreign
Princes, or Heathen Emperors and Powers; first, I am not Satisfied that it was
not an Innovation, or Tradition, many of which crept into the Jewish Worship,
till they became of equal Authority to the Law it self.

But if it were true, it seems no more an Instance of Occasional Conformity,
than it would be in the Dissenters of England on a formal Request from the
Emperor of Germany, or the Pope, to keep a solemn Fast to Pray for them, this
might be Occasional Conformity in the Emperor to us, but not in us to him. It
was a public Acknowledgment in the Romans, and a Testimony to the Verity of
the Jews Religion, but it was no Conforming to the Romans, in offering
Sacrifices to God for the Welfare of their Emperors; and I cannot but admire
for what use, in this Argument, this Case is brought, being, in my humble
Opinion, nothing at all to the Matter.

From hence I must lay down, That Occasional Conformity is not sufficiently
proved by Precedents and Authorities of Scripture.

Our Author's second Head is, to prove, That the Principles of the
conscientious Occasional Conformist are Christian and Catholic, and will
Justify him before God and Man.

This Argument, I think, lies a little unfair, for the Man is not rightly
described, who is this conscientious Occasional Conformist.

The Question before me seems to lie thus, Whether a Thing that would otherwise
be Unlawful, is Justifiable because the Person acting it is not Reproved in it
by his Conscience.

The Man is brought in with Extraordinary Qualifications, "Not of a Mercenary
Spirit, or Sinister Intention to the Established Church: He believes it a True
Church, Owns her Ministry, Acknowledges her Liturgy to be sound for Substance."

"But because he conceives the Dissenting Churches to be True Churches, and
their Ministers generally Men of real Piety, he thinks himself obliged to hold
Communion with them." Now, where shall we find this Man? This is not the
Dissenter we are upon.

With Submission, this Man never was a Dissenter, he who, in his Conscience,
believes all the abovesaid of the Church of England, and has no more to say why
he Dissents, may very well justify Conforming to the Church, but I am sure he
can never justify Dissenting from them. Shall we make a Schism in the
Established Church, only because we believe the Dissenting Churches to be True
Churches, and their Ministers good Men? This will never Justify us.

But our Author goes one, p. 11. to Enumerate the Things for which the
Dissenter quits the Church Communion, as 1. A Defective Discipline. 2. A
Promiscuous Communion, contrary to the Rules of the Gospel, and the Primitive
Practice of the Church. 3. An Imposed Liturgy, to an entire Loss of the Gift of
Prayer. 4. Human Mixtures in the Ministration, as the Cross, Surplice, etc. 5.
The Obligation on a Christian, to seek the best Guides for his Soul.
This is a Satyr upon the Church of England, and the True and Real Grounds of a
Dissenter's Separation; and he that Dissents on these Grounds, can never
Conform upon Occasion; if he does, how he can, at the same time, Justify his
Dissenting, remains with me a Question yet unanswered.

All the Instances brought from Dr. Bates, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Corbett, Mr.
Tallents, have some particular Exceptions, at first the great Dispute in their
Cases is between Lay Conformity, and Conformity as Clergymen; as Laymen they
could Conform, as Clergymen they could not, and preached in separate Churches,
only because the Church having shut the Door against them, they thought
themselves obliged, as they were Lawful ordained Ministers, not to desist from
the Work of their Office, though Man had imposed some Things on them which they
could not comply with, but that they were under an indispensible Necessity to
preach the Gospel, and to Exercise their Duty, though they were silenced by the
Law.

I think the third Head is something of Kin to the second; for this is to show
that the Difference between the Church of England, and the Dissenter, is but
little.

I solemnly Appeal to the Searcher of all Hearts, that I am none of those who
are for making the Difference greater than it really is.

And with the same Sincerity, I protest I wish it was not so great as it is,
and heartily wish I could Conform wholly to the Church.

And I wish the Church, to try the Sincerity of the Dissenters, would come to a
Temper; abate us what, without Prejudice to Doctrine, or Discipline, might be
abated, and condescend so far to the Tender Consciences of us their weaker
Brethren, that all the Dissenters of a Catholic Spirit might come in, and join
with them.

But as I would not make the Difference wider, so I cannot make it less; I
cannot bring my Dissenting Reasons to such Punctilio's, and reduce them all to
Trifles, without reproaching my self with a needless and unchristian
Separation: For I cannot but say, God forbid I should be found making, or
keeping up a Breach in the Christian Union and Charity of the Church for little
Matters, and divide in Communion for Trifles.

Our Author says, we Agree in all the Essentials of Christianity, and differ
only in Accidentals; and the great things, in which we agree, should be more
powerful to unite us, than the lesser, in which we differ, should be to divide.

I cannot think I do the Author Injustice if I say, if this be true, no Man can
justify Dissenting from the Church; and if it be any thing but a strong
Argument for a constant Conformity, then I am at a loss to understand plain
English.

We agree in all the great Things, and differ only in Small; the great Things,
in which we agree, ought to be more powerful to make us Conform, than the small
Things should be to make us Dissent, that is, we ought to Conform.

If this be true, why do we not Conform? How can we justify our Dissenting.

They agree, and none of them scruple a Moderate Episcopacy, says our Author.

This I refer to the whole Church of Scotland, who are all Presbyterians, and
have suffered as much for a Dissenting from Prelacy, as ever the Church of
England did for Dissenting from Popery. If the English Dissenters do not
scruple Episcopacy, then I confess I am at a Loss to know why we dissent.

But then we are led to this Argument by the word Moderate Dissenter, and
Moderate Episcopacy, either this Moderate Dissenter is no Dissenter, or this
Moderate Episcopacy is no Episcopacy. Indeed the Churchmen do look on
Archbishop Usher's Model to be no Episcopacy at all.

They agree in their Public Worship; their Prayers and Praises are, for
Substance, the same, says this Author.

Witness, say I, their Cathedral Worship; their Choristers, Music, Singing
their Prayers; their Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, Chapters, Dignities,
Vestments, Bowings to the Altar, and at the Name of Jesus, their Responses,
Anthems, Exorcisms, and a numberless variety of things the Dissenter has no
concern about in his Worship,

I wonder any Gentleman of so much Learning and Candor, can say our Praises and
Prayers are the same for Substance.

Nay even this very Author employs very good Reasons for our not complying with
the Liturgy; nor thinking it Lawful to impose Forms upon the Ministry, and tie
them up to them.

The Difference about Ordination of Ministers which this Author is pleased to
say is inconsiderable, is the next; and I cannot agree that this is a small
Difference, and all he says on this Head, seems to me to be a good Reason, why
the Church should agree to allow an Ordination by Presbyters, but no reason to
satisfy the Dissenter with Episcopal Ordination.

I believe there are five Reasons to be given why the Church of England should
allow, and accept of an Ordination by Presbyters, to one, why the Dissenter
should submit to Episcopal Ordination.

And if it be only this One, it is a great One, which even our Author has
Quoted, viz. that Ordination by Presbyters, without the Diocesan, is owned by
the Church of England, to be Orthodox in that great Act of Parliament, by which
the Reformation was Established in England in Queen Elizabeth's time 13. Eliz.
Cap. 12.

What has been since, has been Imposed by the Craft, and for the private
designs of States Men in the Church, whose designs have been not to have the
Dissenters Conform, but to keep them rather the farther from Conforming.

As to the rest of this Book, I leave the Churchmen to Answer it if they can.

As about the multitude of Broils, Parties and Contentions, the Church has
within her self, how Inconsistent with her own Canon and prescribed Rules many
of her Members act, these are most True, and all the rest of his Heads I
readily Grant as his fourth Head, That employing Dissenters is so far from
weakening, that it strengthens the Church.

This he may more easily persuade me to believe, than he will the Churchmen of
the high Party, who rail at it.

Fifth, That Occasional Conformity is an Advantage to the Church, and weakens
the Dissenters: The latter I believe, and therefore would not have the
Dissenter be concerned in it, and wonder if the Author believes so, how he that
is a Dissenter can argue for the Practice, the Dissenters ought to thank him
for it.

I doubt not but this Occasional Conforming of the Dissenters in this Age, is a
Prologue to a total Conformity in the next, and leads our Posterity to quit
that Dissenting wholly, which they saw their Fathers could quit as they found
Occasion; and I desire him, in his next, to tell us what Advantage it is any
way to the Dissenters.

Sixth, That the late Bill against Occasional Conformity would have been highly
Prejudicial to the Church.

I believe so, and to the Dissenters too; and therefore the Lords dismissed it,
as not proper by any means to pass into a Law.

His last Argument, that Dissenters, from National Established Churches, have
always been Employed by most Nations and Governments, I grant, and he has
effectually made it appear.

But all this leaves the matter where we found it.

That Conforming to the Church of England, as it has been lately Practiced by
the Dissenters, for the qualifying themselves for Places and Employments in the
Government, is a Practice unwarrantable from the Scripture, Pernicious to the
Dissenters themselves, and will be fatal both to their Reputation and Interest.

And though really Occasional Communion does not seem Clear to me on any score
whatever,

Yet, this is out of doubt, and the Author I have been naming, readily grants
it me. That though Occasional Conformity Abstracted might be justified, yet, this
is no justifiable Occasion.

Since then, the Dispute will end as to this Occasion, those who are willing to
be concerned in any further Debate of it, would do well to lay down what
Occasions are sufficient to justify Conforming to the Church, and what
Circumstances are required to such an Occasion; that the honest Conscientious
Occasional Conformist, if such a Man can be, may be distinguished from the
Hypocrite, and the whole Party may not bear the Reproach.

And, because this Point has never been yielded before, I cannot dismiss it
without some Remarks, which I judge Natural from the Premises, and Necessary to
the Circumstance.

As first, it is apparent many of the Dissenters who have thus Conformed, have
never in the whole Course of their Lives Conformed before; no, not when
Persecuted by the Church of England, have suffered Imprisonment, Confiscation
of Goods, and several other public Oppressions, and never would Conform: But
when Invited to Places of Honor or Profit, have Complied, thinking the
Obtaining a good Place, a sufficient Occasion to Invite them; when neither the
Laws, nor the Persecution it self could be thought an Occasion to Compel.

Now, if as is owned, Moderation a Virtue, p. 7. This be a Reproach to
Religion, and Offensive to all good Christians, then they ought to avoid the
Practice, or to Regulate it, so as that it may not appear to be done merely as
a Qualification.

Another Remark I cannot but make, That if Occasional Conformity be Lawful,
then it cannot be True, as too many have said, That this Dispute will bring
Persecution upon the Dissenters.

For it is no Breach of Charity, to say none of those Gentlemen who can
Voluntarily Conform, will ever suffer Persecution for not Conforming; and this
Confirms the ill Actings of those who did suffer before, and Conformed
afterward: For it is plain, by their Suffering, their Consciences were against
it before; and it is as plain, by their Complying, that the Advantage smothered
the Scruple.

A Man can by no possible Arguing justify suffering persecution, for that
which he can, with a satisfied Conscience, comply with. If thereforo a hot
Persecution should come on the Dissenters, which God forbid, Occasional
Communion secures all those who can comply: For if to avoid Persecution be not
a justifiable occasion, I know very few occasions which can be justified.

And it is for this Reason I would entreat those Gentlemen to let us know what
are justifiable Occasions, and what are not.

Now as our Author has furnished us out of History with a great many excellent
Precedents for the employing Dissenters both in the Governments and Armies of
those Nations where they dwelt.

I wish with all my Heart he had pleased to Examine History for all those
glorious Instances of the Confessors and Martyrs of all Ages, who have
sacrificed their Lives even for the rejecting the most Minute Articles of
Conformity upon the most pressing and extraordinary Occasions.

I shall rather recommend my Reader to the Histories where such Instances are
to be found, than trouble him with a long Transcription of the Particulars.

Let them who are curious in this Search, Examine the Martyrologies of the
Church from its first Institution; and first let him but view: the young
Maccabees, and their wonderful Mother, and when the Tortures they endured are
considered; let them also consider what was the Occasion, only refusing to eat
a Bit of Swines Flesh; nay, they would have excused them, if they would but
have suffered them to put it into their Mouths by force, which they would not
endure, but as soon as it was attempted, spit it out in the very Faces of their
Tormentors; and died, rather than be guilty of Occasional Conformity.

Let such Men remember Origin, who having been guilty of Occasional Conformity
only in the most passive manner he possibly could, as but suffering the Heathen
Priest to put a little Frankincense into his Hand, and dropping it into the
Fire, not so much as owning it to be a Sacrifice, much less owning the Idol to
be a God; and see his Repentance, how many Years was he left in the Agonies of
Despair, and how does he bemoan himself on that account, calling himself
Apostate from Christ, and unworthy of Martyrdom.

The Primitive History of the Church gives us innumerable Instances of the
Constancy and Exactness of the Christians in this Point.

And I only forbear to enumerate them, because they are to be found in the
first Vol. of Fox's Acts and Monuments of the Church, in Eusebius, and in all
the Historians of those Times.

But it may be answered, That this was a Conformity to what was absolutely
unlawful, Idolatrous, and abominable, which is not to be alleged here.

To this I rejoin, he that Dissents from the Church of England does it, because
he cannot in Conscience Comply, or else he can have no justifiable Reason for
Dissenting. Now all things are unlawful to him, which his Conscience is not
satisfied about, and though not equally abominable, are so much so, as that no
Man can comply with them safely. But to obviate the Objection wholly, we will
come nearer to the present Case.

The Church of England to her Glory be it spoken, is founded in the numerous
throng of blessed Martyrs and Confessors, who have left their Memory and
Example as a lasting Testimony against Occasional Conformity, even in the
small, and some of them indifferent things.

Blessed Bishop Hooper when he came to the Stake to seal with his Blood, the
Testimony of his Faith, and when in the last Agonies of his Life, the Queens
Pardon was offered upon Terms, very much short of a total Conformity, only to
set his Hand to an acknowledgement; cried out before it was read; If you Love
my Soul away with it.

Let us now look abroad in Times more Modern, and within our Memory, and what
are all the new Converts as they are called in France, but Occasional
Conformist.

The Fire of Persecution having burnt up the Protestant Church, all those who
could not stand the brunt, not make their escape, or such whose Religion had
not force enough with them, to make them suffer the loss of all, what did they
do, they fly to this very refuge Occasional Conformity, and if the Arguments
are Examined, they are much the same with Ours.

The Protestants do not deny but it is possible to be saved in the Roman Church,
and they may, upon occasion therefore Conform in some things, while, at the
same time, they reserve their Minds and Hearts entirely to the true Worship;
and Naaman, the Syrian, say they, was such an Occasional Conformist, to whom
the Prophet gave a tacit License, when, upon the proposal, he replied, Go in
Peace.

Here is the only Instance of Occasional Conformity, which exactly reaches our
Case that I remember; and I see nothing can be said to justify Ours, which may
not justify Theirs, only, that indeed the difference is not so great between
Protestant and Protestant, as between Protestant and Roman Catholic.

But if the difference here be great enough to justify a Dissenting for
Conscience sake, the Argument is the same.

The Case of kneeling in the Street when the Roman Processions come by, is as
parallel to our Imposed Ceremonies, as any thing in two different Religions can
be, and yet, thus they Occasionally Conform, and please themselves with
fancying that they do not do it as an Act of Worship. But our Martyrs in Queen
Mary's time, frequently Sacrificed their Blood on more minute Circumstances
than that, as not suffering a Child to be Baptized, though by Force, in the Case
of Mr. Glover, Mrs. Lane, John Field, throwing down the Rood of Dover Court,
and the like.

Now let any Man Examine the Occasional Conformity of the Hugonots in France,
and tell me, if the Consequence is not very probable to be this, that one Age
may make all their posterity Roman Catholics, Vice Versa.

And what is the Opinion their Brethren, who are in Banishment, have of them.
Come les Persons, qu on Avez Vendue leur Religion, as Persons that have sold
their Religion, People who have Tainted their Principles and testified that
they cannot part with their Estates to preserve their Consciences.

They are still Protestants on their Inclination, and they please themselves,
that this Conformity is justified by the occasion of it, and let them that like
it follow their Example.

I am not concerned here to prove that the Church of Rome is no true Church,
that Popery is Idolatry, and that the Cases therefore do not agree. The
Dissenting in both Cases is for Conscience sake, and therein the Cases are
Parallel: We were once all of the Roman Church, and had never removed from
thence, but from Scruples of Conscience, and we are now Dissenters from the
Church of England from scruple of Conscience: We own the Church of England to
be a true Church, and we do not deny Salvation to the Members of the Roman;
there are things in the Church of England we cannot comply with, and there are
some things in the Church of Rome which we could comply with, but there are
things in both we Dissent from, and Occasional Conformity to those very things,
can be justified from very few reasons on one side, which will not hold good on
the other.

This in short then is the plain Conclusion of this Matter. Occasional
Conformity to a Church from which we have separated, and in those things for
which we separated, viz. Communion does not appear to be lawful or justifiable
in a Dissenter, nor are there any Precedents for it in the Scripture.

But Occasional Conformity being practiced as a Qualification for Civil
Employments, is a Reproach to Religion, and scandalous to the Dissenters.

The last is fairly acknowledged by the Author of Moderation a Virtue, and I
think the first is made plain in these Sheets.

Of the whole Argument then this is the sum.

1. Those Dissenters who are yet of the Opinion, it is not unlawful in it self,
should take care to practice it so, as that those Circumstances of
Qualification may not be suspected.

2. They should state what are sufficient Occasions to justifye our Conforming,
to what at other times we have Dissented from, and give us Scripture
Authorities to prove them.

3. They ought to let us see how they can justifye Dissenting at all, if they
can defend Conforming again.

4. They ought to prove that the Conformity, or Occasional Conformity (as they
call it) of Christ, and the Apostles, was to such things as were merely of
Mans' Appointment, or purely to such as were Divine; or whether they Conformed
to any thing they Dissented from before.

But till some of these Points are settled, I cannot but think the whole
practice of it a Scandal to the Dissenters, ruinous to their Interest; and
tends to the reducing them all or their Posterity at least to an absolute total
Conformity, or at best a general Indifferency in Matters of Religion.

FINIS.

