AN EASY AND VERY PRACTICABLE METHOD TO ENABLE DEAF PERSONS TO HEAR: Together
with A brief Account of, and some Reflections and Observations upon, the
several Attempts formerly made for the Benefit of such Persons.

Translated from the GERMAN OF ANDREW ELIAS BUCHNER, Professor of Medicine and
Natural Philosophy in the University of HALLE.

LONDON: Printed for Mess. HAWES, CLARKE, and COLLINS, Booksellers in
Paternoster-row. MDCCLXX.

INTRODUCTION.
THE more extensively useful, and the more adapted to the occasions of life,
the matters are which an author takes upon him to lay before his readers, the
more he answers that end, which every virtuous man ought, in justice, to
propose to himself in every address to the Public, and the more such matters
claim the attention and patience of the reader. These considerations have
principally weighed with me in favor of the present undertaking, and I promise
myself, on this occasion, the approbation of every one, who can put a due value
on the enjoyment of his senses, as well as of him, who can be sensible of the
great disadvantage arising from the loss of any of them.

Sight and hearing are undoubtedly two of the principal external senses, as
they supply us with the knowledge of a far greater number of external objects,
than the other senses put together; which, though indeed of considerable, are
yet of a more limited usefulness, and their impairment or loss more tolerable;
but blind or deaf, what melancholy objects! Both blind and deaf, what
accumulated woe!

I wave, at present, the several attempts which have been made, in order to
correct the manifold defects of sight, at least to lessen or render them
tolerable, confining my reflections, on this occasion, to that of hearing; and,
for that purpose I shall relate the several means devised, in order to amend
this sense, when impaired, or retrieve it, when entirely lost; or by help of
the other senses, and a tolerable degree of understanding in the patient, to
render its loss, in some measure, more tolerable: And lastly, I shall select,
among the several methods proposed, that, which to me appears, to be the
easiest and most simple. But, previous to this, I shall briefly explain the
reasons of the principal defects of the sense of hearing, both from their
causes, and from the structure of the outer and inner ear; and then more
accurately determine the greater or less utility of the methods hitherto
employed, in order to amend these defects.

AN EASY AND PRACTICABLE METHOD, etc.
CHAP. I. Containing reflections preparatory to the following discourse.
AMONG the defects, to which the sense of hearing is subject, the greatest,
without dispute, is the entire loss thereof, or that, which, in a word, we call
deafness. This, when either brought into the world, or contracted before a
child comes to the use of his understanding, and before he learns to speak,
renders him very unhappy, as thereby he continues to be speechless or dumb, and
thus precluded all social intercourse. And this is the reason, why persons born
deaf, are at the same time also dumb, if not taught to speak by some peculiar
devices, or by means of the other senses. To this defect of hearing, we are to
class that which is called difficulty of hearing; which, besides that it comes
nearest to absolute deafness, proceeds, for the most part, from the same
causes, only in a less degree; all the other defects of this sense, as not
being to our present purpose, we shall wave at this time.

All the senses have from nature their proper organs, which are in a certain
determinate manner affected and altered by external objects; and first, in that
they propagate these affections or alterations to the common sensory, and
thereby render our sensations complete, and communicate them to the soul. Now,
as deafness is the inability to perceive those tremulous or vibratory motions
of the air, which produce sound; the cause of this defect must necessarily be,
either in the organ itself, namely the ear, or in its connection with the
common sensory, the vibrations of the air being prevented from producing the
necessary and determinate alterations in those parts of the human body. The
same thing holds with respect to difficulty of hearing, as being only a less
degreee of deafness.

The ear consists of several distinct parts, which together concur to produce
the sense of hearing. Hence, if the causes of deafness, or of a difficulty of
hearing, are in the ear itself, one or more parts thereof must be injured, that
is, be in a preternatural state. To show this the more distinctly, it is
necessary to consider those parts separately, and to explain the preternatural
alterations which occasion deafness, or a difficulty of hearing.

Anatomists commonly divide the parts of the ear into two sorts, namely, those
which belong to the external ear, and are situate without the temporal bones;
and into those that constitute the inner ear, comprising all the parts that lie
within the said bones.

To the first sort belongs that which is properly called the outer ear, and the
meatus auditorius, or auditory passage or canal, the inner part of which last,
anatomists generally refer to the inner ear; but it may be here very
commodiously treated, together with the external parts, as being only a passage
from them. As the different defects of that which is properly called the
external ear, if, in other respects, the aperture of the auditory passage is
not at the same time affected, may produce a difficulty of hearing, or other
defect of this sense, but are never the causes of perfect deafness; so I shall
not insist on this, but directly handle the several defects of the auditory
passage, as an external part of the ear, so far as they are to my present
purpose.

The use of the auditory passage is, to propagate the vibrations of the air,
communicated externally thereto, by repeated repercussions in its cavity, to
the inner parts of the ear: And thence it is necessary, that this passage be
neither obstructed, nor extraordinarily constricted or straitened. In the first
case, deafness is the consequence; in the last, a difficulty of hearing at
least. The first defect often arises either from a long accumulated, a
condensed, or a greatly indurated ear-wax, or from foreign bodies introduced
into the auditory passage; as for instance, cherry-stones, peace, lead-shot,
etc. or from tumors and imposthumes, or from fleshy or spungy excrescences
therein; or, very often from the concretion of its sides from such imposthumes;
or, lastly, from a pellicle or membrance growing across it, as is frequently
observed in newborn children. The other defect of the auditory passage,
namely, its too great constriction, may arise from the very same causes, if we
only except the preternatural membrane stretched across it, or the obstruction
of the auditory passage by fluid matters, which diffuse themselves on every
side.

The second species of the parts of the ear, mentioned above, constitutes the
inner ear, and comprises the membrane of the tympanum, or drum, its cavity, the
labyrinth, the tuba Eustachii, and the auditory nerves. The membrane of the
drum receives by the auditory passage the tremulous motions or vibrations of
the air, which it farther diffuses in its cavity, and in the labyrinth. But
particularly in the drum we find four species of defects, which prevent its
ordinary use: One, the too great flaccidity of its membrane, whereby it is
unfitted for vibrations or tremulous motions, and so transmits sounds, either
not at all, or but faintly, to the other inner parts. And hence we may judge,
how it happens, that a phlegmatic constitution, moist and purulent ears, damp
air, foggy and rainy weather, and the like, often increase a difficulty of
hearing, to a pitch of perfect deafness. The other defect of the membrane of
the drum is directly opposite to this, and consists in an extraordinary tension
thereof; which, when to so considerable a degree, as too much to resist the
insinuating tremulous air, and prevent its vibrations, gives rise in like
manner to a difficulty of hearing, and even to perfect deafness; as may be
often observed in the case of elderly people, and emaciated constitutions. Both
these defects, flaccidity and tension, may also arise from an undue action of
the muscles, moving the small auditory bones. But as such considerations would
carry us to anatomical and philosophical niceties, we shall wave them at
present, as not greatly to our purpose. The complete induration, or even
ossification of the membrane of the drum, is the third defect; which may
besides, from the same causes mentioned before, under the extraordinary tension
of this membrane, impair the hearing. And lastly, its laceration constitutes
the fourth defect, which, indeed, does not so soon vitiate the hearing; as the
air, insinuating into the auditory passage, can freely pass into the inner
parts of the ear, and put them in motion: but then, by this immediate contact,
the just mentioned tender and sensible inner parts are blunted and rendered
unfit for farther regular sensations.

The cavity of the drum, and the labyrinth are, indeed, as consisting of bones
of a more durable substance than all the parts of the ear hitherto mentioned,
sometimes, however, subject to several untoward accidents, whereby the hearing
may be injured or depraved. For as they are covered with a very tender and
extremely sensible periosteum, which may be affected with inflammation and
imposthume, and thereby be either destroyed, or so indurated, that no
communicated vibrations of the air can any longer put them in due motion: Or,
also, as these cavities are sometimes so choked up with purulent matter, as to
become unfit for propagating the vibratory motions of the air; or that at
length there sometimes ensues from the imposthumation of the periosteum, a
caries of the bones themselves, which may entirely destroy the whole of this
curious piece of mechanism, and unfit it for its destination.

In the last place, before I touch on the defects of the auditory nerve, I must
farther mention the tuba Eustachii, which some reckon among the parts of the
external ear, but which I refer to the internal, because the bony part of this
passage lies between the temporal bone and the os multiforme; besides, the
entire passage lies concealed in the cavity of the mouth: And running from the
cavity of the drum to the palate, and terminating behind the tonsils, with an
aperture in the mouth, is partly bony, partly cartilaginous, and partly
membranous, and internally lined with a fine membrane full of mucose glands:
This passage, I say, serves principally to renew or shift the air, which is
lodged in the inner cavities of the ear, in order to prevent its entire loss of
elasticity by a too long confinement there. When this passage therefore is
either obstructed, or entirely destroyed, the air, contained in the ear, will
be unfit for the reception and propagation of that determinate degree of
vibratory motion, which is necessary for the act of hearing. The obstruction of
this passage often arises from a critical and catarrhous accumulation of mucus,
from an incrassation and induration of this accumulated mucus; from the
swelling of the mucose glands; from membranous and fibrous excrescences; which,
upon the erosion of the inner membrane of this passage, sometimes happen,
particularly by a venereal taint; and from numberless other causes. The erosion
in this case happens in the same manner, as was mentioned in the erosion of the
membranes of the bones of the ear.

The auditory nerve is the last, but yet a principal part of the internal ear,
and the alone copula, or tie, by which this peculiar organ of sensation is
connected with the common sensory. Whence also its due and regular disposition
is absolutely necessary, in order to communicate to the soul, by means of this
sense, its proper perceptions and sensations. This communication or intercourse
of motion is interrupted, when the subtle fluid, called the nervous juice by
physiological writers, is obstructed in its regular motion and passage through
these nerves and their principal branches. Most pathologists reckon
principally, among the causes of this interrupted passage, the obstruction of
the nerve. But as from physiological principles, it does not appear, how this
extraordinary subtle fluid should be incrassated, or the fibers of the nerves
drawn together or contracted; the obstruction in this case must be the same as
when in the nutricious vessels, and within the involucra or sheaths of this
nerve, accumulated, indurated, or even extravasated juices from lacerated
vessels, being collected, compress the nervous fibers. The principal defect,
which in these nerves can possibly interrupt the motion of the nervous juice,
is, secondly, their compression; which may arise either at their origin, or
near the common sensory, or in their entire length, either internally or
externally, by accumulated or even extravasated blood, or other juices of the
adjacent parts; as also in the ear itself, from a caries or exostosis of its
bones; which last has often been observed, particularly in venereal cases.

Besides these defects of the auditory nerve hitherto mentioned, we are
principally to attend to the seat of this disorder, and to its greater or less
distance from the common sensory. For, when deafness arises from compression,
or even erosion of the nerve spread over the labyrinth, there still remains a
resource to supply this defect in another and that an ingenious manner; and
even to produce such sensations, as are otherwise communicated to the soul by
the organ of hearing. But if the origin of the nerve, namely, that part thereof
which lies nearest the common sensory in the brain, is injured, it is not in
the power of art to restore the sense of hearing. Yet by all this I would not
on any account deny, but that dumb persons of this class, might by the eye, by
a long, careful, and attentive observation of the different motions of the
mouth in the act of speaking, be brought, at last, to understand the thoughts
of those about them; as in Amman's method, of which hereafter.

CHAP. II. An account of the attempts formerly made for the relief of the deaf.
HOW various soever the causes of deafness and difficulty of hearing, hitherto
mentioned, may be, many have, for a long time past, especially more latterly,
been employed in the quest and discovery of the means of removing some way or
other, or at least of diminishing this calamity. The many essays for this
purpose, made by physicians and inquirers into nature, may be very properly
divided into two classes. To the first I refer that method, according to which,
a person, either naturally deaf, or become so by some accident, may, by means
of the other senses, without the intervention of the organs of hearing, or any
part of them, be enabled to have those perceptions, which others obtain by the
sense of hearing. The second class, on the contrary, comprises those methods,
in which the auditory nerve itself is put in motion, and thus the very
sensation produced in the soul, which we usually call hearing. This method
again is twofold: One, in which the vibratory motion of sound is propagated to
the auditory nerve, by means of the ordinary, but, in other respects, faulty
parts of the organ of hearing; by the intervention of some other bodies, and by
a variety of ingenious devices. The other method, on the contrary, conveys
sound in like manner to the auditory nerve, and thus produces the sensation of
hearing, not only by means of the ordinary channels and organs, but also by
means of the adjoining firm parts of the head.

Several physicians and other learned persons have been at great pains on the
discovery and improvement of the first method, in order, by the other senses,
particularly the sight, without the intervention of the auditory organs, to
produce in the soul the perceptions peculiar to the ear. But most of these
attempts have only occasionally and incidentally proved of any benefit to the
hearing: As most of them have, in all their attempts, made it their principal
view, to enable the deaf person to speak; though, indeed, the frequent and
attentive observation of the motions of the mouth and other parts, which concur
to form articulate sounds, may give such a degree of readiness to those
wretched persons, as to enable them to understand and distinguish, with
extraordinary quickness, all the motions of a speaker, and thus also clearly to
comprehend all that is spoken. Nature herself has formed most persons
uncommonly docile in this respect, though otherwise not endued with the
brightest parts. Experience very day almost shows, that deaf persons may
observe by the mouth, that which others speak; and their uncommon and great
attention is the reason, that they have the misfortune to be generally taken by
the common people for very arch and roguish.

But this very natural device, namely by means of the nicest observation of the
motions of the mouth in the act of speaking, employed in order to hear, and by
imitating the very same motions also to speak, may be reduced to several rules,
limited and determined by the genius of every language spoken, and thereby the
learning them made much easier. This is that device, in which, for a century
and a half back, many learned men have employed their thoughts; among whom
Peter Pontius, Paul Bonnetus, Dr. Wallis, Holder, Sibscota, Franciscus
Mercurius Van Helmont, but above all others, John Conrad Amman, have most of
all distinguished themselves. It would carry me too far, and be inconsistent
with my present design, were I to recite here all the attempts made by these
learned men to this purpose, and their success therein. Suffice it therefore to
give a short account of the latest attempt in that way, namely, that of Dr.
Amman; and at the same time to point out its principal defect; but as to the
others, briefly only to mention their writings, or other accounts we have of
them. Peter Pontius, a Spanish Benedictine, who lived toward the close of the
sixteenth century, made the first essay in this way, and taught deaf persons
both to write and to speak. His method, which he did not himself describe, was
afterward improved by Paul Bonnetus, a master-gunner of the king of Arragon,
and explained in a particular writing, entitled, Reduccion de las letras, y
art para ensenar hablar los mudos; i. e. The resolution of the letters, with
the art of enabling dumb persons to speak, Madrid, 1620, in 4to. Dr. John
Wallis, who after both the former applied himself to improve this art, gave a
description thereof, both in his Tractatus grammatico-physicus de loquela, and
in his letter to the honorable Mr. Boil, de surdis mutisque informandis. The
former tract is also prefixed to his Grammatica linguae Anglicanae, published
in 1653, and was afterward often published with Dr. Amman's writing. But the
latter we have in the philosophical transactions, No. 41; as also in the
Ephemerides acad. not. curiosor, Dec. 1. Ann. 1, in append. p. 11. and seqq.
About the same time Dr. Holder, subdean of the king's chapel, published in
1669, in 8vo, a book, called Elements of speech, etc. together with the art of
teaching deaf and dumb persons to speak. In the year immediately following,
namely 1670, George Sibsesta published, also at London, the following book,
namely, Deaf and dumb man's discourse, or concerning those who are born deaf
and dumb; to which he subjoined a treatise, De ratione loquelae creaturarum
animatarum. Lastly, the younger Van Helmont attempted to explain more
distinctly, the natural formation of the letters of the alphabet, for the
benefit of the deaf and dumb; but the has confined himself to the Hebrew
language, and given his rules in his Alphabetum natural Hebraicum, which has
been several times reprinted: I have seen an abstract of it under the following
title, Francisci Mercurii ab Helmont alphabeti vere naturalis brevissima
delineatio, quae simul methodum suppeditat, juxta quam, qui surdi nati sunt,
six informari possunt, ut non alios solum loquentes intelligant, sed et ipsi ad
sermonis usum perveniant, Ann. 1667, in 12mo, cum fig.

But above all others, John Conrad Amman, a physician of Amsterdam,
distinguished himself more, toward the end of the last century, by his
ingenious method of teaching the deaf and dumb to speak: And after having
happily succeeded in his method, not only on a deaf and dumb girl at Harlem,
but also on his own daughter, and on several others, he published, in 1692, at
Amsterdam, his Tract of Surdus loquens, in 8vo, wherein he laid open the whole
of his method. Which being afterward published in English by Daniel Foot, and
highly approved by the learned, he gave a new and more enlarged edition of it
at Amsterdam in 1700, in 8vo, under this title, Dissertatio de loquela, qua non
solum vox humana et loquendi artificium, ex originibus suis eruuntur, sed et
traduntur media, quibus ii, qui ab incunabulis, surdi et muti fuerunt, loquelam
adipisci, quique difficulter loquuntur, vitia sua emendare possint. And
afterward there came out several editions thereof, a proof of the good
reception it met with from the public. On this foundation William Kerger
established his method in his epistle De surdo-mutorum cura, published in the
appendix to the Ephemerid. Acad. not. curiosor. Cent. I. and II. p. 233. seqq.
accommodating his instructions to the German language, together with a succinct
account of his predecessors in the same method of treatment.

The whole of this method rests on that well known physiological principle,
incontestably confirmed by daily experience, namely, that we communicate our
thoughts to each other by means of articulate sounds, formed by the organs of
speech, which we call language: And, by a daily practice, we insensibly learn
to form with every conception, a certain articulate found. The simple
articulate sounds are generally four and twenty, and in several languages
fewer, called letters of the alphabet; which, when combined according to
certain rules, and pronounced at once like a single articulate sound, are
called syllables, and a farther combination forms that which we call words. But
all these articulate sounds, in order to their production, require, at the same
time, a certain visible alteration and motion in the organs of speech, namely,
the lips, teeth, tongue, cheeks, larynx, etc. For instance, all sounds,
articulated by a bare aperture of the mouth in different degrees, are called
vowels: And all others, formed by means of the other parts, are mutes or
consonants. And, indeed, the accurate attention to, and careful imitation of,
all the particular motions requisite to the articulation of sounds, constitute
the whole of Amman's method.

As in this, or in any other method of the same kind, the organs of hearing
contribute nothing to the effect, it may indeed, be employed in all the defects
and imperfections of the auditory organs, by which either deafness or a
difficulty of hearing is produced. This method, however, is subject to several
considerable imperfections, which render it greatly inferior to some of the
following methods, by which the auditory nerve itself is at the same time made
to be affected. In the first place, let us suppose a case, and which actually
happens, as appears from the history of diseases, namely, that such a persom is
born deaf, dumb, and blind. No one, certainly, though more dexterous than Amman
himself, could, by that method, impart the conceptions, which, in other
respects, arise from the sense of hearing. But then it may be alleged, that if
he cannot see, he may feel, at least. I grant, that he may learn to speak in
that manner: But then, for one in this condition, to lay his hands on the mouth
and throat of the speaker, would appeal clumsy and awkward: Not to mention,
that in forming sounds, several motions are performed with the tongue, the
teeth, the cheeks, the gums, etc. mostly observable by the eye, but not
properly to be felt, without interrupting the speaker at the same time.

The second imperfection in this method, consists principally in confining the
conceptions imparted, barely to language. All those ravishing sensations,
which, in other respects, the sense of hearing is susceptible of, are here
quite lost; nor can the thrilling motions of the organs of speech,
instantaneously lost in each other, when raised with that rapidity in the
expressions of the deeper Passions, as to strike and surprise the hearers, be
once distinguished by, much less yield, that melting sensation to a person so
wretched. Much less could a skilful musician throw him into those soft and calm
raptures, when under his hands, the strings, in harmony truly divine, thrill
the hearer with unspeakable delight. Thirdly and lastly, take a person of
little or no natural abilities, and attempt to teach him in this manner; I am
fully persuaded, that all the pains taken with him, would be quite lost: Not
Amman himself, with all his art and practical skill, could hope to succeed in a
case of such indocility.

I now proceed to the second order of the attempts made to restore hearing to
the deaf, by putting the auditory nerve itself in motion, thereby producing the
sensation of hearing. I have already shown above, that this order may be
properly divided into two sorts. To the first belong the methods of propagating
sound in a due degree of motion, by the ordinary though faulty organs of
hearing, quite to the auditory nerve. To this we may justly refer all those
contrivances, which, either by peculiar instruments, or other means or devices,
raise or heighten the motions and repercusions of the air in the channels and
cavities of the ear; when those parts are so faulty as not to be put into the
proper vibratory motions by the ordinary action of sound. And in this case it
is always requisite, that the auditory channel be open.

When the auditory channel is thus open, or the other parts of the inner ear
connected therewith are susceptible of some, though a very faint degree of,
vibratory motion, and only require a greater action of the insinuating air than
is necessary in a natural state, there hence arises a difficulty of hearing,
and not a perfect degree of deafness. Now as among the several methods of
propagating sound, by means of the parts mentioned, to the auditory nerve, in
natural order, they are only of service in difficulty of hearing, but not in
the case of perfect deafness; I shall therefore mention only, in brief, some of
the means of this species of method. And one of the best known, and which
nature herself, for the most part, points out, is, to apply the hand bent and
hollow to the ear, and thereby not only to convey a greater quantity of
vibrating air to the auditory channel, but likewise to raise or heighten its
repercussions. With this view also, such persons generally set the mouth wide
open, when they want to hear more accurately; that the air, reflected from the
palate, may be forced through the tuba Eustachii into the cavity of the drum,
and thereby render more intense the vibration of the air. But then we are to
suppose this last mentioned channel to have no obstruction.

And this very heightening the action of sound, is procured by means of
peculiar instruments. Of this sort are acoustic trumpets or horns, instruments
commonly well known, and which require no particular notice to be taken of them
here. Somewhat less known is the ingenious acoustic drum of Father Sebastian
Truchel, a Carmelite monk, which, in 1718, he presented to the royal academy of
sciences at Paris, and which had their approbation. This drum consists of
gold-beater's skin, which is originally ox gut. This skin is stretched either
on a round or an oval hoop, as is commonly done in drums; so that when fastened
to the ear, it forms, with the natural membrane of the drum of the ear, a
perfect drum; the artificial skin exhibiting the part which is struck upon; the
ear itself again and the auditory channel, the kettle or hollow cavity of the
drum; and the natural membrane of the drum of the ear, the undermost skin of
the drum. The artificial skin had, befides, over it, a raised cover, in shape
of a box, whose aperture was turned to the mouth of the speaker. A person hard
of hearing in both ears, may, by means of a semicircle of brass or silver,
which goes round the hinder part of the head, under the hair or peruke, fasten
two such drums to his ears.

We are now at length come to the other method of the second class or order,
comprising those means which convey found, and thereby restore actual hearing
by extraordinary ways, and not by means of the natural auditory channel, to the
auditory nerve. But before I explain the peculiar methods under this head, I
must here borrow three prepositions as principles, from natural philosophy and
anatomy, as they properly afford a natural foundation and reason for all the
methods that are now to follow, and to all the remarks that may occasionally
offer, as we proceed. In the first place, sound is propagated by bodies
elastic, and susceptible of a vibratory motion. Secondly, propagation of sound
is interrupted by softer interposing parts, unsusceptible of any, or of but
faint vibrations. Thirdly, the bones of the skull, in which the auditory nerves
are lodged, form, with the upper maxillary bone, one continued hard and elastic
body, uninterrupted in their connection by any softer parts, and hence
extremely well adapted for the propagation of found.

As I have adduced these prepositions principally with the view that the
attentive reader may have them constantly in his eye, either in passing a
judgment on, or in explaining, the several methods, which, indeed, produce the
sense of hearing by means of the auditory nerve, but not by the natural
auditory channel, to which class also my own method, which I am now about to
explain, does belong; so I shall at present, first, historically relate the
several imperfect attempts of this kind: And then, secondly, describe my own
method, in all its circumstances, and in the whole of the manner of procedure.
Thirdly and lastly, explain it in its physical and physiological principles,
and at the same time determine the particular case, in which it is absolutely
inapplicable.

We have extant experiments of a long standing, the first careful attention to
which is generally, at least by Father Kircher, in his Musurgia universalis, P.
II. p. 559. ascribed to the celebrated Neapolitan John Baptista Porta; namely,
that we can, for instance, hear the sound of a ringing fork, when striking its
forepart, or prongs, on another hard body, we hold its handle to the teeth.
The very same thing is observable in a pair of tongs, a steel wire, a
sword-blade, etc. when struck in the same manner, and applied to the teeth.
Moreover, that we distinctly hear all the tones or notes of a musical
instrument, when played upon, on taking it in the teeth, or touching it with a
wire, sword-blade, etc. held in the same manner. Travelers, who happen to
stray in the night, upon laying the head, especially the hinder part, close to
the earth, may hear distinctly, at the distance of a German mile or more,
people going, riding, or traveling. In this manner, some of the inhabitants of
Halle could, on the neighboring eminences, hear all the cannon fired in the
glorious battle of Rosbach, in as distinct and plain a manner, as if at no
great distance from the action, though at that time full four German miles off.
Conrad Victor Scheider, so celebrated for his description of the mucose glands
of the nose, in his book, De ossibus temporum, published at Wittemburg in 1653,
in 8vo, p. 43, relates the same thing of some peasants, who sticking their
staves in the earth, held one end in their teeth; to wave other instances at
present.

All these experiments succeed as well, if not better, with deaf persons, than
with those that have their hearing: As those last, upon stopping their ears,
feel a tingling and whizzing from the included air, which the former are
without. The proof of this I refer to the experience of all deaf persons who
will make the trial. For, cases, where deafness cannot be relieved by this
method, and which I shall mention toward the conclusion, are very rare: Nay,
the practice of setting the mouth wide open, in difficulty of hearing, in order
more distinctly to hear, is in some measure reducible hither: Though, in
explaining this observation, I must differ from very great physicians, who
would account for this manner of hearing, solely from the air insinuated into
the tuba Eustachii; which I shall more fully treat below.

That the methods of hearing but just mentioned, without the use of the
ordinary organs of hearing, has been confirmed by the repeated observations of
physicians and inquirers into nature, I shall briefly illustrate from some
credible histories, which may, at the same time clear up, and show the
different application of the method I am now upon. Boerhaave, a man, whose
testimony is every where unexceptionable, tells us in his Praelectiones
academicae in proprias institutiones medicas, T. IV. p. 414. according to
Haller's edition, of a deaf Musician, who, laying hold with his teeth in the
upper parts of his lute, at the tuning pegs, played in a manner perfectly just,
and according to all the rules of art, without the least mistake or blunder.
Like instances we have in Ingrassias, in his Commentarii in Galeni librum de
ossibus, Schelhamer in his book De auditu, and in Du Verney, in his treatise on
hearing.

Du Verney, just now mentioned, as also De Lanis, in his Magist. nature. and
artis, p. 928, and others, have farther observed, that deaf persons have been
enabled to hear extremely well, if, in speaking, one should direct the sound
over and against the head. A curious instance of this we find in the
Ephemerides academ. not. curiosor. decur. i. ann. i. observe. xxxv. which is the
more remarkable, as the principal circumstance therein lies buried in the
rubbish of trifling quack medicines. Emanuel Ramiresius de Cariour, a Spaniard,
is the inventor of this method, of whom Petrus a Castro, physician to one of
the Dukes of Mantua, learned it, and to whom we owe the account. The whole of
it consisted in the following particulars. In the first place, the patient,
according as his constitution might require, was to use a proper laxative, and
then once or twice a somewhat stronger purgative; after which the head was to
be shaved at the coronal suture, for a hand's-breadth, and often rubbed,
especially morning and evening, with the following salve: Take three ounces of
the best brandy, two drams of purified saltpetre, one ounce of oil of bitter
almonds, set the whole to boil gently, till all the brandy is evaporated, then
pour to it an ounce of orange water, (aqua naphae) stir it with a spatula, till
it turns of the consistence of a thin salve. Lastly, early every morning the
patient must clean, perfectly well, his head and eyes, and clear his ears and
nose, rinse his mouth, and chew some mastich, or other fragrant substance, and
then do his hair back with an ivory comb; this done, the speaker is to direct
his voice just over the shaven part, and the deaf person comes to hear
perfectly and distinctly every word that is spoken: And thus the deaf learn,
not only to hear, but to speak. The reason of all this, will appear below.

But as the methed of Ramiresius is attended with many inconveniences, and as
it must be very troublesome, not only to the patient, on account of such
antecedent preparation, but to the speaker also. The following methods of
producing this sense, by means of some elastic body held to the teeth, claim,
by much, the preference: Of this the experiments adduced above are sufficient
proofs. But the following account, taken from the Breslaw collection, Essay 21.
p. 330. is still a fuller proof. A man at Copenhagen had, by distemper, lost
his hearing, to such a degree, as not to have the least sense of firing of
cannon, the beating ever so many drums, nor of any other the most violent
motions: At last, he accidentally fell on a method, by which he could perfectly
well understand any speaker, and write down all that he said; and this he did
by means of a stick of wood, of a moderate length, one end of which he held to,
or took in his teeth, resting the other end against the place where the speaker
stood. And thus at church he could understand the preacher, and write down the
sermon, upon seating himself just under the pulpit, with his face toward it,
and one end of the stick, while the other was between his teeth, resting
against the foot of the pulpit.

About ten years since, John Paul Baumer, a young physician of Franconia,
undertook to improve this method: And in a writing, which we shall presently
mention, he pretended, he himself had devised the whole of the method,
explaining it from the nature of the sense of hearing, and from the different
manner of propagating sounds; but now and then something escapes him, which
bewrays, that he was not altogether unacquainted with that which others had
attempted before him in that way. He published his method in an inaugural
disputation at Erfurt in 1749, under the following title, Prodromus methodi
surdos a nativitate faclendi audientes and loquentes. The whole consists in
taking a stick, made of an elastic body, or glass, steel, copper, bell-metal,
silver, etc. flat and broad at both ends, to prevent its touching the lips; and
being thus made fit for the due propagation of sound, one end of this stick the
deaf person takes between his teeth, and the speaker the other, with this
precaution, however, that neither of them shall touch the stick with the tongue
or lips: In this manner, the deaf person hears every word that is uttered.

In order the more fully to establish the utility of this method, the author
gives an instance in his second remark, 6. of a young woman of twenty-four, who
learned to hear in this manner, though with an old rusty piece of a
sword-blade, about two feet long: For, upon pronouncing only a few words, she,
with a smile, and pointing to her head, intimated, that she perceived every
word that was said, and directly attempted to imitate them. But, as there are
many defects in this method, as namely, that the stick must not be touched
either with the lips or the tongue, in which case, all the lingual and labial
letters, as b, d, f, l, m, etc must be uttered indistinctly; to obviate which,
the author, indeed, has, 15 and 17. of his disputation, proposed another
method, by using an acoustic tube, and a speaking trumpet. If the first, the
deaf person must take it in his teeth, and the speaker must pronounce at the
wide end of the tube; which purpose a common funnel will answer as well: But if
a speaking trumpet, the deaf person must open his mouth very wide, while the
speaker, who pronounces through it, holds its upper broad part close to the
teeth of the deaf person, yet without touching them.

CHAP. III. An account of the best and easiest method to make deaf persons hear.
TO conclude, all the methods hitherto metioned under this second class, are
rendered far more commodious, more perfect, and of far more general utility, by
considering a peculiar instance of an ingenious deaf person, who gave the
greatest attention to every incident that offered to his observation: And this
method I shall now propose at full length, as the easiest and best to enable
deaf persons to hear. I am not, indeed, the first who published the account,
and an explanation of it; as an unknown author, under the initial letters C, F,
W. has already described it in the Harlem Journal for the year 1754, p 393.
seqq. but as both his historical part is erroneous and imperfect, and the
explanation of its circumstances, and the observations made thereon, are
groundless and false; I had the whole matter more fully and more justly
described, a year and an half since, in an academical disputation, defended
under my presidentship, with the following title, Dissertatio sistens novae
methodi, surdos reddendi audientes, physicas and medicas rations. But as such
dissertations seldom come into the hands of any, but of physicians, I shall
here, first, relate the history of this deaf person, in all its circumstances,
together with the manner in which he recovered his hearing. Then, secondly,
give a rational explanation, grounded on physical sical and medical principles,
of all the incidental circumstances observable therein.

A reputable merchant of Wesel, in the Duchy of Cleves, a venerable, hoary, old
man of seventy-eight, had, as early as his twentieth year, a great difficulty
of hearing, which, as far as he could recollect, was occasioned, either by a
violent fall, or by a profuse bleeding at the nose. The most promising means
against this disorder proved ineffectual, it rather growing upon him from year
to year, till, at last, he became quite deaf, unable to understand a single
word, without bawling loud in his ears. Both German and Dutch physicians, who
were consulted on this occasion, could not, with all their art and skill,
afford any relief: At length, after an accurate examination of the external
organs of hearing, the case was deemed incurable. However, he procured a
variety of acoustic tubes from Amsterdam, in order to afford some relief to
those who wanted to speak with him: But their use was afterward laid aside, as
being attended either with much inconvenience, or as never procuring any
distinct degree of hearing.

Afterward marrying, and having two of his eldest children, a son and a
daughter, taught to play on the spinnet, he often came up to it, and eagerly
wished to hear the music: As the music-master once happened to say, that it was
very possible for him to hear, if, according to an old, and well known
experiment, he held a thin stick, or a tobacco-pipe, with the one end on the
bridge of the sound-board, and with the other to the upper teeth; this he
instantly tried, and was greatly pleased, that he could both plainly
distinguish each note, and, as he thought, much stronger than formerly, at his
best hearing. But all this was ineffectual to make him understand persons
speaking, till an accidental trial procured him also this happiness.

In the year 1749, he had the good fortune to light, by mere accident, on a
peculiar method, by which any person, at the distance of twenty, or even thirty
paces, may, without greatly straining his voice, speak to be understood. This
happened as follows: As one time this deaf person had all his family about him,
and was pleasing himself with his daughter's playing, by means of his
tobaccopipe; his brother, who happened to be present, alleged, that as he
could plainly distinguish the sounds or notes of the spinnet, he might also, in
the same manner, understand the articulate sounds of a speaker. For this
purpose, his brother took a speaking-trumpet, and holding the narrow part, or
mouth-piece, to the upper teeth of the deaf person, he uttered a few words at
the upper or wider part thereof: This trial, however, proved unsuccessful, the
deaf man not being sensible of the least articulate sound. But he himself
directly fell upon a device, which proved more successful. The brother was to
hold the rim of the wide end of the speaking-trumpet to his upper teeth, and he
himself to do the like with the lower end, or mouthpiece: Upon which, his
brother had scarce uttered a couple of words, but he directly repeated them
with the greatest joy, and also assured him, that he understood them more
distinctly than if he had bawled them in the loudest manner in his ear.

The deaf man did not stop here: In order to be convinced, whether the success
was not owing to the structure of the speaking-trumpet, or whether the same
thing might not succeed with other bodies; he directly tried, in the same
manner, his tobacco-pipe, and a little wooden stick, and to his great joy found
it not only possible, but that the speaker might even speak as low as he
pleased, so the voice were only audible. The curiosity of this man and his
friends did not rest here; they wanted to know, at what distance one might
converse with him: For this purpose, they took thin sticks or slips of wood, of
different lengths, and one, in particular, six feet long, an inch broad, and of
the thickenss of the back of a knife. At Wesel, and in the country round about,
they call such sticks flooring-slips or laths, which they use in filling up the
openings of the boards of the flooring, when starting asunder: And such slips
are the more commodious, as being thin, they the less hinder the pronunciation,
and as in other respects, they produce the same effect in propagating sound:
And even, by means of a bundle of them tied together, the lowest sound is
distinctly audible, when the bystanders can scarce perceive any.

The farther trials and observations, which were made in the use of this
method, have been confirmed by the following experiments. In the first place,
upon bawling in the loudest manner, in the mouth of the deaf person, through a
large tin funnel, without touching the teeth, or even without the funnel, not a
single word was understood. Secondly, if the slip of wood be held too fast with
the finger, or laid hold on with shut lips, the voice proves very indistinct.
But thirdly, if held with the teeth, the sensation is extremely weak. Fourthly,
if the slip be held to the under teeth, there is not the least sense of
hearing. Whereas, fifthly, the voice is perceptible and distinct, upon
bringing, in using the slip, the tongue to the palate or to the teeth. Sixthly,
the voice is less perceptible on joining the teeth together, than on their
standing asunder. Seventhly, though the mouth be full of water, the hearing is
not in the least diminished. Eighthly, when a brass or iron wire is held to the
teeth, the deaf person hears nothing at all; but held between the teeth, a
little. Ninthly, the deaf person may hear very well, on holding, by the lower
rim, a beer-glass, to the upper teeth; or if, with the mouth shut, he presses
it somewhat hard just under the nose, and another person directs his voice up
the glass, close to it; all which answers not with a wine-glass. Tenthly and
lastly, the speaker must have good sound teeth, without any loose ones, at
least in the upper jaw, as then the voice is very indistinct.

As the explanation of all the methods hitherto treated, and the observations
occasionally offering thereon, are founded on the three physical and medical
propositions, advanced above; all that is necessary here, is to make a closer
application of them to the present case, and from the consequences thence
drawn, give a sufficient proof of the commodiousness and utility of the last
method proposed, to procure hearing to the deaf. And thus, in the first place,
I shall briefly handle the propagation of sound, so far as is necessary to my
present purpose. Secondly, mention those parts of the body, which either
obstruct, or promote this propagation. Thirdly, deduce from their several
causes the peculiar observations, made in the foregoing paragraph. Fourthly and
lastly, determine briefly those cases, in which the application of this method
does not take place.

Inquirers into nature show, that the propagation of sound depends principally
on elastic bodies, that is, such, whose parts resist the action.of another body
upon them, and which, when thereby altered in situation, restore themselves to
their former state, from a force, not arising from their gravity, but peculiar
to them. For, sound is nothing other but the tremulous, or vibratory motion,
arising from elasticity, of the minutest air-particles, whereby a peculiar
sensation is produced in the auditory organs. Now, as this vibratory motion,
and the sound produced thereby, are solely owing to the elasticity of bodies,
we may thence fairly infer, that all elastic bodies are sonorous; for instance,
glass, bell-metal, copper, silver, steel, etc. But, in order to one body's
acting upon another, they must come either into mediate or immediate contact
with each other. For, action at distance, actio in distans, is both, by
physical and metaphysical principles, a nonentity, a mere fancy. Now, as daily
experience shows, that sound takes its rise at a distance from the ear, and
thus only mediately, namely, by another intervening body, puts in motion the
auditory organs; it follows hence, that the body producing this mediate effect,
must be elastic, as the propagation of sound is not possible by means of any
other body.

The elastic body, which commonly propagates sound, is the air; but it is
possessed of this virtue from no other quality, but from that of its
elasticity. Consequently, all elastic bodies without exception answer this
purpose, so that they only affect the organs of hearing, or are continuous with
them. Of this we have undoubted proof from well-known experiments. Besides the
instances adduced above, it is a thing we may daily observe in musical
instruments. The tremor or vibration, imparted to the string of a spinnet or
violin, and the like instruments, is propagated from it to the bridge, and
thence again to the sound-board; and in the instance we are now upon, from the
bridge of the spinnet to the tobacco-pipe, and thence farther on, till it
reaches, and puts into a similar motion, the organs of hearing; and the parts
themselves of our body are adapted for this propagation. For instance, hang a
little bell, cymbal, pair of tongs, etc. by means of a metal wire or
gut-string, on the finger, and with that finger stop the ear, and strike upon
or move any of these bodies, and the sound is perfectly well perceived: Or take
a watch by the chain between the teeth, and stop the ears close, and you will
very distinctly hear it go.

As in these cases, the sound is propagated from the mouth to the ear, though
the air, which is put in motion, is no ways connected with the external ear; in
that case it must be, that the parts of the head, lying between the mouth and
the organ of hearing, are the means of propagation. But as it is well known
from physical grounds, that soft parts, susceptible of little or no degree of
vibration, are not only in themselves incapable of propagating sound, but even
obstruct, or, at least, diminish its farther propagation, when happening to
interrupt the connection of the hard and elastic parts: The hard and elastic
parts, therefore, of the body, uninterrupted in their close connection or
continuity by the intervention of softer parts, are alone fittest for this
purpose.

I shall now briefly mention, as I promised above, all these hard parts of the
head, with their several connections with each other; from all which, their
capacity or incapacity to propagate sound will be more easily and certainly
determined; and shall begin with the under parts, where, according to the
experiments above mentioned, the communication and propagation of sound took
its rise; and thus shall proceed to the upper parts. And first, the teeth offer
to consideration, which are parts extremely hard and firm, and by an
articulation, called gomphosis, wedged or fixed immoveably in their cavities or
sockets, in both the jaw-bones, so as not to drop out even in a skeleton. In
the second place, follows the under jaw bone, both whose apophyses condyloideae
are obliquely inserted in the fovea glenoides of the temporal bone, and move
over the oblique eminence of the same bone, by means of the cartilago
interarticularis. Thirdly, the upper maxillary bones come to be considered,
whose hinder and inner part is immediately connected with the apophyses
pterygoides of the os sphenoides; but the forepart firmly connected with the
palatine to the ossa palati, and with the zygomatic processes to the os
zygomaticum. Then, fourthly, follows the just mentioned os jugale, or
zygomaticum, which, by a peculiar process, is closely connected, backwards,
with the temporal bone. Fifthly, the palatine bones are connected with the os
cuneiforme by the pterygoidal processes. Sixthly, the os cuneiforme lies in the
middle, between the said bones, and forms, as it were, the common copula or tie
of these and of the temporal bones; seeing it is connected forwards with the
palatine bones by the pterygoid processes, and by the temporal processes,
called by some the greater wing of the os cuneiforme, with the os squamosum and
petrosum of the temporal bone. Hence, seventhly, it appears, that the temporal
bone is immediately connected with the os jugale and cuneiforme, and mediately
with the palatine bones, and both the maxillary bones, and with the teeth; yet
so, as that the connection with the inferior maxillary is interrupted by an
interposing cartilage. Eighthly, the connection of the temporal with the other
bones of the cranium, as the ossa frontis, sincipitis, and occipitis, is either
mediate, by means of the os cuneiforme, or immediate, by means of the sutures;
which last, in more advanced years, entirely disappear. Ninthly and lastly, to
this head we refer the tuba Eustachii, a canal, partly bony, partly
cartilaginous, and partly membranous, and closely connected with the temporal
bone.

From this connection of bones, we may plainly see, that sound is propagated by
such of them, as are continuous, and closely connected together, and are, as
much as may be, either bare and naked, or only covered with thinly expanded
soft parts: Of this kind are principally the upper teeth, then the upper
maxillary bone; also all the bones of the cranium, when stripped of their hair,
and their other softer parts, are a little stretched, either by the hand, or
some astringent. And this is the foundation of Ramiresius' method, very easily
explicable from that which we have just said. On the contrary, where there is
neither no perfect and continuous connection of bones with each other,
particularly with the temporal, which contains the internal ear, or where too
many softer parts lie round or between the bones, the propagation of vibratory
motion, and consequently of sound, is, according to physical principles,
impossible: On this account, neither the under maxillary bone, nor the tuba
Eustachii, can properly propagate sound. Of the last we are, moreover, to
observe, that being membranous from the pterygoid processes to its opening into
the mouth, and partly also lax, and on that account exhibiting a somewhat
collapsed passage, the vibrating air cap neither be conveyed in sufficient
quantity, to the cavity of the drum, nor produce in it the due vibratory motion.

As sound may be propagated by all elastic bodies, in close connection or
contact with each other; so in this case may be of service all thin slips of
wood, Spanish reeds, sword-blades, tobacco-pipes, etc. when pressed to the
abovementioned hard and elastic parts of the head, which stand connected with
the temporal bones. Now, as among all the elastic bodies just mentioned, the
fibers of wood are remarkably tough and flexible, and on account of their loose
and open texture, give no great resistance to vibratory motions, but rather
afford them greater scope; so thin slips of wood, or slender Spanish reeds, are
best adapted for the purposes of propagating sound to the elastic parts of the
head, and to the organs of hearing.

From the principles hitherto advanced, may be explained all those experiments,
which were made on occasion of actually employing this method, and briefly
recited above. The first experiment, either with the large funnel, or with
barely speaking into the mouth of the deaf person, in order to produce the
sense of hearing, miscarried in the execution: For, as in this case, the air
alone is to communicate to the teeth, and other elastic parts connected with
them; a vibratory motion; it is in general unfit for this purpose, as it comes
greatly rarefied from the mouth of the speaker, and consequently, greatly
diminished in activity and elasticity: Besides; from the property common to all
forced fluids, as soon as it has escaped the mouth of the speaker, it expands
every way, and thereby becomes still more weakened in its efficacy, and
consequently cannot, in that case, overcome the resistance of the teeth, and
other elastic parts of the mouth of a deaf person, nor put them into vibratory
motion, sufficient to produce the sense of hearing.

The second, third, and sixth experiments, in which the voice proved too weak
and imperceptible to the deaf man, when the slips of wood were held too fast
with the singers, or shut lips and teeth, as also when held to the shut teeth,
may be explained in the same manner. From the foregoing propositions it is
evident, that the softer parts of our body interrupt the progress of sound,
receiving indeed the vibratory motion, but for want of the requisite re-action
not propagating it far enough: And for this there is also another reason,
namely, that in the three former methods of applying the slip of wood, the same
degree of force must put in motion a far greater quantity of the vibratory air,
than can happen in different and opposite circumstances, whence, of necessity,
a less effect must ensue: Now, as in the third and sixth experiments, a greater
share of vibration is lost in the under jaw bone, the sensation thereof must,
of course, be extremely weak and indistinct.

And this farther explains the fourth experiment, by which the deaf person
perceived not the least sound, on holding the slip to the under teeth. To
explain this observation there can be no difficulty, when we recollect the
connection of the under jaw bone with the temporal: The under jaw bone having
its connection with the rest of the bones of the head, only by means of soft
interposing parts, namely, a soft cartilage, which, besides, on account of the
constant moistness of those parts, is lower, receiving, indeed, the vibratory
motion, but directly again losing it, and, as it were, deadening it, in its
softer substance, for want of the requisite re-action; how is it possible then
to expect any alteration in the other bones of the head from the vibratory
motion of this bone?

The fifth experiment, on the contrary, is somewhat more difficult to explain:
For, as here the tongue, a softer part, is brought to the palate and teeth, and
yet that which another utters remains distinct and perceptible to the deaf
person, it should seem, that this experiment contradicts the second, third, and
sixth.

But here we are to consider, that, in the first place, the tongue is applied
behind the teeth. 2dly, That all soft parts, as fully appears from physics,
receive not such a quantity of vibratory motion, as do hard bodies: Whence it
is, as the teeth are as it were wedged in the upper maxillary bone, being a
hard part, the greatest share of vibration will go to the jaw, and only a
smaller share thereof to the tongue: But, if you slip the tongue forwards over
the teeth, the same thing happens as in lips together; either no sound at all,
or but very indistinctly, being perceivable by the deaf person.

The seventh observation, namely, that the hearing is not diminished, though
the mouth be full of water, is easily accounted for; as we learn from
philosophy, that there is much elastic air in water, adapted for the
propagation of sound; as sufficiently appears from the example of diverse, who,
under water; perceive the sound produced above water: Now, as water perfectly
increases the continuity of the parts in the mouth, and propagates the
vibrations produced by sound from the teeth to the maxillary bones, and the
pterygoid processes of the os cuneiforme, we may, from the connection of these
parts with the temporal bones, easily judge, that the sensation of sound is
rather heightened than diminished by the water in the mouth.

In order to explain the eighth experiment, which was made with a brass or iron
wire, two things, in particular, are to be remarked; first, that such metal
strings or wires are a great deal firmer than wood, and consequently require a
greater degree of force, in order to vibrate, than is possible to be produced
by the air in speaking: Secondly, that their base of contact with the teeth is
by much too small, for them to communicate a sufficient degree of motion to the
whole range of bones reaching quite to the ear: And this is the very reason,
that by laying hold on it with the teeth, the points of contact being
increased, the deaf person comes to have some degree of sensation.

The happy effects produced with the beer-glass, and the unsuccessful attempts
with the wine-glass, which was the ninth experiment, seem to depend, either on
the greater compass of the former, or on some degree of compression produced in
the air spoken into it, which thereby communicates its vibratory motions and
repercussions to the elastic glass, and by that means to the teeth and upper
jawbone, though the lips interpose or lie between, as they acquire a greater
degree of closeness in their texture, and greater susceptibility to propagate
sound, by the greater degree of pression, made on them with the rim of the
glass: Whereas, a less portion of air goes into the wine-glass, besides, its
compass is smaller, and the greater mass of foot or stalk, diminishes the
motion of the air, so as to prevent its communicating to the teeth a sufficient
pitch of vibration. And lastly, the reason why, according to the tenth
observation or experiment, the loose teeth of the upper jaw rendered speaking
indistinct to the deaf person, is easily understood, when we reflect, that, in
order to propagate a vibratory motion, a closer continuity of elastic parts is
requisite.

As the sensation, which is perceived in the act of hearing, produced by the
methods of the second order of the second class, seems to be formed almost in
the middle of the brain, backwards at the medulla oblongata, we may hence,
according to anatomical grounds, judge, that the vibrations produced by sound,
put the auditory nerves in sensation, from the os petrosum, quite to their
origin: And hence arises this practical proposition, that the easy method we
have been hitherto upon, to procure hearing to the deaf, is adapted to all
persons afflicted with deafness, be the other auditory organs injured how they
may, provided the auditory nerves are not obstructed, injured, or quite
destroyed at their origin: For, this last is the only case, in which the
present method is not applicable, and on such melancholy objects all labor and
pains are lost.

FINIS.

