THE HISTORY OF THE Lateral Operation: OR, An ACCOUNT of the METHOD of
Extracting a Stone, by making a Wound near the great Protuberance of the Os
Ischium, through the Common Integuments and Levator Any, into the Side of the
Bladder, without touching the Urethra, Prostate Gland, Vesiculae Seminales, or
any other of the Urinary or Seminal Vessels; first attempted by Friar Jacques
in France, and afterward successfully performed by Professor Rau in Holland.

With a POSTSCRIPT Concerning the Introduction and Improvement of this Method
here in London.

By JAMES DOUGLAS, M. D.

LONDON: Printed for G. STRAHAN, at the Golden Ball, over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. MDCCXXVI.

A CATALOGUE of BOOKS, From whence the Materials of this HISTORY have been
Collected.
PAULUS BUSSIERE, Surgeon and F. R S. A Letter to Dr. Sloane, wherein he gives
an Account of the New Way of Cutting for the Stone by the Hermit; with his
Opinion of it.
V. Phil. Trans. Land. 1699. 4to.
MARTINUS LYSTER, M. D. Physician to Queen Anne. A Journey to Paris in the Year
School.
Land. 1699. 8vo.
JOHANNES MERRY, First Surgeon to the Hotel Dieu at Paris, and Anatomist to the
Royal Academy of Sciences. Observations sur la Maniere de Tailler dans les deux
Sexes pour l'Extraction de la Pierre Pratiquee, par Friar Jacques.
Amstelod. 1700. 12mo. Acta Eruditorum, Anno 1700, Lipsiae 1700. 4to.
SAVIARD. Surgeon to the Hotel Dieu, and Sworn Surgeon of Paris. Nouveau
recueil des Observations Chirurgiales.
Paris 1702. 12mo.
DIONIS. Chief Surgeon to the Dauphiness of France, and to the Duchess of
Burgundy. Course d'Operations de Chirurgie Demontrez au Jardin Royal.
Bruxel. 1708. 8vo.
CHAPTER ED. A Saxon Physician. The Relation of a Journey into England and Holland
in the Years 1706. 1707.Translated from the Latin.
Land. 1711. 8vo.
ANDREAS OTTON GOELICKE. Doctor and Professor in Physic. Histor^^ Chirurgiae
Rece^tior.
Hal. Magdeburg 1713. 8vo.
GULIELMUS CHESELDEN, Surgeon to St. Thomas's Hospital, and F. R. S. A Treatise
on the High Operation for the Stone.
Land. 1723. 8vo.
DE FONTENELLE. Histoire de l'Academie Royale des Sciences. Annee 1722.
Paris 1724. 4to. V. p. 129.
BERNARDUS SIEGFRIED ALBINUS. Professor of Anatomy in the University of Leyden.
Index Supellectilis Anatomicae quam Academiae quae Leydae est legavit Johannes
Jacobus Rau; cui accesserunt Vita ejus, and Curatio quam Calculosis Adhibuit,
Instrumentorumque figurae.
Ludg. Batav. 1725. 4to.
The CONTENTS.
INtroduction. Page 1 The Operation for the Stone practiced in the Time of
Hippocrates. ib. What was the Method of Cutting then used. ib. History of
Celsus's Method. Page 2 Marianus's Method. ib. Rossetus's Method. Page 4
Lateral Method. Page 6 Plan of the Treatise. ib.
CHAP. I.
THE History of Friar Jacques Methods of Cutting Males. Page 9 Authors, from
whom this History is collected, ib. Life of Friar Jacques. Page 11 His Arrival
in Paris. Page 13 His first Experiments on dead Bodies. Page 14 Mery's Account
of his Method of Cutting. ib. Mery's Report concerning his Experiments. Page 15
His Second Experiments on dead Bodies. Page 17 Friar Jacques leaves Paris, and
Cuts a Boy at Fontainbleau. Page 18 Bussiere's Account of his Method. Page 19
Saviard's Observation about it. Page 21 Dionis's Account. ib. Cheselden's
Account. Page 22 Albinus's Account. ib. Friar Jacques returns to Paris. Page 23
He Cuts Twelve Patients there and at Versailles. ib. Success of these
Operations. Page 24 Mery's Account of Friar Jacques Method of Cutting on the
Gripe. ib. Bussiere's Account of that Method. ib. Friar Jacques admitted to Cut
in the two Hospitals at Paris. Page 25 Number and Fate of the Patients he Cut
there. Page 26 Fictitious Story tramped up by his Friends to excuse his bad
Success. Page 27 Friar Jacques Disgrace. ib. He leaves Paris, goes to Orleans;
and there Cuts Eight Patients. ib. His Arrival at Aix la Chapelle. Page 28 An
Advertisement published in his Name. ib. His Transactions in Holland. Page 29
CHAP. II.
A Comparison of die several Descriptions that have been given of Friar Jacques
Methods of Cutting Males. Page 30 Preparation of the Patient. ib. Instruments
used by him, viz. Catheter. ib. Bistouri. Page 31 Conductor. ib. Forceps. ib.
Scoop. ib. Situation of the Patient, Number and Office of the Assistants. ib.
Introduction of the Catheter into the Bladder. Page 32 His Method of making the
Incision according to Merry. ib. Bussiere. ib. Dionis. ib. Cheselden. ib.
Albinus. Page 33 Extraction of the Stone. ib. Dressing the Wound, etc. Page 34
His Method of Cutting on the Gripe. ib.
CHAP. III.
JUdgments concerning Friar Jacques Methods of Cutting Males. Page 35 Opinion
of Mr. Bussiere's Correspondent about it. ib. Bussiere's own Opinion. Page 36
Experiments upon which that Opinion is founded. ib. Dr. Lister's Opinion about
it. Page 37 Mery's Opinion. Page 39 His Observations on living Bodies cut by
Friar Jacques. ib. Observations on those cut in the Hospitals of Paris. Page 40
Conclusions drawn from thence by Merry concerning the Operations themselves.
Page 44 Conclusions concerning Friar Jacques as the Operator, Page 46 History
of Friar Jacques Success at Orleans. Page 47 Saviard's Reflections on Friar
Jacques. Page 49 Dionis's Judgment. Page 53 Cheselden's Judgment. Page 54
Albinus's Judgment. ib.
CHAP. IV.
Friar Jacques Method of Cutting Females. Bussiere's Account of that Method.
ib. Mery's Account of it. ib. Noel's Account, Page 59 Dionis's Account. Page 60
CHAP. V.
MOnsieur Merry 's Method of Cutting for the Stone. Page 61 A general View of
all the Improvements of Friar Jacques Operations. ib. Monsieur Mery's Life.
Page 62 Steps by which he was led to his New Method. Page 64 His Method of
Cutting Males. Page 66 Reflection upon this Method. Page 67 The Method which he
once proposed for Cutting Females. ib. Inconveniences of that Method
afterward discovered by him. Page 68 Bussiere's Method of Cutting Women. Page
69
CHAP. VI.
PRofessor Rau 's Method. Page 70 Rau's Life. ib. His Character by Albinus.
Page 72 Account of Rau's Method of Cutting by a Saxon Physician. Page 73 Mr.
Cheselden's Account of it. Page 74 Reflection on this last Account. ib. Dr.
Albinus's Account. Page 75 Description of Rau's Catheter. ib. Situation of the
Patient. Page 76 Introduction of the Catheter into the Bladder. ib. Place where
the lncision was begun. Page 77 First Incision. ib. Second Incision. ib.
Introduction of the Conductors. Page 78 Other Steps of the Operation. Page 79
Success of this Method. ib. Rau's Method os Cutting Women. Page 80 Reflection
on Rau's Operation. ib.
POSTSCRIPT. Page 81
BOOKS printed for GEORGE STRAHAN.
1. LIlium Sarniense; or, A Description of the Guernsay Lilly. To which is
added. The Botanical Dissection of the Coffee Berry, with Figures. By Dr. James
Douglas, Honorary Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, London; and Fellow
of the Royal Society. 2. Myographiae Comparatae Specimen; or, A Comparative
Description of all the Muscles in a Man, and in a Quadruped. Showing their
Disverer, Origin, Progress, Insertion, Use, and Difference. To which is added,
An Account of the Muscles peculiar to a Woman. With an Etymological Table, and
several useful Index's. By the same Author. 3. Bibliographiae Anatomicae
Specimen, sive Catalogus omnium pene Auctorum qui ab Hippocrate ad Harveum Rem
Anatomicam ex Professo, vel obiter, scriptis Illustrarunt opera singulorum, and
Inventa juxta Temporum seriem complectens. Cura ad Studio, Jacobi Douglas, M.
D. R. S. S. 4. Index Materiae Medicae; or, A Catalogue of Simple Medicines that
are fit to be used in the Practice of Physic and Surgery. Containing, 1. The
Officinal Name of each in Latin, with the Accent and Genetive Case. 2. A short
Botanical Description of the Species that is commonly used, 3. The Name in
Greek and English. 4. The Part that is most in Use 5. The Name of the
Dispensatory, or Shop Preparations and Composition. To which are added Two
Tables. In the First, The Simple Medicines are reduced under General Heads. And
in the Second; They are classed according to their principal Virtues. 5.
Pharmac^-Botanologia; An Alphabetical and Classical Dissertation on all the
British Indigenous and Garden Plants of the New London Dispensatory. In which
their Genera, Species, Characteristick, and distinctive Notes are Methodically
described; the Botanical Terms of Art explained; their Virtues, Uses, and Shop
Preparations declared. With many curious and useful Remarks, from proper
Observations. Together with suitable Directions for Manuring and Cultivating
barren Grounds. By Patrick Blair, M. D. and F. R. S. 6. An New Table of
Dispensatory Plants, distributed according to their principal Virtues, neatly
engraved on a large Broadside, and dedicated to Dr. Mead. By the same Author.
INTRODUCTION.
THE Stone in the Bladder is a Distemper, which, for ought we know to the
contrary, is as ancient as any other to which the humane Body has ever been
subject: And Hippocrates, to whom we owe the first Accounts of that, as well as
of all the other Diseases he has mentioned, informs us, that in his Time the
Operation of extracting the Stone by Cutting was already in Use; and that there
were Men who made it their chief Business, without intermedling with any other
Part of Physic or Surgery, which then, and for a great while afterward, made
up but one and the same Profession. All this is evident from that Clause of
Hippocrates's Oath, in which he makes his Disciples swear not to cut any Person
for the Stone, but to leave that Operation to such who exercised themselves in
that Art, and made a particular Profession of it. (...). And from these Words
there may be some ground to think, that Hippocrates never practiced this
Operation himself.

What was the Method of Cutting then used, we know not. Thus far however we may
be sure, that the Incision was not proposed to be made in the Body of the
Bladder; because Hippocrates every where declares it to be his Opinion, that
Wounds there are mortal. (...), says he, Aphor. 6, 18. and in his Book de
Morbis 3. (...). The only further Conjecture that can with any Probability be
formed is, that as Celsus is universally allowed to have borrowed his whole
System, both of Physic and Surgery, from the Greeks, the Method of Cutting for
the Stone which he has described, may likewise have been taken from them; and
perhaps they knew no other but that. Ammonius, surnamed Lithotomus from the
Instrument he invented to break the Stone in the Bladder, when it happened to
be too large to pass through the Wound entire, practiced this Method at
Alexandria, in the Time of Herophilus and Erasistratus; that is, perhaps about
150 Years after Hippocrates; and Meges practiced it at Rome in the Reign of
Augustus. It is Celsus, who has preserved us the Names of these two famous
Lithotomists; and it is evident from what he says of them, that he believed
their Method of Cutting to be the same with his. And as they lived at a great
Distance, both of Time and Place, from one another; and the first of them so
near the Age of Hippocrates, it becomes from thence further probable, that the
Operation for the Stone described by Celsus was the most ancient, and perhaps
the only one that had ever been practiced before his Time.

Whatever Solidity may be in these Conjectures, for I give them only as such,
Celsus is undoubtedly the first Author now remaining, who has taught us any
thing like a Method of Cutting; and the same, without any considerable
Variation, is described by the later Greek Writers, particularly Paulus
Aegineta; by the Arabians, Avicenna and Albucasis; and, in general, by all
Chirurgical Authors down to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century, Rogerius,
Rolandus, Brunus, Theodoricus, Gulielmus de Saliceto, Lanfrancus, Mundinus,
Guido, and others. These Authors do little more than copy one another; and what
is worth remarking about them is, that it does not appear that any of them ever
saw this Operation performed, Guido alone excepted; but even he does not seem
ever to have cut himself.

During all this long Interval, no other Method but this being known, we are
not to imagine that it went by any other Name than that of Cutting for the
Stone, or Operation of Lithotomy.

But when Johannes de Romany had invented his New Method of Cutting, which
happened some Time near the Year 1500, at least in all probability nearer that
than 1520, as is said by Gourmelenus, and the generality of Writers since his
Time; it then became necessary that Names should be appropriated to these two
Methods, by which they might be distinguished from one another.

The principal Difference between them consists in the Instruments used, and in
the Manner of using them; and therefore it was natural that the Names applied
to them should be taken from thence. Accordingly we find that De Franco calls
Marianus's Operation, La Cure de la Pierre avec gros ferrement; and from thence
undoubtedly came the Appellations of Major and Minor Apparatus, by which these
two Operarations have since been most commonly expressed; first used, as far as
I can find, by Paraeus and Gourmelenus, as well as the French Names which
answer to them, Le haut and le petit Appareil. The English Names of Cutting
upon the Staff, and Cutting upon the Gripe, are of a much later Date. We
probably borrowed them from the Dutch, in which Language these two ways of
Cutting are expressed by Terms analogous to them; and perhaps they came to be
taken into the English Language, by being used by Lithomists whom we have had
oftener than once from Holland.

The Second of these Methods, the Apparatus Major, was, as I have said,
invented by Johannes de Romany, and practiced by him at Rome; but it was first
published there by his Scholar Marianus Sanctus Barolitanus in the Year 1522,
not at Venice in 1535, as some have said. And it is upon this Account, that
Authors who do not so much attend to Discoverers, as to the Publishers of
Discoveries, have given it the Name of Methodus Mariana or Mariniana.

This Operation being suited to Persons of all Ages, whereas that of Celsus was
formerly thought practicable only upon Children, soon gained a general Vogue,
and brought Lithotomy much more in Fashion than it had been for many Ages
before. Celsus's Method, however, was not quite laid aside, but continued to be
practiced; and perhaps even more frequently than it had ever been since
Aegineta's Days; with this Advantage also, that the Success of the other Method
being experienced in full grown Persons as well as Children, encouraged
Lithotomists to break through the narrow Limits of Time fixed by the Ancients,
and extend the Use of Celsus's Method much further than Celsus himself had
prescribed.

From this Time downwards, the Practice of Lithotomy becoming still more
common, a great many Improvements were made in both Methods, especially in that
of Marianus; and other Varieties introduced in them, as best suited the Genius
of particular Operators, the Condition of the Patients, or the Humor of the
Times; and in all these the Parisian Lithotomists must be allowed to have had
the principal Hand.

In the Year 1561, De Franco's Treatise of Hernia's, etc. was first published,
and in that he gives an Account of a new Method he once made use of in order to
extract a Stone, all the others proving ineffectual, and that was by making an
Incision above the Os Pubis. Though the Operation succeeded, yet he thinks fit to
dissuade all Persons from ever following his Example; and indeed his Advice was
so far complied with, that for above Twenty Years after his Book appeared,
Authors are as entirely silent about this extraordinary Operation, as if it had
never been known; and in all Probability would have continued so much longer,
had not a lucky Chance engaged a Person of Rossetus's Learning and Sagacity, to
undertake the introducing of the Caesarean Operation: For, in order to
recommend this unheard of and dangerous Practice, one Method this great Man
thought it for his Purpose to take, was to compare it with some others then in
Use; and, amongst the rest, with the common ways of Cutting for the Stone. This
led him to so clear and terrifying a View of the Cruelty and Barbarity of both
of them, that a Person of his Talent for Invention needed no more to put him
upon the Search of a New one; and the Pains he had been at to consider the
Nature and Consequences of Wounds in the Abdomen, was undoubtedly what gave him
the first Hint of that which he invented. De Franco must indeed be owned to
have published an Instance of this Operation before Rossetus endeavored to
introduce it: But Rossetus is not for that Reason to be denied the Glory of
having invented it; for, to say nothing of the Circumstances of De Franco's
Story, which every body is now sufficiently acquainted with, Rossetus was led
to the Theory he established by the mere Force of his own Judgment, his
Knowledge of the Structure of the Parts concerned, in which he exceeded all
that went before him, Vesalius himself not excepted, and Consequences drawn
from Facts, among which that mentioned by Franco appears to have no Place,
Rossetus having discovered his Method before ever he had seen that Author's
Book, as he affirms himself, and in a manner that gives not the least ground to
suspect him of a Falsehood.

But if it should be granted that he took the first Hint of his Method from
Franco, be must still be allowed by all who have read and understand his Book,
to deserve a greater share of Praise as an Improver, than the other can claim
as an Inventer: And I believe it will be found upon a strict Examination, that
the Honor of many Discoveries which we now enjoy, is given to Persons who had
no better Title to them than he has to this, even supposing he had borrowed
from De Franco all that he could possibly borrow from him. He must be very
little acquainted with the History of Inventers, who does not know that many of
their Inventions are owing to more favorable Accidents, than reading De
Franco's Book can have been to Rossetus.

Though this great Author lived to publish a complete Account of his new Method
of Cutting for the Stone, (which has by Writers in Latin been generally called
Sectio Hypogastrica; by the French, Le haut Appareil; and in English, The High
Operation) yet he never had an Opportunity of performing it upon a living Body;
and for above 130 Years after him, none seemed ever so much as inclinable to
make Trial of it. The Writers of Lithotomy, during that Time, have most of them
indeed mentioned this Operation; but in such a manner, as shows very plainly
that few of them had ever read Rossetus's Book, and that not one of them
understood it. The Authority of De Franco, who forbids the attempting of this
Method, and of Hippocrates, who thought all Wounds in the Bladder mortal, are
the common Topics they make use of to cry it down; and all this most commonly
in the Compass of half a Page, from which an intelligent Reader can gather no
more, than barely that it had been once proposed in France to cut for the Stone
above the Os Pubis. Dionis, it is true, has been at a little more Pains about
it than the rest, and had probably heard something of Rossetus's Method; but
then he is so supinely negligent in all the Parts of his Account, that one
would be ready to think he mentions it at all, not so much with a design to
recommend it to Practice, as to have something to say, and to make way for a
new Figure in his Book, which should not be found in the other Treatises of
Chirurgical Operations.

From these lame and imperfect Scraps, my Brother took the first Hints of this
Method, having, as I am very well satisfied, never seen Rossetus's Latin
Treatise till he had composed the whole Theory of his Operation, and performed
it successfully on living Bodies. To him therefore may be applied what I have
said about Rossetus, supposing that Author to have read De Franco's Story
before he invented his Operation. But even Rossetus himself must yield to him
the Honor of having introduced the Practice of it; and for this, considering
the Discouragement he met with, the Difficulties he had to overcome, and on the
other hand, how highly this Method has already conduced to the Preservation of
Mankind, no Praise nor no Reward can be too great.

From this short View that I have given of the History of Lithotomy, it will
appear, that properly speaking there are but two Ways possible of extracting
the Stone out of the Bladder by Incision; and these are, making the Wound
either above or below the Os Pubis. The first of these, if rightly practiced,
admits of no considerable Variety; in the second, there is a greater Latitude,
not only in respect of the Instruments used, and the several Steps of the
Operation, but also in the Place of the Incision. All these may be, and
actually have been, compounded and combined together by Lithotomists in a great
many different manners, and it would be hard to prove that any two of them ever
cut exactly the same Way; but to avoid as much as can be done all unnecessary
Subdivisions, I think the different Methods of extracting a Stone by Cutting
below the Os Pubis, may be reduced to three kinds; that of Celsus, that of
Marianus, and what I have chosen to call the Lateral Way first practiced by
Friar Jacques. The two first, as has been already observed, differ from one
another chiefly in the Instruments and Steps of the Operation, and the last
differs from both these in the Place of the Incision.

To this Method I shall confine myself at present, referring the complete
History of the other two, together with the High Operation, to another
Opportunity; and in treating it, I intend to observe this Order,

First, I shall set down, from all the Authors I have met with, the History of
Friar Jaques, his two Methods of Cutting Males, and the Success with which they
were attended.

Secondly, I shall compare the different Accounts which have been given of the
several Parts of his Operations with one another, that thereby it may clearly
appear wherein they really consisted.

Thirdly, I shall relate the Opinions of Authors concerning his Operations, and
the Grounds upon which their Opinions have been founded. These, as is easy to
conceive, are chiefly the Observations made on the dead Bodies of such as he
had cut.

Fourthly, I shall set down his Method of Cutting Females, and the Judgments
that have been made thereof.

Under these four general Heads will be contained the whole History of the
Lateral Operation for the Stone, as it was performed by this Monk; and from
thence we are naturally led to consider the Improvements that have been made of
it; first those proposed by Monsieur Merry, and then such as were contrived and
put in Practice by Professor Rau.

For the Matter of all this History, I must be obliged to Books; nothing can be
called mine, except the Order in which I have digested it. What Authors I have
chiefly consulted, the Reader will see in the Beginning of the first Chapter.

Before I close this Introduction, I must further acquaint the Reader, that I
intend that the History of this Lateral Operation shall be followed in a very
short time, by that of the other three general Methods of Cutting for the
Stone, in three separate Treatises. To these I shall add a fifth, containing
the Anatomy, and Figures of the Parts concerned in them all; the Figures of all
the Instruments that have been used; and lastly, my own Observations concerning
the Advantages and Inconveniences with which each of them are attended; and in
what Cases I judge any of them, taken all together, to be preferable to the
rest.

CHAP. I. The History of Friar Jaques Methods of Cutting Males.
THE first Account that I find to have been ever published of Friar Jacques
Operations for the Stone, is contained in a Letter written by Mr. Bussiere, a
skilful and experienced Surgeon in London, and F. R. S. to Sir Hans Sloane, and
inserted in the Philosophical Transactions for the Month of March 1699. The
Author begins by describing the Instruments used in these Operations, and the
Method of performing them, according to the Informations he had received from
Paris; then he sets down the Opinion of his French Correspondent about them;
and lastly, subjoins his own, founded on several Experiments he had made on
dead Bodies.

Much about the same time Dr. Lister published his Journey to Paris, and
amongst other Curiosities, he has given us some Account of Friar Jacques. The
Doctor went Physician to the Earl of Portland, who was sent Ambassador to
France by King William after the Peace of Reswick; and during his Abode at
Paris, he had the good Fortune to see Friar Jacques several times cut for the
Stone.

Soon after that, appeared a French Treatise with this Title, Observations sur
la Maniere de Tailler dans les deux Sexes pour l'Extraction de la Pierre,
pratiquee par Friar Jacques, par Jean Merry, Chirurgien de la feue Reine, and
Anatomiste de l'Academie Royale de Sciences; printed at Paris, and presently
afterward at Amsterdam, both in the Year 1700. This excellent Author has left
almost nothing unsaid that relates either to the History of Friar Jacques
Operations, or the various Success with which they were attended in France; and
he has likewise shown, at very great length, the Reasons of the Inconveniences
that follow upon them, and the Way by which he thinks these may be remedied:
But, as it is to him that we must be chiefly obliged for all that can with
certainty be affirmed about them, it is unnecessary to make any more particular
Abstract of his Book in this Place.

The same Year that Monsieur Mery's Observations were published, the Leipsick
Journalists gave an Extract of it; but, as I shall have occacasion to remark as
I go along, they do not seem always to have hit the true Sense of the Author.

Saviard, in a Collection of Chirurgical Operations published at Paris in 1702,
has likewise mentioned those of Friar Jacques for the Stone, but refers
entirely to Merry for an Account of them; and indeed, by the few Things he has
said about them, he appears to have been very unfit for that Task himself.

Monsieur Dionis is the next who affords us any thing further remarkable upon
this Head. In his Book of Chirurgical Operations published at Paris in 1707, he
has given a very distinct and methodical History of Friar Jacques Operations.
The principal Facts he mentions are, or might have been taken from Merry; and to
these he has added some others, which, as he lived and practiced in Paris while
Friar Jacques was there, and saw him several times cut, it could be no hard
matter for him to collect.

Goelick, in his History of Surgery 1713, has transcribed the Extract of Mery's
Book from the Leipsick Acts; and Mr. Cheselden, in his Treatise on the High
Operation for the Stone 1723, has abridged the Account of Friar Jacques given
us by Dionis; but yet differs from him in some Things.

The learned Professor Albinus has made a few Observations on the same Subject,
introductory to the accurate Account he has lately published of Mr. Rau's
Method: And it is from these Nine Authors that I have extracted the following
History of Friar Jacques Operations for the Stone; though in reality they may all
be reduced to Three; the other Six having told us nothing worth minding, but
what they have borrowed from Bass^ere, Merry and Dionis.

We know but very little concerning this Man's Original, Education, Life or
Character, in any other respect than as a Lithotomist. The Name he gave himself
was Jacques Beaulieu, and he said he was born in Beaufort, a Town or Village of
the District of Long saunier, in what is called the County of Burgundy. (1)

All our Authors agree that he was a Monk of some one kind or other; but of
what Order or Institution is not so certain. Mr. Bussiere calls him an Hermit;
(2) and this seems to be confirmed by what we are told by Dionis, that he had
framed to himself a Rule of Religion backed with Vows, which he left it to his
Bishop for the Time being to dispense him from at Pleasure. (3) For at this
time, as I have been informed, an Hermit in France is commonly a Person, who,
being without Education, and having either spent his Substance, or been born to
none, associates himself with one or two (never more) of the same Stamp, and
finding means to get a Gift of some few Acres of Ground in a solitary Place
near a great Town, and Liberty from the Bishop of the Diocese to erect a
Hermitage, together with what they call a Rule to be observed in it, first
build themselves little Cells, and then by manuring the rest of the Land,
selling little Trinkets which they make, and the Charity of well-disposed
Persons, supply themselves with all the Necessaries, and most commonly even the
Conveniences of Life. What makes it further probable that our Monk was of this
kind is, the Ignorance and want of Education, which both Merry and Dionis have
observed in him.

Merry tells us he was a Brother of the Third Order of St. Francis; a Set of
Mendicant Monks, who differ indeed very much from Hermits, because they live in
great Communities, and are tied up to a stricter Rule of Life; but amongst
those they call Brothers of that Order, there are many so perfectly void of all
sorts of Education, that they cannot so much as read their own Mother Tongue.
(4)

Dionis says he wore the Habit of a Recolet, except that he had Shoes instead
of Sandals, and a Hat instead of a Cowl. The Recolets are such Monks of the
first or great Order of Franciscans, called in France, Cordeliers or Freres
Mineurs, who embraced the Reformation that was some time ago made amongst them;
and if what Dionis here says be strictly true, our Monk might still be a
Hermit, but could not be of the Third Order as Merry pretends he was. (5)

But of whatever Order he was, or whether of any Order or not, none of these
Authors give us the least ground to think he was ever admitted to Holy Orders;
and the Appellation of Friar Jacques which Dionis says he took to himself, is
Proof enough to any body who has had Occasion to inform himself of the Customs
of these Monks in France, that he never was. (6) And therefore it is, I
believe, pretty much without ground, that Mr. Cheselden terms him an
Ecclesiastic, (7) a Name seldom given to any but the Secular Clergy, and never
to a Friar who is not a Priest. Dr. Lister indeed, and his Correspondent Mr.
Probie, both call him Pere Jacques; but he is never so termed by the French
Authors, who understand the Propriety of such Designations better than
Strangers.

Albinus contents himself to call him in general a Monk, and such in some Sense
or other he undoubtedly was; and this is all that can with any certainty be
affirmed about his Profession. (9)

His ordinary Residence he pretended was in an Hospital called La Charity at
Besancon, the Capital of the Province of Franche Comte, erected for the
Maintenance of poor aged People and Children. (10) His outward Behavior had
all the Appearances of Probity and Simplicity; he lived on nothing but Bread
and ordinary Soupes, despised Money, and never asked for any but only a few
Pence to set his Instruments and mend his Shoes. (11)

But to come nearer our present Design, the History of his Operations for the
Stone, Merry informs us, that his natural Character was very much suited to
them; he was of an intrepid and undaunted Courage and Resolution, had a sure
and steady Hand, and went about whatever he undertook without the least
Hesitation, Faultering or sign of Fear. These natural Talents were, however,
the only ones he possessed; Art he was a perfect Stranger to, being altogether
ignorant of Anatomy, and the regular Operations of Surgery. (12) Neither is it
without ground that Dionis observes, that the Intrepidity and Quickness with
which he performed his Operations, were owing to nothing so much as his being
insensible of the Danger that attended his Miscarriages.

This being the case, it may be justly wondered how he came ever to attempt
Cutting for the Stone at all. This is a Mystery which no Author but Merry has
endeavored to explain, and he has done it but very imperfectly. By comparing
his natural Character with that of Raoux, a famous Impostor, their Curing of
Hernia's, and likewise their Method of Operating for the Stone, he imagines
that Friar Jacques might have been Raoux's Disciple, and learnt some Part of
his Operations from him; and from thence, and what he had taken from the Method
commonly practiced when he began to cut, have invented the rest. (13) But this
will be better understood when we have explained wherein his Operations
consisted; and that, together with the Series of his Practice, as far as our
Authors have handed it down to us, is what we now proceed to.

That he had cut for the Stone many times before he went to Paris, is evident
from the great Number of Attestations which he brought along with him from
Besancon, and several Towns and Villages in Burgundy, and other Provinces of
France. He boasted extremely of the Success he had had, and his Credentials
seemed to confirm all he said; however, it appeared soon after, by Letters from
these Provinces, that these Attestations were given upon too slight grounds,
and before any other Effect of his Operations, besides bare extracting the
Stone, could be perceived: his Way being to run from Place to Place, where
there was any Employments for him; and as soon as he had performed an
Operation, to engage the most considerable of the Spectators to sign a
Certificate in his Favor, without ever allowing them Time to see whether the
Patient recovered or not; and when he had cut all that came in his way in one
Place, he immediately left it and hastened to another, being sollicitous about
nothing but to make his Dexterity appear in taking out the Stone, and not at
all about what should become of the Patient after the Operation. (14)

This is all we know of him before he arrived in Paris, which happened in the
Month of August 1697. The Occasion of that Journey he gave out to be no other
than to teach the Surgeons of the Hospitals there a new Way of Cutting for the
Stone: And having found means to get an Acquaintance with Monsieur Marshall,
afterward First Surgeon to the French King, he endeavored by his Interest to
obtain leave to Cut in the Hospital of La Charity; but the Surgeons there, as
well as those of the Hotel Dieu, being unwilling to trust the Lives of their
Patients in the Hands of a Stranger, of whose Abilities they were altogether
ignorant, desired him first to make some Experiments in their Presence upon
dead Bodies, which he readily consented to; and accordingly, as Monsieur Dionis
relates, he performed his Operation on a Body, into the Bladder of which a
Stone had been conveyed before by the Surgeons of the Charity, but not at all
to their Satisfaction. (15)

Monsieur Merry, who was appointed by the First President of Paris (whom the
Leipsick Journalists have mistaken for the President of the Royal Academy,) 16
to inspect these Experiments of Friar Jaques Operation, says nothing of any
that were performed at the Charity; and concerning those which he was Witness
to at the Hotel Dieu, he makes quite a different Judgment from what Dionis says
was made by all the Surgeons who were present at that which he mentions.

On the 7th Day of December, says Monsieur Merry, I received Orders from the
First President to go to the Hotel Dieu, and be present at the Extraction of a
Stone out of the Bladder of a dead Body by Friar Jacques. He performed the
Operation in this manner.

Having introduced into the Bladder a solid round Staff without a Groove, and
of a different Figure from those used in the old Way of Cutting, he took a
Bistoury like the common ones, only longer; and with that made an Incision on
the Left and Inside of the Protuberance of the Ischium, and cutting obliquely
from below upwards, he divided whatever came in his way between that
Protuberance and his Staff, which he kept still in the Bladder. His Incision
being finished, he thrust his Finger through the Wound into the Bladder, to
find out the Stone; and having observed where it lay, he introduced an
Instrument into the Bladder, of the Figure hereafter represented, to dilate the
Wound, that the Stone might have more room to come out, Upon this Dilator,
which he calls his Conductor, he thrust in a Pair of Forceps, and then drew out
the Conductor; having felt for and laid hold of the Stone, he pulled the Staff
out of the Urethra, then his Forceps and the Stone along with it. All this he
did with a wonderful Facility, notwithstanding the Stone was as big as an Hen's
Egg.

The Operation being finished, I dissected the Parts which had been cut in
Presence of the Physicians and Surgeons of the Hotel Dieu; by that means, and
by comparing at the same time these Parts with those of the other Side, we
observed that Friar Jacques had cut first about an Inch and an half deep in
Fat, that from thence he had carried his Knife between the Musculus Erector and
the Left Accelerator, but without wounding either of them; and lastly, that he
cut through the whole Length of the Neck of the Bladder on one Side, and about
half an Inch of the Body of it.

Two Days after this Experiment I waited on the First President, to give him an
Account of my Observations, and at the same time my Opinion concerning Friar
Jacques Operation: My Report was conceived in these Terms.

SIR,
" Friar Jacques Method of Cutting appears to me to be much preferable to that
commonly practiced, because the Incision being made both in the Neck and Body
of the Bladder, and the Stone extracted at the broadest part of the Angle made
by the Ossa Pubis, comes out with great Ease, and without the least Force: But
in the common Operation, as the Incision is only made in the Urethra, and the
Stone drawn through the Neck of the Bladder, which remains entire, and at the
narrowest part of the Angle of the Ossa Pubis, it is evident that the
Extraction of the Stone through such strait Passages must be very difficult,
and require a great deal of Force when of any considerable Bigness; from whence
it is easy to conclude, th^^ Friar Jacques Operation will not be liable to such
dangerou^ Accidents as are found to attend the other; and that for these
Reasons,"

"1. Because in his Way of Operating he cuts none of the Muscles of the Penis;
whereas in the common Way the two Accelerators are entirely separated from one
another, by the Incision which is made of the Place of their Union, that is, at
their Origin; by which means these Muscies happen very frequently to lose their
Action."

"2. In making his Operation it must be owned, indeed, that he cuts the Body of
the Prostates, the whole Neck of the Bladder on one Side, and a little of the
Body; but these Parts having no considerable Blood Vessels belonging to them,
an Haemorage is not so much to be feared as in the common Operation, in which
the Incision is made in the spungy and thick part of the Urethra, which receive
a great Quantity of Blood from the two Arteries of the Penis."

"3. His Operation can neither be followed by an Echymosis, Fluxion nor
Suppuration in the Membranes of the Scrotum, which happen so frequently after
the other; because the Place by which he gets into the Bladder has not the same
Communication with the Scrotum as the Perinaeum, in which the other
Lithotomists begin their Incision."

"4. By making a large Wound in the Neck and Body of the Bladder, through which
he easily draws out the Stone, he evites the Contusion and Tearing, which in
the common Operation almost constantly happens, both to the Neck of the Bladder
and Prostates which are joined to it, and even to the Urethra itself when the
Stone is large, or its Surface rugged. And from hence it comes to pass, that
the Parts which he divides being only simply cut, will very easily reunite
after the Operation, and by this means Fistulas be in a great measure
prevented; whereas in the common Method, the Parts suffering most commonly
cause a violent Contusion, and a considerable Loss of Substance by Suppuration,
their Reunion is retarded, and thus Fistulas are occasioned: But, however, I
am inclined to believe, that if Friar Jacques made his Incision two Inches
higher up than the Place where he now begins it, he might get into the Bladder
in the same manner, and yet the Wound not be so deep, and consequently sooner
healed; supposing always that Wounds in the Neck and Body of the Bladder are
not mortal, as has been hitherto believed, and that the Sphincter Muscle may be
reunited as exactly as it was before, which Experience alone must determine."

"As for the Instruments he uses, I cannot find that they are any ways
preferable to ours. On the contrary, his Staff seems to be much more
inconvenient, both because it forces the lower Part of the Urethra too far
outward, and because not being Grooved it cannot be so surely cut upon; for
let Friar Jacques have never so steady a Hand, the Point of his Bistoury must
be apt to slide either to one Side or other, upon a Staff which is exactly
round."

"The Conductor which he thrusts into the Bladder after the Wound is made, is
not at all proper to direct his Forceps thither, and can be of no manner of
Service to dilate the Incision made in the Neck and and Body of the Bladder,
because that Incision is longer than the Conductor is broad; and besides the
Wound may be dilated by the Forceps with this Advantage, that the Dilatation
will never be more than is necessary, which is what no other Dilator can do.


The Account I have here given of Monsieur Mary's Observations made on
dissecting the Parts cut by Friar Jacques in this first Trial of his Operation,
did not properly belong to this Part of my History; in which my Design is not
to consider either the Structure of the Parts concerned in this Method of
Cutting, nor the Judgment that has or may be formed from thence concerning the
Advantages and Inconveniences thereof. This I reserve for a distinct Head: But
as Monsieur Merry did afterward retract the greatest part of the favorable
Opinion he had here conceived of Friar Jacques, upon a more full Insight into
his Operation; and as this is the first Trial that we have any certain Account
ever to have been made of it; I judged it necessary in entering upon the
History of this Method of Cutting, to make the Reader thus far acquainted with
the Nature of it, that the Sequel of this Relation might be the more easily
understood.

What Effect this Report had upon the First President, and the other Persons to
whom it was communicated, Monsieur Merry has not informed us; nor of any thing
else that happened before the second Experiment was made, which was just a Week
after the first.

On the 14th Day of the same Month of December, continues our Author, I went to
the Hotel Dieu, by a second Order of the First President, to see Friar Jacques
perform his Operation a second time. He cut the dead Body of a Child between
Twelve and Fourteen Years of Age, and likewise of a Woman; into the Bladders of
which Stones had been put as before. He cut the Boy exactly in the same manner
as he did the Man, and I dissected the Parts cut in Presence of the Physicians
and Surgeons of the Hotel Dieu. (17)

What was the Result of our Author's Observations we shall see elsewhere; as
likewise the Account he here gives of Friar Jaques Method of Cutting Women. It
is sufficient to remark in this Place, that the Judgment he makes of both these
Operations was not near so favorable to the Monk as the former had been; and
it may very well be, that this was the Reason of his leaving Paris so abruptly,
as Monsieur Dionis informs us, though he has by Mistake placed the Time of his
Journey two Months too early.

The Court was then at Fontainbleau, and thither our Operator resolved to steer
his Course. Upon his Arrival, he addressed himself to Monsieur du Chesne, first
Physician to the Princes of the Blood, having found means to procure some
Letters of Recommendation to him, and we may be sure he did not forget to show
him his whole Bundle of Certificates. Monsieur du Chesne was charmed with the
Account the Monk gave him of his Design in going to Paris, his Method of
Cutting, and the great Number of Operations which he had performed: And out of
a Zeal for the Welfare of his Fellow Creatures, which can never be enough
commended, he mentioned him to Monsieur Fagon, first Physician to the King; to
M. Bourdelot, first Physician to the Duchess of Burgundy; and to several
others besides; who all concluded that it would be worth while to see him cut:
And for this purpose a Shoe-maker's Boy of Versailles, then at Fontainbleau,
and who was troubled with the Stone, luckily offered himself. Monsieur du
Chesne immediately sent him to a Nurse, and ordered him all manner of
Necessaries. Friar Jacques performed the Operation in Presence of the
Physicians, and of Monsieur Felix, then first Surgeon to the King. The Success
answered their Expectation, and they were all perfectly satisfied with what
they had seen, especially Monsieur Felix; who from that Moment took Friar
Jacques home to his House, and kept him there all the time he staid at
Fontainbleau.

This Operation we may easily conceive made a great Noise, and was published
all over the Court. The Princes of the Blood were informed of it by Monsieur du
Chesne, and he gave them an Account every Day of the Progress of the Cure. As
for his own part, he looked upon the Monk as a Man sent by God for the Relief
of those who were afflicted with the Stone, by a more easy and less dangerous
Method than any that had till then been known; and, indeed the first Effects of
his Operation on the Shoemaker were extremely happy. It was performed very
quickly, the Urine came out through the ordinary Passage a very short time
after; no bad Accident superveen'd, and the Patient was able to go abroad in
three Weeks Time. (18)

This was the first Operation that ever we hear Friar Jacques performed, after
his Arrival at Paris, on a living Body. It happened at Court, to which he went
of his own Accord, not by Invitation, as we are told by Mr. Cheselden; and by
the Success of that, not by the Reputation he had acquired by those he had cut
before, he recommended himself to the Court.

Monsieur Dionis goes on to Friar Jacques Manner of Cutting; but the Account
thereof sent to Mr. Bussiere from Paris, being prior to his in order of Time,
it must for that reason be inserted before it. Here is the Description, says
Mr. Bussiere to Sir Hans Sloane, of the Way of performing the Operation for the
Extraction of the Stone out of the Bladder by Brother James, an Hermit in
France, as I received it from Paris.

He makes use of a Steel Staff, much bigger and shorter than those which are
commonly made use of. It is shorter from the Top to the Bending of it, it bends
more than ours; he has but two, one for Men and another for Children.

His Conductor is slender and longer than ours; the Point whereof, which goes
into the Bladder, being of the Figure of a Lozenge, is wide and open in the
Extremity.

His Forceps have longer Branches than ours; but the Holds of them are shorter
and wider, with many large Teeth within.

The Eurethra with which he draws the Sand or Gravel, which remain sometimes
in the Bladder after the Stone is out, is shorter than ours.

His Knife is much longer and slenderer than ours.

He causes the Patient to lie flat upon his Back, either upon his Bed or upon
a Table, whereupon is a soft Quilt, in such a manner, that the Fundament is
three or four Fingers over the Table, some Servants supporting his Legs and
Thighs. He uses no Ligature to fasten the Patient, giving him more Liberty
than we do; he causes his Legs to be bent against the Thighs, but not the
Thighs against the Belly, except the Left, which in his Operation he uses more
or less, as he thinks fit.

Then he introduces the Catheter or Staff into the Bladder; which, though bigger
and shorter than ours, yet seems to run in easier. Very often he holds it
himself with his Left Hand, pressing it close toward the Fundament, in order
to dilate and extend the Membranes of the Bladder; then he feels with the
Fingers of his Right Hand, to find cut the Staff through the Skin; so having
felt it, he runs his Incision Knife, at the Bent of the Left Thigh, upon the
fat Protuberance below the Ischium Bone, directly upwards by the Rectum to the
Bladder, which he pierces by its Neck, and sometimes a little above it. When
he cutteth, the cutting Parts of his Knife are turned upwards and downwards.
Having thus pierced the Bladder, which he knows by the Urine running out,
then he turns his Knife, and thrusts it a little further, in order to open
the Bladder wide enough that his Finger may go in easily; then he withdraws
his Knife, and enlarges the Wound in the outward Parts, of the Length of two
or three Inches; after which he thrusts his Finger into the Bladder, in order
to know more precisely the Bigness and Situation of the Stone, and make it
loose, but chiefly to dilate the Overture of the Bladder, by tearing its
Membranes.

Then he introduces his Conductor into the Bladder, along this Finger which is
in it.

When the Conductor is in the Bladder he takes the Staff out, and introduces
the Forceps by the Conductor into it, with which he gets hold of the Stone and
draws it out.

If he finds any Difficulty, either in getting hold of the Stone, or in drawing
it out, he uses all the Ways commonly used, raising the Left Thigh more or
less, putting his Finger in the Fundament, and sometimes times the Bladder, in
order to examine the Situation of the Stone, and loosen it in case there might
be any Adhesion with the Membranes of the Bladder. Having found out, and
removed the Cause of the Difficulty, he thrusts the Forceps again into the
Bladder, and gets hold of the Stone, and pulls it out.

It is to be observed, that this second Time, nor any other, he uses no
Conductor, the Forceps running in very easily. He never thrusts his Finger or
any Instrument into the Bladder, without steeping them in Oil of Roses. He
never uses any Dilatatorium or Canula, or Tents in the Wound, except some small
Dossils in the Lips of the outward Wound, to keep them open for a little while.
He uses no Ointments at all for the Wound, applying only a Pledget steeped in
Oil of Roses upon it; for he understands nothing at all of the Way of dressing
Wounds, nor in the Diet which the Patient is to observe; which Things he does
not value. In this Way he operates as dexterously as any of our best Operators.
(19)

Wherein this Account of Friar Jacques Operation differs from the rest; and
also wherein they all differ from one another, we shall be better able to show,
when we have gone through all that belongs to the History of it.

The next Author, in order of Time, who has said any thing further about the
Method of performing it, is Saviard; and he has only told us, that Friar
Jacques, who cut several Patients in the Hotel Dieu in the Year School, used to
leave a large ill-contriv'd Catheter in the Bladder ti^l he had extracted the
Stone. (20)

Dionis, to whom we now return, begins his Account of Friar Jacques Method, by
observing, that he took no Pains to prepare his Patients for the Operation, and
cared not whether they had been blooded and purged beforehand or not. He
places the Patient upon the Edge of a Table set in a good Light, and then lays
him upon his Back, with only a Pillow under his Head. He raises his Thighs,
separates them wide from one another, bends his Legs so that his Heels and
Buttocks almost meet, and sets two strong Men to keep him in that Posture,
without binding him at all, but trusting entirely to the Strength and
Management of these Assistants.

The Patient being thus in a proper Situation, he introduces a greased Staff
not groov'd, into the Penis, and holding it in his Left Hand, he thrusts out
that part of the Bladder where he designs to make his Incision: Then taking in
his Right a long Bistoury shaped like a Dagger, he plunges it near the Point of
the Left Buttock, two Fingers breadth from the Perinaeum, and pushing it
straight toward the Bladder, he cuts into the Body thereof as near the Neck as
he can, making an Incision as wide as the Size of the Stone requires it, before
ever he takes out his Bistoury.

He makes use of a Conductor in order to direct the Forceps, which is made
pretty much of the same Shape with ours; but very often before he introduces
this Instrument, he thrusts his Finger into the Wound to discover the Situation
of the Stone. As soon as he lays hold of it with the Forceps, he pulls it out
suddenly and roughly, never reflecting on the bad Consequences that such
Violence may be attended with. If there be more Stones than one, he extracts
all of them after the same manner; and when he finds there are none left, he
believes his whole Work to be done, for he never thinks of getting any
Apparatus ready beforehand, nor of dressing his Patients after the Operation.
He uses no Astringents nor Defensives; all he does is to apply a little Oil and
Wine to the Wound; and when he is put in mind of the Necessity there is of the
Patient's being well looked after, his Answer is, I have extracted the Stone, I
leave God to cure the Patient. (21)

Mr. Cheselden, in order to explain Friar Jacques new-invented Way of Cutting
for the Stone, thinks it sufficient to tell us, that it was by the Direction of
a Staff into the Bladder near the Rectum; and as he supposes this to be the
same with that practiced afterward in Holland by Mr. Rau, we may gather this
further, that he thought the Incision was made in the Bladder exactly betwixt
the Ureters. (22)

Albinus informs us, that the Parts proposed to be cut in Friar Jacques
Operation, were not the Neck of the Bladder, as had been anciently practiced,
nor the Urethra as was commonly done at that time; but the Bladder itself on
one Side, near the Neck, and a little toward the lower and back Part. In order
to this the Patient was laid upon his Back, with his Knees erect, his Thighs
bent, and kept at a small Distance from one another. The Incision was begun on
the Side of the Anus, and afterward the Knife was thrust obliquely inwards,
and a little upwards all the way to that Part of the Bladder already described;
and lastly, a Pair of Forceps introduced through the Wound to lay hold of and
extract the Stone.

These are all the Accounts that I can find ever to have been published
concerning Friar Jacques Method of Cutting upon the Staff; and I have placed
them all together, Mery's alone excepted, which came in more naturally before,
that it may be easier for the Reader to compare them with one another, or at
least to perceive the Truth and Exactness of the Comparison I shall lay before
him in its proper Place.

Friar Jacques was sufficiently caressed at Fontainbleau, not to think of
leaving it while the Court remained there; but I hear of no other Operations he
performed during his Stay. It had one good Effect however: By giving the News
of his extraordinary Success, and the kind Recepception he met with at Court,
time to spread over Paris; he found his Reputation as a Lithotomist much better
established upon his Return, than it could otherwise have been, though he had
made a Thousand Experiments before the Physicians and Surgeons of the
Hospitals. The Approach of the Court to Paris contributed further to this; and
therefore no sooner had the King left Fontainbleau to go to Versailles, but
Friar Jacques resolved to try his Fortune once more at Paris; if that can be
called a Trial, in which he knew the Genius of his Nation too well, not to be
sure to succeed.

He arrived there about the Beginning of April School, having been between Three
and Four Months absent. A very few Days after his Return, he cut a Woman named
de Lorrain, a Boy between Sixteen and Seventeen Years of Age, two Men and
another Boy, and three more, at which Monsieur Merry was not present, The Days
of the Month in which all these Operations were performed are not set down; but
they must all have followed very close upon one another, for before the End of
April he had made a Journey to Versailles, cut four People in an Hospital
there, was returned to Paris, and had cut in the Hospitals of that City, having
obtained what he so much desired, Leave so to do, in the manner we shall
presently relate.

Concerning the Fate of these Twelve Patients, for I do not find that he cut
any more, though it is very probable he did, Monsieur Merry informs us, that one
of the Parisians died two Days after the Operation, another in three Days,
another in the Month of September following, having never been cured; the rest
lived, but in such a manner as did this new Method no great Honor, as we shall
hear in the proper Place. Merry says nothing of his Journey to Versailles; but
Dionis who mentions it owns, that all the Patients he cut there recovered in
some sort or other. (23)

One of the Three last of the Paris Patients he cut upon the Gripe. This is the
first time we hear of his Cutting for the Stone in that manner; and Monsieur
Merry has given us the following Account of his Method. He introduces the Fore
and Middle Fingers of his Left Hand through the Anus into the Intestinum
Rectum; and pressing upon the Bladder behind with his two Fingers, and before
with his Right Hand upon the Belly, he thrusts the Stone toward the Perinaeum,
and keeps it there by means of the two Fingers which he holds firmly behind it.
In his Right Hand he takes his Bistoury, and beginning at the Protuberance of
the Ischium, he cuts all the Parts that lie between that and the Stone. So that
his two Ways of Operating differ, not in the Course of the Incision, but only
in the Instruments he uses, and the Manner of extracting the Stone; for whereas
in the great Apparatus he cuts upon a Staff, and uses Forceps to draw out the
Stone, in this he cuts upon the Stone itself, and takes it out by means of a
Curete of about an Inch in breadth. First of all he dilates the Bottom of the
Wound, by thrusting his Conductor into the Bladder; then forces in his Curete
between the Stone and the upper internal Surface of the Bladder; and having got
it behind the Stone, he raises the Handle of it with his Right Hand, the two
Fingers of his Left remaining still in their former Place; and thus, in the
same manner as a Weight is raised, or any other Obstacle removed by a Lever, he
forces out the Stone. (24)

Mr. Bussiere's Correspondent has likewise taken Notice of this Method of
Operating. Brother James, he says, very often cutteth the Patient upon the
Gripe, almost in the same manner as was used formerly, except that he makes
the Incision in the same Place as for the former; this Way he likes better
than the other, and it seems, to be more favored by him, and indeed it is
surer, though the pressing upon the Belly which he does, is a very bad Method.
(25)

Neither Dionis, nor any of the rest of our Authors, have so much as mentioned
this second Way of Cutting. The Success that attended it we shall see as we go
along.

We are now come to that Period of Friar Jacques Transactions at Paris; in
which, as his Wishes seemed to be entirely crowned, so a speedy Foundation was
laid for the Ruin of that Reputation which he had so unaccountably acquired.
The Operations which he had performed immediately upon his Return from
Fontainbleau, had so far succeeded, as that but Two Patients died out of Twelve
that we know he cut. This, joined to the favorable Character that some
Physicians from the Provinces gave of him at Court, and the great Merit that
was made there of what had already happened to him at Fontainbleau, made the
Magistrates of Paris (not the King, as far as we can learn either from Merry or
Dionis, 26) begin to think seriously of allowing him to Cut in the two great
Hospitals of that City. In order to that, however, the First President thought
it proper to call together the Administrators of the Hotel Dieu, the Physicians
and Surgeons belonging to it, and also Mesieurs Merry and Bessiere who had
before been commissioned by him to inspect Friar Jacques Experiments on dead
Bodies, to hear their Sentiments upon a Matter wherein the Lives of the Sick
People in that Hospital were so nearly concerned. The Assembly was held in the
Archbishop's Palace on the 24th Day of April, and Monsieur Merry was desired to
give his Opinion the first. He has set down at length the Discourse he made
upon that Occasion; in which he endeavors to oppose the Monk's being allowed
to Cut, as strenuously as he had in his former Report recommended him.

None of the other Physicians nor Surgeons pretended to dispute either the
Facts alleged by Monsieur Merry, or the Consequences he drew from them; but
they thought, that considering the great Number of successful Operations which
he had performed in the Provinces, as they were informed by the Physicians
there residing, it would be hard to condemn his new Method altogether, upon
account of a few unlucky Experiments he had made of it at Paris, especially
since the Public was so much prejudiced in his Favor; and therefore they gave
it as their Opinion, that the surest Way was to admit him to make new Trials,
which he could by no other means do so well, as by being allowed to Cut in the
Hotel Dieu; and this was accordingly resolved on. (27)

He was at the same time admitted to the Charity; and in these two Hospitals he
Cut Sixty Patients, Forty two in the first, and Eighteen in the second, during
the Space of one Season; that is, at farthest between the 24th of April and the
Beginning of July; for by the 8th Day of that Month, he had left Paris, reached
Orleans, (which is 100 Miles distant from it) and there performed an Operation.

The Crowds to see him Cut were inconceivable; there was not a Physician nor
Surgeon who did not strive to get in, insomuch, that they were forced to have
Guards to keep off the Press; and there have been Two Hundred Persons present
at once at his Operations.

Of these Sixty Patients Dionis tells us more died than lived, and at the Time
he wrote that may be true; but by a Computation which Monsieur Merry made of the
different Fate of them, about September following, as near as I can guess,
since no Part of his Relation appears to have been written after that Time; and
it is certain it did not exceed a full Year, because toward the latter End of
it he calls the Time in which Friar Jacques Cut in the Hospitals the last
Spring: By this Computation, I say, it appears that Twenty Five died soon after
the Operation; Thirteen went from the Hospitals perfectly cured, as was
thought, though afterward he was informed that some of their Wounds had broke
out afresh; and Twenty Five remained in the Hospitals, some afflicted with
Incontinence of Urine, others with Fistulas, and all of them so very low, that
according to the Information he had received from the Officers and Servants of
the Hospitals, there was on the 30th of July very little Hopes of their
Recovery. On this Day, our Author says, he ended his Observations; but as in
other Places of his Book he mentions Facts which did not happen till September,
it is plain they were retouched after that Time. (28)

Monsieur Merry was at Pains to examine the Bodies of such as died after Friar
Jacques Operations with a great deal of Care, and he has set down the
Observations he made upon them: By these we may with great Certainty judge of
the Merit of these Methods of Cutting for the Stone; but before we can proceed
to that, some few Facts more, belonging to the History of them, must first be
related.

It is not mentioned, neither by Merry nor Dionis, how many died out of each
Hospital; but it is probable that the Number was greater in Proportion to those
he Cut in the Charity than in the Hotel Dieu. Dionis says, that Seven died
there in one Day; and from thence, and from a Quarrel which Friar Jacques is
said to have had with some of the Monks of that House, it was, that he and his
Friends took occasion to trump up a fictitious Story, that the Monks sometimes
poisoned his Patients, and sometimes cut other Parts in dressing their Wounds,
than those which he had touched, in order to discredit his Operation. This
Story, how unlikely so ever, gained the Belief of great Numbers of People, and
the Death of Friar Jacques Patients turned as much to his Honor, as his having
saved the Lives of the rest; but at length, when upon Dissection of the dead
Bodies, especially of those who had been Cut at the Hotel Dieu, in which there
was no Suspicion or any Fraud, the Ignorance of the Operator, and the
Inconveniences of the Operations, came to be plainly discovered, this
Accusation vanished into Smoke; and with it the Reputation of Friar Jacques,
and his Interest at Paris, which he had reason to think so well established; so
that it was soon afterward resolved that he should be no more allowed to Cut
in either of the Hospitals. (29)

What contributed very much to this sudden Disgrace of Friar Jacques, was the
Death of the Marshall de l'Orge, which happened in the most cruel and
lamentable Manner, the very next Day after he had been Cut by him; while at the
same time Monsieur Fagon, who, notwithstanding all the Solicitations that were
made to him, to put himself in the Hands of Friar Jacques, resolved rather to
trust the Art of Monsieur Marshall, a skilful and regularly bred Surgeon,
recovered perfectly after undergoing the same Operation. (30)

Friar Jacques finding his Credit quite sunk at Paris, and that there was no
Hopes left of getting any more Employment there, thought his best Way was to
withdraw to some other City in France; and Orleans was the Place he pitched
upon. There, between the 8th and 15th Day of July, he performed Eight
Operations, Five in the Public Hospital of that City, and Three elsewhere; as
we are informed by a Letter which Monsieur Noel, a Physician of Orleans, wrote
to Monsieur Merry, dated Sept. 13. School. The Success of these Operations was
every bit as bad as those he performed in the Hospitals of Paris. Three of the
Eight Patients died within a few Days after the Operation; a Fourth before
September, that is, in less than two Months after he was Cut; One recovered
perfectly; and the other Three continued in a languishing State, being either
troubled with an Incontinence of Urine, or very gross Symptoms of a Fistula.
(31)

Dionis says, he Cut afterward at Lions, and in other Cities in France; but he
must certainly be mistaken, since by an Advertisement in the Amsterdam Gazette,
dated the 8th of August, it appears, that on the 28th of July, that is
(allowing for the Difference of the Style) only 23 Days after his last
Operation at Orleans, he arrived at Aix la Chapelle. The Substance of that
Advertisement is as follows:

" Friar Jacques, Operator for the Stone to the most Christian King, arrived at
Aix la Chapelle on the 28th of July, to Cut a Man for the Stone; and he hereby
gives Notice, that whoever are afflicted with that Distemper, the Gravel, or
any kind of Hernia or Rupture, he will undertake to cure for nothing, the Rich
as well as the Poor, only out of Charity and Benevolence to Mankind. He offers
to all Surgeons to teach them his Way of Cutting, and all his other Operations
gratis; and to all Physicians, to show them infallible Remedies against the
Gravel. He lodges at Monsieur Blondel's a Physician. His Operations are all
New, and of his own Invention. That for the Stone in particular never endangers
Life, and no Fistula is to be feared after it. He has performed it on
Multitudes at Paris and Versailles, in Presence of the Physicians and Surgeons
of the King of France, and met with an universal Approbation." (32)

The Style of this Advertisement shows, that it was published by the Monk's own
Order; and from it, as well as several other Particulars of his History, it
appears sufficiently that he must have been a most profligate abandoned Wretch;
and that under an outward Air of Simplicity and Self-denial, he concealed some
secret Design or other, which perhaps the Multitudes of Persons that died under
his Hands prevented his ever putting in Execution.

He gives himself out here not only for an Operator for the Stone, but a Curer
of Ruptures. He had made some Experiments of his Talents that Way in Paris, and
more at Orleans: His Patients all of them recovered after the Operation, at
least we hear of none that died; but as it was always accompanied with
Castration, it soon met with a general Disgust, and therefore he laid it aside
during all the rest of the Time he remained at Paris. (33)

What Reception he found at Aix la Chapelle I have not as yet learned, nor
whither he went from thence. It is certain he was afterward in Holland, and
Cut for the Stone there; as we learn from Albinus in the following Words,
"While Rau taught Anatomy and practiced Surgery at Amsterdam, Friar Jacques
arrived there to practice his new Method of Cutting for the Stone, as he had
already done in France. For this purpose he obtained a Permission from the
Civil Magistrate; and Rau was frequently present at his Operations, which he
highly blamed and condemned. This Freedom of his gave some Umbrage at first,
and he found himself obliged to hold his Tongue; but afterward, when they saw
that all he had said was confirmed by the Event, Friar Jacques Permission was
taken from him, and Rau made Public Lithotomist in his Room."

CHAP. II. A Comparison of the several Descriptions that have been given of
Friar Jaques Methods of Cutting Males.
IN the foregoing History I have collected all that I can find in Authors
concerning the two Methods used by Friar Jacques in Cutting Men; but as these
Accounts are not only some of them more full and complete than others, but
likewise differ from one another in several Particulars, I have thought it
necessary to compare them together; it being impossible to judge as we ought
concerning the true Merit of an Operation, except we be first thoroughly
acquainted with the true Manner of performing it.

To begin therefore by the Preparation of the Patient, the first Step toward
all Operations of this kind; Dionis, the only Author who has said any thing
about it, assures us, that Friar Jacques looked upon Blooding, Purging, and
every thing else that goes under that Name, as Things indifferent and of no
Consequence to the Success of the Operation; and indeed this agrees so well
with the Character we have given of him, and especially the short Stay he
usually made in the Places where he Cut, that there can be no room to doubt of
the Truth of it.

The Instruments he made Use of were first a Catheter or Staff. In describing
this, all our Authors agree well enough; and from what they have said, we may
conclude that it was made of Steel, solid, round, without a Groove, thicker and
shorter than those used in the common Way, shorter from the Top to the Bending,
and bent more; that he had two sorts, one for Men, and one for Children,
differing only in Size; and that before he used it, he always dipped it in Oil
of Roses, or some such thing.

His Incision Knife, or Bistoury, as it is called in French, differed from the
common one chiefly in Length. Bussiere adds, that it was slenderer; and Dionis,
that it was shaped like a Poinard or Dagger.

Merry has given us a Figure of his Dilator or Conductor, by which it will be
better understood than by any Description that has been made of it. Dionis says
in general, that it is pretty much of the same Shape with the common one, which
I believe is pretty far from being true. But Mr. Bussiere's Description will
agree very well with Mery's Figure. His Conductor, says he, is slender; and
longer than the common one; the Point whereof, that is all that Part which goes
into the Bladder, being of the Figure of a Lozenge, is wide and open in the
Extremity.

His Forceps no Author has described except Mr. Bussiere, that is, they all
believed it to be like the common one; but he tells us, that the Branches are
longer, and the Holds shorter and wider, with many large Teeth within. It is
for the same Reason that they say nothing of his Scoop; but Mr. Bussiere takes
Notice, that that Instrument, which he calls an Eurethra, is shorter than the
common sort.

The Situation of the Patient, Number and Office of the Assistants, follow next
in Order. About all these Monsieur Merry is entirely silent; Bussiere, Dionis
and Albinus agree, except in a very few Particulars. The Patient is laid upon
his Back on a Bed or Table, with a soft Quilt under him, or only a Pillow under
his Head, in such a manner that the Fundament is Three or Four Inches over the
Edge of the Table, the Thighs erect, not bent toward the Belly, and at a good
Distance from one another; ( Albinus says they are bent, and not much
separated;) the Legs bent so as that the Heels do almost touch the Buttock; and
in this Posture he is kept by two strong Assistants, without the help of any
Ligature, so that the Operator is at Liberty to move any Part, as he thinks
convenient.

The Patient being placed in this manner, Merry tells us that Friar Jacques
introduces his Catheter into the Bladder; and Bussiere adds, that though it be
bigger and shorter than the common ones, yet it seems to run in easier; that he
very often ( Dionis says always) holds it in his Left Hand, and presses it
close toward the Fundament, in order to dilate or thrust out that Part of the
Bladder which he designs to Cut, till he can feel it with his Fingers through
the Skin. Albinus seems to think that Friar Jacques made Use of no Staff in his
Operation; for besides, that he does not mention it in the Account he has given
us, he makes the Addition Rau made to Friar Jacques Operation to consist in a
Staff, which he compares not with the Staff used by him, as he naturally ought
to have done, in order to show wherein Rau's Was preferable to his, but with
that used in the great Apparatus.

When Friar Jacques had felt the Catheter through the Skin, he began to make an
Incision on the Left and Inside of the Protuberance of the Ischium, and so
cutting on obliquely from below upwards, he divided whatever came in his Way
till he reached his Catheter; and it appears by all Mery's Dissections, from
whom these Words are taken, that his Design was to cut the Neck of the Bladder
length-ways, and as much of the Body of it as the Size of the Stone required.

Bussiere describes his Incision thus: He runs his Knife at the Bent of the
Left Thigh, upon the fat Protuberance, below the Ischium Bone, directly upwards
by the Rectum into the Bladder, which he pierces by its Neck, and sometimes a
little above it. This Account disagrees with the former, chiefly in the Course
of the Incision from its Beginning till it reached the Bladder.

According to Dionis, the Knife was plunged near the Point of the Left Buttock
two Fingers breadth from the Perinaeum, and from thence pushed directly
forwards into the Body of the Bladder, as near the Neck as he could, and all
this before ever he took out his Knife. Here the Neck of the Bladder is
supposed to remain entire, which is contrary to both Merry and Bussiere's
Observations.

The first part of Mr. Cheselden's Account of his Way of Cutting, that it was
by the Direction of a Staff into the Bladder near the Rectum, may be either
true or false, just as he understood it; but the second Part, that the Bladder
was cut exactly betwixt the Ureters, can never be true. This shall be shown in
describing the Structure of the Parts concerned in this Operation.

Albinus has copied Dionis's Mistake about the Neck of the Bladder not being
cut; but what he says further, that the Incision was begun on the Side of the
Anus, and afterward the Knife thrust obliquely inwards and a little upwards
into the Side of the Bladder near its Neck, and a little toward the lower and
back Part; is exactly agreeable to what we have heard from Merry.

This being the Part of Friar Jacques Method, which is of the greatest
Consequence to be rightly understood, I thought it proper to bring here under
one View all that has been said about it.

The Incision being made, Mr. Merry acquaints us further, that he thrust his
Finger through the Wound into the Bladder, to find out the Stone; and having
observed where it lay, he introduced his Conductor to dilate the Wound, if the
Bigness of the Stone required it, and also that it might direct his Forceps
into the Bladder. As soon as the Forceps had entered there, he drew out his
Conductor, and also the Staff out of the Urethra; then having felt for and laid
hold of the Stone with the Forceps, he extracted both of them together.

Bussiere's Account of this Part of the Operation disagrees with Mery's chiefly
in this, that he supposes the Wound to be dilated by the Knife and Finger only,
not by the Conductor; that he makes him enlarge the outward Part of it Two or
Three Inches after the first Incision is finished; and that the Staff is taken
out before the Forceps is introduced. He has likewise made this very
considerable Addition to Mr. Mery's Relation, that when the Monk found any
Difficulty, either in getting hold of the Stone, or in drawing it out, he used
all the Ways commonly practiced, raising the Left Thigh more or less, putting
his Finger in the Fundament, and sometimes into the Bladder, in order to
examine the Situation of the Stone, and loosen it in case there might be any
Adhesion with the Membranes of the Bladder. Having found out and removed the
Cause of the Difficulty, he thrusts the Forceps again into the Bladder, gets
hold of the Stone, and pulls it out; and at this time he used no Conductor, the
Forceps running in very easily.

Saviard makes the Staff remain in the Bladder till the Stone is extracted.
This I take to be a Mistake, because it not only contradicts the two former
Accounts, but because by this means it must have been more difficult to search
for, and lay hold of the Stone with the Forceps.

Dionis agrees with Merry in the few Things he has said, without having made any
material Addition; and Albinus has mentioned the Extraction of the Stone with
the Forceps in very general Terms.

As for the Care of the Patient after the Operation, and the Dressing of the
Wound, both Bussiere and Dionis inform us, that Friar Jacques neglected that
almost entirely, or at least left it to other People; and amongst all the
Operations that he performed in the Hospitals of Paris, I cannot learn from
Merry that ever he applied the least Thing to any Patient whatever.

In the Comparison which I have here made of Friar Jacques first Method of
Cutting, I have taken care to point out the Mistakes of the several Accounts we
have of it, as far I could with any Certainty conclude there were any to be
found. As for the other Particulars in which they disagree, and about which I
have not ventured to determine any Thing, it may very well be supposed that
they have all of them a real Foundation; since it is more than probable, that
at different Times, and on different Subjects, the Monk may have operated
different Ways.

There is no room for such a Comparison of his Method of Cutting upon the
Gripe; for besides, that the only thing in which it differs from the Old
Operation that goes under that Name, was in the Place where the Incision was
begun, we have no particular Account of it but from Monsieur Merry, and that has
been already set down.

CHAP. III. Judgments concerning Friar Jacques Method of Cutting Males.
HAving now finished the History of Friar Jacques Operations for the Stone, and
compared all the Parts of his Method of Cutting, as far as there is any thing
to be met with in Authors about it; we are fully in a Condition to understand
the Judgments that the same Authors have made concerning the Advantages and
Inconveniences that must attend it; together with the Reasons upon which their
several Decisions have been founded.

Monsieur Bussiere, as has been already said, was the first who ventured to
publish his Thoughts about these Operations, first in the Name of his
Correspondent, and then in his own.

His Friend's Opinion is, that Friar Jacques Way of Cutting is not so sure as
the ancient Way, by which he means that of Marianus; and that for these two
Reasons: First, Because the Point of the Knife not being directed by the Staff,
he is always in danger of piercing all the Membranes of the Bladder through and
through; and, Secondly, Because the Place whereupon he makes the Incision
being full of considerable Vessels, one can hardly avoid Cutting of some of
them; and accordingly it was observed in almost all that died in his Hands,
that there was a great deal of Blood in the Bladder, and in some in the Cavity
of the Abdomen.

The Author goes on to illustrate these two Reasons in this Manner: He
succeeds better when the Stone is big and large than when it is small, by
reason that a big Stone not only extends the Bladder, but it stops the
Point of the Knife. He did refuse to Cut One, in whose Bladder there was but a
small Stone; which confirms me in the Opinion, that the Unsuccessfulness of
his Operations proceeds from the Point of his Knife not being stopped neither
by the Staff nor Stone; for when there is but a small Stone, the Bladder being
empty, he must necessarily cut the whole Bladder thoroughly, and consequently
cut some of its own Vessels, which causes the Hemorrhage, which is the better
voided when the Stone is large.

Thus far Monsieur Bussiere's Friend; and what he adds as his own Opinion is
not much different, except in the Experiments he has made to prove how
reasonable it is. I cannot approve the Hermit's Way, says he, on all Occasions;
yet I think it might be successfully improved (by which he can mean no more
than that it might be used) in some particular Cases. What these Cases are,
will appear by the Observations he made about it, after he had received his
Friend's Account.

I took a Body, continues he, in the Bladder of which I put a Stone; the Staff
being in the Bladder, I did press it downwards hard enough as to be felt
through the ^eg^ments, and made the Incision upon it in the Bent of the Thigh,
in order to know whether it would not be a surer Way by securing the Point of
the Knife; by that Way I got my Conductor and Forceps into the Bladder, and
drew the Stone very easily; but afterward, by the Dissection of the Body, I
found that the Artery of the Penis and the Vesiculae Seminales were cut through
and through; which cannot be avoided, because the Artery and Vesiculae lie
immediately under that Part of the Bladder which the Staff presses upon.

I took another Body, and having put in the Bladder a small Stone, I made the
Incision much lower, and pierced the Bladder under the Staff, by which Incision
I drew the Stone; then dissecting the Body I found the Bladder cut through and
its Arteries, which can hardly be avoided, the Bladder being then so much
contracted, that both Sides of the Bladder are cut, before the Operator either
feels the Stone, or sees any Urine running out.

I took a third Body, in the Bladder of which I put a very large Stone; the
Staff being in it, I made the Incision upon the fat Protuberancy under the
Ischium Bone; and piercing the Bladder below the Staff, I found immediately the
Stone with the Point of the Knife, with which I cut the Bladder the Length of
an Inch; through which having introduced the Conductor, and then the Forceps, I
got hold of the Stone, and drew it out very easily. Then I did dissect the
Body, and found that neither the Vesiculae Seminales nor any Artery had been
cut, by reason that the Weight of the Stone pressed the Bottom of the Bladder
lower than the Vesiculae and Arteries.

Monsieur Bussiere's two first Experiments, we see, confirm his Friend's two
Reasons against this Method; and the third serves for a Foundation for his own
Opinion in favor of it in some particular Cases; that is, he thinks that this
Way might be made use of when the Stone is very big, and willingly I would
prefer it, says he, to the old Way; for by this Way we avoid that extraordinary
and violent Dilatation of the Neck of the Bladder, which the Stone causes when
it is very big, and which is the Cause of the Inflammation and Mortification of
the Bladder that kills the Patient. But when the Stone is very small, or but
of an indifferent Bigness, the old Way is easier and surer.

Monsieur Bussiere has given us his Judgment of Friar Jacques Method of Cutting
on the Gripe likewise: I cannot approve, says he, the Cutting upon the Gripe;
because, in that Way one cutteth through the Prostates, which destroys the
Parts of Generation. I have observed, that all those who have been Cut by that
Method, were never fit for Generation.(35)

Dr. Lister was at Paris when Friar Jacques was there, and saw him frequently
Cut. The principal Thing to be remarked in what he has said about his Method,
is the favorable Judgment he makes of it; and therefore I have chosen to
insert the whole Passage in this Place.

Another popular Disease at Paris, says the Doctor, is the Stone, and there are
Men well practiced in the Cutting for it. There are also two Hospitals where
great Numbers are cut Yearly, La Charity and Hotel Dieu; but that which I shall
here most insist upon is the New Way practiced by Pere Jacques, a Monk. About
the 20th of April he Cut in the Hotel Dieu Ten in less than an Hour's time; the
third Day after, all were hearty and without Pain but One.

He Cuts both by the Great and Little Appareil; in both he boldly thrusts in a
broad Launcet or Stilleto into the middle of the Muscles of the Thigh near the
Anus, till he joins the Catheter or Staff, or the Stone betwixt his Fingers;
then he widens the Incision of the Bladder, in Proportion to the Stone, with a
Silver Oval Hoop; it that will not do, he thrusts in his Four Fingers and tears
it wider, then with the Ducks Bill he draws it out.

I saw him cut a second time in the Hotel Dieu, and he performed it upon Nine
Persons in Three Quarters of an Hour very dexterously. He seemed to venture at
all, and put me into some Disorder with the Cruelty of the Operation, and a
stouter Englishman than my self; however, I visited them all in their Beds, and
found them more amazed than in Pain.

Pere Jacques cut also his Way in the other Hospital La Charity, much about the
same time, Eleven at twice. Here Monsieur Marechal, the best of the Surgeons
now in Paris for this Operation, harangued against him before the Governors;
who coldly answered, they would be determined by the Event which Way was best.

Of those Cut at La Charity, One died; and being dissected, it was found he had
his Bladder pierced in four or five Places, also the Musculus Psoas sadly
mangled, also the Left Vesiculae Seminales cut. Notwithstanding this, if this
Method was well executed by a skilful Hand, it might be of good Use to Mankind.

Since my Return I had a Letter from Mr. Probie, a very learned and industrious
young Gentleman, who was with me to see the Operation; that Part relating to
this Matter I shall here transcribe. Indeed, I mightily longed for an Account
of this Matter, the Success of which I came away too soon to learn any thing
for certain.

Paris, August 2. ^^98.
" PEre Jacques Reputation mightily slackens; out of Forty Five that he Cut at
the Hotel Dieu, but Sixteen of them survive; and of Nineteen in the Charity,
but Eleven. He has practiced at the Hospitals at Lions; but, it is said, with
more Success than at Paris. I am sensible he has got Abundance of Enemies,
which makes me very much question what I may hear said of him. Dr. Fagon, the
King's Physician, told Dr. Tournefort, when he went to present his Book to him,
that he had Cut Seven at Versailles, and that Six of them are alive, and as
well as if never Cut. The Person that died was so distempered, that he was not
expected to live; and it was thought if he had not been Cut, he had not lived
so long. The Surgeons have a great mind to cry down the Man, though they practice
his Method; for Marechal has since Cut after Pere Jacques Manner, only with
this Difference, that Marechal's Catheter was canulated. La Rue, the Second
Surgeon of the Charity Hospital, Cut after the Old Manner, at the same time
when Marechal Cut Pere Jacques Way, but had not so good Success as Marechal
had; for all that Marechal Cut are alive and well, whereas the other lost One
or Two of his Number; besides, those that lived were not so soon cured, no not
by a Month or Six Weeks." Thus far Mr. Probie.


I now go on to Monsieur Merry; and in relating the many Observations he has
given us concerning Friar Jacques Operations, I shall observe this Order;
first, to set down the Observations themselves in the same Order of Time in
which they were made; and Secondly, Make a methodical Extract of the Reasonings
and Conclusions he draws from them.

What the first Experiments made by Friar Jacques furnished him with upon both
these Heads, has been already taken Notice of. Upon dissecting the Body of the
Boy on which the second Trial was made, our Author observed, that the Monk had
cut the Accelerator Muscle, which remained untouched in the former; and that
the Beginning of the Urethra, the Neck, and that Part of the Body of the
Bladder which lies near the back Part of the Os Pubis, were so much torn as to
be almost entirely separated from the rest. These Accidents he judged were to
be imputed to the Tenderness of the Parts, the Largeness of the Monk's Finger
which he thrusts into the Bladder, and the too great Length of his Staff; and
from this we may probably infer, that he was not at that time provided with
such a Staff proper for Boys, as we are assured he afterward made Use of. (36)

The first living Person he Cut at Paris was a Woman. Out of the second he
extracted Four or Five large Stones: The Patient lost a great deal of Blood in
the Operation, and three Days afterward a very great Hemorrhage happened, the
Blood coming out through the Wound, the Penis and Anus at the same time; which
made it plain that the Intestinum Rectum had been cut; and accordingly he
voided two Worms by the Wound, and Excrements were found upon the Tents applied
to it. He had afterward a Fistula, and died about two Months after the
Operation, but his Body was never opened. (37)

Of Three others which Monsieur Merry saw Friar Jacques Cut soon after, one died
of an Hemorrhage in two or three Days; Another was afflicted with a Tumor in
the Groin different from an Hernia, and an Incontinency of Urine, though his
Wound was cicatriz'd; the Third our Author could hear nothing of. (38)

The first Person that he cut upon the Gripe, died two Days after the
Operation; and being opened, his Bladder was observed to be torn as with an
Iron Comb, by the Forceps and Curette, which had been several times thrust into
the Wound. (39)

The other Observations which Monsieur Merry has given us, were made on the
Bodies of such as Friar Jacques had Cut in the two Hospitals. The first dead
Body he dissected, was of a Man who died Five Days after the Operation; his
Scrotum, Penis and Bladder were gangreen'd, and the Left Levator Any cut
according to the Direction of the Fibers. In the Bladder remained one Piece of
Stone of the Size of a Man's Thumb, and another smaller which was lodged
between the Membranes of it.

In the Second, the Intestines were all over inflamed, and some Parts of them
gangrened. The Cavity of the Abdomen was filled with a stinking serous Matter,
the thickest Parts of which glewed the Intestines to one another, and also to
the Bladder, Peritonaeum and Mesentery. The Bladder itself was gangrened, and
there was a Wound in the Bottom of it, by which the Cavity of it had a
Communication with that of the Abdomen: This Wound was round, and consequently
in all Probability made with the Catheter. There was likewise a Wound in the
Neck of the Bladder, on that Side which lies next the Rectum, two Inches deep
and one broad, with a Bit of Stone still sticking in it.

The Third Body had been Cut on the Gripe, and the Operator had begun his
Incision an Inch and a half higher than in the rest. The Cavity of the Abdomen
was here likewise filled with a stinking pituitous Matter, which glewed the
Intestines in the Hypogastrick Region to the Bladder, and they were also very
much inflamed. The Neck of the Bladder was quite separated from the Urethra,
and the whole Body of it inclining to a Gangrene. It was thicker and harder
than ordinary, and between it and the Peritonaeum there was found a great
Quantity of Urine and extravasated Blood. The Intestinum Rectum was bruised and
shattered, and of a livid Color.

Mery's Fourth Observations were made on Five Dead Bodies, Four of which had
been Cut two Days before, the Other some time longer: But in this last the
Lower Belly was so much corrupted, that it was impossible for him to examine
whence that terrible Disorder proceeded. In the rest he found the Urethra cut
off from the Bladder, and the Bladder separated from the Os Pubis; so that the
Nerves, Arteries and Veins of the Penis being by this means either broken or
cut, there was a great Quantity of Blood between the Peritonaeum and the
Viscera of the Hypogastrick Region; the most Part of which were very much
bruised. In one of these Bodies the Intestines were every where inflamed, and
in some Places gangrened, the Cavity of the Abdomen being filled with Pus. In
two others it was filled with a serous Matter died with Blood. Four of these
Patients, as Monsieur Merry was informed, had been Cut upon the Gripe.

His Fifth Observations were made upon the Bodies of Six Children, some of whom
had been Cut upon the Gripe, and others upon the Staff. In all of them he found
the Bladder separated from the Urethra and Os Pubis, the Blood Vessels of the
Penis broken or cut, the Rectum and all the Parts thereabout bruised, because
the Monk had thrust his Fingers into the Anus of them all. Moreover, in one of
them the Bladder was cut with the Bistoury, from the back to the fore Part; in
another, from the Left Side to the Right near the Neck. He found likewise a
great deal of extravasated Blood; which, together with the Contusion of the
Parts, had produced in some of them Inflammations and Gangreens, in others
considerable Abscesses, the Matter of which run out at the Wound.

The next were made on the Body of a Boy between Thirteen and Fourteen Years of
Age, whom Friar Jacques had Cut upon the Gripe. Besides that, the Bladder was
separated from the Os Pubis, he found the Haemorroidal Arteries cut, which had
produced an Haemorrhage at two different Times; and that, together with the
Mortification of the Wound, were the chief Causes of his Death. What was
further peculiar to this Operation was, that in pushing his Knife toward the
Bladder, Friar Jacques had opened three different Passages, one at the lower
Part of the Scrotum, the second between the Bladder and the Rectum, the third
between the Peritonaeum and the Outside of the Bladder.

The Seventh dead Body was of a Child, which had likewise been Cut upon the
Gripe; the Cavity of the Omentum, as well as the Abdomen, was full of a serous
stinking Matter, the Sediment of which had glewed the Intestines to the
Bladder, and all of them were gangrened at the Place of their Union. The Rectum
was livid, and that as well as the Bladder surrounded by a fetid Ulcer, the
Matter of which run out at the Wound. In order to extract this Stone, Friar
Jacques run his Knife from the Protuberance of the Ischium, between the Rectum
and Peritonaeum, and entered the Body of the Bladder without touching either the
Neck or Urethra, making a Wound about five Inches deep, which he could not do
without Cutting a great Number of Blood Vessels, and cruelly dilacerating the
Parts.

The Eighth Body was of a Child, who died near a Month after the Operation; but
not having been opened, the only Observation that could be made was, that
during all that Time the Wound continued open, and that the Urine came out that
Way.

The next Male Body was likewise of a young Boy, who died six Weeks after he
had been Cut. The Wound remained still open, and was of a very livid Color.
Between the Rectum, Os Sacrum and Peritonaeum there was a fetid Ulcer, the
Matter of which run out at the Wound; the Neck of the Bladder was parted from
the Penis, and the Vessels of the Penis cut. The Rectum was wounded and
gangrened; and by this last Accident it appears, that this Child had been Cut
upon the Gripe. The Cavity of the Hypogastrium was filled with a serous
purulent Matter.

The next Observations are taken from great Numbers of dead Bodies; and, in
respect of the rest, may well be called General Observations. In Three Patients
Cut by Friar Jacques, says our Author, Worms were seen to come out; in one
through the Wound, in the other two through the Urethra; which makes it plain
that the Intestinum Rectum had been Cut in all of them, and a Communication
opened, in the first between that and the Wound, and in the rest between it and
the Bladder. Again, it was observed that most of his Patients died with
Convulsions, and all of them with a greater Loss of Blood than commonly happens
to those who are Cut the Old Way.

The two last Observations were made on the same Body, partly before and partly
after the Death of the Patient. About seven Weeks after he had been Cut, his
Wound was looked upon to be in a very good State, but as far from being closed
as at the Beginning: both Urine and a purulent glearious Matter, mixed with
Gravel, continued to run through it, and the Patient was still in a very weak
Condition. In nine Weeks after he died, and his Body being opened, he was found
to have a Fistula; the Entry thereof was very narrow, but farther in it was an
Inch broad, and five Inches in Length, reaching from the Bent of the Buttock
(Moignon de la fesse) to the Neck of the Bladder, and from thence between the
Body of it and the Rectum. Into the innermost Part of it run Matter from an
Abscess which lay between the Os Sacrum and the Rectum. All the Parts contained
in the Hypogastrium were very black; and as there is no room to doubt but that
the first Cause of the Fistula was owing to the Incision, it is likewise
probable, that before or after having cut that Part of the Urethra which joins
to the Neck of the Bladder, he had lost his Way; since the Body ot the Fistula
lay between the Bladder and the Rectum, and since it was evidently impossible
for him to make an Incision five Inches deep, without cutting many Vessels, and
also making the Parts suffer an extreme Violence, in extracting the Stone;
there is reason to think, that from these two Causes proceeded that Fluxion
which produced the Abscess, the Matter of which had corrupted the Parts. (40)

These are the Observations which Merry has given us, concerning the Accidents
which either attended or followed upon Friar Jacques Operation; and by seeing
them all here at length, the Reader will not only have the Satisfaction of
observing all the various Kinds of them, but likewise which of them happened
most frequently, and in how many different Manners they were combined in
different Subjects.

What the Author has remarked in several Places, concerning the particular
Parts cut in particular Operations, will serve to confirm and illustrate an
Observation I have already made, That it is not always a Proof, that where the
Accounts which have been given of Friar Jacques Methods of Cutting are
different from one another, some of them must be false; since by the Instances
our Author has here set down, it is evident, that in the Course of his
Operations at Paris, he differed as much from himself as those Accounts do from
one another.

I go on, in the next Place, to the Conclusions which Monsieur Merry has drawn
from these Observations, as far as they relate either to the Operations
themselves, or to Friar Jacques as the Operator.

To begin by the Operations: The first Conclusion concerning these, which I
shall mention from Monsieur Merry, is, that in both Friar Jacques Methods of
Cutting, it is a very difficult Matter not to separate the Neck of the Bladder
from the Urethra. This Proposition he proves thus: That Part of the Urethra
which is joined to the Neck of the Bladder, being situated in the Angle formed
by the Union of the Ossa Pubis, and the ^^at Part of the Incision Knife being
laid to the Inside of these Bones, and of the Protuberance of the Ischium, it
is impossible to reach the Urethra but in an Oblique Line; it must therefore
necessarily be cut obliquely: Accordingly when he used the Staff, he cut it
half thorough, and consequently destroyed half its Force; wherefore the
Resistance of the Urethra being now weaker than the Effort which he must make
to draw the Stone through the Neck of the Bladder, which in this Case remains
entire, the rest of the Urethra is quite torn off and broken; to which this
likewise very much conduces, that as he draws the Stone from above downwards in
the Direction of the Wound, the Neck of the Bladder is forced out of the
Direction of the Canal of the Urethra, and by this Means more easily separated
from it. The same Accident may likewise follow from the Violence he is obliged
to use, in order to introduce either his Forceps or his Finger into the Bladder.

When he cuts upon the Gripe, the Case is still more evident; for as here in
making the Incision, he has not the Staff to direct and resist his Knife, the
Urethra is liable to be cut quite through at once, as often as he meets with
that Part of it which lies between the Inside of the Os Pubis and the Neck of
the Bladder; and to this, as we have seen, was owing the Death of many of the
Children whom he cut this Way. (41)

A Second Conclusion drawn by Monsieur Merry is, that it is almost impossible to
prevent both Incontinency of Urine and Fistulas in Friar Jacques Ways of
Operating. To prove this, our Author begins by observing, That in these Methods
it is absolutely necessary, that either the Urethra alone be cut, or the Neck
of the Bladder alone, or the Body of it alone, or lastly, the Neck and Body
together. If the Urethra alone be cut, and be not torn afterward from the
Bladder, he thinks such Patients may recover perfectly. If either the Neck of
the Bladder alone, or the Neck and Body together are cut, it is evident that
the Sphincter must be cut likewise; and as this Muscle can never recover again
its former Tone, an Incontinency of Urine must ensue, though the Wound be never
so well cured. If the Body of the Bladder alone be cut, a Fistula is
inevitable, which he thus proves: The Use of the Sphincter is to shut the
Bladder, and hinder the Urine from running out, except when the Bladder being
compressed by the Muscles of the Abdomen, the Urine is by this means, and by
the Elasticity of its own Fibers driven toward the Neck of it, with a Force
which is greater than the Resistance of the Sphincter: But if when this Force
is applied, at the time that the Bladder is wounded, the Resistance will be
less this Way than that which is made by the Sphincter, and consequently the
Urine must flow out at the Wound, by the Continuance of which a Fistula will be
formed. (42)

Thirdly, The Incontinence of Urine and Fistulas which happen from this Way of
Cutting are altogether incurable. Both these Inconveniences, our Author
observes, may attend the old Method; but then, as the Fibers of the Sphincter
may not be quite destroyed, it is possible for them to contract again and
recover their former Tone; whereas, when that Muscle is cut quite through, this
can never be hoped for. Fistulas likewise which are so situated, as that
Causticks and other proper Remedies may be applied to them, are curable; but in
those caused by Friar Jacques Method of Cutting, this is impossible. (43)

In the next Place, the Staff which Friar Jacques makes Use of is altogether
insufficient to guide the Point of his Knife, or hinder it from slipping,
sometimes to one Side, and sometimes to the other. If his Knife passes the
Staff toward the fore Side of the Os Pubis, it will be apt to enter the lower
Part of the Scrotum; and by wounding the Vessels, opens a Passage for the Blood
amongst the Membranes which have been cut: By this means Abscesses,
Inflammations and Gangrenes in these Parts are produced. If the Point of the
Knife runs in behind the Os Pubis, besides the Accidents mentioned in the
foregoing Conclusions, he is liable to wound the Bladder through and through;
and by this occasion Abscesses, etc. in all the Parts contained in the
Hypogastrium.

Again, the Place in which Friar Jacques makes his Incision, exposes him very
often to wound the Intestinum Rectum.

In fine, besides the Convulsions, Haemorrhages, and other mortal
Inconveniences which often happen upon his Cutting the Blood Vessels of the
Penis, etc. if any of these Patients should recover, they must be impotent all
their Lives after. (44)

This is the Sum of what Monsieur Merry has told us concerning the
Inconveniences which he thinks may be gathered from the Nature of Friar
Jacques Operations, as well as from the Observations which Experience furnished
him with. As for what relates to Friar Jacques himself as an Operator, it is
but of very small Importance for any body now adays, to know wherein his
particular Miscarriages consisted: They may be in general reduced to these two
Heads; his Ignorance of the Structure of the Parts, joined to a Defect of
Judgment, which he discovered on many Occasions; and Rashness and Want of
Attention in performing his Operations. To the last of these were owing the
Wounds he often made in the Bladder with his Staff, and the different Passages
by which he forced his Way into the Stone, with his Knife, Fingers, Forceps,
etc. in the same Person.

Monsieur Merry has likewise made a Comparison between Friar Jacques Method of
Cutting, with what was commonly practiced at that Time; but as all the
Particulars, upon which that Comparison is founded, have been partly already
taken Notice of in this History, and the rest belong to that of Marianus, it
would be a useless Repetition to insist any further upon it.

Before we leave Monsieur Mery's Book, it will be proper to insert that Part of
the Letter mentioned to have been written to him from Orleans by Monsieur Noel,
which contains the History of the Operations Friar Jacques performed there.

Friar Jacques Way of Cutting, says Monsieur Noel, differs from that which is
commonly in Use, only in the Place where the Incision is made; for instead of
the Region of the Perinaeum, he begins his in the Fold of the Buttock, (ply de
la fesse) from thence he goes obliquely, directing his Knife as much as he can
toward the Neck of the Bladder; but as the different Thickness of the Parts in
different Subjects varies his Operation considerably, it is no wonder that the
Incision is not always in the same Place of the Bladder; especially since it
does dot appear that he has any certain Rule for this, but cuts sometimes
higher, sometimes lower, sometimes further back, sometimes further forward:
However, this new Operation never succeeds better than when, either by Chance,
or by the Dexterity of the Operator, the Incision happens to be in the Neck of
the Bladder.

Friar Jacques performed Eight Operations in this City, Five in the Hotel Dieu,
and Three elsewhere. The First was upon a Man of Fifty Years of Age, and both
Physicians and Surgeons who were present assured me that it was done with a
great deal of Dexterity; the Stone was much of the Size and Figure of an Egg,
and none that saw it doubted of the Success.

However, Five or Six Days after the Patient was afflicted with a considerable
Haemorrhage, and on the Tenth with another; since that time he has felt extreme
Pains in the Region of the Perinaeum, Anus and Scrotum, caused by an Abscess in
these Parts, which is at length broken by means of proper Remedies applied to
it. It opened in the lower Part of the Scrotum, and there came cut a great
Quantity of purulent Matter. Ever since, the Urine runs both that Way and
through the Wound, though in a less degree than before. I have seen him dressed
several times; and by examining both Wounds, I find them disposed to remain
Fistulous. The Patient is in a very low Habit of Body, and in no Condition to
undergo any further Trials for a Cure.

The Second Operation was on a Man of Sixty. It was very long and troublesome;
he lost the Stone several times, and at last it broke. It was of an Oval
Figure, and about the Size of a Pidgeon's Egg. When it was out, there was a
Part of the Inner Membrane of the Bladder found sticking to it; and another
Portion of a Membrane followed it some time after, in which some Gravel was
wrapped up. The Incision, contrary to his usual Custom, was begun at the
Extremity of the Scrotum, and from thence run obliquely toward the Fold of the
Buttock. The Operator had no Incision Knife, but was obliged to make use of a
Razor. Ever after the Operation, the Patient was troubled with the Hickup, a
Looseness, and a great Tension in the Abdomen. The Penis. Scrotum and Anus were
bruised, and of a livid Color almost like a Gangrene, which was prevented only
by the Care and Skill of the Surgeon employed. The Wound was always foul and
rotten, notwithstanding the strongest Detersives that could be applied. It
resembled the Mouch of a Lampray both in Figure and Color, and the Patient
complained of an excessive Heat in the Scrotum and End of the Penis, through
which his Urine passed sometimes, but with extreme Pain; and it never ceased to
come out at the Wound, which remained in such a miserable State, that his Death
was not surprising to any. His Body, however, was not opened.

The Third Person Friar Jacques Cut was Sixty Six Years of Age. He extracted
two smoorh Oval Stones, both of them of the Size of an Egg. I was informed that
this Operation was performed very dexterously, and in very little Time. The
Incision was made lower than in the rest, that is, at a greater Distance from
the Scrotum. In Five or Six Weeks time the Patient was perfectly recovered. He
has no Incontinency of Urine, and it came through the Wound only for the first
Eighteen or Twenty Days

The Fourth Patient was about Eleven Years old, but his Wound is not as yet
healed. What is particular in him is, that though some Urine still continues to
flow out at the Wound, yet the greatest Quantity comes through the Penis, and
not involuntarily neither. His Wound seems now to be in a very good
Disposition, if the Urine that runs that Way does not hinder the Cure.

The Fifth was of the same Age, but he died the fourth or fifth Day after the
Operation, with a Fever and Vomiting. This Operation was very troublesome and
violent; and upon opening the Body, we found that the Incision had been made on
one Side of the Neck of the Bladder, some Part of the Sphincter, and a little
of the Body being Cut. The Figure of the Wound was triangular, oblique and
transverse, it having been made at different Times.

The Sixth Patient was Cut upon the Gripe, and with a great deal of Ease. He
extracted two Stones, both of the Bigness of a Walnut with the Husk on. The
Thirty Fifth Day after the Operation the Urine began to come out the right Way;
but the greatest Part of it passes still through the Wound, and in all
Appearance it will remain Fistulous.

The Seventh Operation was made on a young Man of Twenty Two Years of Age.
Friar Jacques could neither find the Stone nor Staff with his Knife, which made
it a long while before he could extract it. The Patient died in four Days with
a high Fever and Vomiting; and when he was opened, we found the whole Sphincter
Cut transversely. (45)

To this Place likewise may belong the Reflections which Monsieur Saviard has
made upon Friar Jacques in Obs. 109.

On the 18th of July School (it is printed by Mistake 1696) I was sent for to the
Abbey of St. Germain des Prez, together with Monsieur Jacquemier Doctor of
Physic, Monsieur Tursan Deputy (Lieutenant) to the King's First Surgeon, Mess.
Collot, Tolet and Coliguon Lithotomists, to examine the Wound of a Benedictine
Monk, who had been Cut by an Operator named Friar Jacques Beaulieu. We found
the Patient extremely fallen away, with a slow Fever, which had continued upon
him ever since the Operation. His Wound, which we were told had been corrupted,
was then ruddy enough without any Hardness or Tumor about it, but as wide open
as the first Day it was made. We saw the Urine run out at it, together with a
glairous purulent Matter, and a gravelly Sediment.

It was our Opinion, that the Bladder was ulcerated, and that there were but
little Hopes of his Recovery; we ordered what we thought proper, but he died
the 21st of September following, the Wound remaining always open.

This Friar Jacques was and is still looked upon by some People as a very
wonderful Operator, notwithstanding all the Discoveries that have been made of
his Miscarriages; and that for four or five Reasons, 1. Because he Operates
differently from the other Lithotomists. 2. Because he shows a great deal of
Courage in Cutting, and Assurance in bragging of his Feats. 3. Because he
appears to be disinterested. 4. Because he wears a Religious Habit, and has a
great Air of Devotion. 5. Because he pretends to have received all that he
knows in Surgery by Inspiration; and as it cost him nothing, so he is willing
to teach other People gratis.

These are the Foundations of his pretended Merit, and it is a very easy Matter
to examine the Solidity of them.

For in the first Place, what Inference can be drawn touching his Abilities
from this, that he Cuts differently from other Lithotomists? He is not a bit
the better Operator for that, except his Method were preferable to the rest,
which it certainly is in no respect, except in killing a greater Number of
Patients, as appeared by the Trials made of it at the Hospitals.

Again, is he a better Operator, because he is bold and forwards? No certainly:
for though Assurance be very commendable in an Operator; yet still it is to be
looked upon only as a subordinate Talent, and presupposes Knowledge and Skill,
for otherwise it is pernicious; and that Friar Jaques was of this kind, is
plain from the Number of Persons who died under his Hands.

His Readiness to boast of the Cures he had performed, has always been looked
upon as a Thing very unbecoming in any Body, but much more when founded upon
Lies and Falsehoods. This is Friar Jacques Case; for as soon as he arrived in
Paris, he gave out, that by his New Method he cut without Pain; that his
Patients would recover in much less Time than is usual, and that without any
Danger of a Fistula, or other Accidents: All this has been found to be false.
His Method of Cutting is much oftener attended with Fistulas and Haemorrhagy
than the others: He causes great Pains in Operating, and his Patients are a
great while in recovering; his Boastings therefore ought rather to make him be
despised and undervalued, than be looked upon as any Thing extraordinary.

Can his Disinterestedness be reckoned a Proof of his Ability? This is, no
doubt, a very commendable Quality in him, but he does not possess it in a
greater Degree than the other Lithotomists, as far as the Poor are concerned;
for all who Cut in the Hospitals do it gratis, and even to such as are not
there, there are very few who would refuse their Assistance upon the same
Terms, when it is needful: But I must own, if Friar Jacques pretends to extend
his Charity to the Rich, he outdoes the rest; but at the same time he exceeds
the Bounds of his Duty, by a Zeal which, according to the Gospel Phrase, is not
according to Knowledge.

His Religious Habit and Air of Sanctity are but equivocal Signs. We are all
used to see such Dresses every Day, and therefore ought not to wonder at any
Body who wears them: But with relation to Friar Jacques, the Wonder is this;
how if he is really and truly a Monk his Superiors should ever have sent him
on such an unaccountable Errand, as to go all over the Kingdom, and Cut People
of both Sexes for the Stone; which he cannot do without viewing Objects which
must put that Chastity, of which he has made a Vow, to a very severe Trial; or,
if he be not a Monk, but only wears the Habit, how the Church should suffer
such a Disguise, which must infallibly scandalize great Numbers of People.

But the greatest Wonder of all is, that Friar Jacques should be esteemed an
excellent Lithotomist, merely upon Account of his Dress, as if that were
sufficient to give him more sure and unerring Knowledge in Physic and Surgery,
than the most famous Universities, the reading good Books, the Lessons of the
best Masters, and a long Practice, can give to others.

I doubt not but Friar Jacques Devotion has gained him the Confidence of many
People; for this is a ready Way to lead People wherever we have a Mind: But I
doubt very much, if true Devotion can be consistent with the visible
Prevarication which the Exercise of Surgery must engage him in, if he be truly
a Monk, or with the Disguise he puts on, if he is not.

We have only now to examine, if he has obtained all that he knows in Surgery
in a supernatural Way, as he gives it out himself. Now the surest Means to
judge of the Nature of a Cause, is by the Effects it produces: If therefore
Friar Jacques is directed, and immediately inspired by God in all he
undertakes, he ought always to succeed; and in that Case he would certainly be
the most excellent Lithotomist in the World. All that the others know, they are
very ready to own comes to them, either from the Instruction of their Master,
or their own Labor. But as every body must now be convinced from what happened
at both Hospitals, that Friar Jacques is less successful than they, it is
impossible to believe he is divinely inspired, except it be by the evil
Principle of the Manicheans.

Having thus enquired into the Reasons of so many Peoples being prejudiced in
Favor of Friar Jacques, I leave every Body to judge if these Prejudices be
well founded, or ought not rather to be looked upon as Proofs of the Ignorance
and Unskilfulness of this Religious Lithotomist.

As for the Proposals he makes in the Public Gazettes, to teach all Surgeons
his Method gratis, it is the Magistrates Business to hinder these Offers from
being accepted; because as his Method is pernicious, it ought rather to be
abolished than perpetuated, whatever he may pretend, that he has corrected his
first Method, that he has made good Use of the Advices given him in the
Hospitals of Paris, and that he now uses the same Instruments with the other
Lithotomists; for all who are Judges must know, that in order to make him a
good Operator, 1. He ought to retain nothing which makes his Method differ from
the Common, which is certainly much better. 2. He ought to lay aside a great
deal of his Forwardness in operating, because to that is owing the Temerity
with which he thrusts in his Instruments to Places which he knows nothing of,
from whence irreparable Disorders ensue. 3. He ought to lay aside the Opinion
he has of himself, of being the best Lithotomist in the Kingdom; than which
nothing can be more false, both because his Method is bad, and because he knows
nothing of the Parts concerned, or to be shunned in the Operation; neither has
he any Tincture of Surgery, to enable him to remedy the Accidents which may
befall his Patients. While he retains this Presumption of his own Skill, it
will be in vain to think of his making any Progress in the Art he professes. 4.
He ought to Cut for five or six Years in the Hospitals under able Masters, who
might direct him in his Operations, tell him of his Faults, and explain the
Consequences of them: For it is in this Manner that all the great Lithotomists
in France have been formed; whereas Friar Jacques, while he continues to be
fond of his own bad Method, intrepid in his Ignorance, obstinate in his
Operations, and presumptuous to Excess, will never rise above the Level of a
Quack and a Vagabond.

Dionis has made a great many Remarks on Friar Jacques Methods of Cutting
Males, but none of them are new; and therefore it will be sufficient, to sat
down here the Conclusion he draws from the whole History of them. Though I do not
approve of Friar Jacques Way of Cutting, says he, yet I do not absolutely
condemn it, for there is something good in his Method; and I am persuaded, that
a Surgeon, who is a good Anatomist, knows how to guide his Instrument, and is
so far Master of it as to carry it where he pleases, may succeed in the
Practice of Friar Jacques Operation, by reason that he would avoid all those
pernicious Accidents which attended his Performance; but it would be to expose
the Patient to too great Dangers to cause him to be Cut by that Monk, who being
wholly ignorant of the Parts to be Cut, his bold Assurance in thrusting in his
Poynard proceeds only from the Want of a sufficient Stock of Knowledge to
foresee the Consequences. (46)

This Judgment of Dionis is very different from that given by Merry. Merry
pretends to prove from the Nature of the Method itself, that it ought to be
quite laid aside, as well as from the Character of the Monk, that he in
particular ought never to use it. Dionis on the contrary is of Opinion, that
the Inconveniences that were found to attend it, were owing more to the
Operator, than to the Nature of the Operation; though at the same time it must be
owned, that, take all his Words together, they amount to no more than this;
Friar Jacques Operation may be practiced with Success by those who are able to
avoid whatever the Want of Success in it is owing to.

Mr. Cheselden, by supposing that Friar Jacques Operation was the same with
Rau's, and that Rau practiced his with great Success, declares sufficiently
what was his Opinion of it, notwithstanding all the Inconveniences which he
had just before mentioned from Dionis. These therefore he must have looked upon
to be all owing to the Operator; and thus his Judgment will coincide with that
of Dionis, with this Difference only, that his he reckons to be confirmed by
Matter of Fact, which the other does not pretend to. (47)

Albinus conformably to the Description we have heard from him of Friar Jacques
Method, has given us his Opinion of it in these Words: This Way of Cutting,
says he, could not well be more dangerous than either the making an Incision
into the Neck of the Bladder, or into the Urethra: And as by this Means both
these remained untouched and altogether free from the bad Consequences which
usually attended the thrusting in of Instruments, the violent Dilatations, and
the extracting of large rugged Stones in a most cruel Manner through such
narrow Passages, this Method seemed highly preferable to all the rest. But on
the other hand, as this Part of the Bladder lies altogether hid, it was a very
difficult Matter to get at it; yet when this Operation was rightly performed,
no Part lay in the Way, of Consequence enough to hinder the Success of it.

The Danger and Difficulty of it consisted both in the Thickness of the Parts
to be cut through, and the Nearness of some noble Viscera, which were by all
Means to be avoided; for if either the Surgeon should happen to thrust his
Knife too far in, or too much to one Side, he runs the Risque of Cutting the
opposite Part of the Bladder, of hurting the Intestinum Rectum and Vesiculae
Seminales, of wounding or Cutting quite through the Ureter, Erector Penis,
Corpus Cavernosum Majus, the Urethra it self, and of other such melancholy
Accidents.

Likewise after the Wound is made, it is an easy Matter to mistake in
introducing the Forceps, by thrusting it not into the Bladder, but amongst some
other Parts which it ought to have passed by, and thus open and dilate them,
and pull out whatever came in its Way; which would not only frustrate the
Design of the Operation, but bring on many other Inconveniences. Such
Accidents we have both heard and read to have happened to Friar Jacques, who
neither knew the Structure of the Parts, nor had any certain Method of guiding
his Knife or Forceps; which last Mr. Rau looked upon to be the only Defect of
his Operation.

Wherefore we are so far from commending Friar Jacques Method of Cutting, that
we are not afraid to assert the Practice of it to be highly pernicious and
destructive to Mankind; and had it not served as a Hint to lead Rau to the
Discovery of the best of all Methods, it had better never have been heard of.
(48)

CHAP. IV. Friar Jaques Method of Cutting Females.
WE have already mentioned, in several Places, that Friar Jacques Cut Women as
well as Men; but we have delayed till now, to give an Account wherein these two
Operations differed, and the Judgment that has been made of this Part of his
Method.

Mr. Bussiere's Friend tells us upon this Head, that Friar Jacques cutteth
Women upon the Staff, and in the same Place as Men. He did perform this
Operation, continues he, in my Presence upon Three; One whereof was a Girl of
Eleven Years old; which makes me believe that he uses the same Way in all,
though in them he did Cut the Internal Neck of the Uterus. His Opinion therefore
is, that this Way of Cutting is not so sure in Women, no more than in Men, as
the Ancient Way.

Mr. Bussiere subscribes to his Correspondent's Judgment: Though I have not tried
this Way upon Women, says he, yet I cannot approve it at all, since one cannot
avoid Cutting the Neck of the Uterus, the Cicatrix of which might prove to be
of some ill Consequence, in case the Woman should come to be with Child. (49)

One of the three Experiments which Monsieur Merry saw Friar Jacques make upon
dead Bodies, was upon that of a Woman, and he has given us a particular Account
of his Method of Operating. The Incision, he says, was made on the Right Side,
near the Protuberance of the Ischium, the same Staff he used for Men being
first introduced into the Bladder. It was about an Inch and an half long; and
by measuring the Situation of it by the means of cross Lines, he found that the
lower Part of it answered to the Anus, the upper to the external Orifice of the
Uterus, and the middle of it to the Raphe. The inward Progress of it was in
this manner; After having passed about an Inch and an half of Fat, it went in
betwixt the Levator Any and the Accelerator of the Clitoris, cutting this
Muscle at its Origin, and from thence pierced the Vagina quite through,
beginning at the Backside of it, and thus reached the Body of the Bladder,
which it wounded lengthways from the Beginning of the Urethra to the Insertion
of the Ureters, but without touching either of them. The Incision in the Vagina
and in the Bladder were each of them an Inch long.

Though Merry was at this Time as much prejudiced in favor of Friar Jacques, as
he was afterward against him, yet his Method of Cutting Women disgusted him
from the very first Moment he saw this Experiment. This appears from the
Reflections which he subjoins to his Description of it. If we judge, says he,
of Friar Jacques Way of Operating upon Women, by the Structure of the Parts,
and by the Incision which he makes in the Vagina and Body of the Bladder, I
cannot believe th^^ the Stone can be extracted in them with the same Ease and
Advantages as in Men, if he always follows the same Methods in both, as I have
hitherto seen him; I mean, if he begins his Incision on the Inside of the
Ischium. For if we consider that the Urethra in Women is but six Lines in
length beyond the Os Pubis, that the Cavity is but a Line and an half in
Diameter, and that it lies along the middle of the fore Part of the Vagina,
which is two Inches broad, it will be easy to conceive that whatever Care Friar
Jacques takes to put the Vagina out of his Way, and not to wound it, it will be
very difficult for him to shun it, and almost impossible to get into the
Bladder by the Urethra in the Way he takes, since it is so very short and lies
so close to the Vagina. Since therefore the Stone cannot be extracted by this
Method, without Cutting the Body of the Bladder, I cannot believe it less
dangerous than the common Way of drawing the Stone through the Urethra. As an
Incontinency of Urine most commonly happens in this Way, so in that used by
Friar Jacques a Fistula of the Bladder into the Vagina appears to me
inevitable; which; is at least as great an Inconveniency, since the Urine flows
equally involuntarily here. (50)

The living Bodies which Friar Jacques afterward Cut, were but too evident
Proofs of the Truth of the Reflections Monsieur Merry here makes. The first of
these was Madam de Lorrain; he began the Incision two Inches higher than he did
upon the dead Body, and pierced the Vagina quite through, as appeared by the
Quantity of Blood which run out of it. What other Accidents followed upon this
Operation, Monsieur Merry has not told us; but we may judge what they were by
the Observations which he made on other Subjects. (51)

On the 16th of May following, says he, Friar Jacques cut two Girls at the
Hotel Dieu, one upon the Staff, and the other upon the Gripe. The youngest was
but Four Years of Age, and went out of the Hospital the 17th of June, the
outward Wound being cured; but she continued to be troubled with an
Incontinency of Urine. The other was Fourteen Years old, and went out the 25th
of the same Month, in the same State with the other. Just as she was to leave
the Hospical, I was sent for to examine the Cause of her Incontinency of Urine,
and I found that it came partly through the Urethra, and partly through the
Vagina. Another Surgeon that was there injected Barley Water through the
Urethra into the Bladder, which presently flowed out at the Vagina, by which we
discovered, that though the exterior Wound all the Way to the Vagina was healed,
the other Incision from the Vagina to the Bladder was still open. (52)

Now besides the Incontinency of Urine which attends this Accident, there are
other Consequences no less terrible that must follow upon it, especially if we
take in the Danger there is in this Method, of falling into many of the same
Inconveniences which have been already observed in Men. Women must by this
means be rendered for ever barren, since the continual Flux of Urine into the
Bladder must necessarily hinder the Action of the Semen; and as the Rectum may
likewise be pierced, the gross Excrements may come out the same Way at the same
time. From these and such like Observations, drawn partly from Experiments, and
partly from the Analogy of the Structure of the Parts to be Cut in both Sexes,
Monsieur Merry concludes, that Friar Jacques Way of Cutting Women ought upon no
account whatever to be put in Practice. (53)

Of the Eight Patients which Friar Jacques cut at Orleans, One was a Girl
between Ten and Twelve Years of Age, but she died the Fourth Day after the
Operation; and Monsieur Noel, in the forementioned Letter to Merry, has given us
the following Relation of it: Friar Jacques set her upon the Knees of a
Surgeon's Servant, and made two others hold her Thighs: He began by making a
violent Pressure upon the Hypogastrium, with his Fingers half bent, as if he
had a mind to bring the Bottom of the Bladder nearer its Neck: Then he
introduced a Silver Catheter into the Bladder, and pulled it out again as soon
as he had drawn off the Urine contained in it. Afterward he put his two
Fingers into the Rectum to command the Stone, and so made his Incision in the
ordinary Place, only a little higher; and directing his Knife toward the
Stone, he cut the Bladder. This being done, he made several Motions in the
Wound, sometimes with his Forceps, sometimes with his Scoop, pressing anew
upon the Hypogastrium to bring down the Stone, but all to no purpose; so that
at length he was obliged to thrust his Fingers a second time into the Anus, and
to use his Knife once more, in order either to make a new Incision, or enlarge
the former. Thus, by keeping the Stone well down with his Fingers, after two or
three Efforts, he at length extracted it with his Forceps.

The Operation was no sooner over, but the Patient began to be tormented with
Pains in her Belly, Fever and Vomiting, which never left her till she died:
Upon opening her Body, we plainly discerned that the Incision had been made in
the Middle and membraneous Part of the Bladder; that it was transverse and a
little oblique, with three Angles observable in it, occasioned by his having
Cut several Times. The Bladder and all the Parts near it were filled with Pus,
and in many of them there were Abscesses formed. The lower Parts of the
Abdomen, such as the Pyramidal Muscles and the Extremities of the Recti, were
very much bruised, livid, and tending to a Gangrene, though there was no
Blackness nor Swelling to be seen upon the Skin. (54)

We are told by Dionis, that one of the four Patients which Friar Jacques cut
in the Charity of Versailles, was a Girl of Seven Years of Age, who died three
Days after the Operation. Dionis opened her in Presence of Monsieur Felix, one
of Friar Jacques Patrons, and found the Bladder wounded in the Body near the
Neck. In the Vagina there was a Wound of the Length of a Nail, made by the Edge
of the Knife, in thrusting it along that Part to come at the Bladder: On this
Occasion Friar Jacques said, that the Wounds of the Vagina are of no
Consequence, and that he frequently happened to pierce it. (55)

Dionis saw him cut Two Women more, and in both the same Accidents happened, as
appeared by the Blood which came out at the Vagina as soon as the Incision was
made. And he observes further, that the same thing fell out in almost all the
Women he cut. (56)

REFERENCES.
(1) Merry, p. 14. (2) p. 100. (3) p. 167. (4) p. 14 (5) p. 167. (6) Ib. (7)
Pref. p. 2. (9) Albin. (10) Merry, p. 15. (11) Dionis, p. 167. (12) Merry, p. 15.
64. Dio^^^, p. 174, (13) Id. p. 63. (14) Merry, p. 15. Dio^is, p. 173. (15)
Dionis, p. 167. (16) p. 460. (17) Merry, a p. 17. ad p. 26. (18) Di^^is, p. 167.
(19) Phil. Trans. 1699. p. 100. ad 105. (20) p. 205. (21) p. 169. (22) Pref. p.
2 and 4. (23) M^ry, p. 33 to 37. Dionis, p. 169. (24) Merry, p. 45. (25) Phil.
Trans. p. 103. (26) Chese^d. Pref. p. 2. (27) M^^y, a p. 37 ad 44. Dionis, p.
170. (28) Merry, p. 44. 74. Dionis, p. 170. (29) Merry, p. 82 ad 84. Dion. ib.
(30) Dionis Tran^^at. p. 135. (32) Merry, p. 73. Dion. p. 135. (33) Merry, p. 89.
Dion. ib. (34) Merry, p. 85. Dion. p. 131. (35) p. 103. to 106. (36) Merry, p.
25. (37) Ib. p. 35. (38) Ib. p. 36. (39) Ib. p. 37. (40) Ib. a p. 48 ad 65.
(41) Ib. p. 79. (42) Ib. p. 85. (43) Ib. p. 92. (44) Ib. p. 69, etc. (45) Ib.
p. 73, etc. (46) Dionis, p. 134, etc. (47) Pref. p. 3. (48) Albin, p. (49)
Phil. Trans. p. 106. (50) Merry, p. 26, etc. (51) Ib. p. 35. (52) Ib. p. 58.
(53) Ib. p. 77. (54) Ib. p. 81. (55) Dionis, p. 132. (56) Ib. p. 134.
CHAP. V. Monsieur Mery's Method of Cutting for the Stone.
THE Account which we have given from Authors, of Friar Jacques Operations for
the Stone, is very far from being to their Advantage. The most favorable thing
that has been said of them, by any Body who was in a Condition to judge of
their true Merit, is, that it is possible they may succeed when performed by a
skilful Hand; and that some few Cases may happen, in which they may perhaps be
preferable to the ancient Methods. But Monsieur Merry, who has been at more
Pains to examine them, than all the other Authors put together, declares
himself altogether against the Practice of them in any Case; not only on
account of the bad Success they were attended with in the Hands of that
ignorant inconsiderate Monk, but also by comparing the Structure of the Parts
concerned with the Nature of the Operation itself, and from thence deducing the
many grievous Accidents with which the Practice of them will most commonly, if
not always, be attended.

All this, however, is to be understood of these Operations taken by the Lump;
for when they are pulled to Pieces, Monsieur Merry, even in the midst of all his
Declamations against them, cannot help seeing some Parts of them, which he
thinks preferable to what answered to these in the former Methods of Operating.
It was natural for a thinking Man to endeavor to bring such valuable Parts
into Practice, by joining to them, either from his own Invention, or what was
already in Use, whatever he judged proper to complete this whole Operation of
extracting the Stone, freed from all the Disadvantages which Friar Jacques
Methods, taken all together, seemed to him to labor under.

This is the general View, which not only Monsieur Merry, but all the other
Improvers of them, proposed to themselves in their Improvements. What these
have been, and by whom made, I now go on to relate; that is, to explain such
Methods of Cutting for the Stone, as differ from and were posteriour to those
of Friar Jacques, but to the Discovery of which the Authors of them have been
led by Hints taken from what they observed in his.

Of these Improvements, the first that I hear of were made by Monsieur Merry;
but before I proceed to them, it will be necessary to say something concerning
this great Man's Life, by abridging the Eloge which the Elegant Monsieur
Fontenelle has given us of him in the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences for
the Year 1722. Printed in 1724.

John Merry was born at Vatan, in the Province of Berry, the 6th Day of January
1645. His Father was a Surgeon; and after having sent his Son for some Time to
School, finding that, whether for Want of Inclination, or by the Fault of his
Masters, his Genius was not turned to Letters, he resolved to bring him up to
his own Business.

At Eighteen Years of Age he went to Paris, to improve himself in the Hotel
Dieu, the best School in the World for young Surgeons. There, not satisfied
with the Exercises of the Day, he used as often as he had an Opportunity, to
convey a Body out of the Hospital to his Lodging, and hide it in his Bed till
he had Time to dissect it.

In 1681, he drew up a Description of the Ear, at the Desire of Monsieur L'A^y,
Doctor of Physic, to be inserted in the Second Edition of his Book De L'A^e
Sensitive. It was in that Year likewise, that he was made Surgeon to the Queen.

In 1683, Monsieur Louvoy, then First Minister of State, appointed him Surgeon
Major to the Hospital of the Invalides.

The Year after, the King of Porlugal having desited that a Paristan Surgeon
might be sent him, his Queen being indisposed, Monsieur Merry was pitched upon
as the properest Person to execute that Commission. The Queen was dead before
he reached Lisbon; but by the other extraordinary Cures which he performed
during his Stay there, he gained the Esteem of the Portugueze so much, that
they made him most advantageous Offers, in case he would resolve to settle
among them. He had like Proposals made to him in Spain, through which he
passed; but he chose to accept neither of them, but to return to his own
Country, which he did timely enough in that same Year, to be admitted a Member
of the Royal Academy of Sciences, by the Recommendation of Monsieur de Louvois,
and to be appointed Surgeon to the Duke of Burgundy, then a Child, whom he
accompanied in a Journey the Court made to Chambort, a Royal Palace near Blois.

In 1692, he was sent by the Court on a secret Commission to England; and
indeed it always remained so: for to this Day no Body can tell what he went
about.

In 1700, he arrived at the Height of his Ambition, being named by Monsieur
Harlay, First President of Paris, to be First Surgeon of the Hotel Dieu. The
Functions of that Post, together with his Place in the Academy, took up his
whole Time; no Considerations but Friendship could ever persuade him after
that, to practice in the City, or teach Anatomy to any but his Pupils in the
Hospital; and it was by his Means that the Anatomical Theater was erected there.

His great Talent lay in the Exactness of his Observations. He thought it
sufficient for his Purpose, to see Things precisely as they existed in Nature,
without being often at Pains to build Systems upon the Phenomenon he had
discovered. When he ventured so far as that, he was convinced it was upon very
sure Grounds, and therefore was very stiff in maintaining his own Opinions. His
Hypothesis concerning the Circulation of the Blood in a Foetus, was an Instance
of this; and his Defense thereof against the numerous Attacks that were made
upon it, together with his Observations on the Methods of Cutting practiced by
Friar Jacques, a Francomtois, make up the only Book he ever published. There
are a great many Papers of his amongst the Memoirs of the Academy; and he left
behind him a vast Number of valuable Preparations of the Parts both of Men and
other Animals.

He applied himself much to the Knowledge of the Blood Vessels and Nerves; but
used to give it to his Friends, as an Instance of the Imperfection of Human
Knowledge, that the Nature and Actions of the Fluids contained in them had not
been discovered. Anatomists, he told them, might be compared to Porters, who
know all the Streets and Corners of a Town, but are entirely ignorant of what
passes within Doors.

They, who conversed much with him, attribute to him several Discoveries which
pass under other Peoples Names; of which the Glands ascribed to Mr. Cowper, are
one Instance.

He died on the Third Day of November 1722, in the 78th Year of his Age,
leaving Six Children behind him.

It appears from the Reflections Monsieur Merry has given us on Friar Jacques
Operations, that he had seen but very few of them, before he began to think of
carrying them to a greater Perfection. It would be to no purpose, however, to
trace all the Observations which lie scattered up and down his Book to this
purpose; he having saved us that Trouble himself, by bringing them all under
one View, in the last Chapter of that Treatise, in which we may se^ distinctly
first, by what Steps he was led to the Improvem^nts he has made, wherein they
consist, and lastly, what are the Advantages that he thinks may be expected
from them.

As to the first of these, he acquaints us, That since the principal Disorders
which appeared in the dead Bodies of such Persons as had been Cut upon the
Staff by Friar Jacques, and which he had Opened, proceeded only from this, That
his Staff being solid and round, it was impossible for him, with all the
Steddiness of Hand he was Master of, to guide the Point of his Knife upon the
Unequal Part of it so surely, as not to miss it upon most Occasions; One would
be apt to think, that in order to rectify his Operation, and evite all the
dismal Accidents that attended it, nothing should be requisite but to make use
of a furrowed Catheter; and to adjust the Length of it so exactly, as not to
run the Risque of piercing the Bottom of the Bladder, as he frequently did.

But if we consider further, (says our Author) that the only Cases in which
Friar Jacques extracts the Stone with more Facility than the other
Lithotomists, are when he Cuts both the Neck and Body of the Bladder, which is
the most astonishing Part of his Operations, and was the chief Thing that
procured him the Liberty of Cutting in the two Hospitals; and if we consider,
on the other hand, that the wounding of these Parts is the evident Cause of the
Incontinency of Urine and Fistulas, with which the most Part of those who
survived his Operations were afflicted: When these two Things are attended to,
I say, we will see that the Improvements I have mentioned are not sufficient,
but that it is moreover absolutely necessary to abstain from cutting the Neck
and Body of the Bladder.

Again, if we reflect, that the Reason why Friar Jacques ever wounds the
Rectum, is only because he begins his Incision too low down, and that the
Opening of the Nerves and Blood Vessels, from whence proceeded the Hemorrhages,
Abscesses, and Convulsions, which carried off so many of his Patients, happened
by thrusting his Knife too far forward; we must conclude, that it would be a
much surer Way to begin the Incision in the Urethra, and end it at the
Beginning of the Neck of the Bladder ( al' eutree du col de la Vessie) which is
very often dilated by the Stone, which the Contraction of the Fibers of the
Body of the Bladder has forced into the Cavity of it.

And therefore it is that I am inclined to think, that the greatest Difficulty
which the most expert Lithotomists find in extracting a Stone, proceeds more
seldom from the Neck of the Bladder than from the Urethra; because as they Cut
the Urethra on the Fore-side of the ( au devant) of the Ossa Pubis, and the
Neck of the Bladder lying behind these Bones, there remains at least an Inch of
the Urethra under that Angle formed by their Union, which is not cut, and
through which the Stone must pass; that is, by a Way which is narrower than the
Neck of the Bladder; it is this therefore which must cause the Difficulty.

Upon these Principles our Author's Improvements are founded: Wherein they
consist, he goes on to explain in the following Manner.

In order to rectify the ancient Operation, end that of Friar Jacques likewise,
and evite the Accidents which either accompany or follow them; I believe it
would be proper, the Patient first being placed and tied in the ordinary
Manner, to begin by thrusting a furrowed Catheter into the Bladder with the
Right Hand, then to hold it with the Left, and turn that End of it toward the
Right Groin, that the Concave Part being directed to the Inside of the Left Os
Pubis, the Groove may lie a little obliquely. Afterward taking in the Right
Hand a crooked Bistoury well fixed in the Handle, between Three and Four Inches
long, Three Lines broad or thereabout, the Edge on the Unequal Side, and ending
in a very sharp pointed Stilet, about an Inch in length, thrust it directly
into that Part of the Groove which lies in the Angle made by the Junction of
the Osia Pubis; conduct the Stilet all the Way into the Neck of the Bladder (
conduire le Stilet du Bistouri dans le Col de la vessie) the Point of it being
kept firm in the Groove of the Catheter; then lowering the Hand, make the
Incision down from the Neck of the Bladder, along the Inside of the Os Pubis,
all the Way to the Protuberance of the Ischium. The Incision being made,
introduce the Conductors or Gorgeret and Forceps in the ordinary Manner.

The Leips^^k Journalists have rendered this Passage of Monsieur Merry, Conduire
le Stilet du Bistouri dans le col de la vessie, Pars Aculeata Scalpelli usque
in Vesicae Collum adigenda; by which it is plain, they conceived that the Neck
of the Bladder was to be pierced by the Stilet, it being in that Sense only
that there could be any Force required, which is implied in the Word adigere:
But this is very fat from being the Author's Meaning, the principal Part of his
Improvement consists in leaving the Neck of the Bladder untouched; and by
conducting the Stilet into the Neck of the Bladder, he understands no more than
that as soon as the Stilet was in the Groove of the Staff, the Operator should
run it along that, all the Way into the Canal or Cavity of the Neck of the
Bladder, which in collum veficae adigere can never be imagined to express.

The Patient must be made to lie upon the Right Side; because by this Means the
Urine not having so easy a Descent toward the Wound, will more readily be
directed into its former Channel, which will very much facilitate the Reunion
of the divided Parts; and the common Practice of Binding the Patients Thighs,
near the Knees, must not be omitted.

In this manner, according to Monsieur Merry, may the Operation for the Stone be
improved; and the Benefit which will result therefrom, he thinks, will be very
considerable; for first, the Stone may be extracted with as much Facility as in
Friar Jacques Method, without any Danger of the Accidents which attend it.
Likewise the greatest Part of those Inconveniences which accompany the common
Operation will be evited, because the Urethra will be cut all the Way to the
Neck of the Bladder, without touching the Muscles of the Penis, or wounding any
Part of the Scrotum, which is most commonly attended with Fluxions,
Inflammations and Gangreen. Lastly, by following this Method, we shall never be
under any Necessity of Cutting upon the Gripe, either Men or Children, except
when the Stone is got into the Urethra, and sticks out in the Perinaeum; and in
that Case the common Way of performing this Operation suffers no Difficulty. (1)

This is the Account that Monsieur Merry has given us of his own Method of
Cutting Males, in order to extract the Stone; whether ever he put it in
Practice or not is uncertain, but if we will be at pains to compare it with
Marianus's Operation and that of Friar Jacques both together, it will be found
that what is new in it is only the Place in which he makes his Incision, and
the Figure of his Knife: And if we compare it with each of these Methods by
themselves, it will deserve rather to be called an Improvement of that of
Marianus, than of Friar Jacques; for, properly speaking, it was the Place in
which he observed this last to make his Incision, that led him to alter the
Place where Marianus's Followers make theirs, and pitch upon a new one equally
different from both. The other Parts of Monsieur Mery's Operation he has no
manner of Title to; but still, since the Merit of an Invention is only to be
determined by its Usefulness, did this small Improvement rid his Operation of
the Inconveniences which the others are liable to, he might justly claim the
same Share of Acknowledgment from Mankind, as if he had invented a Method
entirely new.

Monsieur Merry had no sooner seen Friar Jacques make an Experiment of his
Method upon the dead Body of a Woman, but he thought of rectifying that Part of
his Operation likewise: For having made the Reflections which have been already
mentioned, concerning the Inconveniences of it, he adds, That if it should
appear from Experience, that his Conjectures about these Inconveniences were
ill grounded, and that both the Wounds of the Vagina and Body of the Bladder
are easily cured, he has a Way to propose for Cutting of Women, which must
still be preferable to that of the Monk. His Method is this: Let a furrowed
Catheter, such as is commonly used for Men, be introduced into the Bladder, and
with the Unequal Part of it press down to the Entry of the external Orifice of
the Uterus (a l'entree de l'Orifice externe de la Matrice) that Part of the
Vagina which lies under the Extremity of the Body of the Bladder, and the
Beginning of the Urethra which is joined to it; then cut that Part of the
Vagina upon the Groove of the Staff; and thus it will be easy to get into the
Bladder without hurting the Urethra, if the Incision is made but a very little
Way up in the Vagina.

By this Method the Stone may be extracted out of the Bladder of a Woman with
the same Advantages that Friar Jacques does it in Men; because, as it must pass
through the Vagina, it will pass out at the broadest Part of the Angle which is
formed by the Union of the Ossa Pubis.

It may likewise be made use of in young Girls, and is undoubtedly more sure
and less painful than that used by Friar Jacques. The Wound made in the Vagina
needs not be above Two Lines deep; whereas in his Method there must be several
Incisions, which taken all together, are at least Three Inches deep; for he not
only pierces the Vagina twice, but the Wound he makes from the Buttocks into it
is altogether unnecessary.

This Method seems, moreover, to be better than that of Drawing the Stone
through the Urethra, because as both that and the Sphincter of the Bladder
remain untouched, there is no Danger of an Incontinency of Urine, which most
commonly follows the other. (2)

The Suppositions upon which Monsieur Merry builds the Advantages of this new
Method of Cutting Women, are, we see, that Wounds in the Vagina and in the Body
of the Bladder may be cured; but though upon the Trials he afterward made on
dead Bodies, he was fully satisfied how easily it might be put in Practice, yet
the Observations he had occasion to make of such as had been Cut by Friar
Jacques, convinced him at length that these Suppositions were false; and
consequently, that this Method, however improved, was altogether to be
rejected. This he testifies in the following Words: As for Friar Jacques Way of
Cutting Women and young Girls, since there remains always a Fistula from the
Bladder into the Vagina, it is evident that neither that, nor the Method in
which I proposed it to be amended, ought ever to be put in Practice: There is
no other Way left but to draw the Stone through the Urethra; and though an
Incontinency of Urine should remain, it does not make them incapable of
Conceiving, which is very much to be feared from that which proceed from a
Fistula. (3)

Before I take leave of Monsieur Merry. I cannot forbear remarking that
something very like the Way he here proposed for Cutting of Women is mentioned
by Monsieur Bussiere; but as that Author had put it in Practice before Friar
Jacques Operations were known to him, it cannot be called an Improvement of
these; and therefore I did not take Notice of it in that Place, which, as being
published before that of Monsieur Merry, it would otherwise have deserved.

In Women, says Mr. Bussiere, when the Stone is but indifferent big, the old
Way is preferable to any other; but if it was very big, then I had rather
thrust my Finger into the Vegina, and bring the Stone as near the Neck of the
Bladder as can be, and cut the Membranes of the Vagina and Bladder upon the
Stone. I did Cut a Woman in Hambourgh by that Way, of which I drew a Stone
weighing five Ounces and an half, who did recover very well. By this Way we did
prevent the Incontinency of Urine, which follows always the Extraction of great
Stones in Women. (4)

REFERENCES.
(1) Merry, a p. 95. ad 70. (2) Ib. p. 30. (3) Ib. p. 70. (4) Phil. Trans. 1699.
p. 106.
CHAP. VI. Professor Rau 's Method.
THE next Improvement of Friar Jacques Operation for the Stone, was made by Mr.
Rau in Holland: But before I lay before the Reader wherein it consisted, I
think it necessary to make him a little acquainted with that great Man's Life,
by a short Abridgment of the elegant and faithful Account which the learned
Professor Albinus has lately published of it.

John James Rau was born at Baden, a small Town in the Circle of Suabia in the
Year 1668. His Father was a Wine Merchant, and in such indifferent
Circumstances, that he was obliged, as the best Provision he could make for his
Son, to bind him Apprentice to a Surgeon in Strasburg, before he was full
Fourteen Years of Age: There he remained Three Years; and in that Time thinking
he knew enough of his Business to gain his Living in any Part of the World, he
resolved to bid adieu to his own Country, and try his Fortune somewhere else.
After he had traveled through some Part of Germany, he went to Hamburgh, from
thence to Norway, where he lived at Bergen with Mr. Franen the Surgeon, and
soon after to Amsterdam, being unable to endure the rigorous Cold of that
Climate. At Amsterdam he had the good Luck to get to be Surgeon of a Man of
War, in which he went to Spain and other Countries; and upon his return to
Holland, he went on board the Vice Admiral of that Fleet, which brought King
William to England.

During his Service at Sea, he found Means to save as much Money as enabled him
to go to Leyden, and there study Physic for some Time; after which he went to
Paris to improve himself in Anatomy and Surgery under Du Verney, Merry,
Marshall, Roumart, Old Petit, and others. In 1694, he returned to Leyden, and
there took his Degree of Doctor of Physic, being then but Twenty-six Years of
Age.

Being by this Time weary of a wandering Course of Life, he resolved to settle
at Amsterdam, and to teach Anatomy, and practice Physic and Surgery: He
remained there something more than Eighteen Years; but Two of them were not
past before he had already acquired so great a Reputation in Anatomy, that the
Magistrates of that City appointed him to dissect in the public Theater. He
was likewise so successful in the Practice of Surgery, that he was sent for all
over Holland by those who needed his Assistance, and for the Sake of no
Operation so much as that of Cutting for the Stone, which he performed upon
above Sixteen Hundred People, with the greatest Applause, and equal Success.

In 1705, he was sent for to Leyden, to give some Public Lessons of Anatomy;
and in 1713, he was made Professor of Physic, Anatomy, and Surgery, in that
famous University, upon the Death of Doctor Bidloo. While he remained in
Health, he was extremely diligent in discharging the Functions of that
honorable Profession; but his Health abandoned him above Four Years before his
Death, which happened in a very lamentable Manner on the 18th Day of September
1719. in the Fifty first Year of his Age.

Besides the Anatomical Treasure which he bequeathed to this University, and of
which we are obliged for a very ample and methodical Account to the Author of
his Life, he left the World his Oration De Methodo Anatomen Docendi and
Discendi, pronounced on the Day of his Reception as Professor at Leyden; a
Latin Letter De Inventoribus Septi Scroti, and a Defense of it against Dr.
Ruysch; together with several Improvements both in Anatomy and Surgery, the
Chief of which may be justly reckoned the Discoveries he has made of the true
Method of Cutting for the Stone.

As for D. R^^'s Character, I cannot give it better than in the Words ^f his
elegant Historian, Fuit Corpore Magno, and Robusto, says Albinus, ^gregiaque
and virili plane forma; vultu Severo, and torva nonnihil tuente. Fuit Animo
generoso and alacri; totus tamen paulo fervidior atque commotion. Caterum
Ingeniosus Laboriosus and atteatus; atque gloriae semper cupidissimus; quam non
art, sed aperte palamque meritis suis acquiere studebat. Vixit in Caelibatu
parce and Sobrie, libere tamen and cum amicis hilarus. Adulari admodam non
poterat, neque sustinere diu simulationem. Itaque nemini facile and diu parcere
solebat; sed alios reprebendebat, errores evellere conabatur; in multos
vebemeatius quoque invectus, prasertim si quos in sua art a vero abesse
existimaret. Quod eam non tam carpendi aut l^dendi libidine fecisse credimus,
quam veritatis asserenda and defendendae studio atque impetu quodam, and quod
non prorsas abjecte de se se^^iret. Quemadmodum etiam non tam vitio vertendum
ei ese vide^ur quod verbis and moribus fuerit asperior; quam admirandum potius,
talem adbut evafisse, qui vitam tam duram and erraticam, and tam ab omni
^^^^a^ita^e and ^rba^itate re^^tam, egerit in ea aetate, qua flexibiles
booni^um ^^^imos, (...) ceram, ad arbitrium fere sociorum, and at fors tulerit,
^^rmati and f^agi ^^^imus.

Thus far concerning the Life of our famous Lithotomist; we go on now to the
same Albinus's Account of his Lithotomy.

Amongst the other Parts of Surgery which Rau had learned at Paris; the
Operation for the Stone by what is called the great Apparatus was one, and it
is certain, that for some time after he fixed at Amsterdam, he practiced it in
that manner himself; but upon seeing Friar Jacques Cut in Holland, and having
examined the Bodies of many such as died in that Monk's Hands, he from that
Time changed his Method of Cutting in the Manner which we are now to explain.

Several Accounts have been published, and many more handed about concerning
this Method of Professor Rau, but all of them trifling, false, and imperfect;
and had not the learned D. Albinus, who has often seen Rau Cut, and is a
perfect Judge of these Matters, thought it worth his while to oblige the World
with an accurate and particular Relation of all the Seeps of his Operation, we
must have despaired of ever having a true Knowledge of it.

I shall trouble the Reader but with Two of these Accounts, both of them
printed; the first by a Saxon Physician; and the other, of which something has
already been said, by Mr. Cheselden.

We are told by the Physician, that in his Travels through England and Holland,
he arrived on a certain Time at Amsterdam; and being there resolved to attend
Dr. Rau's Courses of Anatomy and Surgery, amongst other Curiosities he saw
there, one was the Operation for the Stone performed by him.

The 7th Day of February 1707, says the Traveller, I and Mr. Wickham went with
our Master Rau to Cromenic, a Village near Harlem, where a Boy was to be Cut;
which was done in the Presence of two Surgeons and Burghers of the said Town.
After the Body was disposed in a proper Posture with his Arms bound, and his
Posteriours laid higher than his Head, and his Feet so tied, that the Part to
be Cut could not be moved; Mr. Rau kneeling with one Knee upon the Table, sets
himself directly before the Patient, thrusting in a common Catheter moistened
with Oil into the Yard; at last meeting with the Stone, he withdraws that, and
puts in another Catheter, so deep that he might feel it upon the Perinaeum with
his Fingers; then he makes an Incision in the Left Side of the Perinaeum, four
Fingers breadth from the Tuberosity of the Os Ischium, or Huckle Bone, and a
Fingers breadth from the Anus, which Place of Incision the Catheter depresses
toward the Perinaeum. His Incision Knife was guarded a Thumbs breadth, looking
like a common Launcet, which was not laid above the length of the first Joint
of the Finger: First he cut the Skin, and then making an Incision through the
Fat and the Muscles, he applied his Itinerary; after which he penetrated the
Neck of the Bladder, then putting in the Penknife into the Wound, holding it
strongly with his Hand, he delivered it to me; but in the mean time snatched up
his Forceps, and drawing out his Penknife, he thrust it in betwixt the
Itinerary and Conductor, dilating the Lips of the Wound by those two said
Instruments, by which means he happily drew our the Stone. When it was
extracted it was of the Size of a little Hen's Egg, moistened with Blood, and
on one Side surrounded with a small little Membrane, where perhaps it had an
Adhesion to the Side of the Bladder. It was almost of a round Figure and
uneven, like a large Sand or gretty Stone. Cleansing the Wound with a Sponge,
he applied nothing but a little Lint; and so binding up the Patient he put him
to Bed, placing under his Buttocks some Oatmeal to receive the Urine, that
would run from the Wound and the Faeces upon Occasion. He ordered the Curtains
of the Bed to be drawn close, that the Light might not disturb the Patient's
Rest, to compose whom he ordered an Anodyne Emulsion to be drunk ad Libitum.
After the Operation, and the Sick being just laid upon the Bed, he cried out of
exquisite Pains in the Glans of the Yard, when the Stone was taken away, which
happens by Consent; in all which the Membrane of the Urethra has with the
inward Membrane of the Bladder.

On the 7th of March, I saw another Lithotomy or Operation for the Stone
performed by my Master on a Jewish Boy of Seven Years old; in which, besides
what I have already told you, nothing particular happened, except the falling
down of the Intestinum Rectum, occasioned by the Cries of the Patient; which
lubricating with Oil he put up again with his Fingers, least it should hinder
him in his Operation.

By comparing this Account of Rau's Operation with that which is given by
Albinus, it will be very easy to see how full it is of Mistakes, that is, how
much it is of a-piece with all the rest of this Author's Book.

Mr. Cheselden makes Rau's Method to be the same with that of Friar Jacques;for
after transcribing some few Things from Dionis about that, he tells us, that
the late Mr. Rau, Professor of Anatomy at Leyden, performed it afterward in
Holland, Cutting exactly between the Entrance of the Ureters, and with great
Success.

It is not a little surprising how Mr. Cheselden, who is so perfectly well
acquainted with the true Structure of these Parts of the Body, came to let
himself be so grossly imposed upon by the Person that gave him this Account of
Rau's Operation, which the least Reflection must have convinced him to be false
and impossible, as shall be presently shown. What he has added, is I believe
very just; at least it deserves the Attention of all such as shall ever
undertake the Practice of Mr. Rau's Operation. In my Opinion, says he, this Way
of Cutting exceeds the two former, (that is, the greater and lesser Apparatus)
and would be yet better, if the Bladder was filled with Water before the
Operation.

These, and many other such as these Accounts, have been given of Mr. Rau's
Method of Cutting for the Stone; and I have only set down two Samples of them,
to show what need there was of a more exact and complete Explanation of an
Operation, which the Success wherewith it was attended must recommend to our
most serious Thoughts. This the ingenious Dr. Albinus has fully executed in the
Manner which we now proceed to show.

After having explained the Method of Cutting used by Friar Jacques, and given
his Opinion of it, which as we have already seen, he concludes with this
Observation, That it had better never have been heard of, had it not served as
a Hint to lead Rau to the Discovery of his: He goes on to inform us, that Rau
having fully examined the Structure and Situation of these Parts, which are
either to be cut or shunned in this Operation, discovered the only Defect of
Friar Jacques Method to be the Want of some Way whereby the Instruments might
be safely and securely directed toward the proper Place of the Bladder. This
he also found out, and used it with the greatest Success. It cannot therefore
be denied but that Friar Jacques showed Rau the Way; for this, however, he
ought always to be praised and valued, that by his own Skill and Industry he
made that Addition to the Operation, by which alone it is rendered sure and
safe, and preferable to all that have hitherto been invented, whereas before,
it was dangerous, uncertain, and oftentimes fatal.

His Addition consisted in a Catheter furrowed or grooved on the Unequal Side,
which he thrust through the Urethra into the Bladder, that Unequal Side pressing
against the Part of it which was to be Cut, so as to be felt without; and by
this Means serving to direct him in making the Wound in the Skin, in thrusting
in the Knife, so as to cut the Bladder upon it, and in introducing the other
Instruments which guide the Forceps strait into the Wound, as was practiced in
the great Apparatus.

But as the Common Catheters made Use of by those who cut the Urethra in the
Perinaeum, are for the most part too little bent to be able to press
sufficiently against the proper Place of the Bladder, he invented a new one,
different from the others; first, in that where the crooked Part, and
consequently the Groove begins, the Curvature was greater, and also in that the
Rostrum or Beek at the other Extremity of the crooked Part was straiter and
longer, that the Knife might be at more Liberty to ^un both Ways upon it, and
so make a large Wound in the Bladder. The Comparison of the Structure of these
Parts in the humane Body, with what was to be done in the Operation, seem to
have led him to these Things.

He placed the Patient, tied him, and ordered him to be held almost in the fame
Manner as they who cut the Urethra in the Perinaeum; except that he laid him
upon his Back on a low Table, in such a Manner as that his Back was lower than
his Buttocks, for the more convenient Situation of the Part to be cut.

Then he kneeled down before the Patient upon his Right Knee, his Left Leg
being erect, and making an acute Angle with the Thigh, the better to support
his Body.

Next laying hold of the Penis with his Left Hand, with his Right he thrust the
Catheter artfully into the Bladder.

Then taking the Handle of the Catheter between the Fingers and Thumb of his
Left Hand, he turned it gently and warily toward the Patient's Belly and right
Groin, that the furrowed Unequal Side thereof might be applied to that Part that
was to be Cut; that is, as has been already said, to the Left Side near the
Neck, and something toward the lower and back Part.

This being done, he pressed the Catheter gently toward that Part, and at the
same time put his Right Thumb upon the soft Place of the Buttocks, on the Left
Side of the Anus, between that and the great Protuberance of the Os Ischium,
upon which we sit, just opposite to the Unequal Part of the Catheter.

Then pressing the Catheter gently toward his Right Thumb, and at the same
time his Right Thumb toward the Catheter, from the Left and lower Parts to the
Right and upwards, he discovered and marked the exact Place on the Outside
which was opposite to the Unequal Part of the Catheter, for there the Incision
was to be begun.

This Place was on the Left Side of the Anus, about an Inch, or two Fingers
breadth from that, toward the Protuberance of the Ischium. He chose it no
nearer the Anus, for fear of hurting the Intestinum Rectum; and no further from
it, that he might not be obliged to thrust the Knife too obliquely toward the
Catheter: However, according to the Difference of Age and Stature, Structure,
and Largeness of these Parts, he cut the Skin sometimes nearer the Anus,
sometimes farther from it, and sometimes a little higher or lower; but the
Unequal Pare of the Catheter, which pressed upon the Bladder, always directed
him to the Place.

This being discovered, he began by Cutting through the Skin and a small Part
of the Fat. He made the Wound strait and long, from above downwards, and a
little inclined outward toward the Protuberance of the Ischium, to keep
farther from the Intestinum Rectum. About this first Incision, however, he was
not very sollicitous.

As soon as it was made, he thrust into it that Part of his Right Thumb or
Forefinger, which is opposite to the Nail, to feel the Staff, which he kept
with his Left Hand applied to that Part of the Bladder which he was to cut,
with all possible Steddiness.

When he had found the Staff he pulled back his Thumb, and thrust the Point of
his Knife immediately into the Wound, not very deep at first; and directing it
with all the Caution he could toward the Staff, he cut gently all that came in
his Way: And for fear of wounding the Intestinum Rectum, he most commonly first
thrust his Finger into the Anus, to examine the Situation of it precisely, that
so he might be able to shun it with the greater Certainty.

When by these gentle Steps his Knife had got almost to the Bladder, he thrust
his Thumb or Forefinger again into the Wound to feel for the Catheter as
before, to replace it, if by any Motion of the Patient it had changed its
Situation, and also to remind himself of the Position of the Unequal Part of it,
upon which he was immediately to cut the Bladder.

In doing this he used more Caution and Circumspection than before: He first
begged of the Assistants not to let the Patient move any Part, especially his
Buttocks, and of the Patient himself to keep as quiet as possible; then holding
the Catheter fixed in its Place with the Left Hand, with the other he
approached the Knife toward it, through the Wound, without making any further
Incision, but only carefully directing the Point. This done he thrust it into
the Groove of the Catheter with all the Attention and Wariness he was Master
of: And it was easy for him to know when he was right, by the Point of his
Knife pressing upon the Bottom of the Groove, and upon the Sides of it when he
moved it gently either Way.

Then carrying the Knife along the Groove both upwards and downwards, but
mostly downwards, and favoring the Motions of it by the Position of the
Catheter, he made a pretty large Wound in the Bladder. The Situation of the
Staff made the Incision incline a little from above outward, and the Security
of the Neighboring Parts made it necessary it should do so.

He continued to take Care that the Staff should not slip from the Wound, and
with his Fingers examined the Largeness of it, feeling at the same Time for the
naked Catheter, it he had any Suspicion that it was out of its Place; for it
was necessary that the Groove should be close to the Incision, that he might
with the more Security thrust the Male Conductor into it.

Therefore having again desired the Patient to lie still, he took the Male
Conductor into his Right Hand, and pushed it carefully and steddily through the
Wound toward the Catheter; and after some few Trials, fixed it in the Sulcus
without any thing being intercepted between them, which it was easy to judge,
both by the Resistance and Hardness of the Staff.

When he was assured of this, he pushed the Conductor with more Force, and
thrust back the Staff, drawing the Handle of it gently toward him at the same
time.

By this Means the Unequal Part of it retired from the Wound into the Cavity of
the Bladder, and the Conductor remaining still in the Sulcus was safely guided
thither likewise; and by moving it gently up and down, he discovered either by
its touching the naked Staff or the Stone, that it was really in the Cavity of
the Bladder where he wanted it to be.

The other Parts of this Operation were performed as by the great Apparatus;
for with his Right Hand he kept the Male Conductor in the Bladder, and with his
Left drew the Catheter out through the Urethra. Then he took the Male Conductor
into his Left Hand, and upon that directed the Female into the Bladder with his
Right; afterward holding the two Conductors at a sufficient Distance with his
Left Fingers, he thrust the Forceps between them into the Bladder with his
other Hand, and presently drew out the Female Conductor.

Then he felt with the Forceps for the Stone, that he might be sure that
Instrument had not missed its Way, but was really within the Bladder, and
afterward drew out his Male Conductor likewise.

He used to open the Forceps with a considerable Force several times together,
both to dilate the Wound and Bladder, and loosen it as much as he could from
the Stone.

When this was done, he searched for, laid hold of, and extracted the Stone
with the Forceps, with all the same Precautions which they commonly do, and
always ought to use, who perform this Operation by Cutting the Urethra in the
Perinaeum.

As soon as one Stone was taken out, he thrust other Instruments into the
Bladder, to discover if there were any more behind; and with a proper Scoop,
and very often with his Forefinger, he brought away any small Bits of Stones,
Sand or clotted Blood, and then the Patient was laid in a Bed upon his Back.

He put neither Tent, Plaster nor Bandage upon the Wound, but kept it open for
some Days after the Operation; and in the mean time ordered the Patient as much
Ptisane or weak Emulsion as he could drink; that the Urine flowing first
copiously into the Bladder, might wash it thoroughly, and then running out at
the Wound, might carry along with it the Sand, Blood, or whatever else might
remain. Afterward he cured the Wound, as other fresh Wounds usually are.

With how great Dexterity, and in how short a Time he always performed this
Operation, there are innumerable Witnesses to testify; among whom I could name
several Persons of Probity, Learning and Character, who are still alive. How
well and how successfully he operated, the Event afterward proved; for the far
greatest Part not only survived the Operation, and did very well after it, but
recovered in an incredibly short Time so perfectly, as never to be afflicted
with a Fistula, involuntarily Flux of Urine, Barrenness, or any other Accidents
which so oftend attend those in whom the Urinary Passages have been Cut.

And though this Method may seem more difficult to be put in Practice upon Women;
yet even these he Cut the same Way, provided they were Maids, or had never had
Children: neither are there Instances wanting of his Success among such as had.

This excellent Account has Dr. Albinus given us of Rau's Method of Cutting for
the Stone, in which he has omitted nothing that can any Way contribute to its
being fully understood, if it is not that he has set down no Observations made
on the Bodies of such as died before the Wound was cured; by which we should
have had a more certain Account of all the Parts cut, than is to be found in
this Relation at present.

But now, if we compare a little this Method with all those that went before
it, it will be found to contain nothing of any Consequence that can be called
New, except the extraordinary Skill and Dexterity of the Operator, and his
cautious, prudent and attentive Manner of Operating. It is to these Things
only, that is owing any Difference to be observed in either his Instruments, or
the several Steps of his Operation; which Differences deserve not so much to be
called New Inventions, as the making the best Use of what was already invented.
The principal Thing wherein his Way of Cutting differs from that of Marianus,
is in the Place in which he makes his Incision; but this his Historian owns to
be the same with that where Friar Jacques made his; though, as I have
sufficiently proved, that Monk's Design was to make it in another Place. Again,
he differs from Friar Jacques Methods in the Instruments he uses, and the
manner of using them; but all this he took from the great Apparatus, except the
strait Rostrum of his Staff, as Merry had done before him; though I do not think
it at all probable that he had seen Mery's Book, before he had composed the
Theory of his own Operation. Mr. Rau's principal Merit therefore consists in
having made a judicious Collection of the Parts of several Methods, which were
attended with the greatest Advantages and least Inconveniences, and framing
these into one Regular Operation, which in his Hands has been perhaps more
successful than any hitherto discovered; but whether it will continue so to be,
if brought into Practice anew, must be left to Experience and Time to
determine.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IN the Beginning of the foregoing Chapter, I observed that though several
Accounts of Professor Rau's Operation for the Stone have been published, and
many more handed about by those who pretend to have seen him Cut, yet they are
all both imperfect and full of Mistakes; and that it is entirely owing to the
learned and accurate Dr. Albinus, that this great Man's Method was not for ever
lost to Posterity.

As soon as the Doctor's Book was published at Leyden, he did me the Honor,
amongst several of his ingenious Friends here in London, to send it me in a
Present; and at the next Meeting of the Royal Society, I thought proper to lay
before them an Abstract in English of that Part of it which relates to Mr.
Rau's Operation for the Stone; together with several Preparations, from which I
demonstrated and described the Parts concerned in it.

These Preparations I have had now a good many Years by me: They make part of a
complete Collection that I have made, by which all the possible Ways of getting
in to the Humane Bladder, in order to extract a Stone, may with the greatest
Clearness be illustrated; and the Advantages and Inconveniences of each of
them, as far as these depend on the Structure of the Parts, with the greatest
Certainty determined.

Of these Ways, I always reckoned that practiced by Professor Rau to be one,
long before I had heard any thing of his true Method, or even, of that of Friar
Jacques, from which it is taken; and indeed, my Preparations will serve to
direct in every Step of his Operation, and point out the Parts that are either
to be Cut or avoided in it, as fully as if I had had Albinus's Book before me
when I went about them. And I will venture to say, that the Examination of such
Preparations as these, when fresh Subjects cannot be had, which every Surgeon
and Anatomist must know is too often the Case with us, is the surest and
easiest Way to enable us to understand, and make the right Use of what has been
written upon the Subject of Lithotomy, which of late Years has made so much
Noise in our Phyisical World.

But to return from this short Digression: If I may judge by the Event, what I
then offered to the Royal Society was by many Members of that Honorable Body
thought no unsuitable Entertainment for them; for from that Time several worthy
Physicians and Surgeons, having carefully read Albinus's Book, and examined my
Preparations, began to think seriously of introducing the Practice of it
amongst us. And I most willingly embrace this Opportunity of doing Justice to
the ingenious Dr. Bamber and Mr. Cheselden, by declaring in a public manner,
(what I had many Opportunities of knowing, having assisted at most of the
Experiments they made on dead Bodies) that as it was their Turn to Cut in the
two great Hospitals of this City the following Season; I beheld with the utmost
Pleasure, the Alacrity, Industry and Application with which they soon made
themselves Masters, each in the Way that suited his Genius best, of the true
Method of performing an Operation, which they thought they had all the Reasons
that Theory could furnish, to prefer even to the high Way of Cutting, which
both of them had for a considerable Time practiced with great Success.

On the 7th Day of last August, Dr. Bamber made the first Trial of it on living
Bodies in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, and since that Time he has made several
more. In all these Operations he has thought it proper to follow every Step of
Mr. Rau's Method, except that he filled the Bladder moderately with Water; and
therefore, as his Dexterity and Skill in every Operation he goes about are
sufficiently known, there remains no more to be said about them; save only,
that as far as can be judged from the Number he has Cut, his Success is
hitherto at least equal to that of Mr. Rau.

Mr. Cheselden began to Cut in St. Thomas's Hospital a few Days after Dr.
Bamber; but as he has thought fit to vary Professor Rau's Method considerably,
I must beg leave to insist a little more on his Operation.

I have already mentioned an Account of Rau's Method given by Mr. Cheselden, in
the Preface to his Treatise on the High Operation for the Stone, published
1723, as he had received it from those who had been Scholars to Mr. Rau, and
several times present at his Operations. His Informations were indeed very lame
and imperfect; but yet, even from these, he had conceived so favorable an Idea
of that Method, as to think it preferable either to that of Celsus or Marianus;
and withal, that it would be still more so, if the Bladder was first filled
with Water.

Albinus's late Treatise has, as I have already remarked, given this ingenious
and most expert Surgeon an Opportunity of examining the whole Matter with more
Clearness and Certainty than he had done before; and the Fruit of the Pains he
has been at, is not only to confirm him in his former favorable Opinion of it,
but also to bring it to such a degree of Perfection, as in his Judgment makes
it preferable to all the Methods of Cutting that have ever been invented.

Now, as Mr. Cheselden's Method must be reckoned an Improvement of that first
attempted by Friar Jacques, a Description of it, such as a Spectator is able to
give, does even upon that Account very well deserve a Place in the History I
have ventured to write of the Lateral Operation for the Stone: And if, in what
I shall say about it, I shall happen to mistake or omit any material
Circumstance, I wish that may serve as an Inducement to the happy Improver to
rectify and complete whatever is amiss or wanting in mine, by obliging the
Public himself with a more accurate and full Account of his own Operation.

The Table upon which the Patient is placed is highest at that End upon which
his Buttocks rest; and by means of a Pillow laid under him there, and another
under his Head when he lies upon his Back, his Belly is lower than any other
Part of his Body.

His Buttocks are placed upon the Edge of the Table, and his Knees being
separated from one another, and bent as much as they can be conveniently, his
Wrists and Ancles are tied together; and he is kept in that Situation by three
Assistants, One at each Leg, and a Third at his Head; who presses with his two
Hands upon the Patient's Shoulders, to keep him from retiring backward from the
Operator.

The Patient being brought from his Bed in a Nightgown, and situated in this
Manner, the Operator thrusts an hollow grooved Steel Catheter, through the
Urethra into the Bladder; and with a Syringe mounted with an Ox's Ureter,
injects as much warm Water into it as the Patient can bear without Pain, in the
same Manner as is done in the High Operation. Into one Patient of about
Eighteen Years of Age, and who had a Stone weighing Six Ounces and a Quarter,
Mr. Cheselden injected Seven Ounces of Water; but he thinks the Quantity may
always be determined by the Complaints of the Patient without observing any
other Rule.

When the Water is injected, and secured from running out, by tying round the
Penis a narrow Slip of Flannel, he gives the End of the Catheter to an
intelligent Assistant to hold; whose principal Care is to keep it from rising,
but not at all to direct the Groove to the Place where the Incision is to be
made, for a Reason that we shall hear presently.

Then the Operator having feared himself upon a Chair, the Height of which is
suitable to that of the Table on which the Patient is laid, takes a pointed
Knife with a Unequal Edge, and beginning about an Inch above the Anus, on the
Left Side of the Raphe, between the Accelerator Urinae, or as I name that
Muscle, Constrictor Urethrae, and the Erector Penis, he makes an Incision
downwards by the Side of the Sphincter Any, a little obliquely outward as it
descends from Two and an Half to Four Inches in Length, according to the Age of
the Patient, or Size and Structure of the Parts. This first Incision he
endeavors to make all at one Stroke, so as to cut through the Skin, Fat and
all, or Part of the Levator A^i, which lies in his Way.

As soon as this is done, he thrusts the Forefinger of his (...) into the
Middle of the Wound, in order to press the Intestinum Rectum to one Side, that
it may be in less Danger of being Cut; and taking a crooked Knife in his other
Hand, with the Edge on the Concave Side, he thrusts the Point of it through the
Wound close by his Finger into the Bladder, between the Vesicula Seminalis and
Os Ischium of the same Side; then lowering his Hand, he continues this second
Incision upwards, till the Point of his Knife comes out at the upper Part of
the first.

This Incision being finished, he thrusts the Forefinger of his Left Hand
through the Wound into the Cavity of the Bladder; and having f^lt. It and
secured the Stone, he introduces his Forceps upon his Finger, and endeavors to
lay fast hold of the Stone with it; then he pulls out his Finger, and taking
the Forceps in both Hands, he extracts the Stone with greater or less Facility,
according to the Size thereof, or Largeness of the Wound he has made.

If there are more Stones than one, he feels for the rest with his Finger, then
introduces his Forceps, and extracts them in the same manner.

During the whole Operation, the Catheter remains in the Bladder; and all that
the Assistant who holds it has to mind is, as has been already said, to keep it
from rising. By this means Mr. Cheselden thinks the Bladder is pressed down
sufficiently to facilitate the Entry of the Forceps upon his Finger without the
Use of any Director; and it being filled with Water, there is no occasion to
Cut upon a Groove; neither is there any danger of laying hold of the Catheter
with the Forceps, if due Care is taken to manage that rightly after it is in
the Bladder.

In this Method of Operating there are but one or two Arterial Branches cut,
from which there is any Danger of an Haemorrhagy, and not always from them
neither: However, if after the Wound is well cleansed and washed with a wetted
Sponge, any Quantity of Blood continues to run, he ties the Vessels
immediately; and then having applied Pledgets of dry Lint and other proper
Dressings, the Patient is afterward carried to Bed.

(...) regular Method of Cutting; and when (...) Accident happens, which it was
impossible to be aware of before the Operation, he has been seldom above a
Minute (sometimes less) between the Beginning of the first Incision and
Extraction of the Stone.

There are Circumstances, however, in which he finds it necessary to ^ary some
Steps of his Method. These, as far as I have been Witness to, or can remember
them, are as follows:

First, When having laid hold of the Stone with the Forceps, he finds by the
Force it takes to draw it out, or other Signs, that it is very large, rather
than expose the Patient to the Danger and Pain of a violent Diaceration of the
Parts, he chooses either with a Pair of Scissars, if it is the upper Part, or
his Knife if the lower, to enlarge the Wound by an additional Incision.

Secondly, If after the second Incision is made, he finds by the Finger which
he endeavors to thrust into the Bladder, that the Catheter has slipped into the
Wound, which, by the straining of the Patient and other Accidents, sometimes
happens; then he withdraws his Finger, and instead thereof thrusts a Gorgeret
into the Groove of the Catheter, upon which he introduces his Forceps in the
ordinary Manner. It is only with a View to this Accident, that he prefers a
grooved Catheter to one entirely round, such as was used by Friar Jacques.

Thirdly, When the Assistant, who holds the Catheter, gives him any ground to
think that he his laid hold of that with the Forceps instead of the Stone;
which, though he believes it will rarely happen, yet is not impossible; be orders
it immediately to be pulled out, and then endeavors to lay hold of and extract
the Stone without that Convenience which the pr^ssing down of the Bladder would
afford him, if he should be obliged to introduce his Forceps oftener than once.

Fourthly, When by the Smallness or Situation of the Stone, he finds this
Method to be ea^ie^ or more s^fe, he thrusts his Fingers into the Anus; and
having pressed the Stone toward the Orifice of the Wound, he pulls it out with
his other Hand, without using any Forceps at all.

Lastly, When he feels, either by his Finger, or the Resistance the Stone makes
to the Force with which he strives to draw it out, that there is any kind of
Constriction, either of the Ureters or Membranes of the Bladder about it, he
endeavors by thrusting his Fingers into the Anus, or other proper Methods, to
bring that Part near the Orifice of the Wound; and then with his Knife he cuts
these Membranes which had formed the Sphincter; and thus the Stone being
disengaged is extracted with the greatest Ease.

As I have here described Mr. Cheselden's new Operation nearly in the same
Order that Albinus has followed in that of Mr. Rau, it will be easy for the
Reader to perceive what Additions or Alterations are owing to him, or, in one
Word, what Improvements he has made; so that it would be altogether superfluous
to lengthen this Postscript any further, by comparing them together.

Mr. Cheselden has hitherto Cut but Seven Patients this Way that I know of; and
whoever has heard of the wonderful Success which attended his Practice of the
High Operation, will have but little room to doubt of the happy Event of his
present Method, in which even these first Trials have succeeded equally, if not
beyond whatever he could boast of in the former.

To conclude: Were I not afraid of being thought to pass the Bounds I
prescribed to my self in this History, of only relating and comparing Facts
together, without interposing my own Judgment, I might add, that in my Opinion
there is nothing wanting in Mr. Cheselden's Method of performing the Lateral
Operation, by which it can in any respect be improved, except the Use of
crooked Forceps upon some Occasions; for I have frequently observed at both
Hospitals, that the Stone is much more easily extracted, when it lies on that
Side of the Bladder in which the Incision is made, then when it lies on the
other, especially if the Cavity to be observed there, is of a preternatural
Depth or Breadth, as it sometimes happens. Therefore when this is the Case, I
am of Opinion that if the Forceps were a little crooked, the Stone might with
less Difficulty be laid hold of, than by the strait ones which have been
hitherto used. It is true, that crooked Forceps will be weaker than the others;
but the difference in Strength would be more than compensated by the Facility
of charging the Stone; because in this, rather than in the Force necessary to
extract it when laid hold of, the Inconveniency I am talking about seems to
consist.


