A LETTER TO George Cheyne, M. D. Occasioned by his ESSAY on HEALTH and long
LIFE.

A LETTER TO George Cheyne, M. D. F. R. S. SHOWING, The Danger of laying down
General Rules To those who are not acquainted with the Animal Economy, etc.

FOR PRESERVING and RESTORING HEALTH.

Occasioned by his ESSAY on HEALTH and long LIFE.

With ANIMADVERSIONS upon that Performance.

The Circumstances of DISEASES are infinitely various, and no general RULES
whatsoever, can be applied to particular CASES, without the Knowledge of the
Reason of the RULE, that is, without understanding the ANIMAL ECONOMY, upon
which all the Rules of Physic are built.

Preface to KEILL'S Essay's. LONDON: Printed: And Sold by J. Graves, in St.
James's- Street, J. Hocke, over against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street,
and F. Jefferies. in Ludgate Street. (Price one Shilling.)

ERRATA.
PAGE 18, Line 23. read abstemious. Page 37, Line 1, read seldom or never. Page
38, Line 17, read turgid. Page 47, Line 12, read refined. Page 48, Line 14,
read Genius. Page 53, Line 26 read Podagram. Page 56, Line 12, r. recede and
shun.

TO George Cheyne, M. D. FELLOW OF THE Royal Society.
SIR,
IF any Thing in this World, be worthy of a wise Man's Care, it is Health; and
as Mankind, cannot sufficiently testify their Gratitude to those, who labor in
the Practice of healing Diseases, with Diligence, Candor, and Judgment; so on
the other hand, they cannot enough detest those who set up for the Art of
Healing, without any other Qualification, but their Diploma, to Recommend them;
and having nothing in their view, but making or mending their Fortunes, neglect
that Knowledge, which is absolutely necessary, to make their Practice
Honorable and Successful.

They who write Well and Ill, on the Subject of Health, ought in like-manner,
to be set in opposition to one another, and as their Labors tend to the
Preservation or Prejudice of Health, so ought they to become the Objects of our
Favor, or Contempt.

As all Mankind, are more or less frail, they therefore ought to bear a great
deal from one another Folly; and the trade of Scribbling, among the rest of
Men's folly's, may be so far indulged, as not to be censured, so long as it
continues harmeless and innocent; but as soon as it ceases to be so, it is
every reasonable Man's duty, to endeavor to stop its torrent, and divert as
much as possibly he can, the Mischief it threatens.

If a Man imagines he can oblige the World, by communicating some thing useful;
as he ought by no means to suppress it, so what he advances, ought to be
attended with the Reasons that led him into his Opinion; and these should be
offered to the Consideration of such only, whose application in that way to
which they tend, has made them Judges of their Sufficiency; and then if his
Arguments should prove too weak, to support his Oppinion, no other harm will
ensue, but his Loss of Labor, and that share of Praise, which probably he
might expect as the Reward of it.

But when a Physician shall presume, to lay down Practical Rules, to all
Mankind without Distinction, for the Preservation of Health; and if these Rules
should prove pernicious and destructive to it, People will be apt to imagine,
that he puts himself upon a Level with these Savages on the Seacoast, who set
out false Lights, to invite distressed Mariners to their destruction; that they
may reap the Benefit of the Ship-wreck.

You best know SIR, what were the Motives, that prompted you to publish your
Essay of Health and long Life, as you call it; but I doubt, many will have
Reason to wish it had never appeared; it is now almost in every bodies hand, and
that seeming self-deniedness in your Preface, that Air of Piety that you put
on, in almost every other Period, will persuade many to believe, so good a Man,
would never publish a Book to pamper his Vanity, and would never pretend to the
Knowledge of any thing he was an absolute Stranger to; these Considerations,
will, I am afraid weigh with many to their Destruction.

I intend by this to show, that every Attempt of this kind must be fruitless,
if not pernicious, by encouraging People to tamper with their Constitutions,
which they cannot possibly regulate by any General Rules. And if your
Performance proves, that your knowledge of the Animal Economy, is not quite so
extensive as perhaps it ought to be; you must not take it amiss if I point out
a few of those Passages, from whence that unhappy Conclusion naturaly flows. If
the Reasons I shall offer to this purpose, are not sufficient to make it
appear, they cannot hurt you; but on the Contrary, if they happen to be just
and convincing, no good Man will blame me for undeceiving People, in what
regards a thing, so essential to their Well-being as Health.

I have no Inclination to trace you through every thing that I think wrong in
this Performance, because, beside the irksome Employment of finding fault, that
would oblige me to write a Book at least as large as yours. I shall endeavor
therefore, to be as short as the Subject will allow me.

It is a common Saying, as you observe, that a Man past Forty, is either a
Fool, or a Physician; and if it means any thing, it only implys, that by so
long experience, a Man that is not a Fool, will know what things have best
agreed with him; and his Reason will direct him to continue the Use of them,
till some alteration in his Constitution makes them hurtful; and when the
happens, he will find there is something else required to make a Man a
Physician, besides living forty Years in the World; for beside Diseases, old
Age will alter a Man's Constitution, and bring on Symptoms, which he could have
no experience of, when less advanced in Years. Of what use then, can his former
Experience be to him, in Circumstances he never was in before?

But let us suppose, that by forty Years Experience, a Man may have discovered
the proper Method he should follow, through all the different Stages and
Accidents of Life, to preserve his Health, and prolong his Days; yet this
Method will only be applicable to himself, and such Constitutions as exactly
resemble his own, in every Circumstance; and such another, perhaps will not be
to be found among all the rest of Mankind.

You tell us Page 4.
"The Reflection is not more common than just, that he who lives Physicaly
lives Miserably, the truth is too great a nicety and exactness about every
minute Circumstance that may impare our Health, is such a Yoke and Slavery, as
no Man of a free and generous Spirit would submit to; it is as the Poet
expresses it, to dye for fear of dying."

If this had been the Effect of any previous Reflection, or if you had believed
it, Charity inclines me to think, that you would not have been so industrious
to contradict it, as appears from your subsequent Rules of Health; (as you are
pleased to call them,) but have left Mankind to act for the Benefit of their
Health, as Reason and Experience should dictate to them; and when they are
Indisposed, to call in those Aids that are proper to give them Relief; I mean
such Physicians, whose Skill in the Animal Economy, and the Materia Medica,
has rendered them capable to judge of the Nature of a Distemper, and to apply
the proper Means to remove it. I am sure every reasonable Man is a better Judge
of what he ought to do, for the Benefit of his Health, than any Physican can
be, who is not intimately acquainted with all the Circumstances of his
Constitution.

When a Man has acquired a competent Knowledge of the Animal Economy, and of
the Power and Efficacy of these Medicines, proper to restore and preserve
Health, to such a Man, I believe it is possible to lay down such general Rules,
and Directions, as may enable him to practice the Art of healing, with success
and ease.

But to pretend to direct Men ignorant of these things, how to govern
themselves, to preserve or restore their Health, is equally reasonable, as if
one should give Directions to a blind Man, to go a long Journey by himself,
through ways that he never could possibly have any Idea of, and where every step
out of the way would endanger if not destroy his Life. For how shall Men be
able to adjust either the Kind or Quantity of Diet or Medicine, that may be
necessary, to Constitutions they are Strangers to? How shall they be able to
judge for themselves, of that Exercise, and Air, that is proper for them, when
they are unacquainted with the Nature of those Symptoms, that can only enable
them to distinguish.

You will perhaps say, that you have acquainted them with these Symptoms to
which your Directions are suitable; but may not a Person be afflicted with any
Symptoms you can mention, and at the same time have others, which would make
the Method that might be proper to remove such Symptoms, were they alone,
destructive to the Patient, now they are complicated with others, which you
could not possibly foresee.

What then must become of that Person, who having these Symptoms you mention,
follows your Advice, and whose want of Knowledge will make him disregard those
other Symptoms that will make your prescription pernicious?

Many Attempts have been made to lay down general Rules, for Mankind without
distinction, to preserve their Health and prolong their Lives; but these
Productions never obtained the End they aimed at; because the Constitutions and
Habits of Men's bodies differ so much from one another, that any general Rule
laid down to any number of Men for this Purpose, must be destructive, at least
to the greatest Part of them, if they all comply with it.

For if every Man, was exactly to pursue that method to Health and long Life,
that is proper for him to follow, perhaps we should not find two in ten
thousand, exactly pursuing the same Course, though their End would be all the
same; so that any general Rule enioyn'd to these ten thousand, would but at
best be useful to two, and hurtful or destructive to all the rest.

It very rarely, or never happens, that Diseases, even of the same
Denomination, ever affected two Persons, in the same manner, in every Symptom,
and the Method of Cure ought always to vary with the Symptoms. How then can you
tell a Man, after what manner he should govern himself in a Disorder, when you
cannot possibly know, in what manner he is to be affected with it? Or tell how
a Constitution should be be regulated, which you are altogether a Stranger to?
And these valetudinary crazy Constutions, that you address your self to,
actually labor under Distempers, or they would not be so; and perhaps there
are not two such in all England, whose Complaints, and Constitutions don't
differ in many Circumstances.

So infinite is the variety of Diseases and Constitutions, that the best
Physician in the World, can only determine, for these he is intimately
acquainted with, and whose Symptoms he himself has examined, and cannot with
any safety, depend upon any thing, but the conviction of his own Senses, to
regulate his Practice by.

What then must the Complexion of your Merit be, who pretending to point out
the way to Health and long Life, lay down Rules for Mankind to follow, which
perhaps will never be useful to any, and may be hurtful and destructive to all,
who regard your Advice? and the greater your Reputation as a Physician, the
worse will be the Consequences, and consequently the greater your Guilt.

Your Rules for Health, are all of them, either such as have been known to all
Mankind, since the World began; or mistaken Notions, founded upon no Principles
that ever reason dictated.

When, or by whom was it ever denied, or even so much as doubted by the
Thinking-Part of Mankind, (and you tell us, you don't write to the Insensible)
that Eating and Drinking to excess, were destructive to Health; but then it
must be owned, that no Body before you, ever presumed to determine the Quantity
of Meat and Drink, that a Man should take, and prescribed that quantity to
every Body, without distinction; this is indeed entirely New, and I hope in
Charity to the rest of Mankind, that you are the only Man in being, capable of
laying down such a Rule.

That a very great regard ought to be had to the Constitution of the Air, to
restore and preserve Health, is a greater Truth than you seem to be aware of;
but then, it is as true, that no one Constitution of Air, will agree with every
habit of Body; and a Physician must be intimately acquainted with a Man's
Constitution, before he can prescribe a proper Temperament of Air for him to
live in.

You affirm Page 46.
"That you have constantly observed good Effects from leaving off suddenly
great quantities of Wine and Fleshmeats too, by those long accustomed to both."
I will not here dispute what you say is Fact; but I shall beg leave to enquire
a little into the Arguments you give us, to support the Reasonableness of this
Assertion.

You tell us Page 45.
"That nothing is more rediculous than the common Plea for continuing in
drinking on large quantities of spirituous Liquours, viz. Because they have
been accustomed so to do, and they think it dangerous to leave it off of a
sudden, it were as reasonable for him that is fallen into the Fire or Water to
lie there, because of the Danger of removing him suddenly." But this Argument
of yours is to no Purpose, unless you can prove, that a Perseverance, in that
Life a Man has been accustomed to, will as suddenly destroy his Life, as lying
in the Fire or Water will; and your other Argument is, Page 45.
"That no Man was ever afraid to forbear strong Liquours in an acute Distemper,
what quantity soever he might have drank in his Health."

Here SIR, you must give me leave to inform you, that Diseases and Health, are
Circumstances, directly opposite to one another, and what may be proper and fit
to be done in the one, may by no means be safe, or convenient in the other.

e. g. In a continued Fever, where Obstructions prevail in most of the
Capillary Vessels, and the usual discharges from the Body, by insensible
Perspiration, etc Being obstructed the larger and passable Vessels, to which
the circulating Fluid is confined, are for that reason overcharged, and to give
a Person in this Case, even that kind, and quantity of meat and drink, that
would be necessary in a state of Health to preserve it, would increase the
Distemper, by increasing the quantity of Fluid, in the passable or pervious
Vessels.

In all these we call acute Cases, the circulating Fluid is not only confined
to a smaller number of Vessels, but there being a Check put to the usual
Expense and Discharge from it, by the several Emunctories of the Body, which
made the former supply from eating and drinking in a State of health useful:
Temperance therefore, whatever has been a Man's way of living, is not only
safe, but absolutely necessary, till these Obstructions which are the Disease,
be removed; and the several Excretory's are again qualified, to throw off the
Superfluities, from the Mass of Blood. Care must likewise be taken in these
Cases, to dilute the Blood, and relax the Fibers; and these Medicines which can
effect this, will dissolve the Union of the combined Particles, that obstructed
the Capillary's, and stood in the Way of the circulating Fluid, or
Extra-corporeal Secretions.

But if these diluteing Medicines, which are convenient in this Case, were
given to one, where the Quantity of Secretions, are to the Quantity of Fluid in
the Body, in that just Proportion, that is necessary to Health; they would
increase the Secretions, destroy that necessary Proportion, and beget Diseases.

And if a Man in a good State of Health, who has accustomed himself to eat and
drink plentifully, should suddenly leave of that Method, and betake himself to
a spare Diet all at once; the Excretory's which throw of the Extra-corporeal
Secretions, being large enough to carry off the Refuse of his Extravagance,
would upon so sudden a Change, throw off more than such an abstenious-diet
could spare, and leave too little in the Vessels, to support the Circulation,
with that velocity that is necessary to Health, for that the Blood may be
propelled with that degree of velocity, that is necessary to preserve Health,
the Vessels must all be filled in such a manner, as the Impulse of the Fluid,
and the Re-action of the Vessels, may be adjusted to this necessary velocity;
more or less will beget a Disease: And the Bloodvessels, etc. Being suddenly
drained, and deprived of their usual supply, the pressure of the Fluid against
them will decrease with the Quantity of it; and the Impulse of the Fluid, and
the Re-action of the Vessels being equal, such a Diminution, from a
Constitution that is not laboring under an acute Distemper, must necessarily
lessen the Velocity of the Fluid proportionaly.

Hence it is evident, that the sudden Change which you recommend, would make
such a Disproportion between the Quantity of Fluid, and the Dimensions of the
Vessels, as would render the Circulation very languid; and this slow motion of
the Fluid, would give its Parts an Opportunity of combineing, and forming
Bodies too gross, to pass through the more minute Capillary's, and the
Obstructions that would ensue from thence, would consequently be the Fountain
of many grievous Distempers. The ill Consequences of such sudden Changes, have
been taken Notice of, by every Judicious Observer in Physic, since
Hippocrates; and as many of them, as have wrote upon this Subject, have
faithfully cautioned Mankind against them.

I have already given my Reasons, why I think it dangerous to prescribe either
Diet, or Medicine at random. And now give me leave to point at some things,
which appear to me in a very odd Light. In the Directions you have given to
regulate the quantity of Food.

You observe Page 39.
"Since our Appetites are deceitful, and Weight and Measure troublesome and
Singular; we must have recourse to a Rule independent of our Sensations, etc".
You propose here, to give us a Rule for measuring the Quantity of our Food,
independent of our Sensations; and if this has any meaning at all, it must be
directing us, to eat and drink by guess, without any regard to the Quantity;
for we cannot possibly form a Judgment of any thing, without the Assistance of
our Senses. But afterward you advise us Page 40.
to measure the Quantity by our Eye, but then there is one of the Sensations
employed, unless you deny Vision to be a Sensation. Then you go on; Page 40.
"Thus, the two Wings of a middling Pullet, or one Wing and both Legs; three
Ribs of a middling Neck of Mutton; two middling Slices of a Leg or Shoulder of
Mutton, somewhat less of Beef may be sufficient, etc".

Now if it were prudent or reasonable, to determine the Quantity of Meat, that
a Man should take, without being apprised of the Nature of his Constitution;
what can any Body make of this Direction? As if a middling Slice of Meat, was a
determined Quantity, which every Body knew; however People may determine what
they themselves call a middling Slice, yet I am sure, it is impossible for any
Body, that has not been accustomed to see you eat, to tell what you mean by it.

Every thinking Man, I believe is an Enemy to Debauching in strong Liquours,
but I cannot be of your Opinion, when you recommend and prefer small Wines to
the stronger Kind. Indeed if a Man was obliged to drink a large Quantity of
Wine every Day, then small Wines should be preferred, provided they were sound:
But as no Man is obliged to drink more than he cares for, I should prefer a
convenient Quantity of the more generous sort, either by it self, or mixed with
Water; if it was for no other Reason, but because such Wines, being much less
Subject to Putrefaction than the smaller Kind, People will have a much better
Chance, for drinking that which is Good. For notwithstanding the vast Quantity
of Wine drank in England, very few are Judges when it is good of its Kind, or
otherwise, unless it happen to be spoiled to a very great Degree. And you your
self confess the good Effects of generous Wines and Food, not only moderately,
but plentifully taken: where you say, Page 14.
"That those who have drank strong Liquours so plentifully, as to have thereby
a strong Circulation and full Perspiration, seldom or never catch Cold. And
this is the Reason why rich Foods and generous Wines, moderately used, become
so excellent an Antedote in Infectious and Epedemick Distempers, etc". You are
so far in the Right in my Opinion, in imagining that Men are less apt to
receive injuries from the Circumambient Air, when their Vessels are filled by
rich Food and generous Wines, than diseased People are, whose Vessels are lank
for want of that competent Quantity of Fluid necessary to Health. But this
truth is the Consequence of a Cause, quite different from what you imagine it.
You suppose the violence with which the matter of Perspiration flys from the
Body (which you call a brisk Atmosphere) resists the pressure of the
Circumambient Air, and prevents its having access to the Body. Your Words are
these, speaking of the effects of rich Food and generous Wines, you say they
Page 15.
"Not only banish Fear and Terror, but as they make so full and free a stream
of Perspiration, and maintain so active and brisk an Atmosphere, as suffers no
noxious steams or mixtures, in the Air to come within it, but drives and beats
off the Enemy to a distance; but Persons of viscous heavy Fluids, of poor and
sizey Juices, of little or no Perspiration, such as generally all Studious,
Sedentary and sickly Persons are, but especially those that are subject to
Nervous Disorders, must necessarily suffer under these poisonous Mixtures in
the Air, if they do not cautiously and carefully sense against them, or take
not a present Remedy and Antidote when tainted, for besides the Air that gets
through the Perspiratory Ducts into our Blood, etc."

Doctor James Keill, in his Essays upon the Animal Economy, computed the force
of the Heart, equal to a Weight of 5 Ounces only; and that the velocity of the
Blood at the Heart, to that in the minute Capillary's (and he did not descend
so far as the Excretory's of insensible Perspiration) was as 5.233 to 1. And
here you suppose, that the matter of insensible Perspiration, whose velocity is
the least of any, is upon some occasions, propelled with a Force, sufficient to
repel the Pressure of the Atmosphere, upon the Surface of a Man's Body, which
in a Medium is computed to be equal to between 39.900 and 40.000 Pound.

I confess Dr. Keill was mistaken in this Calculation; for if the force, which
propells the Animal Fluids, was so much inferior to the Pressure of the
Atmosphere, the Circulation could not be carried on, and Consequently no Animal
could exist in the Air we live in; for that Reason, I shall not press this
Doctrine as an Argument against you; nor is it necessary here, to determine,
how much you are mistaken in the other Extreme.

But the true Cause, why People whose Vessels are well filled with good
Nourishment, from rich Food, and generous Wines, are not apt to catch Cold, or
be tainted with infectious Distempers, is because, when the Vessels are all
thus filled, the Excretory's, upon the Surface of the Body, are charged in
proportion; and being swelled with the Matter of Perspiration, they press
against, and shut up these Orrifices, which convey the Air, or any thing else
from the Surface of our Bodies, to our Mass of Blood; and when the Vessels are
not filled as they ought to be, from Sickness, or any other Cause, the
Excretory's of Perspiration are proportionaly empty, and consequently cannot
press upon these Orrifices, but will leave them open to receive the Air, or any
kind of Fluid, that may happen to be applied to the Skin of such a Person.
These Excretory's that emitt the Matter of insensible Perspiration, can never
be the same, which receive any thing into the Blood from without us; because if
they are not Obstructed, they are constantly throwing out the Matter of
insensible Perspiration, and they cannot possibly, give access to one Fluid
from without, at the same time they are discharging another from within; and if
they are obstructed, they can neither do the one nor the other.

That Fat is harder to digest, than the more solid part of Animals, Page 25.
is a Position you seem to be very certain of and quote SIR Isaac Newton's
Authority, to support your Opinion; and though the Justice which the World has
done to the Character of that great Man, will leave but few Dissenters, from
any Opinion of his; yet since the best may err, and the greatest Genious may be
sometime mistaken, I have ventured to think differently, and shall give you my
Reasons why I do so.

Don't we find, that Fat disolves more easily, than any other part of of the
Animal substance, by all the Trials we can make to that purpose out of the
Stomach; what then should make it less soluble in the Stomach, than any where
else? And don't we find that a much less degree of Heat, than is in the Stomach
of any Animal, will disolve it infinitely sooner, than any other part of the
Animal can be dissolved, by all the artful Contrivances we can think of? So
that abstracting from the Action of the Stomach, the heat alone, would dissolve
or digest it sooner, than any other Substance can be.

And if because of its smoothness, as you imagine, it could in some measure
elude the Action of the Stomach, yet its Parts being less tenacious, than that
of any other substance, the less force would be sufficient to divide them. But
when the Stomach is contracted to promote digestion, the Contraction being
equal in every part of it, the Matter contained in it, cannot possibly evade
the Pressure, tho it should shift its Place. And I am informed by Men of great
Probity, who tell me from their own Experience, that the Turtle, which they eat
frequently in the West Indies, is the fattest of all Animals; and that it is
the wholesomest, and lightest Food in the World.

I cannot imagine, why all these Invectives against Punch; as Rack-Punch is
commonly made in England, though I believe this Composition may not be agreeable
to every Constitution, yet I imagine by the generality of People, it may be
drank as safely, as an equal quantity of Wine; for since it contains a smaller
quantity of Spirits, it will consequently be less apt to heat us.

You say P^ge 55.
"every thing that has passed the Fire, so that it has had due time to divide
and penetrate its Parts, as far as it possibly can, retains a Caustic burning
quality ever after, etc". This Observation holds true, in Bodies which have
been calcined; but the Fire never has that effect upon any matter, while its
Parts continue defended and diluted with Water; (and Water is the Basis of
every Liquid, except Oil) this is evident in that single Instance of Hartshorn,
which when calcined, is in some degree Corrosive, and receives that quality
from the Fire; but are not the Parts of this same Substance, divided and
separated by the force of the Fire, when it is boild in Water to make Jelly?
And did ever any body apprehend a Caustic burning quality in Hartshorn Jelly?
Has not the Fire the same access to the Plants, from whence, the simple insiped
Waters of the Shops are distilled, as to Wine, from whence you distill Brandy?
Does it not separate their Parts in the same manner? And as there any thing
caustic either in the Plants which remain in the Alembick, or in the Water
drawn from them?

According to your Notion, it would add to the fiery Quality of Brandy, or any
other Spirit, to boil it over a Fire; but make that Exp^^^ment when you will,
and you will find it produce a very contrary Effect, though you stop it so close
that nothing can escape, but what passes through the Pores of the Vessel; and
though the subtle Parts of the Fire, may get access through the Pores of the
Vessel, yet it can never affect any Particle of Matter contained in it so as to
burn it, as long as there remains any Water, to dilute and defend it.

That there is Oil in the Composition of all inflamable Spirits I own; But
every body knows, whenever Fire gets access to Oil, it sets it in a Flame; and
if the Parts of the Fire, did incorporate with this Oil, as you say it does,
would it not have the same Effect and destroy it? This is obvious from your own
Observation, of the continued Distillation of Spirits, they will at last, when
they come off without any Water to defend them, as you say, be reduced into
liquid Flames, which will of themselves evaporate into visible Flames and Fumes.

It is not my business in this Place, to write a Disertation upon the Nature of
Fire, and Causticks; it is sufficient to show you, (and I think it is evident
from what I have said,) that the Fire contributes nothing to Arrack, Brandy, or
Rum, etc. but as it seperates these Spirits from grosser Bodies, from which
they are drawn, and in which they actually existed, before Distillation.

The Juices of Lemons and Oranges, (and we use no other in England, but what
are brought from Abroad) are every Day given with good success, by Physicians,
who justly deserve that Character, to their Patients, in several Cases, in much
greater Quantities, than People who are not Drunkard's ever take them in Punch.
And you own that Sugar and Water are no Enemies to our Constitutions.

You say Page 57.
"in the West Indies, where from the necessity of drinking much, because of the
violen^e of the Heat, and from the want of Proper Liquors there, they are
forced to drink much Punch, though Lemons and Oranges, be in their full
Perfection, they are universally afflicted with nervous and mortal dry
Belly-Aches, Palsies, Cramps and Convulsions; which cut them off in a few Days,
entirely owing to this poisonous Mixture, etc".

Now I would fain ask you, if all the People in the West Indies are afflicted
with this Distemper, and if it cuts them off in a few Days, how could ever that
Place be Inhabited? But perhaps you only mean those who drink Punch; however
that be, you are misinformed of the State of that Country, for they have plenty
of Wines, from all the Countries which produce it, and Ale and Cider from
England; and are under no necessity of drinking much Punch, for want of other
Liquors; Madera Wine and Water, is the most agreeable and wholesomest drink
imaginable, and this they hive in so great Plenty, that they make it serve the
common Purposes of drinking, as we do small Beer in England. Nor is it to be
supposed, that a People whose Commerce obliges them to have Dealings, with
every Country in Europe, would want any Convenience that Europe can afford.

And I am informed by a Gentleman of good Understanding, and great Integrity,
who lived upwards of 30 Years in the West Indies, and but lately came from it;
that the Disease called the dry Belly-Ach, which is so peculiar to that
Country, attacks the Women as well as the Men; and that the Women there, are
particularly Remarkable for their Temperance, and abstinence from strong
Liquors; and that many of both Sexes, who never tasted Punch, or indulged in
any strong Liquor in their Lives, are afflcted with this Distemper; if this be
true, and I have no reason to doubt my Information, then this Distemper must
have some other Source than Punch.

And if the Bath be the only Cure for this Distemper, as you boldly affirm it
is; how comes it to pass, that so many are cured of it in the West Indies? And
though the meaning of your recommending the Bath, and of your Encomiums upon the
Water, and other Conveniences of that Place, upon several Occasions, is by no
means Mysterious; yet you have rashly strained that Point too far in this
Place, and it will never contribute to the End for which I believe you designed
it; for probably you never can have any Patients, under these Circumstances,
but from the West Indies, who at the same time they read your Recommendation of
the Bath, to Save and Cure them, they will find your Mistake, in saying it is
the only Remedy; since they all know, that many more are cured of it at Home,
than ever came to the Bath to find Relief; and that going to a colder Climate,
never fails to produce a Cure of this Distemper, without taking any other
Remedy.

And this Disease, is so far from always cutting them off in a few Days, that
they who live soberly when they are so afflicted, generally recover in a very
little Time; and it will hold those, who continue the excessive use of strong
Liquors many Months, nay Years, before they are either killed by it, or cured
of it. These things, which every Body in the West Indies know to be true, will
necessarily make them conclude, that you know nothing of the Nature of this
Distemper. And if this be true, your telling them that the Bath is their only
Remedy, will hardly bring them there to become your Patients.

Besides we cannot suppose, without reflecting upon the good Sense of these
People, that they would indulge themselves in a Liquor so pernicious to them,
as you think Punch is, when they have variety of other Liquors, that would
answer all the Purposes of drinking.

This Disease that you ascribe to Punch, is I am told, the Effect of catching
cold in that Country, which the sober People carefully guard against; but those
who use to intoxicate themselves with strong Liquors, often neglect the proper
Means to prevent taking cold, by sleeping sometimes in the open Air, or not
taking the proper Care to avoid this ill, by Means that are necessary to be
used within Doors. For though a Man is less apt to catch cold, when his Vessels
are all turg'd with the Liquor that has made him drunk; yet after some time,
when the several Emunctory's of the Body, have discharged the superfluous Fluid
from the Vessels, they will become more lank, and the Pores of the Skin will be
more open, to admit any noxious Steams that may be in the Air, than they were
before; and therefore, a more than common Care, is requisite to prevent a Man's
taking cold in this State. And if a Man catches cold there, after being drunk,
he will be seized with this Distemper, whatever Liquor he debauched in. Indeed
as all the Ingredients of Ruin-Punch, are the Product of that Country, they are
consequently to he purchased very cheap, and for this Reason the poorer sort of
People, and the Sailors that go thither (who are the Bulk of those who delight
in drinking to Excess) often get the dry Belly-Ach, etc. By catching cold,
after being drunk with Punch. But since Punch is no more accessory to this
Distemper, than any other strong Liquor, that a Man debauches in, and since
sober Persons who never tasted Punch, are subject to this Distemper, I think it
very unreasonable, to attribute this Mischief wholly to Punch.

When you wrote your Essay of the Gout, etc. You took a Fancy to say, that the
Nerves were solid without Cavities; and therefore contained no Fluid. This
Notion, has led you into many extravagant Expressions, about the Condition of
the Nerves; which this last Production of yours is crowded with. e g. What
Idea, can be annexed to that Expression (so often used by you) of Bracing, and
Winding up the Nerves? Every one knows how a Drum is braced, and how a Fiddle
string is wound up; but how those Operations can be applied to the Nerves, in
any part of the Animal Body, is what I am sure no Man can imagine.

In your Treatise of the Gout, etc. you have these Words Essay of the Gout,
Page 91.
"I have a long time suspected the reasonings of Physicians, and the Accounts
given by them of the Nature of Diseases, that were found on Nervous Juices, and
Fluids, their Motion, Nature, and Qualities: And yet it will be a great Baulk
on the Theory of Distempers, the boasted Politeness, and admired Fineness of
the present Age has advanced, should there really be no such Fluids in Animal
Body's". This, as you observe, would have been no small Surprise to the learned
World; and I Will tell you anotherthing, (which perhaps you do notknow) it would
have been no small Addition to their Surprise, to have found that you had made
the Discovery.

Now, though the Arguments you bring to support your Opinion, that the Nerves
contain no Fluid, are of such a Nature, that it may seem trifling to take
Notice of them, yet I shall be at some Pains with the last thing you say in
defense of this Notion; because I presume you brought it thus in the Rear, as
thinking it the strongest and most conducive to your Purpose. The Sum of this
last Argument is, because the Nerves are Cylindrical Tubes, whereas the
Arteries and Veins, etc. which evidently contain Fluid are Conical, and Nature
being uniform in her Operations, therefore you conclude, that the Nerves
contain no Fluid.

The Arteries by dividing into Branches, must grow gradually narrower, and for
that Reason are Conical; and the Nerves are Cylinders because they do not
communicate with one another, but run on in separate Canal's, from their
Origines to their Extremities.

And the Wisdom of our Creator is signaly manifested in contriveing the
Structure of the Nerves, different from that of all the other Vessels in the
Animal Body. For as the Nerves do not communicate with one another, but run on
in separate Canal's from their Origins to their Extremities: An impulse, or
addition of Fluid, to any Quantity of Nerves, determined to move a Muscle or
Muscles, runs on, or is propagated to their Extremities, without communicating
their additional Fluid, or Impulse, to any of the other Nerves; which could not
happen, if their Structure was like that of the Arteries: For if the Nerves
that serve in bending and extending of a Limb, were Branches from a common
Trunk, with which they had a Communication, any impulse at the Trunk, would be
propagated equally to all the Branches, the Benders and Extenders. So that
instead of regular and voluntary Motions, we should be Distorted with
Convulsions. e. g. Suppose a Power at A. determining to affect C. by means of a
Fluid contained in the Vessel A. which communicates equally with B. as with C.
Any impulse upon the Fluid at A. will affect B equally with C. without a
possibility of determining its Momentum, more to the one than to the other.

This Demonstration, I have borrowed from a System of Animal Economy, that is
not yet published; I wish when it is, it may be effectual, to put an End to all
that unintelligible Babbling, which has hitherto confounded this useful
Knowledge.

It is no difficult Matter to conceive, how the Fibers may be contracted, by
increasing the Quantity of Fluid in the Vessels which they compose. But by what
power in Nature, Essay of the Gout.
can the Fibers be drawn in, and sink into their own Substance? which you say
is the Case in Muscular Motion. You are realy so unhappy in all your
Expressions, that regard the Animal Economy, that if I was not certain, you
live by the Trade of Physic, I should Imagine you wrote purposely to turn it
into Redicule.

This SIR, is a very incredulous. Age we live in; and these Infidels, whom
Providence has favored with Knowledge and Understanding, will never regard an
Opinion, without good Reasons to support it, be it never so boldly Asserted. So
obstinate are they in their Aversion to Folly, that a Man who Speaks and Writes
without thinking, may babble and scribble from his Cradle to his Grave, without
meeting any other Recompense, but Redicule for his Pains. And by this Means,
they vainly imagine to restrain the Folly of Writing and Speaking at random; I
say vainly imagine it, because you know it is attempting an Impossibility.

To be humbly Proud, is no new Character, and yet I believe you may justly
boast, that no Body ever came up to it so fully as you have done; a singular
Ambition, peculiar to your self, has made you (upon some Occasion or other)
reject every Opinion, that has been commonly received in that Way, you would
fain persuade the World you was Bred in; yet when Occasion serves, you can
truckle to any Opinion that ever was invented in that Way. And at the same time
you are denying and despising the most reasonable Notions, of the best
Physicians, you condescend to express your self, in all the unintelligible
Jargon of the Mountebanks (though I presume they are your Averon, for the same
reason that they hate one another) and treat us with whole Pages of uncouth
Words and Phrases, with as much meaning, as the wandering Orator delivers them
from the Stage. This Method may get you the Applause of the Ignorant who are
always fond of what they do not understand; and they being the greatest part of
Mankind, and generally the richest, you may advance by it, what the unthinking
herd of Man, mistake for Interest: but sure you can be under no necessity of
stooping to such meanness! though Quackery, like Thieving, is not always prompted
by Necessity.

Your fondness of Novelty, which you have in common with all those, who do not
know how to judge right^y of things, made you assert (what a great Man only
suggested, and was far from being positive about it) that the Nerves were
solid, and contained no Fluid. I have already taken Notice of your Intention to
be Witty, upon the resigned modern Opinion, as you are pleased to call it. And
shall not repeat it again. But when it is convenient for you, to make your
favorite Essay of the Gout
Bath-Water do every thing, by ascribing Qualitys to it, directly opposite to
one another, or which is the same thing making it have effects directly
contrary; you thought (pardon me if I mistake in saying so) that it was
necessary, to fall in with the very Opinion, that you had but a few Pages
before, condemned with the greatest Contempt.

And then you say, that the Relaxation of the Muscles n Palsies, etc, proceeds
from Obstructions in the Nerves; for how can the Nerves be obstructed if they
contain no Fluid?

The desire of Knowledge, is a very laudable Quality as any human Nature can
boast of; But he who endeavors, to grasp at the Knowledge of a Thing, beyond
the reach of his Capacity, and notwithstanding this, will pretend to all the
Knowledge of it, that a Genious equal to the Task, could possibly arrive at; is
a Character much of a Piece with him, who describes foreign Countries, and the
particular Qualities of Great Persons, as if he had been most intimately
acquainted with them, when he never possibly could have access to know any
thing about them, but what public Fame, gave him in common with all Mankind;
and all this from the Vanity of being thought a Man of Consequence, and not
ignorant of what any Body would desire to know. That there are many such
Characters in the World, is a melancholy Truth beyond Contradiction; and the
despicable appearance they make Society when detected, is obvious to every Man
of Sense.

You prescribe Exercise indefinitely to all Mankind, as if rest was never
necessary, and Exercise never hurtful. That Exercise is an excellent Remedy in
some Cases, to restore and preserve Health is very true; but what Rules have
you laid down, or could you lay down, to teach all Men, what kind and quantity
of Exercise is proper for them all, under their several Circumstances to to
take. And it is impossible, for Men Ignorant of the Nature of their
Constitutions, and of any Bodily Distemper, they may happen to labor under, to
judge aptly for themselves in this matter.

When you come to mention the Use of Opium, you acknowledge, that Physicians
are the only proper Judges, when, and in what Quantity it is to be exhibited;
now as one great Effect of this Medicine, is to calm and dispose Men to rest,
which is the Opposite of Exercise; does it not follow, that they must likewise,
be the only Judges of the Quantity of Exercise, that Men should take? For when
it is fit for Men to be quiet, then most certainly it is fit for them to leave
off Exercise; and of Consequence, if Men who are not Physicians cannot Judge
for themselves of the one, they cannot possibly determine the proper Seasons,
and Quantity of the other.

In another Place, you seem to give your Assent to what I have been alleging
in plainer Terms, where you say, Page 27
from these general Rules, taking in the particular Complexions and Habits,
etc. Here you seem to make it necessary, to have regard to the particular
Circumstances of People, in order to prescribe justly for them. But who are to
be the Judges of these particular Circumstances? Must these essential things be
left to the Discretion of Men, who cannot possibly have any knowledge of them?
The Practice of Physic SIR, is a sharp Edged-Tool, and seldom or never fails
of having very ill Consequences, when put into unskillful Hands.

To show you how consistant you are with your self; in your Essay of the Gout,
etc. where you treat of Bathing, you say, Essay of the Gout, Pag^ 57.
' If People will bath indifferantly without Advice, without duly preparing
their Bodies, and cleansing the Alimentary-Passages without any distinct
knowledge of their Case, their Strength, the proper Season of Bathing, or the
Time they ought to stay in at once; there must necessarily happen (as there
have happened) unlucky Accidents, which tend to discourage and disgrace bathing
in General.'

And a little further in the same Treatise, you say Essay of the Gout, Page 65:
' It is impossible to lay down a general Rule about the Quantity of
Bath-Water, which it is convenient to drink daily; that being to be varied,
according to some Circumstances of the Patient, and the Nature of the
Distemper.'

When we consider these Passages, together with your Essay of Health, we find
that at the Bath, People ignorant of Physic, must not pretend to act for
themselves, and must be directed in every step they take, by the Advice of a
Physician. But every where else; your general Rules are sufficient to guide
them without any other Assistance.

If you had not some private Reasons to conceal it, it would be some
satisfaction to know for what reason, you have excluded the People at the Bath
from the benefit of your general Rules? Is it not as easy to give Directions
for bathing and drinking the Bath-Water, under Circumstances that you are not
acquainted with, as to direct People any where else in their Diet and Medicine,
whose Constitutions you are equally a Stranger to? Or would you have us
understand by this, that People had better trust to their own Management, than
to the Advice of any Physician, except just in that Place where Dr. CHEYNE, is
to be consulted with?

I do not know how you may have succeeded in this way, but I think you are by
far less artful in your Addresses to the Public, than For let us our Brethren
the Quacks brag what we will. -- Tollere nodosam nescit Midicina padagram.
Essay of the Gout, Page 133.


those you are pleased to call your Brethren; for though I believe your Ends are
all the same, yet these strenously declare, that the good of Mankind is their
only Aim; while you tacitly own that sordid self-interest is yours.

And here (pardon the Comparison) like the Dog in the Fable, you drop the
Substance to snatch at the Shadow; and when you intend to make a Monopoly of
all the Practice in the Kingdom to your self, you are industrious to lose what
you have already got; for notwithstanding all the fine Things you have said of
the Bath, who do you think will be at the Expense and Trouble of going thither,
and where, to add to that Expense, they must fee a Physician, to regulate them,
according to the various Circumstances of their Constitutions? When every where
else with the Assistance of your Rules only, they can act for themselves,
without being beholden to any Physician.

Give me leave to observe by the by, that you give a very extraordinary
Latitude in taking Opium; when you say, Page 219
"That they who in the Opinion of the World, have died of too much Opium, could
not have lived many Days without it": And yet where you decry the Excessive use
of Drams, you tell us, Page ^^
they will as certainly kill as Laudanum or Arsenick; now if Laudanum can
certainly kill, how are you certain, that no Body was ever killed by it, since
it is a Drug so much in use, and which every Man has access to at his
Pleasure? A Man that has murdered another, may as reasonably urge in his
defense, that the Person he destroyed could not possibly have lived many Days,
though he had avoided that Fate.

Your 7th Chap. contains Reasoning of a very extraordinary Nature: There you
are pleased to say Page 213
"Pain Constricts, Crisps up and shortens the Animal Fibers, it acts like a
Wedge in tearing and rending, and dividing, those small Filaments; it does to
them what the Points of Salts do to all Animal Substances, which are to be
preserved for Food, viz. hardens, stiffens, and contracts them. The Fibers of
live Animals being Contractile, Tonick, and springy when a hard pointed Body
enters them (which is the Case in all bodily Pain) the parts by their
contractile Nature, fly from, recede as much as possibly they can the wounding
Instrument; this appears from the large gash of a Wound, made across the Fibers
of a Muscle; in the continual bending to the other Side, when any Part of us is
pained; in the Cramps and Convulsions, nay, and sometimes Fevers produced by
intense acute Pain. Pleasure on the contrary, relaxes the Fibers by a soft and
Bland (or as the Mathematicians speak) a Commensurate and Harmonious Touch, it
acts on the Fibers as two unison and concordant Musical Instruments act on one
another; and by stroaking, softning, and smoothing, comes at last entirely to
relax and unbend them. The Parts of the Fibers run after, follow, and pursue,
and at last break their Union in some degree to reach such a demulcent touch."

Would not any one that implicitly believed in you, imagine from this passage,
that every individual Animal Fiber, was a rational Being, and had the Power of
discerning at a distance, what was convenient or hurtful to it? Since you say
they fly from a destructive Object, and pursue that from which they can receive
Benefit. And if your Argument of the great Gash in a Muscle, from the Fibers
being cut transversly, be of any weight, they must outlive the Person to whom
they belong; for the same thing happens in the Muscles of a dead Body, a
considerable Time after Life is extinguished. This is a Circumstance very well
known to all those, who have studied Anatomy, in that method by which the
Knowledge of it can only be attained.

When one winds up a Fiddle string till it breaks, does not the two Ends fly
back in the same manner, as the Fibers of a Muscle when cut transversly? Here,
contrary to your Chimera, the broken Ends of the String retreat from one
another toward the destructive Powers that divided it. And this will happen to
every Elastick Fiber, whether you cut it, or extend it till it breaks.

The Muscles in all live Bodies, even in what we call their relaxed State, are
in some measure Inflated and their Fibers endure a proportionable degree of
Tension, for i^ they were not inflated they could not be extended, and if they
were not Fibrae nullam habent Elasticitatem, nisi certa camsint tens^.

S'Gravesand, de Elast.
extended they would not be Elastick, and if they were not Elastick the cut
ends would not recede from one another.

And in Muscular motion, though the Extremity's of the Muscles are brought
nearer, yet we will find the length of the Fibers increased by this Action, if
we consider them through all the Angles, made by the transverse Fibers which
bind them together. And the Fibers of a Muscle, being extended in Proportion as
it is inflated, it is therefore, that exquisite pain is felt in violent Cramps
and Convulsions, etc.

If a Fibre' s being made longer, at the same time its Extremities are brought
nearer, should seem a paradox to you; only consider what happens to a
Bow-string, when one draws it to shoot off an Arrow; in this Action, though the
two Ends of the String are brought nearer, yet the length of it will be
increased, in proportion to the resistance of the Bow, and the Power which
draws the String.

What we call (but very improperly) bodily pain, never happens but when the
Fibers are extended beyond their Natural length; and for that reason, an
Incision made with a blunt Instrument, ragged in the Edge, gives more pain,
than that which is made with one that is ^harp and smoother; because the first
draws the Fibers a greater length, before it can divide them, than the l^^t.
And hence it is, that in Amp^^ations they always with a sharp Instrument
carefully separate the Per^^st^^m from the Bone, where the Saw is to be
applied, to avoid the painful Tension of its Fibers, by the Teeth of the Saw.

And when such Pain is produced from an internal Cause, it happens from the
Obstruction of some part of the Animal Fluid, by which means the Vessels in
that part swell, and the Fibers which compose their Sides, are stretched and in
danger of being broke, and tore assunder, in proportion to the increase of the
obstructed Fluid. And the Intenseness of the Pain increases with the Tumor. Are
not the Fibers extended in the Tumor, while an Abscess is forming? And in the
Case o^ an Exostosis, does not the Tumor of the Bone, extend the Fibers of the
Periostium? Is it not from the Tension then, and not from the Crisping up of
the Fibers, as you Term it, that these Diseases cause Pain? These things are so
well known to every one, who deserves the Name of a Physician, that I am sorry
I should have occasion to mention them to you.

But you are positive Page 215
"That Pain most certainly crisps up, constricts and contracts the Animal
Fibers": Now if the Fibers are sometimes shortn'd and crisp'd up, as you call
it, and if it be a Disease, then according to you, the Pain must precede the
Disorder, but how pain should exist by it self without a Disease to produce it,
is what I dare say no body can imagine. What is commonly called bodily Pain, as
I take it, (and I believe I speak the sense of every reasonable Man) is a
disagreeable Sensation, arising from some Disorder in the Animal Machine; it is
often the Consequence, but never can be the Cause of any Disorder.

What I have said, I think sufficiently shows, how far your Knowledge in the
Animal Economy extends; as to your Skill in Pharmacy, every Apothecary that
reads the Receipt of your Cordial, etc. may determine. And that no Man can be
quallified for a Physician, that is ignorant of both or any of these, I may
venture to affirm, is a Truth as evident as any Proposition in Euclid.

Nor have you succeeded better in you Philosophical Dissertation upon the
Passions, you say, Page 152
"Passion may be defined, the Sentiments produced on the Soul, by external
Objects, either Spiritual ones immediately, or Material ones, by the mediation
of the Organs of the Body". Now how can the Soul perceive any thing from
outward Objects, without receiving some impression from them? And how can such
impressions get access to our Minds, but by the mediation and avenues of our
Senses? And are not all the Organs of our Senses bodily Organs?

You tell us Page 153
"The acute Passions whether pleasurable or painful have much the same effect,
and work after the same manner as acute Diseases do, they effect a brisk and
lively Circulation of the Fluids, crisp up and constrict the Solids for some
time. Thus sudden gusts of Joy or Grief, Pleasure or Pain, stimulate and spur
the nervous Fibers, and Coats of the Animal Tubes; and thereby give a celerity
and brisker motion to their included Fluids". There is something so
extravagantly wild in this Notion (though you have often expressed your self much
to the same Purpose) that I am truly at a loss what Answer to make to so odd a
proportion viz. that the Perceptions and Sensations of the Mind fly about the
Body in the form of a palpable Fluid, which contains hard and pointed Bodies;
for such they must be, to stimulate the Fibers in the manner you contend for.

That a great part of the nervous Fluid is governed by the affections of the
Mind, is evident from the Bodily motions which depend upon the Will. And as the
Mind is differently affected, it may no doubt restrain or increase the flow of
this Fluid to the detriment of the Animal Economy. But you affirm that these
very Sensations and Affections of the Mind, which we term Pain and Pleasure
(not as they prevail upon the Mind to act upon its Organs,) but act as Solids
themselves, to Destroy or Preserve us. And thus you say the Sensations of the
Mind create Bodily Fain.

But all Sensations, whether pleasant or painful, exist no where but in the
Mind, and however it be common to call that disagreeable Sensation, which
arises from any Disorder in the Animal Organs, Bodily Pain, to distinguish it
from other painful Affections of the Mind, which do not proceed from that
Cause; yet in Philosophical Reasoning, no Phrase nor Expression, should be
admitted, that is not strictly agreeable to Truth. And though the Soul readily
perceives, when the Body is either disordered, or better disposed for
performing the Functions necessary to Life and Health; yet the Organs
themselves are incapable of any Sensation, and consequently there is no such
thing in Nature as Bodily Pain; and therefore that Phrase ought never to be
used, especially where close Reasoning is required.

But you seem to be of another Opinion, and tell us, Page 163
"That Beauty or Perfection gives pleasure to both Parts of the Compound". That
is to the Mind and its Organs; I thought there had not been a thinking Man in
Being, who did not know, that the Organs of the Body were composed of mere
Matter, and consequently incapable of any Sensation; and that Knowledge and
Perception, can only exist in the Mind, and is the distinguishing Character of
it.

I have a better Opinion of you, than to believe you mean, what I think this
Passage implys; for since Knowledge and Perception, are these essential
Quallities of the Soul, which denote its existence; and since all things which
are endued with the same Properties, must necessarily be of the same Species
and Nature; why should we then believe the Soul immortal, if these Properties
from whence we derive our belief of its Immortallity, are common to the Body
which evidently perishes? Nor does the Absurdity of this Notion of yours end
here, for when we consider it, with what you call the 4th Prop. of this
Dissertation, we will find them amount to the most hideous Hypothesis that ever
was imagined; equally shocking and repugnant to Reason: Your Words are these,
Page 149
"As in Bodies there is a Principle of Gravity or Attraction, whereby, in
vacuo, they tend to one another, and would unite according to certain Laws and
Limitations established by the Author of Nature: So there is an Analogous
Principle in Spirits, whereby they would as certainly, in their proper vacuity,
be attracted by, tend to, and unite with one another; and their first Author,
Center, and the Rock out of which they were hewn (to use a Scripture Phrase) as
the Planets would to one another, and to the Sun". etc. Now if the Soul be to
the Supreme Power, as the Stone is to the Rock from whence it is hewn, then the
Soul must be of the same Nature and Species with GOD himself; and not only
this; but if the Properties of the Soul are common to the Body (as you have
said they are) then not only the Soul, but the Supreme Power it self, must be
of the same Nature with the Body, which every Days Experience shows us, is
Finite and Corruptible. But as this pretended Reasoning of yours could only be
the produce or a perplexed imagination, it deserves Pity rather than
Reprehension; and a Man must be divested of all Regard to the dignity of Human
Nature, to be able to read it, without having Compassion for the Author.

Page 15^
You desire the Tender and the Valetudinary to guard against Passion: You may
as well propose to cure a Man of a Fever by bidding him be well; for as the
Passions of the Mind depend upon the Habit and Constitution of the Body, a Man
whose Habit of Body, naturaly produces these Emotions we call Passions, can as
well hinder his Pulse to beat, as suppress them, till that Habit which gives
them Birth is changed: Indeed there may sometimes such means be used, as will
alter in some measure this untoward Habit, and give a Man considerable relief,
and make him less subject to these miserable Disorders; yet there being great
variety of Causes, which produce these Ills upon the Minds of Men; to prescribe
a Method for curing this Ill, without knowing the true Cause, it will be so far
from having an equal Chance of bringing about the desired Effect, that there
will be as many Odds against it, for making the Case more desperate, as there
are Causes more than one capable of producing the Distemper.

If you or any Body should think me too severe, and allege in your behalf,
that however faulty your Performance may be, yet since you did your best,
Mankind are still obliged to you for your Endeavors. I would ask you, or any
that would plead in this manner for you, if you were to purchase any thing for
your convenience, that you could not be a competent Judge of, till you had
tried it; and if a Person whose Integrity you depend upon, should sell you that
which is damaged and good for nothing, for the very best of its Kind; and
suppose the Preservation or Loss of your Life, or Health, depended upon the
difference; I would, I say, ask how far this Man's telling you, it was the best
he had to dispose of, would serve to preserve his Credit with you?

I would not here be misunderstood, and supposed to write this for the Benefit
of Physicians, who I look upon generally Speaking, to be the Bane of Mankind.
And I believe it would be better for the World, that the Practice of Physic
was quite abolished; for though many would suffer in wanting these helps that
they might receive from the Hands of able Physicians, yet I am persuaded their
number would be so small, in proportion to those who are daily tortured and
murdered, by ignorant Pretenders to that Art, that People in general would
receive great benefit and relief by being freed from so great a Curse as
Physicians generally are,

I am, SIR, etc.
London, November, 1724. P. S.

YOU very obligeingly insinuate in the Preface to your Essay o^ Health, that
this was the last time you you would trespass upon the Public in his manner; this
I thought was very ^ind in you, and I was in Hopes it you would have attoned for
all that was to follow; but upon reading further, I found my self mistaken. And
if I had any Influence over you, I would persuade yon once more to appear in
Print, and acknowledge your Fault for this last performance; which is (if
possible) worse performed, and may be of much worse consequence than any of
your former

You say Page 92.
" God was forced to shorten the Life of Man, to prevent the Increase of
wickedness, etc". If you had been able to prove this, Mankind might have
thought Charitably of your performance, and believed you intended a further
Reformation, by making their Lives yet Shorter and more Miserable; but as the
matter now stands, I know but one thing you can plead for your excuse, which I
leave you to guess at: And then your Book may be of some use, since it contains
almost in every Page an ample and convinceing Testimony of it.




