THE MAN OF THE WORLD.

A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.

AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATRES-ROYAL OF COVENT GARDEN AND SMOCK-ALLEY.

WRITTEN BY CHARLES MACKLIN, ESQUIRE.

DUBLIN: PRINTED IN THE YEAR. M,DCC,LXXXV.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Dublin.

Sir Pertinax Mac Sycophant, Mr. MACKLIN. Egertoa, Mr. M'CREADY. Lord
Lumbercourt, Mr. MOSS. Sidney, Mr. SWINDAL. Melville, Mr. FOTTERAL. Counselor
Plausible, Mr. G. DAWSON. Sergeant Eitherside, Mr. GLENVILLE. Sam, Mr. LYNCH.
John, Mr. MALONE. Tomlins, Mr. SMITH. Lady Mac Sycophant, Mrs. SPARKS. Lady
Rodolpha Lumbercourt, Mrs. EGERTON. Constantia, Miss JARRETT. Betty Hint, Mrs.
CORNELYS. Nanny, Mrs. O'NEILL.
SCENE, Sir Pertinax Mac Sycophant's House in the Country.

Time -- Three Hours.

THE MAN OF THE WORLD.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Library in Sir Pertinax's House. Enter Betty and Footman. Betty. THE
postman is at the gate, Sam, pray step and take in the letters.


Sam. John, the gardener is gone for them, Mrs. Betty.


Bet. Bid John bring them to me, Sam, tell him I Am here in the Library.


Sam. I will send him to your Ladyship, in a crack,


Exit Sam. Enter Nanny. Nan. Miss Constantia desires to speak to you, Mrs.
Betty.


Bet. How is she now, Nanny, any better?


Nan. Something, but very low spirited still, I verily believe it is as you say.


Bet. Nay, I would take my book oath of it. -- I cannot be deceived in that
point, Nanny -- ay, ay; her business is done; she is certainly breeding, depend
upon it.


Nan. Why, so the housekeeper thinks too.


Bet. Nay, I know the father! the very man that ruined her!


Nan. The deuce you do!


Bet. As sure as you are alive, Nanny, or I am greatly deceived, and yet I
cannot be deceived neither -- Was not that the cook that came gallopping so hard
over the common just now?


Nan. The same. How very hard he gallopped. He has been but three quarters of
an hour, he says, coming from Hyde Park corner.


Bet. And, what time will the family be down?


Nan. He has orders to have dinner ready by Five; there are to be Lawyers, and
a great deal of company. -- He fancies there is to be a private wedding here to
night, between our young Master Charles, and Lord Lumbercourt's daughter -- the
Scotch Lady: -- who, he says, is just come from Bath on purpose to be married
to him.


Bet. Ay, ay, Lady Rodolpha, as they call her, nay, like enough: for I know it
has been talked of a good while; well, go tell Miss Constantia that I will be
with her immediately.


Nan. I shall, Mrs. Betty. Exit Nanny.


Bet. So! I find they all believe the impertinent creature is breeding, that is
pure, it will soon reach my Lady's ear, I warrant. Enter John, with Letters.
Well, John, ever a letter for me?


John. No, Mrs. Betty, but here is one for Miss Constantia.


Bet. Give it me -- hum -- my Lady's hand.


John. And here is one which the postman says is for my young master, but it is
a strange direction (reads) To Charles Egerton, Esquire.


Bet. O! yes -- yes -- that is for Master Charles, John, for he has drop! his
fathers name of Mac Sycophant, and has taken up that of Egerton. -- The
Parliament has ordered it.


John. The Parliament! pry'thee why so, Mrs. Betty?


Bet. Why, you must know, John, that my Lady, his mother, was an Egerton by her
father; she stole a match with our old master, for which all her family, on
both sides, have hated Sir Pertinax, and the whole crew of the Mac Sycophants
ever since.


John. Except Master Charles, Mrs. Betty.


Bet. O! they dote upon him, for though he be a Mac Sycophant, he is the pride of
all my Lady's family. -- And so, John, my Lady's uncle, Sir Stanley Egerton,
dying an old bachelor, and, as I said before, mortally hating our old master,
and the whole crew of the Mac Sycophants, lest his whole estate to Master
Charles, who was his God-son; but on condition though, that he should drop his
fathers name of Mac Sycophant, and take up that of Egerton, and that is the
reason, John, why the Parliament has made him change his name.


John. I am glad that Master Charles has got the estate however, for he is a
sweet tempered gentleman.


Bet. As ever lived, but come, John, as I know you love Miss Constantia, and
are fond of an opportunity of speaking to her, I will make you happy, you shall
carry her letter to her.


John. Shall I, Mrs. Betty? I am very much obliged to you, where is she?


Bet. In the housekeeper's room, settling the desert. -- Give me Mr. Egerton's
letter, I will lay it on the table in his dressing room, I see it is from his
brother, Mr. Sandy; so, now go and deliver your letter to your sweetheart, John.


John. That I will, Mrs Betty, and I am much obliged to you for the savor of
letting me carry it to her; for though she should never have me, yet I shall
always love her, and wish to be near her, she is so sweet a creature -- Your
servant, Mrs. Betty, I will kiss the letter for her sake -- sweet, sweet, dear
Miss Constantia! -- O! if I was but kissing her hand, Betty, now, instead of
this letter, how happy should I be -- Your servant, Mrs. Betty. Exit John.


Bet. Your servant, John -- ha! ha! ha! poor fellow, he perfectly doats on her,
and daily follows her about with nosegays and fruit, and the first of every
thing in the season; ay, and my young Master Charles too, he is in as bad a way
as the gardener -- in short, every body loves her, and that is one reason why I
hate her: -- for my part, I wonder what the deuce the men see in her -- a
creature that was taken in for charity -- I am sure she is not so handsome -- I
wish she was out of the family once, if she was, I might then stand a chance of
being my Lady's favorite myself; ay, and perhaps of getting one of my young
Masters for a sweetheart -- or at least, the Chaplain -- But as to him, there
would be no such great catch, if I should get him -- I will try for him
however; and my first step shall be, to let the Doctor know all I have
discovered about Constantia's intrigues with her spark at Hadley -- Yes, that
will do, for the Doctor loves to talk with me, and always smiles and jokes with
me ( laughs) he, he, -- he loves to hear me talk too, and I verily believe he,
he, he, that he has a sneaking kindness for me! besides, this story will make
him have a good opinion of my honesty, and that I am sure will be one step
toward it. -- O bless me! here he comes, and my young Master with him -- I Will
watch an opportunity to speak to him, as soon as he is alone, for I will blow
her up, I am resolved, as great a favorite, and as cunning as she is. Exit.


Enter Egerton ( in great warmth and emotion) Sidney following, as in earnest
conversation. Sid. Nay, dear Charles, but why are you so impetuous? Why do you
break from me so abruptly?


Egert. I have done, Sir -- You have refused -- I have nothing more to say upon
the subject -- I am satisfied.


Sid. ( Spoke with a glow of tender friendship.) Come, come, correct this
warmth; it is the only weak ingredient in your nature; and you ought to watch
it carefully; if I am wrong, I will submit without reserve; but consider the
nature of your request, and how it would affect me. From your earliest Youth
your Father has honored me with the care of your Education, and the general
conduct of your mind; and however singular and morose his behavior may be
toward others, to me he has ever been respectful and liberal. I am now under
his roof too -- and because I will not abet an unwarrantable passion, by an
abuse of my sacred character, in marrying you beneath your rank, and in direct
opposition to your Father's hopes and happiness -- you blame -- you angrily
break from me, and call me unkind.


Egert. ( With kindness and conviction.) Dear Sidney, for my warmth I stand
condemned; but for my marriage with Constantia, I think I can justify it upon
every principle of filial duty, honor and worldly prudence.


Sid. Only make that appear, Charles, and you know you may command me.


Egert. I am sensible how unworthy it appears in a Son to descant on the
unamiable passions of a Father; but as we are alone, and friends, I cannot help
observing, in my own defense, that when a Father will not allow the use of
reason to any of his Family -- when his pursuit of greatness makes him a slave
abroad -- only to be a tyrant at home -- when his narrow partiality to
Scotland, on every trivial occasion, provokes him to enmity even with his Wife
and Children, only because they dare give a national preference where they
think it is most justly due -- and when merely to gratify his own ambition, he
would marry his Son into a family he detests. ( With great warmth.) Sure,
Sidney, a Son thus circumstanced (from the dignity of human nature, and the
feelings of a loving heart) has a right, not only to protest against the
blindness of the Parent, but to pursue those measures, that virtue and
happiness point out.


Sid. The violent temper of Sir Pertinax, I own, cannot on many occasions be
defended -- but still your intended alliance with Lord Lumbercourt. --


Egert. O! contemptible! A trifling, quaint, haughty, voluptuous! servile tool!
-- the mere lackey of party and corruption; who for the prostitution of near
thirty years, and the ruin of a noble fortune, has had the despicable
satisfaction, and the infamous honor, of being kicked up, and kicked down,
kicked in, and kicked out -- just as the insolence, compassion, or convenience
of leaders predominated; and now, being forsaken by all parties, his whole
political consequence amounts to, the power of franking a letter, and the right
honorable privilege of not paying a Tradesman's bill.


Sid. Well, but, dear Charles, you are not to wed my Lord, but his daughter.


Egert. Who is as disagreeable for a companion, as her Father is for a friend
or an ally.


Sid. Ha! ha! ha! What, her Scotch accent, I suppose, offends you?


Egert. No -- upon my honor -- not in the least, I think it entertaining in
her, but were it otherwise, in decency -- and, indeed, in national affection
(being a Scotchman myself) I can have no objection to her on that account --
besides, she is my near relation.


Sid. So I understand -- but how comes Lady Rodolpha, who, I find, was born in
England, to be bred in Scotland?


Egert. From the dotage of an old, formal, obstinate, stiff, rich, Scotch
Grandmother; who, upon a promise of leaving this Grandchild all her fortune,
which is very considerable, would have the Girl sent to her to Scotland, when
she was but a year old; and there has she been bred up ever since, with this
old Lady, in all the vanity, and unlimitted indulgence, that fondness and
admiration could bestow on a spoiled Child, a fancied Beauty! and a pretended
Wit!


Sid. O! you are too severe on her.


Egert. I do not think so, Sidney; for she seems a being expressly fashioned by
nature, to figure in these days of levity and dissipation! her spirits are
inexhaustible! her parts strong and lively! with a sagacity that discerns, and
a talent not unhappy in painting the weak side of whatever comes before her. --
But what raises her merit to the highest pitch, in the laughing world is, her
boundless vanity, in the exertion of those talents, which often renders herself
much more ridiculous, than the most whimsical of the characters she exposes. --
And is this a woman fit to make my happiness? This the partner that Sidney
would recommend to me for life? To you, who best know me, I appeal.


Sid. Why, Charles, it is a delicate point -- unfit for me to determine --
besides your Father has set his mind upon the match.


Egert. ( Impatiently.) All that I know -- but still I ask, and insist upon
your candid judgment, is she the kind of Woman that you think could possibly
contribute to my happiness? -- I beg you will give me an explicit answer.


Sid. The subject is disagreeable -- But since I must speak -- I do not think
she is.


Egert. I know you do not; and I am sure you never will advise the match.


Sid. I never did -- I never will.


Egert. ( With a start of joy.) You make me happy -- which, I assure you, I
never could be with your judgment against me on this point.


Sid. And yet, Charles, give me leave to observe, that Lady Rodolpha, with all
her ridiculous laughing vanity, has a goodness of heart, and a kind of
vivacity, that not only entertains, but upon seeing her two or three times,
improves upon you, and when her torrent of spirits abates, and she condescends
to converse gravely, you will really like her.


Egert. Why, aye, she is sprightly, good-humoured, and though whimsical, and
often too high in her coloring of characters, and in the trifling business of
the idle world, yet, I think she has principles and a good heart; but in a
partner for life, Sidney, (you know your own precept -- your own judgment)
affection, capricious in its nature, must have something even in the external
manners -- nay, in the very mode, not only of beauty, but virtue itself, which
both heart and judgment must approve, or our happiness in that delicate point
cannot be lasting.


Sid. I grant it.


Egert. And that mode that amiable essential, I never can meet with but in
Constantia. -- You sigh.


Sid. No, I only wish that Constantia had a fortune equal to yours; but pray,
Charles, suppose I had been so indiscreet as to have agreed to marry you to
Constantia, would she have consented, think you?


Egert. That I cannot say positively; but I suppose so.


Sid. Did you never speak to her, upon that subject then?


Egert. In general terms only; never directly asked her consent in form; but I
will this very moment, for I have no asylum from my Father's arbitrary design,
but my Constantia's arms -- Pray do not stir from hence -- I will return
instantly; I know she will submit to your advice, and I am sure you will
persuade her to my wish, as my life, my peace, my earthly happiness depend upon
my Constantia. Exit.


Sid. Poor Charles! He little dreams that I love Constantia -- but to what
degree I knew not myself, till he importuned me to join their hands. -- Yes, I
love, but must not be a rival -- for he is dear to me as fraternal friendship
-- my benefactor, my friend, and that name is sacred It is our better self, and
ought to be preferred. -- For the man who gratifies his passions at the expense
of his friend's happiness, wants but a head to contrive, for he has a heart
capable of the blackest vice.


Enter Betty, raming up to him. Bet. I beg pardon, Sir, for my intrusion; I
hope, Sir, I do not disturb you.


Sid. Not in the least, Mrs Betty.


Bet. I humbly hope you will excuse me, Sir, -- but I wanted to break my mind
to your honor about a scruple -- that lies upon my conscience -- and, indeed,
I should not have presumed to trouble you, Sir, but that I know you are my
young Master's friend -- and, indeed, a friend to the whole family -- (runs up
to him and curtseys very low.) for to give you your due, Sir, you are as good a
preacher as ever went into a pulpit.


Sid. Ha! ha! ha! Do you think so, Mrs. Betty?


Bet. Ay in truth do I -- and as good a Gentleman too as ever came into a
family, and one that never gives a servant a hard word; nor that does any one
an ill turn, neither behind one's back, nor before one's face.


Sid. Ha! ha! ha! -- why you are a mightty well spoken woman, Mrs. Betty, and I
am extremely beholden to you for your good character of me.


Bet. Indeed, Sir, it is no more than what you deserve; and what all the
servants say of you.


Sid. I am much obliged to them, Mrs. Betty -- But pray, what are your commands
with me?


Bet Why, I will tell you, Sir, -- to be sure, I am but a servant, as a body
may say, and every tub should stand upon its own bottom; but (she holds him
familiarly, looks about cautiously, and speaks in a low familiar tone of great
secrecy.) my young Master is now in the China room, in close conference with
Miss Constantia -- I know what they are about -- but that is no business of
mine -- and therefore I made bold to listen a little; because you know, Sir,
one would be sure, before one took away any body's good name.


Sid. Very true, Mrs. Betty -- very true, indeed.


Bet. Oh! heavens forbid that I should take away any young woman's good name,
unless I had good reason for it: -- But, Sir, if I am in this place alive -- as
I listened with my ear close to the door -- I heard my young Master ask Miss
Constantia -- the plain marriage question; upon which, I started and trembled
-- nay, my very conscience stirred within me so, that I, I, I could not help
peeping through the keyhole.


Sid. Ha! ha! ha! -- And so your conscience made you peep through the keyhole,
Mrs. Betty? -- Ha!


Bet. It did indeed, Sir, and then I saw my young Master down upon his knees;
and what do you think he was doing? -- Lord bless us! -- kissing her hand, as
if he would eat it; and protesting and assuring her, he knew that you, Sir,
would consent to the match -- and then, O! my good Sir, the tears ran down her
cheeks as fast --


Sid. Ay!


Bet. (Crying tenderly.) They did indeed, Sir; I would not tell your reverence
a lie for the world.


Sid. I believe it, Mrs. Betty, I believe it; and what did Constantia say to
all this?


Bet. (Sneering severely, and shaking her head.) O! she is fly enough -- she
looks as if butter would not melt in her mouth, but all is not gold that
glistens -- smooth water you know runs deepest, (speaks this with sorrow) I am
sorry my young Master makes himself such a fool, very sorry, indeed; but um --
ha -- take my word for it, he is not the man, (sneeringly) for though she looks
as modest as a maid at a christening. (besitating) Yet, a -- when sweet-hearts
meet in the dusk of the evening -- and stay together a whole hour in a dark
grove -- and -- a -- embrace -- and kiss -- and weep at parting -- why then you
know, Sir -- it is easy to guess all the rest.


Sid. Why, did Constantia meet any body in this manner?


Bet. (Starting with surprise.) O, Heavens! I beg, Sir, you will not
misapprehend me! for I assure you I do not believe they did any harm -- that is
-- not in the grove -- at least not when I was there -- and she may be honestly
married for aught I know. -- O lud! Sir, I would not say an ill thing of Miss
Constantia for all the world -- for to besure she is a good creature -- it is
true my Lady took her in for charity -- and, indeed, has bred her up to the
music, and figures -- ay, and to reading all the books about Homer -- and
Paradise -- and Gods and Devils -- and every thing in the world -- as if she
had been a Duchess; -- but some people are born with luck in their mouths --
and then, as the saying is, you may throw them into the sea -- (deports herself
most affectedly.) -- but if I had had dancing masters, and music, and French
monsieurs to teach me, (smiles, coquets, and puts on important airs of
affectation.) I believe I might read the globes, and the maps, and have danced,
and have been as clever as other folks.


Sid. Ha! ha! ha! -- No doubt of it, Mrs Betty, no doubt in the least. -- But,
Mrs. Betty, you mentioned something of a dark walk -- about kissing -- a
sweetheart -- and Constantia.


Bet. O lud! Sir, I don't know any thing of the matter -- she may be very
honest for ought I know -- I only say, that they did meet in the dark walk; and
all the servants are laughing and tittering, and constantly observing, that
Miss Constantia wears her stays very loose -- looks very pale -- is sick in a
morning, and after dinner; -- and as sure as my name is Betty Hint, something
has happened that I will not name; but nine months hence, a certain person in this
family, may ask me to stand God-mother, for I think I know what is what, when I
see it, as well as another.


Sid. No doubt you do, Mrs. Betty.


Bet. I do indeed, Sir, and (she cries, turns up her eyes, and acts a most
friendly devout hypocrisy.) I am very sorry for Miss Constantia, I never
thought she would have taken such courses -- for in truth, I love her as if she
were my own sister -- and though all the servants say she is breeding, yet, for
my part, I don't believe it -- but one must speak according to one's conscience
you know, Sir.


Sid. I see you do, Mrs. Betty.


Bet. I do indeed, Sir, and so your servant, Sir -- (going away and returning.)
But I hope your Worship will not mention my name in this business, or that you
had any item from me.


Sid. I shall not, Mrs. Betty.


Bet. For indeed, Sir, I am no busy-body -- nor do I love fending and proving
-- and I assure you, Sir, I hate all tittling and tattling, and gossipping, and
backbiting, and taking away a young person's character, be her ever so bad.


Sid. I observe you do, Mrs. Betty.


Bet. I do indeed, Sir, I am the farthest from it in the world.


Sid. I dare say you are.


Bet. I am indeed, Sir, and so your humble servant.


Sid. Your servant, Mrs. Betty.


Bet. (Aside in great exultation.) So! I see he believes every word I say --
that is charming -- I will do her business for her, I am resolved. Exit.


Sid. What can this ridiculous creature mean -- by her dark walk -- her private
spark -- her kissing -- and all her slanderous insinuations against Constantia,
whose conduct is as unblameable as innocence itself? I see envy is as malignant
in a paltry waiting wench, as in the vainest or most ambitious Lady of the
Court. It is always a most infallible mark of the basest nature, and merit in
the lowest, as in the highest station, must feel the shafts of envy's constant
agents, falsehood and slander.

Enter Sam.
Sam. Sir, Mr. Egerton and Miss Constantia, desire to speak with you in the
China room.


Sid. Very well, Sam. Exit Sam.

I will not see them -- What is to be done? Inform his Father of his intended
marriage. -- No; that must not be -- for the overbearing temper, and ambitious
policy of Sir Pertinax, would exceed all bounds of moderation. He has banished
one Son already, only for daring to differ from his judgment concerning the
merits of Scotch and English historians. -- But this young Man must not marry
Constantia -- would his Mother were here: -- she, I suppose, knows nothing of
his indiscretion, but she shall the moment she comes hither -- I know it will
offend him -- no matter, it is our duty to offend, when the offense saves the
Man we love from a precipitate action, which the world must condemn, and his
own heart, perhaps, upon reflection, for ever repent. -- Yes, I must discharge
the duty of my function, and a friend, though I am sure to lose the Man whom I
intend to serve. Exit.


ACT II.
Enter Egerton and Constantia. Constable. MR. Sidney, is not here, Sir.


Egert. I assure you I left him here, and begged that he would stay till I
returned.


Constable. His prudence you see, Sir, has made him retire, therefore we had better
defer the subject till he is present. -- In the mean time, Sir, I hope you will
permit me to mention an affair, that has greatly alarmed and perplexed me; I
suppose you guess what it is?


Egert. I do not, upon my word.


Constable. That Is a little strange. -- You know, Sir, that you and Mr. Sidney, did
me the honor of breakfasting with me this morning in my little study.


Egert. We had that happiness, Madam.


Constable. Just after you left me, opening my book of accounts, which lay in the
drawer of the reading desk, to my great surprise, I there found this case of
jewels, containing a most elegant pair of earrings, and a necklace of great
value, and two bank bills in this pocketbook, the mystery of which, I presume,
Sir, you can explain.


Egert. I can.


Constable. They are of your conveying then


Egert. They were, Madam.


Constable. I assure you they startled and alarmed me.


Egert. I hope it was a kind alarm; such as blushing Virtue feels, when with
her hand, she gives her heart and last consent,


Constable. It was not indeed, Sir.


Egert. Do not say so, Constantia -- come, be kind at once; my peace and
worldly bliss depend upon this moment.


Constable. What would you have me do?


Egert. What love and virtue dictate.


Constable. O! Sir, experience but too severely proves, that such unequal matches
as ours, never produce aught but contempt and anger in parents, censure from
the world, and a long train of sorrow and repentance in the wretched parties,
which is but too often entailed upon their hapless issue.


Egert. But that, Constantia, cannot be our condition, for my fortune is
independent and ample, equal to luxury and splendid folly; I have a right to
choose the partner of my heart.


Constable. But, I have not, Sir -- I am a dependant on my Lady -- a poor,
forsaken, helpless orphan, your benevolent mother found me; took me to her
bosom, and there supplied my parental loss, with every tender care indulgent
dalliance, and with all the sweet persuasion that maternal fondness, religious
precepts, polished manners, and hourly example could administer. She fostered
me, (weeps) and shall I now turn viper, and, with black ingratitude, sting the
tender heart that thus has cherished me? Shall I seduce her house's heir, and
kill her peace? -- No; though I loved to the mad extreme of female fondness --
though every worldly bliss, that woman's vanity, or man's ambition could desire,
followed the indulgence of my love; and all the contempt and misery of this
life, the denial of that indulgence, I would discharge my duty to my
benefactress, my earthly guardian, my more than parent.


Egert. My dear Constantia, your prudence, your gratitude, and the cruel virtue
of your self-denial, do but increase my love, my admiration, and my misery.


Constable. Sir, I must beg you will give me leave to return these bills and jewels.


Egert. Pray do not mention them -- Sure my kindness and esteem may be indulged
so far, without suspicion or reproach. I beg you will accept of them, nay, I
insist.


Constable. I have done, Sir -- my station here is to obey -- I know they are the
gifts of a virtuous heart, and mine shall convert them to the tenderest and
most grateful use -- (weeps)


Egert. Hark! I hear a coach -- it is my Father -- dear girl retire and compose
yourself -- I will send Sidney and my Lady to you; and by their judgment we
will be directed -- Will that satisfy you?


Constable. I can have no will but my Lady's -- with your leave, I will retire -- I
would not see her in this confusion.


Egert. Dear girl, adieu -- and think of love, of happiness, and the man, who
never can be blessed without you. Exit Constantia.


Enter Sam. Sam. Sir Pertinax, and my Lady, are come, Sir, and my Lady desires
to speak with you in her own room. O! she is here, Sir. Exit Sam.


Enter Lady Mac Sycophant. L Mac. (In great confusion and distress.) Dear
child, I am glad to see you, why did you not come to town yesterday to attend
the levee? Your Father is incensed to the uttermost at your not being there.


Egert. (In great warmth.) Madam, it is with extreme regret I tell you, that I
can no longer be a slave to his temper, his politics, and his scheme of
marrying me to this woman. Therefore, you had better consent at once to my
going out of the kingdom, and to my taking Constantia with me; for without her,
I never can be happy.


L. Mac. As you regard my peace, or your own character, I beg you will not be
guilty of so rash a step. -- You promised me you would never marry her without
my consent. I will open it to your Father -- Pray, dear Charles, be ruled, let
me prevail. Here he comes, I will get out of his way -- but I beg, Charles,
while he is in this ill humor, that you will not oppose him, let him say what
he will -- when his passion is a little cool, I will return and try to bring
him to reason -- but pray do not thwart him.


Egert. Madam, I will not. Exit L. Mac.


Enter Sir Pertinax -- in great haughtiness and anger. Sir Pert. Weel, Sir,
vary weel! vary weel! -- Are not you a very fine fellow; a hagh -- Enter
Tomlins. What want you, Sir?


Tom. Sir, the groom is come back -- he has been as far as Hammersmith, and the
turnpike men, and every person upon the road, are sure that Lord Lumbercourt
has not passed by this day.


Sir Pert. Let them take the chestnut gelding and return to town directly, and
enquire at my Lord's house, whether he is at home, or if they know what is
become of him -- and do you hear -- the moment that Counselor Plausible and
Mr. Sergeant Eitherside arrive, let me know it. [Exit Tomlins] Weel, Sir, pray
what do you think of yourself, are not you a fine spark? -- are not you a fine
spark, I say? -- So you would not come up to the levee?


Egert. Sir, I beg your pardon, but I -- I -- I was not very well -- besides, I
did not think that my presence there was necessary.


Sir Pert. (Snaps him up.) Sir, it was necessary -- I tauld ye it was necessary
-- and, Sir, I must now tell you, that the whole tenor of your conduct is most
offensive.


Egert. I am sorry you think so, Sir -- I am sure I do not intend to offend you


Sir Pert. I care not what you intend, Sir, I tell you, you do offend -- what
is the meaning of this conduct? -- neglect the levee! -- neglecting the levee
is such a contempt, and such an ignorance of the world, that, sdeath, Sir, your
-- What is your reason, I say, for thus neglecting the levee, and disobeying my
commands? (Egerton bows.) None of your bowing and sighing, Sir, give me an
immediate answer.


Egert. (With a stifled filial resentment.) Sir, I own I am not used to levees;
nor do I know how to dispose of myself, or what to say or do in such a station.


Sir Pert. (With a proud, angry resentment.) Zounds, Sir, do you not see, what
others do gentle and simple; temporal and spiritual; Lords, Members, Judges,
Generals, and Bishops, aw crouding, burstling, pushing foremost until, intul
the middle of the circle, and there waiting, watching, and striving to catch a
luock or a smile fra the great Mon -- which they meet with an amicable
risibility of aspect, a modest cadence of body, and a conciliating cooperation
of the whole mon, which expresses an officious promptitude for his service, and
indicates, that they luock upon themselves as the suppliant appendage of his
power, and the inlisted Swiss of his political fortune. -- This, Sir, is what
you ought to do -- and this, Sir, is what I never once omitted for these five
and thirty years -- let wha would be minister.


Egert. (Aside.) Contemptible!


Sir Pert. What is that ye mutter, Sir?


Egert. Only a slight reflection, Sir, not relative to you.


Sir Pert. Sir, your absenting yourself from the levee at this juncture, is
suspeecious; it is luocked upon as a kind of disaffection, and aw your country
men are highly offended with your conduct, for, Sir, they do not look upon you
as a friend, or a well-wisher to Scotland, or to Scotchmen.


Egert. (With a quick warmth.) Then, Sir, they wrong me, I assure you; but
pray, Sir, in what particular can I be charged, either with coldness, or
offense to my country!


Sir Pert. Why, Sir, ever since your mother's uncle (Sir Stanly Egerton) left
you this three thousand pounds a year, and that you have, in compliance with
his will, taken up the name of Egerton, they think you are growing proud, that
you have estranged yourself fra the Mac Sycophants -- have associated with your
mother's family -- with the opposeetion, and with those who do not wish weel to
Scotland -- besides, Sir, in a conversation the other day after dinner, at your
cousin Campbell M'Kenzie's, before a whole table full of your ayn relations,
did you not publicly wish a total extinguishment of aw party, and of aw
national distinctions whatever relative to the three kingdoms. (With great
anger.) And was that a prudent wish before so many of your ain countrymen, and
be damned to you? Or was it a filial language to hold before me?


Egert. Sir, with your pardon, I cannot think it unfilial or imprudent; (with a
most patriotic warmth) I own, I do wish, most ardently wish, for a total
extinction of all parties; particularly, that those of English, Irish, and
Scotch, might never more be brought into contest or competition, unless like
loving brothers, in general emulation for one common cause.


Sir Pert. How, Sir, do you persist? What would you banish aw party and
distinction between English, Irish, and your ain countrymen?


Egert. (With great dignity of spirit) I would, Sir.


Sir Pert. Then damn ye, Sir, ye are nai true Scot! -- Ay, Sir, you may luock
as angry as you wuol -- but again, I say -- ye are nai true Scot!


Egert. Your pardon, Sir, I think he is the true Scot, and the true citizen;
who wishes equal justice to the merit and demerit of every subject of Great
Britain, amongst whom, I know but of two distinctions.


Sir Pert. Weel, Sir, and what are those? What are those?


Egert. The knave, and the honest man.


Sir Pert. Pshaw! ridiculous -- nonsense! -- stuff! -- all idle hacknied
opposition, cant, and nonsense.


Egert. And, he, Sir, who makes any other, be him of the North, or of the
South, of the East, or of the West, in place, or out of place; is an enemy to
the whole, and to the virtues of humanity!


Sir Pert. Ay, Sir, this is your brother's impudent doctrine -- for the which I
have banished him for ever fra my presence, my heart, and my fortune. -- Sir, I
will have nai Son of mine, because truly he has been educated in an English
seminary, presume (under the mask of public candor) to speak against his native
land, or my principles, Sir -- Scotsmen -- Scotsmen -- Sir, wherever they meet
throughout the globe should unite and stick together, as it were in a
poleetical phalanx.


Egert. That is a severe judgment, Sir, and according to my observation, and
indeed my frequent experience, consistent neither with truth, nor the
indiscriminate affection of impartial nature.


Sir Pert. How, Sir, not consistent with truth?


Egert. Not in my opinion, Sir, for I, who am a Scotchman as well as you, have
met with as warm friendships, and as many too, out of Scotland, as ever I met
with in it.


Sir Pert. Sir, I do not believe you! -- I do not believe you! -- But, Sir, you
have a saucy, lurking prejudice against your ain country, you hate it -- yes,
your mother, her family, and your brother, Sir, have aw the same disaffected
rankling, and by that, and their politics together, they will be the ruin of
you, themselves, and aw' who connect with them, however, nai mair of that now,
I weell talk at large with ye aboot that business anon -- In the mean time,
Sir, notwithstanding your contempt of my advice, and your disobedience till my
commands, I will convince you of my paternal attention till your welfare, by my
management with this voluptuary -- this Lord Lumbercourt, whose daughter you
are to marry -- ye ken, Sir, that the fellow has been my patron these three and
tharty years.


Egert. True, Sir.


Sir Pert. Vary weel -- and now, Sir, you see by his prodigality, he is become
my dependant, and accordingly, I have made my bargain with him. The dee'l a
baubee he has in the world, but what comes through these clutches; for his whole
estate, which has three impleecit boroughs on it, mark -- is now in my custody
at nurse; the which estate, on my paying off his debts, and allowing him a
life-rent of seven thousand pounds per annum, is to be made over till me for my
life; and at my death it is to descend till ye, and your issue. -- The peerage
of Lumbercourt, ye ken, will follow of course. -- So, Sir, ye see by this
marriage there are three impleecit boroughs, the whole patrimoney of
Lumbercourt, and a peerage at one slap -- Why it is a stroke -- a hit -- a hit
-- Zounds, Sir, a man may live a century and not make sic another hit again.


Egert. It is a very advantageous bargain, no doubt, Sir -- But what will my
Lord's family say to it?


Sir Pert. Why, man, he cares not if his family were aw at the dee'l, so that
his luxury be but gratified. -- Only let him have a race horse till feed his
vanity, his polite blacklegs to advise him in his matches on the turf, at
cards, and at tenis, and his harridan till drink drams we him, and in her
drunken hysterics to scrat his face and burn his periwig, or let him have a
dozen of his dependants, and half a dozen of his Swiss borough voters, sit up
all night drinking bumpers of success to the opposition -- and double bumpers
of destruction to the ministry; and then, Sir, the fellow has aw that he wants,
and aw that he wishes in this world or the next.


Enter Tomlins. Tom. Lady Rodolpha is come, Sir.


Sir Pert. And my Lord?


Tom. Sir, he is about a mile or two behind, the servants say.


Sir Pert. Let me know the instant he arrives.


Tom. I shall, Sir. Exit.


Sir Pert. Step ye oot, Charles, and receive Lady Rodolpha -- and I desire,
Sir, that you wool treat her with as much respact and gallantry ass possible;
for my Lord has hinted that ye have been a little remiss ass a lover. -- So go,
go, and receive her with warmth and rapture.


Egert. I shall, Sir.


Sir Pert. Odzucks, Charles, you should administer a torrent of adu'ation to
her; for woman, Sir, never thinks a man loves her till he has made an idiot of
her understanding by flattery -- for flattery, Sir, is the prime bliss of the
sex -- the nectar and ambrosia of their vanity, so that you can never give them
too much of it -- go, go, a good lad, and mind your flattery. [Exit Egerton.]
-- Ha! I must keep a tight hand upon this fellow, I see -- ah! I am frightened
out of my wits lest his mother's family should seduce him to the opposition
party, which would totally ruin my whole scheme, and break my heart -- a fine
time a day, indeed, for a blockhead till turn patriot -- when the character is
exploded -- marked -- proscribed, why the common people, the very vulgar have
found out the jest, and laugh at a patriot now a days, just as they do at a
magician, a conjurer, or any other impostor in society.


Enter Tomlins and Lord Lumbercourt. Tom. Lord Lumbercourt. Exit Tomlins.


L. Lum. Sir Pertinax, I kiss your hand.


Sir Pert. ( Bows very low.) Your Lordship's most devoted -- I rejoice to see
you.


L. Lum. Why you stole a march on me this morning -- gave me the slip Mac, though
I never wanted your assistance more in my life, I thought you would have called
upon me.


Sir Pert. My dear Lord I beg ten millions of pardons for leaving the town
before you; but you ken that your Lordship at dinner yesterday positively
settled it, that we should meet this morning at the levee.


L. Lum. That I acknowledge, Mac -- I did promise to be there, I own.


Sir Pert. You did, indeed, and accordingly I was at the levee, and waited
there till every mortal was gone -- and seeing you did not come, I concluded
that your Lordship was gone before, and away I pelted hither, as I thought
after ye.


L. Lum. Why, to confess the truth, my dear Mac -- that old sinner, Lord
Freakish, General Jolly, Sir Anthony Soker, and two or three more of that set,
laid hold of me last night at the opera; and as the General says, I believe by
the intelligence of my head this morning; that we drank deep ere we departed --
ha! ha! ha!


Sir Pert. Ha! ha! ha! Nay, if you were with that party, my Lord, I don't
wonder at not seeing your Lordship at the levee.


L. Lum. The truth is, Sir Pertinax, my fellow let me sleep too long for the
levee; but I wish I had seen you before you left town, I wanted you dreadfully.


Sir Pert. I am heartily sorry then I was not in the way, but on what account
my Lord did you want me?


L Lum. Ha! ha! ha! a cursed awkard affair -- and ha! ha! ha! yet, I cannot
help laughing at it neither -- though it vexed me confoundedly.


Sir Pert. Vexed you my Lord! Zounds, I wish I had been with you -- but for
Heaven's sake, my Lord, what was it that could possibly vex your Lordship?


L. Lum. Why that impudent teazing, dunning rascal, Mahogany, my upholsterer --
you know the fellow.


Sir Pert. Perfectly, my Lord.


L. Lum. This impudent scoundrel has sued me up to some kind of a something or
other in the law, which I think they call -- an execution.


Sir Pert. The rascal!


L. Lum. Upon which, Sir, the fellow, by way of asking pardon, had the modesty
of waiting upon me two or three days ago, to inform my honor, ha! ha! ha! as
he was pleased to dignify me, that the execution was now ready to put in force
against my honor, but that out of respect to my honor, as he had taken a
great deal of my honors money, he would not suffer his Lawyer to serve it upon
my honor, till he had first informed my honor, because he was not willing to
affront my honor -- ha! ha! ha! -- a son of a whore.


Sir Pert. I never hard of so impudent a dog!


L Lum. Now my dear Mac -- ha! ha! ha! as the scoundrel's apology was so very
satisfactory -- and his information so very agreeable, I told him that in
honor, I thought that my honor, could not do less than to order his honor to
be paid immediately.


Sir Pert. Vary weel -- vary weel -- ye were as complaisant as the scoundrel
till the full, I think my Lord.


L. Lum. You shall hear -- you shall hear Mac -- So, Sir, with great composure,
seeing a smart oaken cudgel, that stood very handily in a corner of my dressing
room, I ordered two of my fellows to hold the rascal, and another to take the
cudgel, and return the scoundrel's civility with a good drubbing, as long as
the stick lasted.


Sir Pert. Ha! ha! ha! admirable, -- ass good a stroke of humor and fun as
ever I heard of -- And did they drub him, my Lord?


L. Lum. O! most liberally -- ha! ha! ha! -- most liberally, Sir -- and there I
thought the affair would have rested, till I should think proper to pay the
scoundrel; but this morning, Sir, just as I was stepping into my chaise -- my
servants all about me, a fellow, called a Tip staff, stepped up to us, and with a
very modest address, requested the favor of my footmen, who thrashed the
upholsterer, and the two that held him, to go along with him, upon a little
business -- to my Lord Chief Justice.


Sir Pert. The Devil!


L. Lum. And at the very same instant, I in my turn, was accosted by two very
civil scoundrels, who, with a most insolent politeness, begged my pardon, and
informed me, that I must not go into my own chaise.


Sir Pert. How, my Lord, not into your ain carriage?


L. Lum. No, Sir, not into my own chaise, for that they, by order of the
sheriff, must seize it at the suit of a gentleman, one Mr. Mahogony, an
upholsterer.


Sir Pert. An impudent villian!


L. Lum. It is all true, I assure you, so you see my dear Mac, what a damned
country this is to live in! where noblemen are obliged to pay their debts, just
like merchants, cobblers, peasants, or mechanic; -- is not that a damned scandal
to the nation, Mac?


Sir Pert. Sir, there is not a nation in the whole world besides, has such a
grievance to complain of.


L. Lum. But, Sir, what is worse than all that, the scoundrel has seized upon
the house too, that I furnished for the girl I took from the opera.


Sir Pert. I never heard of sic an a scoundrel!


L. Lum. Ay, but what concerns me most, my dear Mac, is I am afraid that the
villian will send down to New Market, and seize my string of horses.


Sir Pert. Your string of horses! Zounds! we must prevent that at all events --
that would be such a disgrace -- I will dispatch an express to town directly,
to put a stop till the scoundrel's proceedings.


L. Lum. Prithee do, my dear Sir Pertinax.


Sir Pert. O! it shall be done, my Lord.


L. Lum. Thou art an honest fellow, upon honor.


Sir Pert. O! my Lord, it is my duty to oblige your Lordship, to the utmost
stretch of my abeelity.


Enter Tomlins. Tom. Colonel Toper, presents his compliments to you, Sir, and
having no family down with him in the country, he, and Captain Hardbottle, if
not inconvenient, will do themselves the honor of taking a family dinner with
you.


Sir Pert. They are two of our militia officers -- does your Lordship know them?


L. Lum. By sight only.


Sir Pert. I am afraid, my Lord, they will interrupt our business.


L. Lum. Not at all -- I should like to be acquainted with Toper; they say he is
a damned jolly fellow.


Sir Pert. O, devilish jolly! -- devilish jolly! -- he and the Captain are two
of the hardest drinkers in the country.


L. Lum. So I have heard; let us have them by all means, Mac -- they will
enliven the scene. How far are they from you?


Sir Pert. Just across the meadows -- not half a mile my Lord; a step, a step.


L. Lum. O, let us have the jolly dogs, by all means.


Sir Pert. My compliments -- I shall be proud of their company. -- [Exit
Tomlins.] -- Guif you please, my Lord, we will gang, and chat a bit with the
women; I have not seen Lady Rodolpha since she returned fra Bath, I long to
have a leetle news fra her aboot the company there.


L. Lum. O! she will give you an account of them, I warrant you. (Loud laugh
within)


Lady Rodolpha, (within) -- Ha! ha! ha! -- Well, I vow cousin Egerton, you have
a vast deal of shrewd humor.


L. Lum. Here the hair brain comes -- it must be her by the noise.


L. Rodol (within) Allons, good folks -- follow me -- fans ceremony! --


Enter Lady Rodolpha, Lady Mac Sycophant, Egerton, and Sidney. L. Rodol.
(Running up to Sir Pert.) Sir Pertinax -- your most devoted -- most obsequious,
and most obedient vassal. (Curtseys very low.)


Sir Pert. Lady Rodolpha -- done till the graund, my congratulations, duty, and
affection, are at your devotion: and I should rejoice till kiss your Ladyship's
footsteps. (Bows ridiculously low.)


L. Rodol. O, Sir Pertinax, your humility is most sublimely complaisant -- at
preesent -- unanswerable; -- but, Sir, I shall instantly study to return it
fasty fold.

(Curtseys very low)
Sir Pert. Your Ladyship does me a singular hohour -- weel, madam -- ha! you
luock gaily -- weel, and how, how is your Ladyship, after your jaunt till the
Bath?


L. Rodol. Never better, Sir Pertinax! as weel as youth, health, riotous
spirits, and a careless, happy heart can make me.


Sir Pert. I am mighty glad till hear it, my Lady.


L. Lum. Ay, ay, Rodolpha is always in spirits, Sir Pertinax -- vive la
bagatelle -- is the happy philosophy of our family -- ha! Rodolpha -- ha!


L. Rodol. Traith is it my Lord; and upon honor, I am determined it never
shall be changed by my consent, ha! ha! ha! -- weel, I vow, vive la bagattelle,
would be a most brilliant motto for the chariot of a belle of fashion -- what
say you till my fancy, Lady Mac Sycophant?


L. Mac. It would have novelty at least to recommend it, Madam.


L. Rodol. Which of aw chairms! is the most delightful that can accompany wit,
taste, love, or friendship: for novelty I take to be the true je ne scais-quoi
of all worldly bliss. -- Cousin Egerton, should not you wish to have a wife,
with vive la bagatelle, upon her chariot?


Egert. O, certainly, Madam.


L. Rodol. Yes, I think it would be new quite out of the common, and singularly
elegant.


Egert. Indisputably so, Madam -- for as a motto is a word to the wise, or
rather a broad hint to the whole world, of a persons taste and principles --
vive la bagatelle! would be most expressive, at first sight, of your Ladyship's
mental character.


L. Rodol. O! Master Egerton! you touch my very heart we your approbation! --
ha! ha! ha! yes -- vive la bagatelle, is the very spirit of my intention, the
instant I commence bride! -- Well, I Am immensely proud that my fancy has the
approbation of so sound an understanding, and so polished a taste -- ass that
of all -- the accomplished Mr Egerton. (Curtseys very low.)


Egert. O! Heavens, madam, your Ladyship's panegyric is most superlatively
complaisant -- to answer it, Madam, would require the ascendancy of the highest
heaven of invention, and of its brightest sublimity


L. Rodol. Weel, I vow Master Egerton, you have a most astonishing genius in
the complimentary style; not to be decyphered by the present state of my
inexperienced capacity! -- but, Sir, in order to improve and elevate my
intellects, I am determined in a few months to commence a long voyage of air
balloon philosophy, on purpose to learn the complimentary sublime, in imitation
of Master Egerton, that great luminary of wit, humor, and all convivial
politeness!


Lord Lum. Hey day, hey day! what the devil are ye both about, with your,
highest heavens, your air balloons, your sublimity, and your nonsensical
jargon: -- You seem to me, to be playing at riddle my riddle my ree -- tell me
what my nonsense shall be; it is all downright jargon, upon honor, I do not
understand a single thought of all you have both uttered.


Sir Pert. But I do -- I do -- and they will soon understand yan another -- But,
Lady Rodolpha, I wanted till ask your Ladyship some questions aboot the company
at Bath -- they say ye had aw the world there.


L. Rodol. O yes, there was a very great mob, indeed -- but vary little
company: -- aw canaille -- exept our ain party -- the place was quite crooded
with your little purse prood mechanics, an odd kind of queer luocking animals,
that hai started intul until fortune, fra lottery tickets, rich prizes at sea,
gambling at Changealley, and sic caprices of fortune -- and awa the aw crood
till the Bath.


Sir Pert. Ha! ha! admirable! what a fund of entertainment!


L. Rodol. O, superlative, and inexhaustible, Sir Pertinax, ha! ha! ha! --
Madam, we haud in yane group, a Peer, and a Sharper -- a Duchess, and a
pinmaker's Wife -- a boarding school Miss, and her Grandmother -- a fat Parson
-- a lean General -- and a yellow Admiral -- ha! ha! ha! aw speaking together,
and bawling, and wrangling, and jangling, and fretting, and fuming, in fierce
contention, ass if the ^ame and fortune, of aw the parties were to be issue of
the conflict.


Sir Pert. Ha! ha! ha! excellent, and pray, Madam, what was the object of their
fierce contention?


L. Rodol. O! a vary important one I assure you! -- of no less consequence,
Madam, than how an odd trick at whist was lost -- or might have been saved --
ha! ha! ha!


Omnes. Ha! ha! ha!


L Mac. Ridiculous!


L Lum. Ha! ha! ha! My dear Rodolpha, I have seen that very conflict a thousand
times.


Sir Pert. And so have I, upon my honor, my Lord.


L. Rodol. In another party, Sir Pertinax, ha! ha! ha! we had what was called
the Cabinet Council! which was composed of a Duke, and a Haberdasher; a red hot
Patriot, and a sneering Courtier; a discarded Statesman, and his scribbling
Chaplain; -- we a busy, brawling, muckle-heeded prerogative Lawyer -- aw of
whom were every minute ready to gang together by the lugs, aboot the in, and
the oot meenistry. -- Ha! ha! ha! --


Sir Pert. Ha! ha! ha! -- Weel, that is a droll mo ley cabinet, I vow, vary
whimsical upon my honor -- but they are aw great poleeticions at Bath, and
settle a meenistry there with ass much ease ass they do a tune for a country
dance!


L. Rodol Then, Sir Pertinax -- in a retired part of the room -- snug in a bye
corner -- in close conference -- we haud a Jew, and a Beeshop.


Sir Pert. A Jew and Beeshop -- ha! ha! a devilish good connection, that -- and
pray, my Lady, what were they aboot?


L. Rodol. Why, Sir, the Beeshop was striving to convert the Jew -- while the
Jew, by intervals, was slyly picking up intelligence fra the Beeshop, aboot the
change in the meenistry, in hopes of making a stroke in the stocks.


Omnes Ha! ha! ha!


Sir Pert. Admirable! admirable! I honor the smouse -- ha! ha! ha! it was
deevilish clever -- the Jew distilling the Beeshop's brains


L. Lum. Yes, yes, the fellow kept a sharp look out; it was a fair trial of
skill on both sides, Mr. Egerton.


Egert. True, my Lord, but the Jew seems to be in the fairest way to succeed.


L. Lum. O all to nothing, Sir, ha! ha! ha! -- Well, child, I like your Jew and
your Bishop much. It is devilish clever, let us have the rest of the history,
pray my dear.


L. Rodol. Good traith, my Lord, the sum total is, that there we aw daunced,
and wrangled, and flattered, and slandered, and gambled, and cheated, and
mingled, and jumbled, and walloped together, till my very bowels went crack
again with the woolley wambles.


Omnes. Ha! ha! ha!


L. Lum. Ha! ha! ha! -- Well, you are a droll girl, Rodolpha, and upon honor
-- ha! ha! ha! you have given us as whimsical a sketch as ever was hit off.


Sir Pert. A yes, my Lord, it is an excellent peecture of the odedities that
one meets with at Bath.


L. Lum. Why yes, I think there is some fancy in it, Egerton


Egert. Very characteristic, indeed, my Lord.


L. Lum. What say you, Mr. Sidney? Don't you think there is something sprightly
in her dashing Caledonian genius?


Sid. Upon my word, my Lord, the Lady has made me see the whole assembly in
distinct colors.


L. Lum. Ho! ho! ho! you indelicate creature -- why, my dear Rodolpha, ha! ha!
ha! do you know what you are talking about?


L. Rodol. Weel, weel, my Lord, guin you lough till you burst, the fact is
still true, now in Edinburgh, my Lady, in Edinburgh we ha nai sic pinch-gut
doings, for their good traith, we always hai a good comfortable dish of
cutlets, or collops, or a nice warm, savorey haggis, we a good swag of whasky
punch till recruit our speerits, aufter our dancing and swatting.


Omnes. Ha! ha! ha!


Sir Pert. Ay, that is much wholsomer, Lady Rodolpha, then aw their slips and
slaps here, i the sooth.


L. Lum. Ha! ha! ha! -- Well, my dear Rodolpha, you are a droll girl, upon
honor, and very entertaining, I vow -- but, my dear child, a little too much
upon the dancing and sweating, and the woolley wambles.


Omnes. Ha! ha! ha!


Enter Tomlins. Tom Colonel Toper, and Captain Hardbottle, are come. Sir.


Sir Pert. O, vary weel, dinner immediately.


Tom. It is ready, Sir. Exit Tomlins.


Sir Pert. My Lord, we attend your Lordship.


L Lum. Lady Mac -- your Ladyship's hand, if you please. ( Leads her out.)


Sir Pert. Lady Rodolpha, here is a sighing arcadian swain, that, I believe,
has a hand at your Ladyship's devotion.


L. Rodol. And I, Sir Pertinax, hai yean at his. -- There, Sir, ( gives her
hand to Egerton.) as to hearts ye ken cousin, they are no brought into the
account of human dealings now a days.


Egert. O, madam, they are mere temporary baubles, especially in courtship, and
no more to be depended on, than the weather, or a lottery ticket.


L. Rodol. Ha! ha! ha! 'twa excellent similies I vow, Mr. Egerton -- excellent,
for they illustrate the vagaries and inconstancy of my dissipated heart, ass
exactly ass if ye had meant till describe it. -- ( Egerton leads her off.)


Sir Pert. Ha! ha! ha! what a vast fund of speerits and guid-humour she has,
Master Sidney.


Sid A great fund, indeed, Sir Pertinax.


Sir Pert. Come let us till dinner -- ha, by this time tomorrow, Master
Sidney, I hope we shall have every thing ready for ye to put the last hand to
the happiness of your friend and pupil -- and then, Sir, my cares will be over
for this life -- for as till my other son, Sandy, I expect, nai good of him,
nor should I grieve were I to see him in his coffin. -- But this match -- O! it
will make me the happiest of aw human beings!


Exeunt. ACT III.
Enter Sir Pertinax and Egerton. Sir Pert. ZOONDS, Sir, I will not hear a word
aboot it. -- I insist upon it ye were wrong -- ye shai'd hai paid your court
till my Lord, and not hai scrupled swallowing a bumper, or two, or twanty, till
oblige him.


Egert. Sir. I did drink his toast in a bumper.


Sir Pert. Yas, ye did; but how? how? -- Just ass a bairn takes pheesyc, we
aversion, and wry faces, whach my Lord observed. -- Then to mend the maiter,
the moment that he and the Colonel get intill a drunken dispute aboot religion,
ye slily slunged awa.


Egert I thought, Sir, it was time to go, when my Lord insisted upon half-pint
bumpers.


Sir Pert. That was not levelled at you; but at the Colonel, in order till try
his bottom -- but they all agreed that ye and I should drink out of small
glasses.


Egert. But, Sir, I beg pardon -- I did not choose to drink any more.


Sir Pert. But zoonds, Sir! I tell you there was a necessity for your drinking
more.


Egert. A necessity! in what respect, Sir?


Sir Pert. Why, Sir, I have a certain point to carry, independent of the
Lawyers, with my Lord, in this agreement of your marriage, aboot which I am
afraid we shall hai a warm squabble, and therefore I wanted your assistance in
it.


Egert. But how, Sir, could my drinking contribute to assist you in your
squabble?


Sir Pert. Yas, Sir, it would hai contributed, and greatly hai contributed till
assist me.


Egert How so, Sir?


Sir Pert. Nai, Sir, it might hai prevented the squabble entirely, for as my
Lord is prood of ye for a son-in law, and of your little French songs, your
stories, about the Popes, and Cardinals, and their mistresses, and your
bon-mots, when ye are in the humor, and guin you had but staid and been a
leetle jolly, and drank half a score bumpers we him, till he got a little
tipsy, I am sure when we had him i that mood, we might ha settled the point
among ourselves before the Lawyers come; but n^o, Sir, I donna ken what will be
the consequence.


Egert. But, when a man is intoxicated, would that have been a seasonable time
to settle business, Sir?


Sir Pert. The most seasonable -- the most seasonable -- for, Sir, when my Lord
is in his cups, his suspeecion is asleep, and his heart is aw jolity, seen, and
good fellowship -- and, Sir, can there be a happier moment than that for a
bargain, or till settle a dispute we a friend? What is that you shrug your
shouders at, Sir? -- and turn up your eyes to heaven, like a duck in thunder!


Egert. At my own ignorance, Sir -- for I understand neither the philosophy,
nor the morality of your doctrine.


Sir Pert. I know you do not, Sir -- and what is worse, ye never weell
understand it, as long ass ye proceed. -- In yean word, Chairles, I hai often
tauld ye, and again I tell ye, yeance for aw, that the maneuvers of
pleeabeelity are as necessary to rise in the world, ass wrangling and logical
sublilty at the bar -- why, you see, Sir, I hai acquired a noble fortune -- a
princely fortune -- and how do you think I raised it?


Egert. Doubtless, Sir, by your abilities.


Sir Pert. Dootless, Sir, ye are a blockhead -- Nae, Sir, I Will tell you how I
raised it, Sir -- I raised it by boowing -- by boowing, Sir. -- I never in my
life could stand straight in the presence of a great man; but was aw ways
booing, and booing, and booing -- ass -- ass -- if it were by instinct.


Egert. How do you mean by instinct, Sir?


Sir Pert. How do I mean by instinct, why, Sir, I mean by -- by -- by the
instinct of interest, Sir, which is the universal instinct of mankind, Sir; it
is wonderful to think what a cordial, what an amicable, nay, what an infaleeble
influence, booing has upon the pride and vanity of human nature -- Chairles,
answer me sincerely, hai ye a mind till be convinced of the force of my
doctrine, by example and demonstration?


Egert. Certainly, Sir.


Sir Pert. Then, Sir, as the greatest favor I can confer upon you, I will gi
ye a short sketch of the stages of my bowing, ass an excitement, and a landmark
for ye till bow by, and ass an infaleeable nostrum for a man of the world, till
thrive in the world.


Egert. Sir, I shall be proud to profit by your experience.


Sir Pert. Vary weel, Sir -- sit ye down then (both sit) and now, Sir, you must
recall till your thoughts, that your Grandfather was a man whose penurious
income of Captain's half-pay, was the sum total of his fortune; and, Sir, aw my
proveesion fra him, was a medium of Latin, an expartness at areethmatic, and a
short system of worldly counsel, the chief ingredients of whach were, a
persevering industry -- a reegid economy -- a smooth tongue -- a pliabeelity
of temper -- and a constant attention till make every great man well pleased we
himself.


Egert. Very prudent conduct, Sir.


Sir Pert. Therefore, Sir, I lay it before ye. -- Now, Sir, wi these materials,
I set out a rough, rawboned strippling fra the North, till try my fortune we
them here in the sooth -- and my first step intull the world, was a beggarly
clerkship in Sawney Gordon's coontinghouse, here in the city of London, whach
you will say afforded but a barren sort of a prospect.


Egert. It was not a very fertile one, indeed, Sir.


Sir Pert. The reverse -- the reverse -- weel, Sir, seeing my sell in this
unprofitable seetuation, I reflacted deeply. I cast aboot my thoughts, and
concluded that a matrimonial adventure, prudently conducted, would be the
readiest gate I could gang for the bettering of my condition, and accordingly I
set aboot it, now, Sir, in this pursuit -- beauty -- beauty -- ah I beauty
often struck mine even, and played aboot my heart -- and fluttered, and beat,
and knocked -- and knocked -- but the deel an entrance I ever let it get -- for
I observed, that beauty is generally a prood, vain, saucy, expensive sort of a
commodity.


Egert. Very justly observed, Sir.


Sir Pert. And therefore I left it to the prodigals and coxcombs, that could
afford till pay for it, and its stead, Sir, mark -- I luock'd oot for an
ancient, well jointered, superanuated Dowager -- a consumptive, toothless,
ptisical, wealthy widow -- or a shreeveled, cadaverous, neglected piece of
deformity, in the shape of an eezard, or an appersiand -- or in short, any
thing -- any thing that had the siller -- the siller -- for that was the North
star of my affection; do you take me, Sir -- was nai that right?


Egert. O doubtless, doubtless, Sir.


Sir Pert. Now, Sir, where do ye think I ganged to luock for this woman we the
siller? Nai till court -- nai till play houses, nor assemblies -- nai, Sir, I
ganged till the kirk -- till the anabaptist, eendependant, bradleonian,
muckletonian meetings -- till the morning and evening service of churches and
chapples of ease -- and till the midnight, melting, conciliating love feasts of
the methodists -- and there, at last, Sir, I fell upon an old, rich, sower,
slighted, antiquated, musty maiden. She was as tall as a grenadier, and so thin
that she luocked ha! ha! ha! she luocked -- just like a skeleton in a
surgeons's glass-case -- Now, Sir, this meeserable object, was releegiously
angry wi herself, and aw the world -- and had nai comfort but in a
supernatural, vicious, and enthusiastic delirums; ha! ha! ha! Sir, she was mad
-- ass mad as a bedlamite.


Egert. Not impossible, Sir -- there are numbers of poor creatures in the same
condition.


Sir Pert. O numbers, numbers -- now, Sir, this cracked creature used to pray,
and sing, and sigh, and groan, and weep, and wail, and gnash her teeth
constantly, morning and evening, at the Tabernacle, in Moor-fields, and as soon
as I found she had the siller, aha! -- in good truth, I plumpt me done upon my
knees, close by her, cheek by jole, and praid, and sighed, and groaned, and
gnashed my teeth, as vehemently ass she could do for the life of her -- ay, and
turned up the whites of mine even, till the strings awmost cracked again -- Weel,
Sir, I watched her motions -- handed her till her chair -- waited on her home
-- got most releegiously intimate we her -- in a week married her -- in a
fortnight buried her -- in a month touched the siller -- and we a deep suit of
mourning, a melancholy port, a sorrowful veesage, and a joyful heart, I began
the world again -- and this, Sir, was the first effectual boow I ever made,
till the vanity of human nature. -- Now, Sir, do you understand this doctrine?


Egert. Perfectly well, Sir.


Sir Pert. Ay, boot was it not right? Was it not ingenious, and weel hit off?


Egert. Extremely well, Sir.


Sir Pert. My next boow, Sir, was till your ain meether, whom I ran away wi fra
the boarding school -- by the interest of whose family, I got a good smart
place in the Treasury -- and, Sir, my vary next step was in till Parliament --
the whach I entered we as ardent, and ass determined an ambeetion ass ever
agitated the heart of Ceaser himself! -- and then, Sir, I changed my character
entirely. -- Sir, I bowed, and watched, and harkened, and lurked for
intilligence, and ran aboot backwards and forwards, and attended, and dangled
upon the then great Mon, till I got intill the very boowels of his confeedence;
and then, Sir, I wriggled, and wriggled, and wrought, and wriggled till I
wriggled myself among the vary thick of them, till I got my snack of the
clothing, the foraging, the contracts, the lottery teeckets, and aw the
poleetical bonusses -- till at length, Sir I became a much wealthier Mon, than
one half of the golden calves I had been so long a boowing to -- (he rises,
Egerton rises too.) And was not that boowing to some purpose, Sir? -- Ha!


Egert. It was indeed, Sir.


Sir Pert. But are you convinced of the good effects, and of the uteelity of
boowing?


Egert. Thoroughly, Sir, thoroughly.


Sir Pert. Sir, it is infaleeble -- but, Chairles, ah! while I was thus
boowing, and wriggling, and making a princely fortune -- ah! I met many heart
sores, and disappointments, frai the want of leeterature, ailoquence, and other
popular abeelities Sir, guin I could hai both spoken in the house, I should hai
done ^he deed in half the time -- boot the eenstant I opened my mouth there,
they aw fell a laughing at me -- aw whach deefeeciencies. Sir, I determined at
any expense till hai supplied by the polished education of a Son, who, I hoped,
would yean day, raise the hoouse of Mac Sycophant till the highest pannicle of
meeneesterial ambeetion. -- This, Sir, is my plan, I hai done my part of it,
nature has done hers -- Ye are ailoquent, ye are popular -- aw parties like ye
-- and noow, Sir* it only remains for ye to be directed -- completion follows.


Egert. Your liberality, Sir, in my education, and the judicious choice you
made of the worthy Gentleman, to whose virtues and abilities you entrusted me,
are obligations I shall ever remember, with the deepest filial gratitude.


Sir Pert. Vary weel, Sir -- vary weel -- but, Chairles, hai ye haid any
conversation yet we Lady Rodolpha, aboot the day of your marriage, your
laveries, your equeepage, or your establishment?


Egert. Not yet, Sir.


Sir Pert. Pah! why, there again noow -- ye are wrong, vary wrong.


Egert. Sir, we have not had an opportunity.


Sir Pert. Why, Chairles, ye are very tardy in this business.

(Lord Lumbercourt sings without, flushed with wine.) What have we with day to
do --
Sons of care 'twas made for you.

Sir Pert. O! here comes my Lord.


L. Lumb. (Sings without.) "Sons of care 'twas made for you."


Enter Lord Lumbercourt, drinking a cup of Coffee, Tomlins waiting with a
Salver. L Lumb. "Sons of care 'twas made for you." -- Very good coffee indeed,
Mr. Tomlins. -- Here, Mr. Tomlins. (Gives the cup)


Tom. Will your Lordship please to have another dish?


L. Lumb. No, thank ye, Mr. Tomlins. -- [Exit Tomlins.] -- Well, my host of
Scotch pints, we have had warm work.


Sir Pert. Yes, you pushed the bottle aboot my Lord wi the joy and veegar of a
bacchanal.


L. Lumb. That I did, my dear Mac -- no loss of time with me -- I have but
three motions old boy -- charge -- toast -- fire* and off we go -- ha! ha! ha!
that is my exercise.


Sir Pert. And fine warm exercise it is, my Lord, especially with the half pint
bumpers.


L. Lumb. Zounds! it does execution point blank. Ay, ay, none of your pimping
acorn glasses for me, but your manly, old English half pint bumpers my dear. --
Zounds! Sir, they try a fellow's stamina at once -- But where is Egerton?


Sir Pert. Just at hand, my Lord -- there he stands, luocking at your
Lordship's picture.


L. Lumb. My dear Egerton! --


Egert. Your Lordship's most obedient.


L. Lumb. I beg pardon, I did not see you -- I am sorry you left us so soon
after dinner -- had you staid, you would have been highly entertained, I have
made such examples of the Commissioner, the Captain, and the Colonel.


Egert. So I understand, my Lord.


L. Lumb. But, Egerton, I have slipped from company for a few moments on purpose
to have a little chat with you. Rodolpha tells me, she fancies there is a kind
of demur on your side, about your marriage with her.


Sir Pert. A demur; how so my Lord?


L. Lumb. Why, as I was drinking my coffee with the women just now, I desired
they would fix the wedding night, and the etiquette of the ceremony upon which
the girl burst into a loud laugh telling me she supposed I was joking, for that
Mr. Egerton had never yet given a single glance or hint upon the subject.


Sir Pert. My Lord, I have just now been talking till him aboot his shyness
till the Lady.


Enter Tomlins. Tom. Counselor Plausible is come, Sir, and Sergeant Eitherside.


Sir Pert. Why then we can settle the business this very evening, my Lord.


L Lumb. As well as in seven years -- and to make the way as short as possible,
pray Master Tomlins, present your Master's compliments, and mine to Lady
Rodolpha, and let her Ladyship know we wish to speak with her directly. [Exit
Tomlins.] -- He shall attack her this instant, Sir Pertinax.


Sir Pert. Ay, this is doing business effectually, my Lord.


L. Lumb. O! we will pit them in a moment, Sir Pertinax. That will bring them
into the heat of the action at once, and save a deal of awkardness on both
sides. -- O! here your Dulcinea comes.


Enter Lady Rodolpha singing, a Music Book in her Hand. L. Rodol. I have been
learning this air of Constantia; I protest her touch on the harpsichord is
quite brilliant, and really her voice not amiss. -- Weel, Sir Pertinax, I
attend your commands, and yours my paternal Lord. -- (She curtseys very low,
and my Lord bows very low, and answers her in the same tone and manner.)


L. Lumb. Why then, my filial Lady, we are to inform you, that the commission
for your Ladyship, and this enamoured Cavalier, commanding you jointly and
separately to serve your country, In the honorable and forlorn hope of
matrimony, is to be signed this very evening.


L. Rodol. This evening, my Lord!


L. Lumb. This evening, my Lady -- come Sir Pertinax, let us leave them to
settle their liveries, wedding suits, carriages, and all their amorous equipage
for the nuptial camp.


Sir Pert. Ha! ha! ha! excellent, excellent -- well I vow, my Lord, ye are a
great officer, this is as good a manoeuver to bring on a rapid engagement ass
the ablest General of them aw could hai started.


L. Lumb. Ay, leave them together, they will soon come to a right understanding,
I warrant you, or the needle and the lodestone have lost their sympathy.


Exit L. Lumb. and Sir Pert. [Lady Rodolpha stands at that side of the stage
where Sir Pertinax and Lord Lumbercourt went off in amazement -- Egerton is at
the opposite side, who, after some anxious emotions, settles into a deep
reflection.] L. Rodol. (Aside) Why this is downright tyranny. It has quite
damped my speerits, and my betrothed yonder, seems planet struck too, I think.


Egert. (Aside) A whimsical situation mine.


L. Rodol. (Aside) Ha! ha! ha! methinks we luock like a couple of cautious
Generals, that are obliged till take the field, but neither of us seems willing
till come till action.


Egert. (Aside) I protest, I know not how to address her.


L. Rodol. He weel nai advance, I see -- what am I to do in this affair? good
traith, I weel even do as I suppose many brave heroes hai done before me, clap
a good face upon the matter, and so conceal an aching heart, under a swaggering
countenance (aside) (as she advances, she mocks and points at him, and smothers
a laugh.) Sir, as we hai, by the commands of our good fathers, a business of
some little consequence till transact, I hope you will excuse my taking the
liberty of my recommending -- a chair till you, for the repose of your body, in
the embarrassed deliberation of your perturbed spirit.


Egert. (Greatly embarrassed.) Madam, I beg your pardon (bands her a chair,
then one for himself) Please to sit, Madam. (They sit down with great ceremony,
she sits down first, he sits at a distance from her, silent some time, he
coughs, hems, and adjusts himself, she mimics him.)


L. Rodol (Aside) Aha, he is resolved not to come too near till me, I think.


Egert. (Aside) A pleasant interview this -- hem -- hem.


L. Rodol. (Aside) Hem, he will not open the congress I see -- then I weel
(very loud) come, Sir! -- when will you begin? --


Egert. (Greatly surprised) Begin! what, Madam?


L. Rodol. To make love till me.


Egert. Love, Madam!


L. Rodol. Ay, love, Sir! -- why you hai never said a word till me yet upon the
subject -- nor cast a single glance at me, nor heaved one tender sigh, nor even
secretly squeezed my loof. -- Now, Sir, though our fathers are so tyrannical, ass
to dispose of us without the consent of our hearts, yet you, Sir, I hope, hai
mair humaneity, than to think of marrying me, without admanistering some of
preleemeenaries usual on these occassions, if not till my understanding and
sentiments, yet till the vanity of my sex at least -- I hope you weel pay some
leetle treebute of ceremony, and adulation -- that, I think, I hai a right to
expect.


Egert. Madam, I own your reproach is just, I shall therefore no longer
disguise my sentiments, but fairly let you know my heart.


L. Rodol. (Starts up and runs to him.) Ah! ye are right, ye are right, cousin
-- honestly and affectionately right -- that is what I like of aw things in my
swain -- ay, ay, cousin, open your heart frankly, till me ass a true loover
should. -- But sit ye down -- I shall return your frankness and your passion --
Cousin, we aw melting tenderness equal to the amorous enthusiasim of an ancient
hereine.


Egert. Madam, if you will hear me.


L. Rodol. But remember ye must begin with farvency, and a most rapturous
vehemence, for ye are to consider, Cousin, that our match is nai till arise
frai the union of hearts, and a long decorum of ceremonious courtship; but is
instantly till start at yeance out of necesseety or mere acceedent. Ha! ha! ha!
-- like a match in an ancient Romance -- where ye ken, Cousin, the Knight and
the Damsel are mutually smitten and dying for each other, at first sight, of by
an amorous sympathy, before they exchange a single glance.


Egert. Dear Madam, you entirely mistake.


L. Rodol. And our saithers, ha! ha! ha! our faithers are to be the dark
mageecians that are till fascinate our hearts, and conjure us till gether
whether we weel or not.


Egert. Ridiculous!


L. Rodol. So, noow Cousin, wi the true romantic enthusiasm, ye are till
suppose me the Lady of the Enchanted Castle -- and ye -- ha! ha! ha! -- ye are
to be the Knight of the sorrowful countenance -- ha! ha! ha! -- and, upon
honor, you luock the character admirably -- ha! ha! ha!


Egert. Trifling creature!


L. Rodol. Come, Sir -- why do ye no begin to ravish me -- wi your valor, your
voows, your knight-errantry, and your amorours frenzy; nay, nay, Cousin, guide
ye do no begin at yeance, the Lady of the Enchanted Castle weel vanish in a
twinkling.


Egert. Lady Rodolpha, I know your talent for raillery well; but at present in
my case, there is a kind of cruelty in it.


L Rodol. Raillery! upon honor, Cousin, ye mistake me quite and clean -- I am
serious, very serious, ay, and have cause till be serious -- nay, I weel submit
my case even till yourself; (begins to whine) can any poor lossy be in a mair
lamentable condition than to be sent four hundred miles by the commands of a
positive Grandmaither, till marry a man who, I find, has nai mair affection for
me, than if I had been his wife these seven years.


Egert. Madam, I am extremely sorry --


L. Rodol. But it is vary weel, Cousin, vary weel -- (cries and sobs) -- I see
your unkindness and aversion plain enough, and, Sir, I must till you fairly, ye
are the ainly man that ever slighted my person, or that drew tears fra these
even -- but it is vary weel -- it is vary weel -- (cries) -- I weel return till
Scotland tomorrow morning, and let my Grandmaither know how I hai been
affronted by your slights, your contempts, and your aversions.


Egert. If you are serious, Madam, your distress gives me a deep concern; but
affection is not in our power, and when you know that my heart is irrevocably
given to another woman, I think your understanding and goodnature, will not
only pardon my past coldness and neglect of you, but forgive, when I tell you,
I never can have that honor which is intended me -- by a connection with your
Ladyship.


L. Rodol. How, Sir, are ye serious?


Egert. (Rises) Madam, I am too deeply, interested, both as a man of honor and
a lover, to act otherwise with you on so tender a subject.


L. Rodol. And so you persast in slighting me? -- it is vary weel.


Egert. I beg your pardon, Madam, but I must be explicit, and at once declare,
that I never can give my hand -- when I cannot give my heart.


L. Rodol. Why then, Sir, I must tell ye, that your declaration is sic an
affront ass nai woman of speerit can, or ought to bear -- and here I make a
solemn voow never till pardon it -- but on yean condition.


Egert. If that condition be in my power, Madam. --


L. Rodol. Sir, it is in your poower.


Egert. Then, Madam, you may command me.


L. Rodol. Why then, Sir, the condeetion is this, ye must here give me your
honor, that nay importunity, command, or menace of your faither -- in fine,
that nai consideration whatever, shall induce you to take me Redolpha
Lumburcourt till be your wedded wife.


Egert, Madam, I most solemnly promise, I never will.


L Rodol. And I, Sir, in my turn, most solemnly and sincerely thank you for
your resolution (curtseys) and your agreeable aversion -- ha! ha! ha! for ye
hai made me as happy -- ass a poor wretch reprieved in the vary instant of
intanded execution.


Egert. Pray, Madam, how am I to understand all this?


L. Rodol. Sir, your frankness and sincerity demand the same behavior on my
side -- therefore, without feuther disguise or ambiguity, know, Sir, that I
myself, am ass deeply smitten, wi a certain swain, ass I understand ye are wi
your Constantia.


Egert. Indeed, Madam!


L. Rodol. O! Sir, notwithstanding aw my show of mirth and courage, here I
stand ass errant a trembling This be as ever sighed or mourned for her
Peeramus. -- O! Sir, all my extravagant leveety and redeeculous behavior in
your presence, noow, and ever since your faither prevailed on mine to consent
till this match, has been a premeditated scheme, to provoke your gravity and
good sense intill a cordial disgust and positive refusal.


Egert. Madam, you have contrived, and acted your scheme most happily.


L. Rodol. Then since Cupid has thus luockeely disposed of ye till your
Constantia, and me till my swain, we hai naithing till think of noow, Sir, but
to contrive hoow to reduce the inordinate passions of oor parents intill a
temper of prudence and humanity.


Egert. Most willingly I consent to your proposal; but with your leave, Madam,
if I may presume so far, pray who is your lover?


L. Rodol. Why in that too I shall surprise you perhaps mere than ever -- In
the first place, he is a beggar, and in disgrace wi an unforgiving Faither --
and in the next place. Sir, he is ( curtseys) your ain Brother.


Egert. Is it possible?


L Rodol. A most amorous truth, Sir; that is ass far ass a woman can answer for
her ain heart; so you see cousin Chairles, that I could nai mingle affections
we ye, I hai ne ganged oot of the family.


Egert. Madam, give me leave to congratulate myself upon your affection -- you
could not have placed it on a worthier object, and whatever is to our chance in
this lottery of our parents, be assured, that my fortune shall be devoted to
your happiness and his.


L. Rodol. Generous indeed; Cousin, but not awhit nobler, I assure you, than
your brother Sandy believes of you; and be assured, Sir, that we shall remember
it, while the heart feels, or memory retains a sense of gratitude. -- But noow,
Sir, let me ask one question -- pray how is your Mother affected in this
business?


Egert. She knows of my passion, and will, I am sure, be a friend to the common
cause.


L. Rodol. Ah! that is lucky; our first step then must be to take her advice in
our conduct, so as to keep our faithers in the dark, till we can bit off some
measure, that we will wind them aboot till oor ain purpose, and the common
interest of our ain passion.


Egert. You are very right, Madam, for should my father suspect my brother's
affection for your Ladyship, or mine for Constantia, there is no guessing what
would be the consequence; his whole happiness depends upon this bargain with my
Lord, for it gives him the possession of three boroughs, and those, Madam, are
much dearer to him, than the happiness of his children; I am sorry to say it,
but to gratify his political rage, he would sacrifice every social tie that is
dear to friend or family. Exeunt.


ACT IV.
Enter Sir Pertinax and Counselor Plausible Sir Pert. NO -- no -- come away
Counselor Plausible -- come away, I say -- let them chew upon it -- let them
chew upon it. -- Why Counselor, did you ever hear so impartinant, so meddling,
and so obstinate a blockhead, as that Sergeant Eitherside? Confound the fellow,
he has put me oot of aw temper.


Plaus. He is very positive, indeed, Sir Pertinax, and no doubt, was
intemperate and rude -- But, Sir Pertinax, I would not break off the match
notwithstanding; for certainly, even without the boroughs, it is a very
advantageous bargain to you, and your son.


Sir Pert. But zoons, Plausible, do you think I will gee up the nomineetion
till three boroughs? Why, I would rather gee him twenty, aw thirty thoosand
pounds in any either point of the bargain, especially at this juncture, when
votes are likely to become invaluable? Why mon, if a certain affair comes on,
they will rise above five hundred per cent.


Plaus. You judge very rightly, Sir Pertinax, but what shall we do in this
case? For Mr. Sergeant insists, that you positively agreed to my Lords having
the nomination to the three boroughs, during his own life.


Sir Pert. Why, yes, in the first sketch of the agreement, I believe I did
consent, but at that time, mon, my Lords affairs did not appear to be half so
desperate, ass I now find they turn oot -- Sir, he must be acqueese in whatever
I demand -- For I hai gotten him into sic an hobble, that he canno exeest
without me.


Plaus. No doubt, Sir Pertinax, you have him absolutely in your power.


Sir Pert. Vary weel, and ought not a mon to make his vantage of it?


Plaus. No doubt you ought -- no matter of doubt. -- But, Sir Pertinax, there
is a secret spring in this business, that you do not seem to perceive, and
which I am afraid, governs the matter respecting these boroughs.


Sir Pert. What spring do you mean, Counselor?


Plaus. Why Sergeant Eitherside, I have some reason to think that my Lord is
tied down by some means or other to bring the Sergeant in the very first
vacancy for one of those boroughs -- now that I believe is the sole motive, why
the Sergeant is so very strenuous, that my Lord should keep the boroughs in his
own power, fearing that you might reject him, for some man of your own.


Sir Pert. Odds wounds, and deeth, Plausible -- ye are cleever -- deevilish
cleever -- by the blood, ye hai hit upon the vary streeng, that hais made aw
this discord -- I see it -- I see it now -- But haud -- haud -- bide a we bit
-- a we bit mon -- I hai a thought come in till my head -- Yas, I think noow
Plausible we a little care in our negotiation. that this vary string properly
tuned may be still made to produce the harmony we wish for, yes, yes, I hai it.
This Sergeant I see understonds business, and if I am not mistaken knows how
till take a hint.


Plaus. O! nobody better, Sir Pertinax -- nobody better.


Sir Pert. Why then, Plausible, the short road is always the best we sie a mon
ye must even come up to his mark at yeance, and assure him frae me, that I
weell secure him a seat for yean of these vary boroughs.


Plaus. O that will do, Sir Pertinax -- that will do, I Will answer for it.


Sir Pert. And further, I beg ye weell let him know that I think myself obliged
till conseeder him in this affair ass acting for me, ass weell ass for my Lord,
ass a common friend till both, and for the service he has already done us,
make my special compliments till him, and pray let this amiacable bit of paper,
be my faithful advocate till convince him of what my gratitude further
intends, for his great (gives a bank bill) equity in adjusting this agreement
betweext my Lords family and mine.


Plaus. Ha! ha! ha! Sir Pertinax, upon my word this is noble -- ay, ay, this is
an eloquent bit of paper indeed.


Sir Pert. Master Plausible in aw human dealings the most effectual method is
that of ganging at yeance, till the vary bottom of a mons heart, for if we
expact that men should serve us, we must first win their affections, by serving
them -- Oh, here they both come.


Enter Enter Lord Lumbercourt, and Sergeant Eitherside. L. Lum. My dear Sir
Pertinax, what could provoke you to break off this business so abruptly? You
are really wrong in the point, and if you will give yourself time to recollect,
you will find that my having the nomination to the boroughs for my life, was a
preliminary article -- and I appeal to Mr. Sergeant Eitherside here, whether I
did not always understand so.


Serj. Either. I assure you, Sir Pertinax, that in all his Lordship's
conversation with me upon this business, and in his positive instructions, both
he and I, always understood the nomination to be in my Lord, durante vitae.


Sir Pert. Why then, my Lord, to shorten the dispute, all I can say in answer
to your Lordship is, that there has been a total mistake between us in that
point, and therefore the treaty must end here -- I give it up -- Oh! I wash my
hands of it for ever.


Plaus. Well, but Gentlemen, Gentlemen, a little patience -- sure this mistake,
somehow or other, may be rectified. Mr. Sergeant, prithee let you and I step
into the next room by ourselves, and re-consider the clause relative to the
boroughs, and try if we cannot hit upon a medium that will be agreeable to both
parties.


Serj. Either. (With great warmth.) Mr. Plausible, I have considered the clause
fully, and am entirely master of the question. My Lord cannot give up the point
without an equivalent.


Plaus. Sir Pertinax, will you permit Mr. Sergeant and me to retire a few
moments to re-consider the points?


Sir Pert. We all my heart and saul, Master Plausible -- ainy thing till
accommodate your Lordship, ainy thing -- ainy thing.


Plaus. What say you, my Lord?


L. Lum. Nay, I submit it entirely to you, and Mr. Sergeant.


Plaus. Come, Mr. Sergeant, let us retire.


L. Lum. Ay, ay, go Mr. Sergeant, and hear what Mr. Plausible has to say
however.


Serj. Either. Nay, I will wait on Mr. Plausible, my Lord, with all my heart,
but I am sure I cannot suggest the shadow of a reason for altering my present
opinion! -- Impossible! -- Impossible!


Plaus. Well, well, do not be positive, Mr. Sergeant, do not be positive -- I
am sure reason, and your client's convenience, will always make you alter your
opinion.


Serj. Either. Ay, ay, reason, and my client's convenience, Mr. Plausible, will
always control my opinion, depend upon it -- Ay, ay, there you are right. --
Sir, I attend you. Exeunt Lawyers.


Sir Pert. I am sorry, my Lord, extremely sorry, indeed, that this mistake has
happened.


L. Lum. Upon my honor so am I, Sir Pertinax.


Sir Pert. But come now -- after all, your Lordship must allow ye hai been in
the wrong; come, my dear Lord, you must allow that now.


L. Lum. How so -- my dear Sir Pertinax?


Sir Pert. Not aboot the boroughs, my Lord, for those I do not mind a bawbee,
but aboot your distrust of my friendship; why do you think now (I appeal to
your ain breast, my Lord) do you think, my Lord, that I should ever hai
refused, or slighted your Lordship's nomination to these boroughs?


L. Lum. Why really I don't think you would, Sir Pertinax, but we must be
directed by our Lawyers you know.


Sir Pert Hah! my Lord, Lawyers are a dangerous species of animals till hai
depandence on -- they are awways starting punctilios, and diffeecultys among
friends, why, my dear Lord, it is their interest that aw mankind should be at
variance, for disagreement is the vary manure we which they enrich and fatten
the land of leeteegation, and as they find that that constantly promotes the
best crop, depend upon it, they will always be sure to lay it on as thick as
they can.


L Lum. Come, come, my dear Sir Pertinax, you must not be angry with Mr.
Sergeant for his insisting so strongly on this point -- for those boroughs, you
know, are my sheet anchor.


Sir Pert. I know it, my Lord -- and as an instance of my promptness to study,
and my acquiescence till your Lordship's inclinations, ass I see that this
Sergeant Eitherside wishes you weell, and ye him, I think now he would be as
good a mon to be returned for yean of these boroughs ass could be pitched upon;
and ass such, I humbly recommend him to your Lordship's consideration.


L. Lum. Why, my dear Sir Pertinax, to tell you the truth, I have already
promised him -- he must be in for one of them, and that is one reason why I
insisted so strenuously -- He must be in.


Sir Pert. And why not -- Odzoons! why not? -- Is nai your word a fiat, and
wall it not be always so to me -- Are ye nai my friend -- my patron -- and are
we nai by this match of our cheeldren, to be united intill one interest?


L. Lum. So I understand it, I own, Sir Pertinax.


Sir Pert. My Lord, it can be no otherwise -- then, for Heaven's sake, as your
Lordship and I can have but one interest for the future, let us hai nai mare
words aboot these paltry boroughs, but conclude the agreement at yeance. just
as it stands, otherwise there must be new writings drawn, new consultation of
Lawyers, new objections, and delays will arise, creditors will be impatient,
and impertinant; so that we shall nai finish the Lord knows when.


L. Lum. You are right -- you are right -- say no more, Mac -- say no more --
split the Lawyers -- you judge the point better than all Westminster Hall could
-- It shall stand as it is -- Yes, it shall be settled your own way, for your
interest and mine are the same, I see plainly.


Sir Pert. No doubt of it, my Lord.


L. Lum. O, here the Lawyers come -- so Gentlemen -- well, what have ye done?
-- How are your opinions now?


Enter Plausible, and Sergeant Eitherside. Serj. Either. My Lord, Mr. Plausible
has convinced me -- fully convinced me.


Plaus. Yes, my Lord, I have convinced him -- I have laid such arguments before
Mr. Sergeant, as were irresistible.


Serj. Either. He has indeed, my Lord -- besides, as Sir Pertinax gives his
honor, that your Lordship's nomination shall be sacredly observed; why, upon a
nearer review of the whole affair, I think it will be the wiser measure to
conclude the agreement just as it is drawn.


L. Lum. I am very glad you think so, Mr. Sergeant, because that is my opinion
too. -- So, my dear Eitherside, do you and Plausible dispatch the business now,
as soon as possible.


Serj. Either. My Lord, every thing will be ready for signing in less than an
hour; come, Mr. Plausible, let us go and fill up the blanks, and put the last
hand to the writings on our part.


Plaus. I attend you, Mr. Sergeant.


Exeunt Lawyers. L. Lum. And while the Lawyers are preparing the writings, Sir
Pertinax, I will go and saunter with the women.


Sir Pert. Do -- do my Lord -- and I wull come till you presently.


L. Lum. Very well, my dear Mac -- I shall expect you. Exit singing Sons of
Care.


Sir Pert. (Alone.) So, a leetle flattery, mixed we the finesse of a gilded
promise on one side, and a quantum sufficit of the aurum palpabile on the
other, hai at last made me the happiest father in Great Breetain. -- Hah! my
heart expands itself as it were through every part of my whole body, at the
completion of this buseeness, and feels nothing but dignity and elevation. --
Haud -- haud -- bide a we! bide a we! I hai yean leetle maiter mair in this
affair till adjust, and then, Sir Pertinax, ye may dictate till fortune hersel,
and send her till govern feuls, while ye show, and convince the world that
wisemen awways govern her. -- Wha's there? --


Enter Footman. Sir Pert. Tell my son Egerton, I waid speak wi him here in the
Library -- [Exit Footman.] -- Now I hai settled the grand point we my Lord,
this, I think, is the proper juncture till feel the poleetical pulse of my
spark, and yeance for aw, till set it to the exact, measure that I would hai it
constantly beat.

Enter Egerton. Come hither, Chairles.


Egert. Your pleasure, Sir?


Sir Pert. Aboot two hoors since I told you, Chairles, that I received this
letter express, complaining of your brother's acteevety at an election in the
North, against a particular friend of mine, which has given great offense; and,
Sir, ye are mentioned in the letter as well as he; to be plain, I must roundly
tell you, that upon this interview depends my happiness ass a man, and a
faither, and my affection till ye, Sir, as a son, for the remainder of our days.


Egert. I hope, Sir, I shall never do any thing either to forfeit your
affection, or disturb your happiness.


Sir Pert. I hope so too -- but to the point -- the fact is this -- there has
been a motion made, this very day, to bring on the grand affair, which is
settled for Friday sen'night. -- Noow, Sir, ass ye are popular, hai talents,
and are weel heard, it is expected, and I insist on it, that ye endeavor till
atone for your past misconduct by preparing, and taking a large share in that
question, and supporting it we aw your power.


Egert. Sir, I have always divided as you directed, except on one occasion, --
never voted against your friends, only in that affair, but, Sir, I hope you
will not so exert your influence, as to insist upon my supporting, a measure,
by an obvious prostituted sophistry, in direct opposition to my character, and
to my own conscience.


Sir Pert. Conscience! Why ye are mad! -- Did ye ever hear any mon talk of
conscience in poleetical maiters? -- Conscience, quotha! -- I have been in
Parliament these three and thraty years, and never heard the term made use of
before. -- Sir, it is an unparliamentary word, and ye weel be laughed at for it
-- therefore, I desire ye wull not offer till impose upon me we such phantoms,
but let me know your reason for thus slighting my friends, and disobeying my
commands. -- Sir, give me an immediate, and precise answer.


Egert. Then, Sir, I must frankly tell you, that you work against my nature,
you would connect me with men I despise, and press me into measures I abhor,
would make me a devoted slave to selfish leaders, who have no friendship but in
faction, no merit but in corruption, nor interest in any measure but their own,
and to such men I cannot submit. -- For know, Sir, that the malignant ferment
which the venal ambition of the times provokes in the heads and hearts of other
men, I detest.


Sir Pert. What are you aboot, Sir? malignant ferment, and venal ambition!
every mon should be ambeetious till serve his country, and every mon should be
rewarded for it. -- And pray, Sir, would ye not weesh to serve your country? I
say, Sir, would ye not weesh to serve your country?


Egert. Only show me how I may serve my country, and my life is here is; were I
qualified to lead her armies, to steer her fleets, and deal her honest
vengeance on her insulting foes, or could my eloquence pull down a state
Leviathan, mighty with the plunder of his country, black with the treasons of
her disgrace, and send his infamy down to a free posterity, as a monumental
terror to corrupt ambition, I would be foremost in such service, and act it
with the unremitting ardour of a Roman spirit.


Sir Pert. Vary weel, Sir! -- the fellow is beside himself,


Egert. But to be a common barker at envied power, to beat the drum of faction,
and sound the trumpet of insidious patriotism -- only to displace a rival -- or
to be a servile voter in proud corruption's filthy train, to market out my
voice, my reason, and my trust, to the party broker who best can promise or pay
for prostitution! -- These, Sir, are services my nature abhors -- for they are
such a malady to every kind of virtue, as must, in time, destroy the fairest
constitution, that ever wisdom framed, or virtuous liberty fought for!


Sir Pert. Why ye are mad, Sir! -- Ye hai certainly been bit by some mad whig
or other. -- Ah! ye are vary young -- vary young in these matters; but,
experience wull convince you, Sir, that every man in public business has two
consciencees, a releegious, and a poleetical conscience. Why, you see a
merchant, noow, or a shopkeeper, or a lawyer, that kens the science of the
world, awways luocks upon an oath in a custom-house, or behind a coounter, or
in a Chancery suit, only ass an oath in business, a thing of course, a mere
thing of course, that hais naithing till do we releegion, and just so it is at
an election -- for instance, noow -- I am a candidate, pray observe -- and I
gang till a perreewig-maker, a hatter, or a hosier, and I give him ten, twenty,
or thraty guineas for a perreewig, hat, or a pair of hose, so on through a
majority of votes -- vary weel, what is the consequence? Why this you see
begets a commercial intercourse, begets friendship betwixt us, and in a day or
two these men gang, and give me their suffrages. -- Noow, pray, Sir, can ye, or
any lawyer, divine, or casuist, caw this a bribe? hai, Sir? in fair poleetical
reasoning, it is ainly generosity on the ain side, and gratitude on the other
-- So, Sir, let me hai nai mair of your releegious or philosophical
refinements; but prepare, attend, and speak to the question, or ye are nai son
of mine; Sir, I insist on it.


Enter Sam. Sam. Sir, my Lord says the writings are now ready, and his
Lordship, and the Lawyers, are waiting for you and Mr. Egerton.


Sir Pert. Vary weel -- we'll attend his Lordship. -- [Exit Sam.] -- I tell
you, Chairles, aw this conscientious refinement in poleetics, is downright
ignorance, and impracticable romance; and, Sir, I desire I may hear no more of
it. Come, Sir, let us gang done, and dispatch the business. ( Going, is stopped
by Egerton)


Egert. Sir, with your permission, I beg you will first hear me a word or two
upon this subject.


Sir Pert. Weell, Sir, what waid ye say?


Egert I have often resolved to let you know my aversion to this match.


Sir Pert. How, Sir?


Egert. But my respect, and fear of disobliging you, Sir, kept me silent.


Sir Pert. Your aversion! -- your aversion, Sir! -- How dare ye use sic
language to me? Your aversion! Luock you, Sir, I shall cut the maitter short --
conseeder my fortune is nai inheritance, it is aw my ain acqueeseetion -- I can
make ducks and drakes of it -- so do not provoke me, but sign the articles
directly.


Egert. I beg your pardon, Sir, but I must be free on this occasion, and tell
you at once, that I can no longer dissemble the honest passion that fills my
heart for another woman.


Sir Pert. Hoow! another woman! and you villain how dare you love another woman
weethout my leave? But what other woman? What is she? Speak, Sir -- speak --


Egert. Constantia.


Sir Pert. Constantia! O! ye profligate! What! a creature taken in for charity?


Egert. Her poverty is not her crime, Sir, but her misfortune. Her birth is
equal to the noblest, and virtue, though covered with a village garb, is virtue
still, and of more worth to me than all the splendour of ermined pride, or
redundant wealth, and therefore, Sir --


Sir Pert. Haud your jaubbering, ye villain! -- haud your jaubbering -- none of
your romance, or refinement till me -- I hai but yean question to ask ye -- but
yean question, and then hai done we ye for ever -- for ever -- therefore,
think before ye answer -- We Will ye marry the Lady? or we will ye break my heart?


Egert. Sir, my presence shall not offend you any longer -- but when reason and
reflection take their turn, I am sure you will not be pleased with yourself for
this unpaternal passion. (Going away)


Sir Pert. Tarry, I command ye! -- and I command ye likewise, not to stir till
ye hai given me an answer, a definitive answer, wull you marry the Lady, or
wull ye not?


Egert. Since you command me, Sir, know then, that I cannot, will not marry
her. Exit Egerton.


Sir Pert. O! the villain has shot me through the head! -- he has cut my
vitals! -- I shall run distracted! The fellow destroys aw my measures -- aw my
schemes -- there never was sic an a bargain, ass I hai made with this feulish
Lord -- possession of his whole estate, wee' three boroughs upon it -- sax
members -- why -- what an acqueeseetion? -- what consequence! -- what dignity!
-- what weight till the house of Mac Sycophant! O! dom the fellow! -- three
boroughs, only for sending down sax broomsticks. -- O! meeseerable I
meeseerable! ruined! undone! -- For these five and thraty years, since this
fellow came intill the world, I have been secretly preparing him for the seat
of ministeerial dignity; and we the fellow's ailoquence, abeelitys,
popularity, these boroughs, and proper connections, he might certainly in a
leetle time hai done the deed. -- And sure naver -- naver -- were times so
favorable -- a very thing conspires, for aw the auld poleetical posthorses are
broken winded, and foundered, and canno get on, and ass till the rising
generations, the vanity of surpassing yean another, in what they feulishly call
taste, and ailegance, binds them hond and foot in the chains of luxury, whach
wull awways set them up till the best beedder, so that if they can but get
wherewithal till supply their dissipation, a meenister may convert the
poleetical morals of aw such voluptuaries intill a vote that would sell the
nation till Prester John, and their boasted leberties to the great Mogul. And
this opportunity I shall lose, by my son's marrying a vartuous beggar for love.
-- O! confound her vartue! it wull drive me distracted! Exit.


ACT V.
Enter Sir Pertinax, and Betty. Sir Pert. COME this way, girl -- come this way
-- you are a good girl, and I Will reward you for this discovery -- O! the
villain! I offer her marriage!


Bet. It is true indeed, Sir -- I would not tell your honor a lie for the
world; but, in troth, it lay upon my conscience, and I thought it my duty to
tell your Worship.


Sir Pert. Ye are right -- ye are right -- it was your duty to tell me, and
I Will reward you for it; but, you say, Master Sidney is in love we her too --
Pray hoow come ye by that intelligence?


Bet. O, Sir, I know when folks are in love, let them strive to hide it as much
as they will -- I know it by Mr. Sidney's eyes, when I see him stealing a sly
side look at her -- by his trembling -- his breathing short -- his sighing,
when they are reading together; besides, Sir, he made love verses upon her in
praise of her virtue, and her playing upon the music -- Ay, and I suspect
another thing, Sir -- she has a sweetheart if not a husband, not far from
hence.


Sir Pert. Wha! Constantia!


Bet. Ay, Constantia, Sir -- Lord, I can know the whole affair, Sir, only for
sending over to Hadley, to Farmer Hilford's youngest daughter, Sukey Hilford.


Sir Pert. Then send this minute, and get me a particular account of it.


Bet. That I will, Sir.


Sir Pert. In the mean time, keep a strict watch upon Constantia, and be sure
you bring me word of whatever new maiter ye can pick up aboot her, my son, or
this Hadley husband, or sweetheart.


Bet. Never fear, Sir. Exit Betty.


Sir Pert. This love of Sidney's, for Constantia, is not unlikely -- there is
something promising in it -- yas, I think it is nai impossible till convert it
intill a special and immediate advantage -- it is but trying -- Wha's there? --
if it misses, I am but where I was.

Enter Tomlins. Where is Master Sidney?


Tom. In the drawing room, Sir.


Sir Pert. Tell him I would speak with him -- [Exit Tomlins.] -- It Is more than
probable -- spare till spoke, and spare till speed -- try -- try -- awways try
the human heart -- try is as good a maxim in poleetics as in war. -- Why,
suppose this Sidney noow, should be privy to his friend Chairles's love for
Constantia -- what then? -- good traith it is natural till think, that his ain
love will demand the preference -- ay, obtain it too -- yas, yas, self -- self
is an ailoquent advocate on these occasions, and seldom loses his cause. I hai
the general principle of human nature at least till encourage me in the
expereement, for only make it a mon's interest till be a rascal, and I think we
may safely depend upon his integreety in serving himself.


Enter Sidney. Sid. Sir Pertinax, your servant -- Mr. Tomlins told me you
desired to speak with me.


Sir Pert. Yas, I wanted till speak to ye, upon a vary singular business --
Master Sidney, gi me your hand -- guin it did not luook like flattery, which I
detest, I would tell' ye, Master Sidney, that ye are an honor till your
cloth, your country, and till human nature.


Sid. You are very obliging.


Sir Pert. Sit ye done here, Master Sidney -- sit ye done by me, my friend, I
am under the greatest obligations till ye, for the care ye have taken of
Chairles -- the preenceeples, releegious, moral, and poleetical, that ye hai
infused intill him, demand the warmest return of gratitude, both frai him, and
frai me.


Sid. Your approbation, Sir, next to that of my own conscience, is the best
test of my endeavors, and the highest applause they can receive.


Sir Pert. Sir, ye deserve -- richly deserve it -- and noow, Sir, the same care
that ye hai had of Chairles, the same my wife hai taken of her favorite
Constantia, and sure never were accomplishments, knowledge, or preenciples,
social and releegious, infused into a better nature than Consta^tia.


Sid. In truth, Sir, I think so too.


Sir Pert. She is besides, a Gentlewoman of ass good a family ass any of this
country.


Sid. So I understand, Sir.


Sir Pert. Her faither had a vast estate, which he dissipated and melted in
feastings, and friendships, and chareeties, and hospitalities, and sic kind of
nonsense -- but the business, Master Sidney -- I love ye, yas, I love ye, and
hai been luocking oot, and contriving hoow till settle ye in the world. Sir, I
want to see you comfortably and honorably fixed at the head of a respectable
family, and guin ye were my ain son a thoosand times, I could nai make a mair
valuable present till ye for that purpose, ass a pairtner for life, than this
same Constantia, wi sic a fortune doown we her, ass ye yoursel shall deem till
be competent; ay, and an assurance of every cannonical conteengency in my
poower till confer or promote.


Sid. Sir, your offer is noble and friendly; but though the highest station would
derive luster from Constantia's charms and worth; yet, were she more amiable
than love could paint her in the lover's fancy, and wealthy beyond the thirst
of misers appetite. I could not -- would not wed her! -- (Rises.)


Sir Pert. Not wed her! Odswins mon, ye surprise me! why so, what hinders?


Sid. I beg you will not ask a reason for my refusal -- but briefly and finally
it cannot be -- nor is it a subject I can talk longer upon.


Sir Pert. Weel, Sir, I hai done -- I hai done -- sit done mon -- sit done
again, sit ye done -- I shall mention it no more -- not but I must confess
honestly till ye, friend Sidney, that the match, had ye approved of my
proposal, besides profiting, ye, would have been of singular service till me
likewise; however, ye may still serve me ass effectually ass if ye had married
her.


Sid. Then, Sir, I am sure I will most heartily.


Sir Pert. I believe it, I believe it, friend Sidney, and I thank ye -- I hai
nai friend till depend upon but -- yoursel -- my heart is aw most broke -- I
canno help these tears, and to tell ye the fact at yeance, your friend,
Chairles, is struck we a most dangerous malady -- a kind of insanity -- and ye
see I canno help weeping when I think of it. -- In short, this Constantia, I am
afraid has cast an evil eye upon him -- do ye understand me?


Sid. Not very well, Sir.


Sir Pert. Why he is grievously smitten wi the love of her, and I am afraid
will never be cured without a leetle of your asseestance.


Sid. Of my assistance, pray, Sir, in what manner?


Sir Pert. In what mainner! Lord, Master Sidney, why hoow can ye be so dull,
why hoow is any mo^ cured of his love till a wench, but by ganging till bed
till her -- Now do you understand me?


Sid. Perfectly, Sir -- perfectly.


Sir Pert. Good friend, gain ye would but gai him that hint, and take an
opportunity till spoke a good word for him, till the wench, and guin ye would
likewise cast aboot a leetle now, and contrive till bring them together once --
why in a few days after he would nai care a pinch of snuff for her. -- ( Sidney
starts) What is the maitter we you mon? What the deevil gars ye start and look
so astoned?


Sid. Sir, you amaze me! -- In what part of my mind or conduct have you found
that baseness, which intitles you to treat me with this indignity?


Sir Pert. Indignity! wha' indignity do ye mean, Sir? -- is asking ye till
serve a friend we a wench an indignity? -- Sir, am not I your patron and
benefacter? Ha --


Sid. You are, Sir, and I feel your bounty at my heart, but the virtuous
gratitude that sowed the deep sense of it there, does not inform me in return,
that the tutor's sacred function, or the social virtue of the man, must be
debased into the pupil's pander, or the patron's prostitution.


Sir Pert. Hoow! what, Sir, do you dispute? -- are ye nai my dependant? ha! and
do you hesitate aboot an ordinary civility, which is practees'd every day, by
men and women of the first fashion, Sir -- Sir, let me tell ye, however nice ye
may be -- there is nai a client aboot the court that would nai jump at sic an
opportuneety till oblige his patron.


Sid. Indeed, Sir, I believe the doctrine of pimping for patrons, as well as
that of prostituting eloquence and public trust, for private lucre may be
learned in your party schools; for when faction and public venality are taught
as measures necessary to good government and general prosperity, there every
vice is to be expected.


Sir Pert. O ho! O ho! -- vary weel -- vary weel! -- fine slander upon
meenisters -- fine seduction against government -- O! ye villain -- ye -- ye --
ye are a black sheep, and I Will mark ye -- I am glad ye show yoursel -- yas yas
-- ye hai taken off the mask at last -- ye hai been in my service for many
years, and I never kenned your principles before.


Sid Sir, you never affronted them before -- if you had, you should have --
have -- known them sooner.


Sir Pert. It Is vary weel, I hai done wi ye -- ay, ay -- noow I can account for
my son's conduct, his aversion till courts, till meenisters, levees, public
business, and his deesobedience till my commands. -- Ah, ye are a Judas! -- a
perfeedious Judas! -- ye hai ruined the morals of my son, ye villain, but I hai
done we ye -- however this I will prophecy at our pairting for your comfort --
that guin you are so vary squeamish aboot bringing a lad and a lass together,
or aboot doing sic an harmless innocent job for your patron, you will never rise
in the church.


Sid. Though my conduct, Sir, should not make me rise in her power, I am sure it
will in her favor -- in the favor of my own conscience too, and in the esteem
of all worthy men! and that, Sir, is a power and dignity beyond what patrons or
any minister can confer. Exit Sidney.


Sir Pert. What a reegorous, saucy, stiff neck'd rascal it is! -- I see my
solly now -- I am undone by my ain policy; this Sidney was the last mon that
should hai been aboot my son -- the fellow, indeed, has given him preenciples
that might hai done vary weel among the ancient Romans, but are damned unfit
for the modern Breetons. -- Weel, guin I had a thoosand sons, I never would
suffer yeane of your university bred fellows till be aboot a son of mine again,
for they hai sic an a pride of leeterature, and character, and sic saucy
English notion of leeberty continually fermenting in their thoughts; that a mon
is never sure of them till he is a Beeshop: Now if I had a Frenchmon or a
foreigner of any kind aboot my son, I could hai pressed him at yance until my
purpose, or hai kicked the rascal oot of my house in a twinkling -- but what am
I to do? Zounds, he must nai marry this begear, I cannot sit done tamely under
that -- stay -- haud -- a we, by the blood I have it -- yas, I hai hit upon
't, I Will hai the wench smuggled till the Highlands of Scotland to morrow
morning -- yas -- yas -- I Will hai her smuggled.


Enter Betty. Bet. O! Sir, I have got the whole secret out!


Sir Pert. Aboot what? --


Bet. About Miss Constantia, I have just had all the particulars from farmer
Hilford's youngest daughter -- Sukey Hilford!


Sir Pert. Weel, weel, but what is the story? Quick, quick, what is it?


Bet. Why, Sir, it is certain, that Mrs. Constantia has a sweetheart or a
husband, a sort of a Gentleman, or Gentleman's Gentleman, they don't know
which, that lodges at Gaffer Hodges's, and it is whispered all about the
village, that she is withchild by him, for Sukey says, she saw them together
last night in the dark walk, and Mrs. Constantia was all in tears.


Sir Pert. Zoones! I am afraid this is too good news to be true.


Bet. O! Sir, it is certainly true, for I myself have observed, that she has
looked very pale for some time, and could not eat, and has qualms every hour of
the day -- yes, yes, Sir, depend upon it, she is breeding, as sure as my name
is Betty Hint -- besides, Sir, she has just written a letter to the gallant,
and I have sent John the gardener to her, who is to carry it to him to Hadley.
-- Now, Sir, if your Worship would seize it -- see -- see -- here John comes
with the letter in his hand.


Sir Pert. Step you oot Betty, and leave the fellow to me.


Bet. I will, Sir. Exit Betty.


Enter John, with a Packet and Letter. John. There you go into my pocket, (puts
up the packet) there is nobody in the library, so I Will even go through the short
way -- Let me see, what is the name? Mel -- Meltill -- O! no, Melville, at
Gaffer Hodge's


Sir Pert. What letter is that, Sir?


John. Letter, Sir!


Sir Pert Give it me.


John. And please you, Sir, it is not mine.


Sir Pert. Deliver it this instant, sirrah, or I Will break your head.


John. There, there, your honor. (Gives the letter to Sir Pertinax.)


Sir Pert. Begone, rascal -- this, I suppose, wull let us intill the whole
business. --


John. (Aside.) You have got the letter old surly, but the paquet is safe in my
pocket. I Will go and deliver that however; for I will be true to poor Mrs.
Constantia, in spite of you. Exit John.


Sir Pert. (Reads) Um, um, "And bless my eyes with the sight of you;" um, um,
"throw myself into your dear arms" -- Zounds this letter is invaluable! ah! ah!
Madam -- yas this will do -- this will do I think -- let me see how it is
directed -- To Mr. Melville -- vary well.

Enter Betty. O! Betty, you are an excellent wench -- this letter is worth a
million.


Bet. Is it as I suspected, Sir, to her gallant?


Sir Pert. It is, it is -- bid Constantia pack oot of the house this instant --
and let them get the chaise ready to carry her where she pleases -- but first,
send my wife and son hither.


Bet. I shall, Sir.


Sir Pert. Do so -- begone. -- [Exit Betty.] -- Aha! Master Chairless, I
believe I shall cure you of your passion for a beggar noow -- I think he canno
be so infatuated as till be a dupe till a detected strumpet -- Let me see hoow
am I till act noow? why, like a true poleetician, I must pretend most
sincerity, when I intend most deceit.

Enter Lady Mac Sycophant, and Egerton. Weel, Chairles, notwithstanding the
meesery ye hai brought upon me, I hai sent for ye and your meither, in order to
convince ye both of my affection, and my readiness till forgive, nay, and even
till indulge your perverse passion; or since I find this Constantia has got
hold of your heart, and that your meither and ye think, that ye can never be
happy without her, why I Will nai longer oppose your inclinations.


Egert. Dear Sir, you snatch me from the sharpest misery -- on my knees, let my
heart thank you for this goodness.


L. Mac. Let me express my thanks too -- and my joy -- for had you not
consented to his marriage here, we all should have been miserable.


Sir Pert. Weel, I am glad I hai found a way till please ye both at last --
but my dear Chairless, (with paternal tenderness) suppose noow, that this
spotless vestal, this wonder of vartue -- this idol of your heart, should be a
concealed wanton after aw!


Egert. A wanton, Sir!


Sir Pert. Or should have an engagement of marriage, or an intrigue wi another
mon, and is only making a dupe of ye aw this time -- I say, only suppose it,
Chairless, what would become ye think of her?


Egert. I should think her the most deep, deceitful, and most subtle of her
sex, and if possible, would never think of her again.


Sir Pert. Wi ye gi me your honor of that?


Egert. Most solemnly, Sir.


Sir Pert. Enough -- I am satisfied -- you make me young again -- your prudence
has brought tears of joy frai my very vitals -- I was afraid ye were faceenated
we the charms of a crack -- do ye ken this hond?


Egert. Mighty well, Sir.


Sir Pert. And ye, Madam?


L. Mac. As well as I do my own, Sir -- it is Constantia's.


Sir Pert. It is so, and a better evidence it is than any that can be given by
the human tongue -- here is a warm, rapturous, lascivious letter, under the
hypocritical Syren's ain hond, Sir.


Egert. Pray, Sir, let us hear it.


Sir Pert. Yas, yas, ye shall hear it -- Eloeesa never writ a warmer, nor a
ranker till her Abelard -- but judge yourselves.

(Egerton reads) "I have only time to tell you, that the family came down
sooner than I expected, and that I cannot bless my eyes with the sight of you
till evening, for my heart has no room for any wish or fortune, but what
contributes to your relief and happiness!"


Sir Pert. O! Chairles! Chairles! -- Do ye see, Sir, what a dupe she makes of
ye? -- but mark what follows --

(Egerton reads) "O! how I long to throw myself into your dear, dear, arms, to
sooth your fears, your apprehensions, and your sorrows. -- I have something to
tell you of the utmost moment, but will reserve it till we meet this evening in
the dark walk."


Sir Pert. In the dark walk! in the dark walk! -- Ah! an evil-eyed curse upon
her! -- yas, yas, she has been often in the dark walk, I believe -- but list --
list --

(Egerton reads.) "In the mean time, banish all fears, and hope the best
fortune, your ever dutiful Constantia Harrington."


Sir Pert. There Is -- there is a warm epistle for ye -- in short, the hussy, ye
must know, is married till the fellow.


Egert. Not unlikely, Sir.


L. Mac. Indeed, by her letter, I believe she is.


Sir Pert. Nay, I know she is -- Now, Madam, what amends can ye make me for
countenancing your son's passion for sic an a hussy? And ye, Sir, what ha ye
till say for your disobedience and your frenzy? -- O! Chairles, Chairles, ye'll
shorten my days!


Egert. Pray, Sir, be patient -- compose yourself a moment -- I will make you
any compensation in my power.


Sir Pert. Then instantly sign the articles of marriage.


Egert. The Lady, Sir, has never yet been consulted; and I have some reason to
believe that her heart is engaged to another man.


Sir Pert. Sir, that is nai business of yours -- I know she will consent, and
that is all we are till consider. O! here comes my Lord.


Enter Lord Lumbercourt. L. Lum. Sir Pertinax, every thing is ready, the
Lawyers wait for us.


Sir Pert. We obey your Lordship -- where is Lady Rodolpha?


L. Lum. Giving some female consolation to poor Constantia, why my Lady, ha!
ha! ha! I hear your vestal, Constantia, has been flirting.


Sir Pert. Yas, yas, my Lord, she is in vary good order for ainy mon that wants
a wife, and an heir till his estate into the bargain.


Enter Footman. Foot. Sir, there is a man below that wants to speak to your
honor upon particular business.


Sir Pert. Sir, I canno speak till any body noow -- he must come another time
-- haud -- stay -- Is he a Gentleman?


Foot. He looks something like one, Sir -- a sort of a Gentleman -- he seems to
be a kind of a Gentleman, but he seems to be in a kind of a passion, for when I
asked his name, he answered hastily -- it is no matter friend -- go tell your
Master, there is a Gentleman here that must speak to him directly.


Sir Pert. Must! hah! vary peremptory indeed! pray thee lets see him for
curiosity sake.


Exit Footman. Enter Lady Rodolpha. L. Rodol. O! my Lady Mac Sycophant, I am
come an humble advocate for a weeping piece of female frailty; who begs she may
be permitted till speak till your Ladyship before ye finally reprobate her.


Sir Pert. I beg your pardon, Lady Rodolpha -- but it must not be, see her, she
shall not.


L. Mac. Nay, there be no harm, my dear, in hearing what she has to say for
helself.


Sir Pert. I tell ye it shall not be.


L. Mac. Well, well, my dear, I have done.


Enter Footman and Melville. Foot. Sir, that is my Master.


Sir Pert. Weell, Sir, wha' is your urgent buseeness wi me?


Mel. To shun disgrace, and punish baseness.


Sir Per.t Punish baseness! what does the fellow mean? what are ye, Sir?


Mel. A man, Sir! -- and one whose fortune once bore as proud a sway as any
within this country's limits.


L. Lum. You seem to be a soldier, Sir.


Mel. I was, Sir, and have the soldier's certificate to prove my service, rags
and scars -- in my heart for ten long years, in India's parching clime, I bore
my country's cause, and in the noblest dangers sustained it with my sword; at
length ungrateful peace has laid me down, where welcome war first took me up --
in poverty, and the dread of cruel creditors -- paternal affection brought me
to my native land, in quest of an only child -- I found her, as I thought,
amiable as parental fondness could desire -- but lust and foul seduction, have
snatched her from me -- and hither am I come, fraught with a father's anger,
and a soldier's honor, to seek the seducer, and glut revenge.


L. Mac. Pray, Sir, who is your daughter?


Mel. I blush to own her -- but -- Constantia.


Egert. Is Constantia your daughter, Sir?


Mel. She is -- and was the only comfort that nature, or my own extravagancies
had left me.


Sir Pert. Good traith then, I fancy ye will find but vary leetle comfort frai
her; for she is nai better than she should be -- she has had nai damage in this
mansion -- I am told she is wi bairn -- but ye may gang till Hadley, till yeane
Farmer Hodges's, and there ye may learn the whole story, and wha the faither of
her bairn is, frai a cheel they call Melville.


Mel. Melville! --


Sir Pert. Yees, Sir, Melville.


Mel. O! would to heaven she had no crime to answer, but her commerce with
Melville. -- No, Sir, he is not the man -- it is your son, your Egerton, that
has seduced her, and here, Sir, is the evidence of his seduction. (Showing the
jewels.)


Egert. Of my seduction, Sir!


Mel. Of yours, if your name be Egerton!


Egert. I am that man, Sir, but pray what is your evidence?


Mel. These bills, and these gorgeous jewels, not to be had in her menial
state, but at the price of chastity -- not an hour since she sent them,
impudently sent them, by a servant of this house -- Contagious infamy started
from their touch!


Egert Sir, perhaps you may be mistaken concerning the terms on which she
received them -- do you but clear her conduct with Melville, and I will
instantly satisfy your fears concerning the jewels and her virtue.


Mel. Sir, you give me new life -- you are my better angel -- I believe -- I
believe in your words -- your looks -- know then, I am that Melville.


Sir Pert. Hoow, Sir -- ye that Melville? -- that was at Farmer Hodges's?


Mel. The same, Sir -- It was he brought my Constantia to my arms -- lodged and
secreted me -- once my lowly tenant, now my only friend; the fear of inexorable
creditors made me change my name from Harrington to Melville -- till I could
see and consult some, who once called themselves my friends.


Egert. Sir, suspend your fears and anger but for a few minutes, I will keep my
word with you religiously, and bring your Constantia to your arms, as virtuous,
and as happy as you could wish her.


Exit Lady Mac. and Egerton. Sir Pert. (Aside) The clearing up this wanche's
vartue is damned unlooky! I am afraid it will ruin aw oor affairs again;
however, I hai yean stroke still in my head, that will secure the bargain wi my
Lord, let maiters gang as they weell. -- But, I wonder Master Melville, that
ye did nai pick up some leetle maiter of filler in the Indies -- ah! there hai
been bonny fortunes snapt up there of late years, by some of the meeleetary
blades.


Mel. It is very true, Sir, but it is an observation among soldiers, that there
are some men who never meet with any thing in the service but blows and ill
fortune -- I was one of those, even to a proverb.


Sir Pert. Ah! it is a pity, Sir, a great pity noow, that ye did nai get a
Mogul, or some sic an animal intill your clutches. -- Ah! I should like till ha
the strangling of a Nabob -- the rummaging of his gold dust, his jewel closet,
and aw his magazines of bars and ingots -- ha! ha! ha! -- good traith no sic
an a fellow would be a bonny cheel to bring over till this toown, and to
exheebit him riding on an elephant -- pon honor, a mon might raise a poll tax
by him, that woul gang near to pay the debts of the nation.


Enter Egerton, Constantia, Lady Mac Sycophant, and Sidney. Egert. Sir, I
promised to satisfy your fears concerning your daughter's virtue, and my best
proof to you, and all the world, that I think her not only chaste, but the most
deserving of her sex, is, that I have made her the partner of my heart, and
tender guardian of my earthly happiness for life.


Sir Pert. How, married?


Egert. I know, Sir, at present, we shall meet your anger, but time,
reflection, and our dutiful conduct, we hope, will reconcile you to our
happiness.


Sir Pert. Naver, naver -- and could I make ye, her, and aw your issue beggars,
I would move hell, heaven, and earth till do it!


L. Lum. Why, Sir Pertinax, this is a total revolution, and will entirely ruin
all my affairs.


Sir Pert. My Lord, wi the consent of your Lordship, and Lady Rodolpha, I hai
an expedient till offer, that will not ainly punish that rebellious villain,
but answer every end that your Lordship* and the Lady proposed wi him.


L Lum. I doubt it much, Sir Pertinax, I doubt it much. But what is it, Sir?
What is your expedient?


Sir Pert. My Lord, I hai another son, (Sandy) a good lad he is -- and provided
the Lady and your Lordship hai no objection till him, every article of that
rebel's intended marriage shall be amply fulfilled upon Lady Rodolpha's union
with my younger son.


L. Lum. Why that is an expedient, Sir Pertinax, but what say you, Rodolpha?


L. Rodol. Nay, nay, my Lord, ass I had nai reason till have the least
affection till my cousin Egerton, and ass my intended marriage wi him was
entirely an act of obedience till my grandmaither, provided my cousin Sandy
will be ass agreeable till her Ladyship, ass my cousin Chairles here would hai
been -- I hai nai the least objection till the change -- ay, ay, upon honor,
yean brother is ass good till Rodolpha ass another.


Sir Pert. I Will answer, Madam, for your grandmaither -- noow, my Lord, what say
you?


L. Lum. Nay, Sir Pertinax, so the agreement stands, all is right again. --
Come, child, let us be gone, ay, ay, so my affairs are made easy, it is equal
to me who she marries -- Sir Pertinax, let them be but easy, and rat me if I
care if she incorporates with the Cham of Tartary! Exit L. Lumbercourt.


Sir Pert. As to ye, my Lady Mac Sycophant, I suppose ye concluded before ye
gave yer consent till this match, that there would be an end to every thing
betwixt ye and me. -- Live we your Constant a, Madam, your son, and that black
sheep there; live we them, ye shall hai a jointure, but not a bawbee besides,
living or dead shall ye, or any of your issue, ever see of mine -- and so my
vengeance light upon ye aw together! Exit Sir Pertinax.


L. Rodol. Weel, cousin Egerton, in spite of the ambeetious frenzy of yer
faither, and the thoughtless dissipation of mine, Don Cupid hais at last
carried his point in favor of his devotees -- but I must noow take my leave --
Lady Mac Sycophant, your most obedient -- Master Sidney, yours -- Permit me,
Constantia, till hai the honor of congratulating mysel upon oor alliance.


Con. Madam, I shall study to deserve and to return this kindness.


L. Rodol. I am sure you weel; but aw I neglect my poor Saundy aw this while --
and good traith, my ain heart begins to tell me what his heart feels, and
chides me for tarrying so long; I will therefore fly till him on the wings of
love and good news, for I am sure the poor lad is pining wi the pip of desire,
and anxious jeopardy -- and so, good folks, I will leave ye we the fag end of
au auld North country wish. -- May mutual love and good humor be the guests of
your hearts, the theme of your tongues, and the blythsome subjects of aw your
triesey dreams, through the rugged road of this deceitful world; -- and may oor
faithers be an example to oorsels, to treat oor bairns better than they hai
treated us.


Exit Lady Rodolpha. Egert. You seem melancholy, Sir.


Mel. These precarious turns of fortune, Sir, will press upon the heart, for
notwithstanding my Constantia's happiness, and mine in hers, I own, I cannot
help feeling some regret, that my misfortunes should be the cause of any
disagreement between a father and the man, to whom I am under the most
endearing obligations.


Egert. You have no share in this disagreement -- for had not you been born,
from my father's nature, some other cause of his resentment must have happened,
-- but for a time, Sir, at least, and I hope for life, afflictions, and angry
vicissitudes have taken their leave of us all. If affluence can procure content
and ease, they are within our reach -- my fortune is ample, and shall be
dedicated to the happiness of this domestic circle.

My scheme, though mocked by knave, coquet and fool,
To thinking minds must prove this golden rule;
In all pursuits, but chiefly in a wife,
Not wealth, but morals, make the happy life.

FINIS.

