NORTHUMBERLAND for the Agricultural Survey by M^ssrs Bailey and Culley. 17^^
map of Northumberland

GENERAL VIEW OF THE AGRICULTURE OF THE COUNTY OF NORTHUMBERLAND, WITH
OBSERVATIONS ON THE MEANS OF ITS IMPROVEMENT; Drawn up for the Consideration of
the BOARD OF AGRICULTURE AND INTERNAL IMPROVEMENT, BY J. BAILEY AND G. CULLEY.

Happy Northumbria!
Grateful thy soil, and merciful thy clime,
Thy streams unfailing in the summer's drought;
-- Thy valleys float
With golden waves; and, on thy mountains, flocks
Bleat numberless; while, roving round their sides,
Bellow the blackening herds in lusty droves.
NEWCASTLE: PRINTED BY SOL. HODGSON; AND SOLD BY MESS. ROBINSON,
PATERNOSTER-ROW, AND ^* NICOL, PALL MALL, LONDON.

1797.

CONTENTS.
Northumberland. Cumberland. Westmoreland. Page. Page. Page. PRELIMINARY
observations 7 241 CHAP. I. GEOGRAPHICAL STATE AND CIRCUMSTANCES. SECT. 1.
Situation and extent 1 171 259 2. Division 2 172 259 3. Climate 2 172 259 4.
Soil and Surface 3 173 260 5. Minerals 5 176 260 Coal 5 176 260 Limestone 20
176 261 Marl 20 176 261 Gypsum -- -- 261 Lead Ore 21 176 260 Copper Ore -- 176
-- Zink Ore 22 176 -- Iron Stone 23 -- Black Lead -- 177 -- Freestones, Slates,
Grindstones 23 177 261 6. Waters 23 177 261 CHAP. II. STATE OF PROPERTY. SECT.
1. Estates and their management 24 178 262 2. Tenures 26 178 262 CHAP. III.
BUILDINGS. SECT. 1. Houses of proprietors 26 179 263 2. Farm houses and offices
27 179 263 3. Cottages 28 180 264 CHAP. IV. MODE OF OCCUPATION. SECT. 1. Size
of farms -- character of farmers 29 181 264 2. Rent 30 182 266 3. Tithes 31 182
267 4. Poor rates 31 182 267 5. Leasee 31 182 267 6. Expense and profit 33 183
258 N. C. W. Page. Page. Page. CHAP. V. IMPLEMENTS. Carts 37 183 269 Wagons 37
-- -- Swing plough 38 183 268 Single horse plough 40 -- -- Double mould board
plough 41 184 -- Horse hoe 41 -- -- Harrows 41 -- -- Rollers 42 -- -- Drill for
sowing turnips 42 -- -- Drill for sowing all kinds of grain 44 -- -- Ditto for
sowing beans at wide intervals 45 -- -- Threshing machines 46 -- -- Winnowing
machine 53 184 269 Pruning shears 53 -- -- CHAP. VI. ENCLOSURES. Quick-fences
54 185 269 Stone walls 55 -- -- Advantages of enclosing 55 185 Gates 56 270
Hanging-gates 56 -- -- CHAP. VII. ARABLE LAND. SECT. 1. Tillage 59 188 270 2.
Fallowing 62 188 270 3. Rotation of crops 63 188 270 4. Crops commonly
cultivated 65 190 270 Wheat 65 190 273 Rye 70 -- 271 Maslin 71 -- -- Barley 71
190 270 Oats 73 190 270 Beans 76 -- -- Pease 78 191 -- Tares 78 -- -- Potatoes
79 193 272 Turnips 80 191 271 5. Crops not commonly cultivated 93 194 273 6.
Corn harvest 95 -- -- CHAP. VIII. GRASS. SECT. 1. Natural meadows and pastures
96 195 274 2. Artificial grasses 97 196 275 3. Hay harvest 100 198 276 4.
Feeding 101 198 276 N. C. W. Page Page Page CHAP. IX. Gardens and Orchards 107
200 277 CHAP. X. Wood and plantations 108 200 277 CHAP. XI. Wastes 110 201 278
CHAP. XII. IMPROVEMENTS. SECT. 1. Draining 111 204 281 2. Pa^^ng and burning
112 205 281 3. Manuring 113 205 281 Dung 113 205 281 Lime 114 205 282 Marl 117
-- 283 Sea-wreck 117 206 -- Coal-ashes 118 -- -- Compost -- 206 282 4. Weeding
118 206 283 5. Watering 119 206 283 6. Embanking 120 -- -- -- Improving heath
lands -- 207 248 CHAP. XIII. LIVE STOCK. SECT. 1. Cattle 121 209 284
Short-horned 121 -- -- Long-horned 122 209 284 Devonshire 122 -- -- Wild cattle
122 -- -- Dairy 125 210 285 Breeding 125 -- -- Hiring bulls 125 -- -- 2. Sheep
126 210 286 Cheviot 126 -- -- Silverdale -- -- 287 Herdwick -- 211 -- Heath 130
212 286 Long-woolled 132 -- -- Improved breed of long woolled 132 215 --
Letting tups 134 -- -- Breeding 134 214 -- Salving 135 213 286 Milking 136 --
-- N. C. W. Page Page Page 3. Horses 136 215 288 Comparison betwixt Horses and
Oxen for the draught 137 -- -- 4. Swine 143 216 289 5. Rabbits 144 216 290 6.
Goats 144 -- -- 7. Poultry 144 216 290 8. Bees -- 216 291 CHAP. XIV. RURAL
ECONOMY. SECT. 1. Labor 145 217 291 2. Provisions 147 218 294 3. Fuel 148 219
297 CHAP. XV. POLITICAL ECONOMY. SECT. 1. Roads 149 219 297 2. Canals 150 220
298 3. Fairs 151 220 298 4. Markets 154 221 299 5. Commerce 155 222 299 6.
Manufactures 155 224 299 7. Poor 156 225 300 8. Population 157 225 300 CHAP.
XVI. Obstacles to improvement 157 226 301 CHAP. XVII. MISCELLANEOUS
OBSERVATIONS. SECT. 1. Agricultural Societies 158 229 -- 2. Weights and
measures 159 229 301 3. Vermin 160 -- -- CONCLUSION. Review of some particular
parts 161 -- Means of improvement 165 230 312 Single-horse carts recommended --
235 -- Mode of destroying moles ditto -- 237 -- Addenda -- -- 317

PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.
IN drawing up this Report, according to the plan laid down by the Board of
Agriculture, we have endeavored to be as concise as possible, except in those
articles which are in a great measure peculiar to this district, some of which,
we have reason to think, may be adopted with advantage in others.

It is scarcely possible, in an undertaking of this kind, to describe all the
minutiae of practice, or to notice every local improvement; but we hope that
the most prominent features of the Agriculture of Northumberland, as existing
in 1795, will be found faithfully recorded in the following sheets.

As weights and measures vary in different districts, we think it right to
apprize our readers that, in the following Reports of Northumberland and
Cumberland,

An Acre is the statute Acre of 4840 square yards. A Bushel=8 gallons
Winchester. A Rood=7 yards in length. A Fother=a two horse cart-load of lime,
dung, etc. A Stone of Wool=24lb. Avoirdupoise. A Stone of every other
article=14lb. ditto.
In the Report of Westmoreland the customary acre is generally meant, which
contains 6760 square yards, or 1 A. 1 R. 23 P. statute measure.

It may also be proper to explain the following provincial terms:

A Hog is a name given to young sheep, from 6 months old till they are shorn. A
Gimmer an Ewe sheep, from the first to the second shearing. A Dinmont a Wether
sheep, from the first to the second shearing. A Quey -- an Heiser. A Steer -- a
three years old Ox. Kyloes a small breed of Cattle bred in the Highlands of
Scotland. Byer -- a House for tying up Cattle in Winter. Fog -- aftermath.
Scaling -- spreading abroad mole hills, dung, etc.
AGRICULTURAL SURVEY OF NORTHUMBERLAND.
CHAPTER I. GEOGRAPHICAL STATE AND CIRCUMSTANCES.
SECTION 1. -- Situation and Extent.
THE district included in this Survey is the whole of the county of
Northumberland, and those detached parts of the county of Durham called
Norhamshire, Islandshire, and Bedlingtonshire.

IT IS BOUNDED
On the East, by the German ocean, 60 miles West, by Roxburghshire and
Cumberland 50 47 North, by Berwickshire, 18 South, by the county of Durham, 50
Making the whole circumference 225 miles. It is situated between the latitude
of 54 degrees. 51 min. and 55 degrees. 48 min. north; and longitudes of 1 degrees. 00 min.
and 2 degrees. 27 min. west from London; its greatest length from north to south is
64 miles, and breadth 48; and contains 1980 square miles, which may be divided
into lands that are, or may be, cultivated by the plough Acres. 817200 And
mountainous districts improper for tillage, 450000 Making in the whole 1267200

SECT. 2 -- Division.
The county of Northumberland is divided into six Wards. -- viz. Tindale Ward,
Coquetdale Ward, Glendale Ward, Bamborough Ward, Morpeth Ward, and Castle Ward.
-- The three first are situated in the western part of the county, and include
the whole of the mountainous district, with a considerable portion of enclosed
cultivated country: -- The three latter adjoin the sea coast, and being exempt
from mountainous district, have been long under cultivation; the vast resources
of coal, Castle Ward in particular possesses, and the increased population the
coal trade occasions, give them a decided preference in point of riches and
population; though in point of magnitude, considerably the smallest, occupying
less than one fourth of the county.

Norhamshire and Islandshire are situated at the northern extremity of the
county of Northumberland, and comprehend a triangular space, the two sides of
which are formed by the River Tweed and German Ocean, and the base the northern
boundary of Glendale and Bambro' Ward; it contains about 72 square miles of
well-inclosed cultivated country.

Bedlingtonshire is situated at the south-east corner of Castle Ward, bounded
on the east by the German Ocean, and on the north and south by the rivers
Wansbeck and Blyth, and contains about 30 square miles.

SECT. 3. -- Climate.
The Climate -- in regard to temperature, is subject to great variation; upon
the mountains, snow will often continue for several months, (and may frequently
be seen there of a considerable depth) when there is none in the lower
districts. The weather is very inconstant, but mostly runs in extremes. In the
Spring months, the cold, piercing, easterly winds are most prevalent; and our
longest droughts are always accompanied by them: in some places they have
acquired the name of sea-pines, from the slow progress vegetation makes
whenever they continue for a few weeks. Rain is of little use while they
prevail, from the great cold which always attends them.

The mild western and southern breezes rarely take place before June; they are
certain harbingers of rain and vigorous vegetation, and are the most prevailing
winds through the Summer and Autumn: In the latter season, they often blow with
tempestuous fury, dash out the corn, and disappoint the just hopes of the
industrious farmer.

Our greatest falls of snow, or rain, are from the south, or south-east; and
whenever we have a very high west wind, it is a certain sign that a great
quantity of rain is falling to the westward, in Cumberland and Roxburghshire.

SECT. 4. -- Soil and Surface.
A strong fertile clayey loam -- occupies the level tract of country along the
coast, and reaches as far up in general as the great post road. It is well
adapted to the culture of wheat, pulse, clover, and grazing.

Sandy, gravelly, and dry loam -- or what is here more generally understood by
turnip soil, is found on the banks of the Tyne, from Newburn to Haltwhistle; on
the Coquet, about and above Rothbury; on the Aln, from its mouth to Alnwick;
and down Tweed-side: But the greatest quantity of this kind of soil is found in
the vales of Breamish, Till, and Beaumont. The hills surrounding the Cheviot
mountains are mostly a dry, channelly, sharp-pointed, gravelly loam.

Moist Loams -- on a wet, cold, clayey bottom, occupy a large portion of this
county, being unsafe for sheep, and unfit for turnips; they are principally
employed in growing grain, rearing young cattle, and feeding ewes and lambs.
This soil prevails most in the middle and southeast parts of the county.

Black Peat Earth -- is the prevailing soil in most of the mountainous
districts, and is found in many places through the lower parts of the county.

The aspect of this county, in respect to surface, is marked with great
variety; along the seacoast, it is nearly level; toward the middle, the
surface is more diversified, and thrown into large swelling ridges, formed by
the principal rivers: -- These parts are well enclosed; in some places enriched
with wood and recent plantations, but the general appearance is destitute of
those ornaments: -- The western part (except a few intervening vales) is an
extensive scene of open, mountainous district, where the hand of Cultivation is
rarely to be traced.

Of the mountainous districts, those around Cheviot are the most valuable;
being in general fine green hills, thrown (by some of those convulsive changes
which this globe has at some time experienced) into numberless variety of
forms; the verdant, swift-sloping sides of which, enclose and shelter many
deep, narrow glens: through the whole of this district no mineral or other kind
of stone is found, except brown, red, and gray whinstone: -- they extend from
the head of Coquet, down to Allenton; from thence northward to Prendwick,
Branton, Ilderton, Wooler, Kirknewton, and Mindrim, and occupy at least an area
of 90000 acres.

The other mountainous districts lie chiefly on the western part of the county,
some of which adjoin the county of Durham; but the largest portion extends from
the Roman Wall to the river Coquet (with a few intervening enclosed vales) and
to the moors north of Rothbury. -- They are not marked by any striking
irregularities of surface, being in general extensive, open, solitary wastes,
growing little else but heath, and affording a hard subsistence to the flocks
that depasture them.

SECT. 5. -- Minerals.
Coal -- is found in abundance through the greatest part of this county,
particularly in the lower district; in the south-east quarter it is of the best
quality, The coals found in this district are of the variety called "caking
coals," which melt in the fire, burn to a strong cinder in the open air, and
the best kinds produce very few ashes.
and the most numerous and thickest seams, from whence those vast quantities
are exported which supply the great consumption of the London market, as well
as the coasting and foreign trade. -- This coal trade is the foundation of the
commerce of the county, and the principal source of its wealth, as well as a
never-sailing nursery for some of the best seamen in the British Navy. -- Of
the quantity of coals raised in this county, we have not been able to form a
probable conjecture, for want of sufficient data to estimate the quantity used
at home; but have obtained what are exported from the River Tyne, in which a
considerable portion raised in the county of Durham is included, and which may
probably come near a balance for those consumed in this county. -- Some idea of
the magnitude of this trade may be formed by the following statement of.

The Exports of Coals from Newcastle.
In 1772 351890 Newcastle chaldrons 1776 380000 1791 444909 1792 490682 1793
486133 1794 426384 This is the only year in which we find the quantities raised
in Northumberland and Durham are kept distinct, and which are in the county of
Northumberland, -- 257462 chaldrons in the county of Durham, 168922 In all
426384

1795 505650

From hence it appears that this trade is increasing at an amazing rate, there
being not less than one-third more coals exported now than were exported 20
years since: From Hartley and Blyth there are exported yearly between 30000 and
40000 chaldrons; if these be added to the average export from Newcastle for the
last three or four years, the quantity exported from this county may be fairly
estimated at 510000 Newcastle chaldrons, or 956250 London chaldrons; the
Newcastle chaldron being to the London chaldron in the ratio of 8 to 15: -- The
value of the above quantity to the various parties concerned will appear by the
following

Calculation of the cost and charges upon a so^p-load of coals containing 20
keels, A keel of coals is 21 ton 4 cwt. and contains 8 Newcastle chaldrons, so
that each chaldron is 53 cwt. -- A London chaldron contains 36 heaped
Winchester bushels, and weighs on an average near 28 cwt. (according to the
quality of the coals) which weights being nearly in the ratio of 8 to 15, it is
always reckoned, that 8 Newcastle chaldrons make 15 London chaldrons.
or 160 Newcastle chaldrons, delivered in the port of London.
Paid at Newcastle, L s. d. To the coal owner (sittage included The price paid
for coals at Newcastle varies from 13s. to 17s. 6d. per chald. according to the
goodness; but in the above calculation the average is taken at 15s. out of
which the coal-fitters deduct for fitters sees; for all above Bladon Burn mouth
1s.5 d. -- Lemington 1s.4 d. -- Denton 1s.4d. and all under Denton 1s.3 d. per
Newcastle chald. -- So that the coal owner for a chald. of Denton coals
(provided the price be 15s.) receives only 13s.8d.
) for 160 chaldrons, at 15s. per chald. 120 0 0 L s. d. Brought forward 120 0 0
20 keel dues at 13s. 4d. 13 6 8 Trimming 2s. 6d. keelman's beer 1s. 4d. per
chaldron 3 16 8 Duke of Richmond's duty 1s. per chald. and ticket 6d. 8 0 6
Cocket and bond at Custom-house 0 3 8 Town's dues 2d. The Corporation of
Newcastle formerly charged 5d. per chaldron for town's dues, which they had
continued to do for a long series of years; but in 1794 Wm Leighton, Esquire of
London, brought an action against them for over-charge of dues, and on its
being tried at York aslizes, a verdict was given for Mr Leighton, by which the
dues were reduced to 2d. per chaldron.
per chaldron and 1s. for ticket 1 7 8 Fee (or 'Foy') to sitter's clerk 0 5 0
Insurance (suppose) 1 10 0 Bridlington Pier 0 4 6 Spurn Light 0 13 4 Well,
Winterton, Foulness, Caster, Lowestoff, and Harwich lights; and Scarborough and
Whitby Piers 4 13 5 Paid at London -- Entry fee at Meter's office 0 3 6 Cocket
fee 2s. 6d. return 1s. 6d. 0 4 0 Lord Mayor's dues a farthing per London
chaldron 0 6 0 Ditto for groundage 0 0 6 Trinity House dues 3 farthings per
Newcastle chaldron 0 10 0 Nore light 3s. market dues 3s. 0 6 0 Carried over 155
11 5 L s. d. Brought over 155 11 5 King's duty The duties on coals in the port
of London, are -- L s. d. By 8th Ann chapter 4 0 3 0 per London chald. 9 do. chapter 6
0 2 0 9 do. chapter 22, to build churches 0 3 0 Impost in 1779 of 5 per cent 0 0 4
Ditto in 1782 of 5 per cent 0 0 4 added to raise the fraction to an integer 0 0
0 Total 0 8 10

Duties on coals carried coast ways into the out ports, are -- L s. d. By 8th
Ann chapter 4 0 3 0 9 do. chapter 6 0 2 0 Import in 1779 of 5 per cent 0 0 3 Ditto in
1782 of 5 per cent 0 0 3 0 5 6


8s. 10d. 10s. per London chald. on 300 160 Newcastle chaldrons are equal to 300
London chaldrons -- viz. as 8: 15:: 160: 300.
chaldrons 150 0 0 Mettage 0 8 10s. per London chald. on 300 160 Newcastle
chaldrons are equal to 300 London chaldrons -- viz. as 8: 15:: 160: 300.
chaldrons Orphan's duty 6 10s. per London chald. on 300 160 Newcastle
chaldrons are equal to 300 London chaldrons -- viz. as 8: 15:: 160: 300.
chaldrons King's duty on Meter's sack 0 1 6 Bond 0 13 6 Discount 2 per cent.
on two-thirds of the amount (supposing the coals to sell for 35 The price of
coals at London is very fluctuating; but we have taken it at 35s. per chaldron,
as the average price for good coals, when there is no interruption to the trade
and navigation; but in March, 1795, coals told in London at the amazing price
of 70s. per London chaldron, on account of the scarcity occasioned by the long
frost.
pounds per score of 21 chaldrons to the score; the amount of the cargo will be
500 pounds) which with some other expenses will be about 7 16 0 Commission per
cent on the whole amount 2 10 0 Total expenses of the cargo 316 12 5

Which deducted from 500l. (the amount of the cargo as above) leaves 183l. 7s.
7d. for the freight of the ship.

As we are not able to procure sufficient information of the number of people
in the coal trade, we shall take the liberty of extracting from Mr M'Nab's
Letter to Mr Pit, that the number of persons employed and dependent on the
coal trade, in the year 1792, were, On the river Tyne 38475 On the river Wear
26250 Total 64725

To the coal-owners the winning and working these collieries are very
expensive, and frequently attended with considerable risque; for though very
large fortunes have been made in the business, yet many have been lost; the
unexpected alteration of the strata, from dykes and other troubles; the
frequent and dreadful explosions from inflammable air; the great depth of the
shafts, and increasing quantities of water to be raised from them, baffle the
most experienced artists, and overcome the amazing powers of the fire-engine,
which of late years has received many improvements, and been made to perform
what was thought absolutely impossible at its first introduction. We were
informed that there was only one fire-engine in the neighborhood of Neweastle,
about 50 years since, -- that it raised the water only 40 yards, which, at that
time, was thought a wonderful performance; at present water is raised, and
probably in greater abundance, 160 yards, and upwards.


These powerful machines are now applied to the purposes of drawing coals,
which business was formerly universally performed by horses; frequently 8 to a
shaft, where great quantities were drawn and dispatch was necessary; but by the
invention and application of the drawing machines, a great many horses were
dismissed from the collieries; which has considerably reduced the consumption
of oats in this neighborhood.

Many of the collieries are situated at a considerable distance from the river,
to which the coals are conveyed from the pits in a peculiar kind of carriage,
called a New Castle coalwaggon; (pl. 1, fig. 1.) it has 4 small wheels, about
34 inches diameter, fixed to the axles, with which they turn round, and move on
a road (called the waggon-way) made on purpose with wood, which is formed by
long pieces of wood (RA, rails) about 4 inches square, laid length-ways, upon
sleepers of wood (SSS) and the thickness of the rail above the plane of the
rest of the road, and at the exact distance of the wagon wheels from each
other, as it is upon those rails the wheels run.

A new waggon-way (including timber, levelling, graveling, and workmanship)
will cost about 5s. per yard, or 440l. per mile; and the expense of keeping it
in repair is generally about 1d. per chaldron on a quantity of 15000 chaldrons
annually, or 93l. 15s. 0d. per mile. It has been suggested, that a waggon-way
might be substituted in lieu of turnpike roads, for the conveyance of heavy
goods; but we presume, that the expense of first making, laying out in nearly a
level line, or so as to have little or no ascent, and keeping in repair, would
greatly overbalance the additional weight to be drawn by one horse; as the wood
rots and wastes nearly as much by a small quantity of carriage passing along
it, as a larger.


The dimensions of the body of these wagons are as follows: Ft. Ins. Length at
top 7 0 -- bottom 5 6 Breadth at top 6 0 -- bottom 3 0 Height 3 9

They hold a chaldron of coals, or 53 cwt. and are drawn by a single horse.

A gently-inclined plane is the most desirable position for those waggon-ways;
but few situations will admit of this: Upon levels, or easy ascents, a single
horse draws the wagon: On such parts of the way where the declination is
sufficient for the wagon to move by the power of gravity, the horse is taken
out and follows behind; and where the descents are such, that the wagon would
move with too great rapidity by its own weight, (or "run amain,") the motion is
regulated by a crooked piece of wood, (called a convey) coming over the top of
one of the hind wheels; upon which the waggon-man presses with such force as he
finds requisite, to regulate the motion of the wagon. This mode of conveyance
has been used here upwards of 120 years.


In has been asserted, that "the coals in this county are inexhaustible" -- Mr
Williams, in his Natural History of the Mineral Kingdom, is of a different
opinion, and think it a matter of such importance as to deserve the serious
attention of the Legislature. -- Toward elucidating this point, it may be of
some use to estimate what number of acres are wrought yearly in this county to
supply the above quantity of coals: In order to accomplish this object, the
thickness and number of workable seams of coal must be first ascertained; for
which purpose we have been favored with sections One of St Anthon's, about 3
miles below Newcastle, by Mr Johnson; the other of Montague Main, about 3 miles
above Newcastle, by Mr Thomas.
exhibiting the thickness and depth of the various strata, in some of the
deepest pits in the county; which will not only be useful for the present
purpose, but we hope will be acceptable to many of our readers, who are curious
in researches of subterraneous geography.

At St Anthon's Colliery (3 miles east of Newcastle) the strata from the
surface to the LOW MAIN coal, are: --

Yds. Ft. Ins. Soil and clay 10 0 0 Brown post 24 0 0 1. COAL 0 0 6 Blue-metal
stone 5 2 0 White girdles 4 1 0 2. COAL 0 0 8 White and gray post 12 0 0 Soft
blue metal 10 0 0 3. COAL 0 0 6 White post girdles 6 0 0 Whin 3 1 6 Strong
white post 6 1 0 4. COAL 0 1 0 Soft blue thill 3 2 0 Soft girdles mixed with
whin 7 2 0 5. COAL 0 0 6 Blue and black stone 7 1 0 6. COAL 0 0 8 Strong white
post 3 0 0 Gray metal stone 3 1 0 7. COAL 0 0 8 Gray post mixed with whin 8 1 0
Gray girdles 6 1 0 Blue and black stone 4 2 0 8. COAL 0 1 0 Gray metal stone 4
0 0 Strong white post 12 0 0 Black metal stone with hard girdles 6 0 0 9. HIGH
MAIN COAL 2 0 0 Gray metal 9 0 0 Post girdles 0 2 0 Blue metal 1 1 0 Carried
over 163 0 2 Yds. Ft. Ins. Brought over 163 0 2 Girdles 0 1 2 Blue metal stone
10 0 0 Post 0 1 0 Blue metal stone 6 0 0 Whin and blue metal 0 1 6 Strong white
post 7 0 0 Brown post with water 0 0 7 Blue metal stone with gray girdles 4 2 0
10. COAL 1 0 0 Blue metal stone 6 0 3 White post 1 1 0 11. COAL. 0 0 6 Strong
gray metal with post girdles 4 0 6 Strong white post 2 1 0 Whin 0 1 0 Blue
metal stone 2 2 7 Gray metal stone with post girdles 5 1 5 Blue metal stone
with whin girdles 3 1 3 12. COAL 0 1 6 Blue gray metal 1 0 8 White post 4 0 7
White post mixed with whin 4 0 0 White post 2 2 0 Dark blue metal and coal 0 2
2 Gray metal stone and girdles 4 2 0 White post mixed with whin 6 0 7 Whin 0 1
0 White post mixed with whin 2 0 0 13* COAL 1 0 3 Dark gray metal stone 1 0 6
Gray metal and whin girdles 3 1 10 Carried over 251 2 6 Yds. Ft. Ins. Brought
over 251 2 6 Gray metal and girdles 3 0 0 White post 1 0 0 14. COAL 1 0 2 Blue
and gray metal 1 1 0 15. COAL 0 0 9 Blue and gray metal 4 0 0 White post mixed
with whin 1 1 6 Gray metal 2 0 6 Gray metal and girdles 2 0 9 16. LOW MAIN COAL
2 0 6 Total 270 1 8

In the above pit or shaft, which is nearly A pit has lately been sunk at
Willington, 5 miles north-east from Newcastle, which is 280 yards deep, to the
low main coal.
the deepest in the kingdom, there are no less than 16 seams of coal. But many
of these, from their thinness, are not workable. The 9th, called the high main
coal, and the 10th, the low main coal, are the two principal seams for
affording quantities of coal, being together 12 feet thick, and are those most
generally wrought. But the 10th, 13th, and 14th, are all workable seams, and
will afford considerable quantities of coal; the aggregate of the three making
nearly 9 feet thick; so that the total thickness of the workable seams in this
colliery amount to 22 feet.

In Montague Main Colliery (3 miles west of Newcastle) south of the main dyke,
the strata are: -- Yds. Ft. Ins. Soil and clay 5 0 0 White post 0 2 0 1. COAL
(1) 0 0 4 Black metal stone 1 0 2 Gray post 3 2 0 Carried over 10 1 6 Yds. Ft.
Ins. Brought over 10 1 6 Blue metal stone 5 1 0 Gray post 4 0 0 Strong white
post 5 0 0 Gray post 1 2 0 White post with black metal partings 10 0 0 Gray
post 0 1 4 Brown post with coal pipes 1 1 8 White post 5 0 0 Ditto with whin 1
0 0 2. COAL (2) 0 0 6 Black metal stone 9 0 0 Gray ditto 8 2 0 Brown post with
skamy partings 1 1 0 3. COAL (3) 0 0 9 Gray metal stone 3 2 10 4. Ft. Ins. COAL
1 0 BAND 0 9 COAL 3 6 Benwell Main 1 2 3 Gray metal stone 1 1 0 Strong white
post 5 1 0 Whin 0 2 0 White post 2 2 0 5. COAL 0 1 0 Black metal stone 3 0 8
White post 6 0 0 Black metal stone 9 0 0 Gray metal stone 10 2 4 Gray post with
whin girdles 5 0 0 Strong white post 12 2 0 Gray metal stone 6 2 0 6. COAL 0 0
8 Carried over 133 1 6 Yds. Ft. Ins. Brought over 133 1 6 Post girdles 0 2 0
Gray metal stone 2 1 0 7. COAL, called Beaumont S^am 1 0 4 Strong white thill 1
0 7 Strong white post 4 0 4 8. COAL 0 1 6 Black thill 0 2 4 Gray metal stone 0
1 2 Gray post 0 2 0 Gray metal stone 0 2 10 Strong white post 1 0 4 9. COAL 0 1
3 Black metal stone 2 2 4 White post 0 1 8 Blue metal stone with post girdles 2
0 0 White post with whin girdles 4 1 9 Black metal stone 0 1 5 Gray post 0 1 2
Blue metal stone 1 0 0 Strong white post 0 1 3 Blue metal stone 2 2 1 10. COAL
0 0 8 Black thill 1 0 4 Blue metal stone with post girdles 2 1 0 Gray post 1 0
0 Strong white post 7 2 6 Black metal stone 0 0 1 11. COAL, called Low Main 0 2
11 Gray metal stone 9 0 0 White post 5 0 0 Gray metal stone with post girdles 2
0 0 White post with whin girdles 6 1 6 Carried over 198 1 10 Yds. Ft. Ins.
Brought over 198 1 10 Gray metal stone with post girdles 1 1 0 12. COAL called
Low Low Main, or Baker's Main 0 2 10 Gray metal stone 1 2 0 White post 0 2 0
Gray metal stone 0 1 8 Black metal stone 0 0 10 Gray metal stone 2 2 6 Gray
post 2 0 6 Strong white post with whin girdles 7 1 8 Gray metal stone 6 2 6
Gray post 0 2 0 White post 1 2 0 Gray metal stone 0 1 0 13. COAL 0 0 6 Gray
metal stone 0 1 0 Gray metal stone with post girdles 6 2 2 14. COAL 0 0 5 Gray
metal stone 0 0 4 Gray post 2 1 6 White post with whin 5 0 4 Gray metal stone 0
1 0 15. COAL 0 0 3 Gray metal stone with post girdles 2 0 6 Strong white post
with whin girdles 1 2 5 Total depth 245 1 9

In this shaft there are 15 seams of coal, of which only four are workable,
viz. the 4th, 7th, 11th, and 12th, making together 4 yds. 1 ft. 7 ins. of
workable coal. If the medium be taken betwixt this and St Anthon's, it will be
nearly 6 yards thick of workable coal, from which may be formed*

A calculation of the quantity of coal in an acre of ground, supposing the
aggregate thickness of the various seams amount to 6 yards.
An acre of ground contains 4840 square yards, which multiplied by the
thickness, 6 yards gives 29040 cubic yards in an acre. From which deduct 1/^
for waste, and the part o^ pillars necessary to be left in working 9680 there
remains 19360 cubic yards to be wrought.

And as three cubic yards of coal, when wrought, afford a Newcastle chaldron,

therefore 19360 divided by 3 =gives 6453 Newcastle chaldrons per acre.

The coals exported yearly from the rivers Tyne and Wear, with Hartley and
Blyth, amount to about 825000 chaldrons, From Newcastle, 510000 chaldrons. --
Sunderland, 315000 ditto. In all 825000
which, with the home consumption of the two counties of Northumberland and
Durham, will make the quantity of coals raised yearly about 1,000,000 chaldrons.

And the chaldrons raised yearly 1,000,000 divided by the chaldrons per acre
6453 =gives 155 acres nearly per year, cleared of coal 6 yds. thick.

And by estimating the breadth occupied by the caking coals to be on an averge
8 miles broad, and 25 miles long, in the two counties, we shall find there will
be about 200 square miles, or 128000 acres, of coal proper for exportation.

Then the whole area 128000 divided by the yearly consumption, 155 =825 years.
The time before this space will be wrought out.

But there are some reasons to think, that a thickness of seam equal to 6 yards
will not be obtained over an extent of 200 square miles; probably not more on
an average than 4 yards; in which case, the coal will be exhausted in 550
years: and if the aggregate thickness of the seams to be obtained should prove
only three yards, then little more than 400 years will be the term of
continuance; but it is probable, that before the half of that time be elapsed,
the price to the consumer will be considerably increased, from the increased
expense of obtaining them, and the increased length of carriage from the pits
to the river. This last, we presume, may be reduced in some situations, by
adopting canals instead of waggon-ways, which we have often wondered have never
yet been attempted.

From the above investigation it appears, that Mr Williams's apprehensions are
not so chimerical at have been represented; how far it may be right for the
legislature to interfere, we leave to the consideration of those more
conversant in political speculations.

Of the coal found all through Bambro' Ward, Islandshire, and those parts of
Glendale Ward east of the river Till, the seams are very thin, mostly from 1 to
3 feet thick, and of a very inferior quality, yielding a great quantity of
ashes, and neither caking in the fire, nor burning to a cinder: they are used
only for home-consumption, and for burning lime; for the latter purpose they
are well adapted, by their property of neither caking nor burning to a cinder;
and it luckily happens, that through all this district, the coal and lime are
generally found together; a circumstance which greatly facilitates and lessens
the expense of burning lime.

If a line be drawn from Alemouth to a little west of Bywell on the river Tyne,
very little of this kind of coal and limestone will be found to the east of it;
and from this line to the sea coast, no limestone whatever appears, except a
small patch of a different limestone that puts in at Whitley, near Tynemouth,
and runs from thence in a south-westerly direction through the county of Durham,
etc. In this space, betwixt these two ranges of limestone, lie the caking coals
of superior quality above described, and the same breadth of coal may be traced
through the county of Durham, stretching in the same direction, and bounded on
the east and west, in a similar manner, by stretches of limestone of different
kinds.

It would be a curious investigation to trace these minerals through the
different counties across the island, and show where the strata of each species
rise to the surface; and the deviations caused in them by cross veins or dykes,
etc.; we believe it will be found that very little or no coal lies to the east
of this line, and that no chalk lies to the west.

Limestone, -- of an excellent quality, abounds through all Bambro' Ward,
Islandshire, and that part of Glendale Ward situated on the east side of the
river Till; it stretches from hence in a south-westerly direction through the
central parts of the county, and is found at Shilbottle, Longframlington,
Hartburn, Rial, Corbridge, etc. and at numberless other places to the westward
of these; but the south-east quarter, which is so rich in coal, is destitute of
lime; Except a small patch at Whitley, near Tynemouth.
as is also that part of Glendale Ward west of the river Till.

Stone Marl, -- abounds in many places near Tweedside; and Shell Marl is found
in a few places in Glendale Ward. The greatest quantity is at Wark and
Sunnylaws, where it has been formed by a deposit of various kinds of shells,
both univalve and bivalve, many of which are yet perfect, forming a stratum
several feet in depth of pure calcareous earth; but the exact depth of this bed
of marl has never yet been ascertained, for want of a proper level to carry off
the water: It probably may afford matter of speculation to some readers to be
informed, that in the middle of this marl there is an horizontal stratum of
sand about 12 inches thick; and also that, a few years since, a Red Deer Stag,
in the attitude of running, and in every part complete, was found embedded in
the marl: horns of the same animal have been found at different times in
perfect preservation; and a part of the scalp, with the cores of a pair of
horns belonging to some animal of the Bos Taurus species, were lately found
here: we have never seen any breed of cattle, the horns of which were of equal
magnitude; for though the outside shell or horn part was wanting, yet the core
was 24 inches long, and 12 inches circumference at the root; and when in a
perfect state and covered with the outside shell, must have been about 5 inches
diameter: their form is a gentle curve, and have all the appearance of a pair
of bull's horns; but probably of a different breed of cattle to any we have at
present.

Clay Marl, -- is also found in small quantities, but in situations where it
could not be conveniently used with effect.

Lead Ore, -- has hitherto never been found in any quantity but in the
mountainous districts on the south-west part of the county, toward the head of
that branch of South Tyne, called Allendale; and a small quantity at
Fallowfield, a little to the north of Hexham. The lead mines in Allendale
produce about 12000 bings of lead ore annually, which at 4l. 4s. od. per bing,
is upwards of 50000l. a year.


In this county, lead ore is wrought by the bing, a measure containing 8 cwt.
of clean ore; the workmen being paid by the owners of the mine at different
prices, from 8s. to 36s. per bing (for getting, and washing, or cleaning)
according to the richness. quality, or hardness of the mine. If the owners sell
any of the ore in this state, the price is generally from 3l. 10s. to 4l. 10s.
per bing, but they mostly have smelt mills of their own, where they smelt it at
their own cost, take the silver out of it by refining, The Alendale lead ore is
smelted and refined at Dukesfield smelt-mill, and produces about 7 or 8 ounces
of silver from each fother of lead; what is got at Fallowfield contains so
little silver, that it will not pay the expense of refining; while some ore got
in Alston Moor, in Cumberland, yields 42 oz. of silver per fother. The process
of refining greatly improves the lead, by making it more ductile.


and then cast the lead into long pieces, called pigs of 1 cwt. each. -- Pig
lead is sold by the fother, a quantity containing 21 cwt. which is reckoned to
sell at a fair price when at 15l. or 16l. per fother; in 1776 it was as low as
12l. and in the beginning of 1782 it was 17l. 5s. -- in 1788 it rose gradually
to 23l. 10s. per fother, which was several pounds higher than it was ever sold
at before; but in the following year, it sell to 16l. or 17l per fother, which
shows the fluctuating price of this article.

The Ore of Zink, -- is found in great abundance embedded with spar, in most of
the veins producing lead ore; but its distance from any brass manufactures, and
from water carriage, renders it of little value. In these mines are also found
great variety of crystallizations of spar, quartz, etc. etc.

The mines which produce lead ore are very fluctuating, and uncertain in point
of profit to the adventurers; but tend to a general good, by giving employment
to a numerous class of industrious workmen, who, being situated in a climate
improper for the production of grain, are obliged to receive the greatest part
of their provisions from the more fertile districts of the county, and by those
means encourage its agriculture.

Iron Ore, -- may be had in many parts of the county; of late years the
convenience of shipping it at Holy Island, has induced the Carron Company to
have considerable quantities from thence.

Freestones, -- of various kinds, abound in almost every part of the county,
and are applied to all the purposes of building. Many of the quarries afford
tolerable slates for roofing, and flags for floors: at some of them excellent
grindstones are got, of which a great many are exported from Camus and
Warkworth.

SECT. 6. -- Waters.
The principal rivers, which act as estuaries to the rest, are the Tyne, Blyth,
Wansbeck, Coquet, Aln, and Tweed. The innumerable streams, which lose their
names in the above, spread in every direction through the county: -- The Tyne
branches into nearly two equal streams a little above Hexham, which are
distinguished by the names of North Tyne and South Tyne: the main branch of
North Tyne, is the Reed; and of South Tyne, the Allen: The principal streams
which empty themselves into the Tyne east of Hexham, are the Devil's-water and
the Derwent: and the river Till is the only stream, of any note, which empties
itself into the Tweed, in this county.

The Tyne and Tweed are the most eminent for their navigation, the tide flowing
up the former 16 miles, and up the latter eight or ten; the navigation of the
other rivers is confined to a small distance from their mouths; of these the
Blyth and Aln are of the most importance, from the convenience which the first
affords to its neighborhood, for the exportation of considerable quantities of
coals; and both of them for corn, etc. and the importation of timber, iron, and
other useful articles.

The Tyne and Tweed have been long celebrated for their salmon fisheries: in
the latter a rent of 800l. a year is paid for a fishing of 200 yards in length,
near the mouth of the river; and the same rent is paid for other (...) above
the bridge, not more than 250 yards in (...). The fish taken here are, the
Salmon, Bull-trout, Wh^^ng, and large common Trout, and nearly the whole of
them sent to London; in the conveyance of which, a great improvement has taken
place of late years, by packing them in pounded ice; by this means they are
presented nearly as fresh at the London market, as when taken out of the river.
For the purpose of carrying them, and keeping up a constant and regular supply,
vessels called smacks sail 3 times a week, and being purposely constructed for
swift sailing, frequently make their run in 48 hours. These vessels are from 70
to 120 tons burden; on an average 12 men are employed in each vessel, and make
about 14 voyages in a year; and not less than 75 boats, and 300 fishermen, are
employed in taking the fish in the river Tweed.

CHAPTER II. STATE OF PROPERTY.
SECT. 1. -- Estates.
ESTATES vary in their annual value from 20l. to upwards of 20000l. a year; --
one in particular is upwards of 40000l. -- Small estates from 20l. to 200l. a
year, are found in the southern and middle parts of the county, but very rarely
in the northern.

There are probably few parts of the kingdom where estates have made such rapid
improvements as in this county; there being several instances of the value
being more than trebled within the last 40 years. Many causes have certainly
been aiding to produce this great effect; but the principal one is attributed
to letting large farms, and leases for 21 years; by which means the tenants of
capital were encouraged to make those great exertions, from which such
advantages have resulted, not only to themselves and proprietors of the land,
but to the community at large, from the very increased produce, and superiority
of its quality.

The usual mode of letting farms is to fix a rent, under certain conditions and
covenants, 6 or 12 months before the expiration of the lease; but upon one of
the largest estates in the county, The Earl of Tankerville's.
the tenants have an offer of their farms 2 or 3 years before the expiration of
the lease, which is a mutual benefit to both landlord and tenant; and is
attended with so many advantages, that it is in a fair way of being generally
adopted.

On some estates the practice of letting farms by secret proposals is still in
use: this is a dark and mysterious mode, which frequently defeats the end it is
intended to accomplish, and instead, of obtaining an excessive high rent, the
prize has been often gained at a very inferior value; and, in the language of
the turf, (where only one has entered the lists) "by walking the course:" and
we have known some of the first farmers in the county forego their farms,
rather than submit to contend in the dark. Upon most estates it is generally
stipulated, that a certain portion of the best old grazing, lands, on each
farm, shall be kept in grass during the whole term.

The quantity of land to be in ploughing is mostly limited to a certain number
of acres; and at the expiration of the term, where the tenant quits on the 12th
of May, he is allowed to have a crop of corn from off two-thirds of the arable
lands; this is called the way-going crop: the entering tenant has the straw,
and leads the crop into the stack-yard. -- The houses, hedges, gates, drains,
etc. are kept and left in repair by the tenant, who likewise pays all taxes,
cesses, etc.

Of the annual value of the estates in this county, no authentic information
could be obtained; but a probable guess may be formed by supposing that there
are 800000 acres of cultivated land, and that this on an average is worth 14s.
per acre, -- and that 450,000 acres of mountainous district is worth 2s. per
acre.

Then 800000 acres, at 14s. 60000l. And 450000 acres, at 2s. 45000l. Gives the
total value of the lands per ann. L.605000

SECT. 2. -- Tenures.
The land property in this county is mostly freehold: -- There are to be found
in a few places some small parcels of copyhold; and in those districts which
belong to the county of Durham, some leaseholds for lives, or years, held under
the church. -- There are also two or three manors of customary tenure toward
the head of South Tyne.

CHAPTER III. BUILDINGS.
SECT. 1. -- Houses of Proprietors.
THE seats of the principal proprietors of this county consist of venerable
castles, old halls, and elegant modern mansions. -- To give particular
descriptions would be too extensive for an Agricultural Survey; those who wish
for information on this subject, we beg leave to refer to Hutchinson's View of
Northumberland, Pennant's Tour, etc. etc.

SECT. 2. -- Farm Houses, Offices, etc.
Buildings, -- for the use and convenience of farms, were formerly very shabby
and ill contrived; but those that have been erected of late years, are better
adapted to the various purposes wanted for extensive farms and improved
cultivation.

The most approved form of distributing the various offices is, on the east,
west, and north sides of a rectangular parallelogram, which is generally
divided into two fold-yards, for cattle of different ages, the south being left
open to admit the sun; and for the same reason, and also for the sake of
cleanliness and health, the farm house is removed in front thirty or forty
yards; between which and the south wall of the fold is a small court for coals,
young poultry, etc. as in the annexed plan A Scale of 100 Feet


A. The farm-house. B. The barn, 18 feet by 60. C. Sheds, over which are
granaries. D D. Ditto, upon which are built corn-slacks; one of which is for
wintering yearling calves, the other for holding implements of husbandry. E.
Buyers for cows and work-oxen, 16 feet by 48. F. Stables. G. Pig-styes, with
hen-house above. H H. Fold-yards for cattle of different ages.
Repairs are mostly done by the tenants; on the large farms complaints are
seldom made of their being neglected, but upon small farms the landlord is
frequently obliged to lend his assistance.

SECT. 3. -- Cottages.
Such cottages as have been erected a number of years, are built with stone and
clay, and covered with thatch; those that have been built of late years, are of
stone and lime, covered with tiles, and mostly a floor of lime and sand; they
consist of one apartment 15 ft. by 16, to dwell in, with a small one at the
entrance for a cow, coals, working tools, etc. 9 ft. by 16, and are only one
story high: Very few of them want the accommodation of a garden.

The materials used for building are, stone and bricks, but mostly the former.
Straw (thatch) used to be the universal covering, but it is now nearly fallen
into disuse, and tiles or slates substituted in its stead. The small dark blue
slate, from Scotland, is the kind generally used here, and are much superior to
tiles; for though they are more expensive at first, yet it is probable that in
a few years they may be as cheap, from the repairs tiles so frequently require,
especially where they are so ill manufactured.

Fir timber is universally used for all the purposes of building.

CHAPTER IV. MODE OF OCCUPATION.
SECT. 1. -- Farms, and Character of the Farmers.
THE size of farms -- varies considerably in this county; in Glendale and
Bambrough Wards the farms are large, from 500l. to 1500l. a year; very few
under 100l. In the other parts of the county they are from 50l. to 300l. a
year: Some tenants in the northern parts of the county, farm from 2000l. to
4000l. a year, and upwards: -- The capitals necessary for such farms entitle
them to a good education, and give them a spirit of independence and
enterprise, that is rarely found amongst the occupiers of small farms and short
leases. Their minds being open to conviction, they are ready to try new
experiments, and adopt every beneficial improvement, that can be learnt in
other districts; for this purpose many of them have traversed the most distant
parts of the kingdom to obtain agricultural knowledge, and have transplanted
every practice they thought superior to those they were acquainted with, or
that could be advantageously pursued in their own situation: And scarce a year
passes without some of them making extensive agricultural tours, for the sole
purpose of examining the modes of culture, of purchasing or hiring the most
improved breeds of stock, and seeing the operations of new-invented and most
useful implements.

The character of a farmer is here so respectable, that gentlemen who possess
landed property from 500l. to 1500l a year, think it no debasement to follow
the profession: and so high a name have many of the farmers obtained for their
superior knowledge in rural affairs, that they are seldom without pupils from
various and distant parts of the kingdom, with whom they have very handsome
premiums. Generally 100l. per annum.
-- Amongst the present pupils may be reckoned the son of an Parl and the son
of a Baronet; -- who, from their abilities, attention, and anxious readiness to
learn and work at every operation, we hope will do credit to the profession,
and render the most essential services to their respective districts.

SECT. 3. -- Rent.
The rent -- of lands in this county used formerly to be clogged with payments
in kind, and personal services: But these have been long disused, and the whole
is now paid in money. -- The rents are mostly due on the 12th of May and the
22d of November; but payment is seldom required till four or five months after
being due.

The rent per acre must vary with the quality of the land, and other
circumstances: At a distance from towns, and for the purposes of farming only,
lands may be had from one shilling per acre up to 30 and 40 shillings: -- Last
year, a farm of upwards of 2000 acres was let for 20s. an acre, uninclosed, but
tithe-free of grain: -- One of 600 acres, at 24s. per acre, pays all tithes: --
Another of 300 acres, at 35s. per acre, tithe-free, well enclosed, and in high
condition, and several other large farms that pay tithes of every kind, have
been let as high as from 27 to 37s. per acre; and some old rich grazing
pastures along the seacoast let for 40s. per acre.

SECT. 3. -- Tithes.
Of this bane to Agriculture, we do not find any thing, peculiar to this
county, which is not common to the rest. In some parts the tithes are collected
with moderation, in others with all the severity that law can enforce; some let
for a term of years at a fair rent, whilst others value and let every year.

SECT. 4. -- Poor Rates.
In Newcastle they vary from 2s. 6d. to 4s. 6d. in the pound, in times of
peace; but at present, All Saints parish is as high as 6s. per pound, owing to
the seafaring people living mostly in this parish; and the sailors being
impressed, their wives and children come for support upon the pairsh -- At
Hexham they are 2s. 6d. -- Morpeth 3s. 6d. -- Alnwick 1s. 10d. -- Belford 2s.
6d. -- Berwick 2s 8d. -- Wooler 1s. 6d. -- and in other parts of the county we
find they vary from 6d. to 2s. per pound.

SECT. 5. -- Leases.
Leases -- for twenty-one years, are let on most of the principal estates,
especially in the northern parts of the county. Some proprietors of land in the
other districts let only for nine, twelve, or fifteen years. The general time
of entry is the 12th of May. Upon the Duke of Northumberland's estate the time
of entry is Lady Day, and the offgoing tenant has no waygoing crop.
The covenants vary with circumstances; but we think the following the best
calculated for improvement, and the benefit of both landlord and tenant:

After the usual reservations of mines, woods, etc. and provisoes of re-entry
on non-payment of rent or alienation, etc. the tenant covenants to pay the rent
-- all taxes -- keep and leave all in repair -- not to sell hay, straw, or
other fodder, from off the premises -- to lay the dung on the premises, except
that bred the last year -- not to sow any hemp, flax, mustard, or rape, except
the last for green food -- not to depasture more stints the last year, than
were depastured for two years preceding -- to destroy the moles yearly, and
scale the grass grounds -- to thresh the waygoing crop in an uniform manner,
and deliver a daily supply of straw to the next tenant -- to keep uneaten the
lands sown with grass seeds in the last year of the term, from the first of
October, except one half to be eaten by the offgoing tenant after the 1st of
April, to the end of the term -- to permit the lessor to sow grass seeds on the
waygoing crop -- and to plough the lands intended for fallow five months before
the expiration of the term -- to have no more ploughing than Generally from
one-third to near one-half, on the larger farms; but on some small farms it is
more.
acres at one time -- to fallow yearly for wheat, turnips, or other green
crops, one-third of the tillage lands, and lay upon every acre cart loads of
lime, where necessary; or, in lieu thereof, cart loads of dung -- not to keep
any land in tillage more than three years at one time -- to lay to grass yearly
one-third of the tillage lands, and sow upon every acre pounds of clover, etc.
(or other seeds suited to the soil;) to keep such lands in grass at least two
or three years, Weak soils, improper for corn, should continue in grass 5, 6,
or 7 years, or until it is thought they want refreshing by ploughing, which is
only used in such situations as being subservient to stock.
before they are ploughed out again -- to lay down to grass, or have in grass
the last three years, all those fields called -- to keep in grass during the
whole of the term, and at the end thereof leave in grass all those fields
called These are generally old rich grazing pastures, or meadows.
(...) and all such lands as shall be converted into watered meadows -- to be
at one half the expense of making new quick senses, and of cleaning and rearing
them for seven years after first planted -- and others, that situation or
circumstances may require.

The lessor convenants, that the tenant shall have peaceable possession, and a
waygoing crop from off two-thirds of the tillage lands, with the use of the
stack yards, barns, and granaries, for twelve months after the expiration of
the term; also to be at one-half the expense of making all new quick fences,
and of cleaning and rearing them for seven years after first planted; with
other covenants that may be agreed on, respecting building, etc.

SECT. 6 -- Expense and Profit.
The expense upon a farm may be estimated pretty near the truth, for a certain
number of acres; but the profits depend upon so many precarious circumstances,
such as seasons, mode of culture, produce, markets, etc. that we think any
estimate of profits upon a particular farm, would be a very vague criterion for
judging of the rest, and most probably would not suit any other farm of the
same rent or magnitude in the county; we shall therefore state the expense of
cultivating an acre, supposing a farm in the rotation of three years arable and
three years grass -- viz -- 1 year oats. 2 turnips. 3 barley. 4 clover and
other grasses. 5 clover and other grasses. 6 clover and other grasses.
And that the first year's clover carries six sheep per acre, the second year
four, and the third year two sheep per acre: -- Then the expense will be as
follows.

First year -- for oats L s. d. Ploughing and harrowing 0 6 0 Seed and sowing 0
14 0 Weeding 0 1 0 Harvesting 0 6 0 Threshing and winnowing 0 5 0 Market
expenses and carriage 0 6 0 1 18 0 Second year -- for turnips, drilled at 30
inch intervals. Ploughing and harrowing 5 times 1 5 0 Lime, leading and laying
on 1 5 0 Leading dung 0 8 0 Spreading ditto 0 2 0 Seed and drilling 0 1 6
Hand-hoeing twice 0 6 0 Horse-hoeing twice 0 1 6 3 9 0 Third year -- for
barley, sown broad-cast. Ploughing and harrowing twice 0 10 0 Seed 3 bush. This
is the quantity commonly sown, but we think 2 bushels. or 2 bushels, very
sufficient; and where drilled at 9 or 12 inches intervals, 1 bushels we find a
proper quantity; which saving of seed will pay for horse and hand-hoeing, when
the crop is drilled.
and sowing 0 8 0 Weeding 0 1 0 Harvesting, threshing, marketing, and carriage
0 17 0 1 16 0 Carried over 7 3 0 L. s. d. Brought over 7 3 0 4th, 5th and 6th
years -- clover and grasses. Grass seeds sown on the barley crop 0 14 0
Harrowing and rolling in 0 1 0 Stoning, scaling, and catching moles for 3 years
0 5 0 Attendance and other expenses of sheep for 3 years 0 12 0 1 12 0 Taxes
and cesses for 6 years 0 18 0 Capital employed for cultivation, etc. 9 13 0
Ditto for 12 sheep, at 26s. each 15 12 0 Total capital employed on 6 acres 25 5
0 The interest of which allowing 10 per cent. is 2 10 6 To which must be added
the expense of cultivation 9 13 0 Gives the expense per year for 6 acres 12 3 6
Or per acre 2 0 6

The expenses incurred for cultivation will be nearly the same, whatever the
soil, but the produce will vary according to the quality of the land.

On good lands the produce may be, 1st year -- Oats, 45 bush per acre, at 2s
per bush. 4 10 0 2 Turnips, per acre 5 0 0 3 Barley, 36 bush. per acre, at 2s
6d do. 4 10 0 Carried over 14 0 0 L. s. d. Brought over 14 0 0 4th year --
Clover and grasses 3 0 0 5 Do. 2 0 0 6 Do. 1 0 0 Value of produce in 6 years 20
0 0 Deduct expense of cultivation, etc. 12 3 6 Leaves the rent for 6 years 7 16
6 Or, per acre, per year 1 6 1

If the value of the crops be, 1st year -- Oats, 30 bush. per acre, at 28 per
bush. 3 0 0 2 Turnips, 3 10 0 3 Barley, 24 bush. per acre, at 2s 6d do. 3 0 0 4
Clover and grasses 2 10 0 5 Do. 1 10 0 6 Do. 0 15 0 Value of produce in 6 years
14 5 0 Deduct expense of cultivation, etc. 12 3 0 Gives the rent for 6 years 2
2 0 Or, per acre, per year 0 7 0

From the above statement it appears, that nearly the fame capital will be
required to carry on a farm in tillage, at 7s. per acre, that it does one at
26s. per acre: -- Therefore, a farm of good land of 100l. per year, will
require less capital than a farm of bad land of 100l. per year; and also, that
when the value of the crops in 6 years amounts to no more than 12l. such lands
are improper for arable, and will pay no rent; -- of course the most profitable
mode of employing such soils, is to let them remain in pasturage.

CHAPTER V. IMPLEMENTS.
THE Carts -- used in this county are mostly drawn by two horses; they are in
general heavy, clumsy, and ill-formed, and such as we think few districts would
wish to imitate; they are right-lined rectangular parallelopipedons; the
general dimensions for a two-horse cart are 66 inches long, 40 inches wide, and
20 inches deep, and contain 24 Winchester bushels, streaked measure: -- The
usual load for two horses in Winter is 30 bushels of wheat, and in Summer 36;
the first about 17 cwt. and the latter about 20 cwt. or one ton. The neatest,
most useful, and best contrived carts we know, are those made in many parts of
the North Riding of Yorkshire: -- The single-horse carts of this construction,
used for carrying coals from the county of Durham into Yorkshire, are 60 inches
long, 36 inches wide, and 18 deep, hold 24 bushels of coals, when set round the
sides with large coals and upheaped. -- A man or boy drives three of these, two
of which are equal to the greatest quantity ever carried by three horses. -- Mr
Charge, of Newton, sends three of these carts for coals every day, which bring
72 bushels of coals, the distance 26 miles there and back, and is performed in
12 hours by one man: -- The same gentleman's two-horse carts bring 36 bushels
of the same coals.


Single-horse Carts -- are becoming more prevalent in several parts of the
county. -- Mr James Johnson, a common carrier at Hexham, has a horse 16 hands
high that commonly carries from Hexham to Newcastle 24 cwt. and 20 cwt. back
again; and there are instances of his having carried 26 cwt. from Newcastle to
Hexham, which is a very banky, heavy-pulling road.

Wagons -- drown by four horses, are used by some farmers for leading coals
and lime; but we hope a few years will show the absurdity of employing such
unwieldy carriages, so destructive to roads, and of so little utility to
farmers.

The swing Plough -- made in imitation of the Rotherham plough, is in general
use through every part of this county; The farmers of this district have always
had the good sense not to load their teams with wheel ploughs, as wheels in
general destroy a considerable portion of the power of the team, (besides their
additional weight;) hence the absurdity of recommending Norfolk ploughs to
those districts, where the simple swing-plough has been used and properly
understood.
its form is constantly varying, no fixed rules being known for its
construction; scarce two carpenters making them alike, differing widely in
length and height of the beam, point of yoking, form of mould-board, etc. etc
-- To remedy these defects it was intimated, in the first edition of this
Report, that "An Essay on the construction of the Plough, deduced from
mathematical principles." would be soon offered to the public. -- This Essay is
now published, For Messrs Robinson, London, price 2s.
from which we have extracted the following

" PRACTICAL CONSTRUCTION For determining the position and dimensions of the
most essential parts of a Plough.
"That the operation of ploughing may be performed with the least loss of
power, it is necessary to know the height and inclination of the horse's
shoulder.

"While a horse is in the act of pulling, the inclination of his shoulder
varies from 69 to 75 degrees, according to circumstances, the medium is 72
degrees; and the medium height of the point of draught on the shoulder of a
horse, 15 hands high, is 48 inches.

"These data being got from experiment, and the depth to be ploughed (suppose 6
inches) given,

"Draw a right line AB, and at any point (fig. 2, pl. 1) A, erect a
perpendicular AP, equal to 48 inches.

"With AP as a radius, from P as a center, describe a quarter of a circle AQ,
which divide into 90 equal parts or degrees.

"From P, through 72 degrees, draw a right line to meet AB in B.

"Set the length of the traces and swing-trees from P to H; this is commonly
102 inches.

"From H, upon AB, let fall a perpendicular HI, which measured on the scale
that AP was taken from, will give the height of the beam HI=16 inches.

"Then at the distance of half the depth the land is intended to be ploughed
(in this case 3 inches) draw a line parallel to AB; and from C, where it
intersects PB, let fall a perpendicular upon AB to S, which will give the point
of the sock; and a line drawn through C, making an angle of 45 degrees with BA,
will be the position of the fore-edge of the coulter.

"The heel of the plough will be got by setting the length of the sole 36
inches from S to L.

"The length of the beam will be determined by taking the distance from H to
any fixed point, as S, or B, or L, and applying it to the scale of equal parts.
-- In this case HS=44 inches. HB=53 do. HL=79 do."


The form of the mould-board is such, that the sod to be raised presses equally
against it on every part, from the sock point S, to where it leaves it at K; it
also differs from other mould-boards in not beginning to take its rise from the
bottom opposite to the heel L, but at least 12 inches farther forward toward
the sock, and in being cut away at the bottom opposite the heel L, about 3
inches high, (from the sole) by which the turning of the sod is much
facilitated.

For the demonstration of the principles from which the above construction is
derived, as well as the investigation and practical directions for making the
mould-board, Cast iron mould-boards of this form, with maundrells for forging
the socks upon, may be had of Messrs Whinfield and Co. iron-sounders, Newcastle
upon Tyne.
and finding the curve of the breast GS, with many other essential properties,
we must beg leave to refer to the asore-mentioned essay; and only observe, that
wherever these ploughs have been properly tried, they have answered the
intention; being allowed, by all who have seen them at work, to go with more
ease to the horses than any other. -- The best mode of applying the draught, is
by two horses yoked double, and driven with cords by the holder; which are
sufficient for ploughing the strongest lands, and will in general do an acre
per day. Upon Wark-haugh, a strong deep loam, a young Nobleman, who did not
think it any disgrace to make himself acquainted with the profession of
Agriculture, with one of those ploughs and two horses (yoked double and driven
by himself) ploughed two acres per day, and not less than six inches deep, the
third furrow or fallow.


The single-horse Plough -- for ploughing between the rows of drilled turnips,
is represented in sig. 3, pl. 1, the mould-board of which moves upon two
hinges, placed on the inside, and is set wider or closer as circumstances
require, by the crooked piece of iron A (fixed to the stilt) being shisted
along the flat piece of iron, placed upon the top of the mould-board with holes
in it: -- The width at the bottom when closest is 5 inches, and when widest, 9
or 10 inches.

The capstan is made with holes in it at C, for regulating the breadth of the
furrows; and at D, for increasing Plate. 1.
Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

Fig 3.

Fig. 4.

Fig 5.

or decreasing the depth. The price of this plough, when completely finished,
is 1l. 5s.

A double mould-board Plough, -- is made by putting on another mould-board,
with hinges on the other side, but about six inches longer.

A Horse hoe, -- for hoeing the intervals between beans drilled at 30 inches
distance is represented ( fig. 4, pl. 1.) The beam AB is 5 feet long, and its
height at B 16 inches: the curved sides, CF, DE, are described with a radius of
24 inches from G and D as centers; the length of the stilts from A to F, 42
inches; the length of the shanks of the hoes from G, to the underside of the
beam, is 15 inches; their length, GH, 7 inches; and breadth, GI, 5 inches. This
horse-hoe, with the coulters and hoes placed as in the figure, will penetrate
and completely hoe strong lands in dry seasons, when it would be in vain to
attempt to stir them with a plough or hand-hoe.

For hoeing the intervals between turnips, or other crops where the soil is
light, the coulters are taken out, and other sets of hoes put in the holes made
in the sides CE and DE, and end CD, to hoe from 18 to 30 inches at once; for
this purpose, in dry seasons, it is preferable to the single-horse plough above
described; and with proper formed hoes, will answer all the other purposes of
expensive scufflers, cultivators, and quicken rakes; though no more than a
single-horse be required to draw it, and its price be only 30 or 40 shillings,
according to the number and variety of the hoes.

This implement answers very well for hoeing wheat or barley, drilled at 10 or
12 inch intervals, by making it a little wider, so as to take in four hoes.

Harrows. -- A large heavy harrow called a brake, is commonly used for reducing
rough land, especially fallows. Single-horse harrows, containing four bulls,
and 24 tines or teeth, five or seven inches long, (below the bull) are
generally used for harrowing-in seed, after it has had a singling by the brake;
a man drives three horses, and every horse draws his own harrow. Some people
use two horse harrows, joined in the middle by crooks and loops; and also small
light harrows with short tines, for putting in grass seeds.

Rollers -- for reducing cloddy land, rolling wheat in the Spring, and grass
seeds, are mostly made of wood; they are generally 5 feet long, and from 12 to
30 inches diameter: those used for slattening the tops of one-bout ridges, for
drilling turnips upon, are 5 feet long, and 10 or 11 inches diameter; the
framing is various, but that shown in the annexed drawing is the most general (
pl. 2, fig. 3.) The rope by which the drill is drawn is fastened to the bar B,
and is slipped from one end to the other, at every turning, to suit the sowing.
To prevent the accumulation of earth upon the roller, a thin piece of wood C,
is placed at its back, to act as a scraper.

A drill for sowing Turnips, on the tops of one-boul ridges. -- When this mode
of cultivating turnips was first introduced, the only drill used was a hollow
cylinder of tin, with a small hole in the bottom, through which the seed was
shook: if this orifice be made of such size as to deposit a proper quantity of
seed, it is very liable to stop, and of course large spaces are totally missed;
if made so wide as to prevent this inconvenience, it then sows far too much:
This defect induced me some years since to construct one upon different
principles, which is now coming into general use.

The most essential parts of this drill consist of a solid cylinder C ( fig. 1,
pl. 2.) of iron or brass, 2 inches diameter, and 1 inch broad; on the surface
are made or punched 15 or 16 cavities, of the form of a semi-egg, Fig. 1.

Fig. 2

Fig. 3.

Fig. 4.

cut length-ways, and so deep as to hold 4 or 5 seeds each. On the back part of
this cylinder (a little below the top) is placed the hind part of the hopper,
to which is fixed a piece of iron or brass GA, one inch long, and broad,
hollowed on the inside into the form of a Gothic arch, (as in fig. 4.) the
sides of which meeting the sides of the cavities in an oblique angle, prevent
the seeds from bruising; at the lower end of this piece of iron (which may be
called a gatherer) is made a slit 3/10 of an inch long, and 1/10 wide; and at
the back of it, a thin flat piece of iron TE, moves up and down, by means of a
screw S, at the top of the hopper, which enlarges or lessens the orifice O,
directly above the cavities, and increases or diminishes the quantity of seed
delivered, as the operator thinks necessary: -- This slip of thin iron (which
may be called a regulator) is let into a groove made in the board which forms
the back part of the hopper.

This cylinder CY, before the cavities are made, is fixed on an iron axle LL, 1
inch square, and turned very true, as well as are those parts of the axle which
turn in the collars, or thimbles, fixed in the shafts or handles DD, ( fig. 2,
pl. 2.) To the ends of the axle are fixed two wheels WW, 26 inches diameter,
that turn the axle and cylinder round; which in passing through the hopper H
(filled with turnip seed) bring forward in each cavity a number of seeds, and
drop them into the spout P, which are conveyed by it to the coulter C, that
forms a channel on the top of the one-bout ridge SD ( fig 3, pl. 2.) for
receiving them, -- where S is the channel, and D the dung directly under the
seeds.

If the cavities be made to hold 5 seeds when the regulator or tongue is
screwed close down, and there be 16 cavities, it will then deposit 80 seeds in
one revolution; and as the diameter of the wheel is 26 inches, the
circumference will be 81; in this case 80 seeds will be deposited in 81 inches,
or nearly 12 in a foot: -- From this minimum quantity, by screwing up the
regulator, the number may be increased gradually to 50 or 60 in a foot; which
is far too much, unless in very particular and unfavourable situations.

The price of this drill, is 1l. 5s.

Drills, -- for sowing the different kinds of grain, used in this county: not
being able to regulate the quantity of seed, to suit different soils, seasons,
etc. we mentioned in the first edition of this Report, that a drill was then
making, which would remedy those complaints; a description and drawing of
which, being published in the Appendix to the Essay on Ploughs, mentioned in p.
38, we take the liberty of extracting from thence, " A description of a drill,
upon a new construction, for sowing all kinds of grain, in any quantity, and at
any distance.

"The inside part of the drill, by which the quantity of seed is regulated, is
represented by fig. 1. pl. 3, where AX is an iron axle, 1 or 1 inch square,
upon which are fixed, at 9 or 10 inches distance, five, six, or more, brass
fluted cylinders, the flutes being rather more than a semicircle of an inch
diameter, or wide and ^/^ deep.

"RM are hollow cylindrical rims of hammered iron, which have segments turned
down at right angles, to fit exactly the flutes of the brass cylinders; the
cavities of which are increased or diminished by the segments of the iron
cylindrical rims sliding backwards or forwards in the flutes. This is performed
in all the cylinders at the same time, by a rectangular space (n) being made in
the brass cylinders, through which passes a straight piece of iron IN, moving
on friction wheels at J, and fastened to the plates at LK, and also to the
cylindrical rims RM.

"LV is a lever, the fulcrum of which is F, and moved Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

by a screw S, passing through the frame at V. The end at LK is forked, and
made to fit exactly the sides of the collar or plates of iron JK.

"By turning the screw S, the lever moves the whole of the rims at once, and
the cavities are increased or diminished at pleasure, This is done with the
greatest facility and readiness, even while the machine is going and at work;
which is frequently necessary, where the land varies considerably in quality,
upon different parts of the same ridge.
and almost instantaneously, to sow any kind of grain, and in any proportion,
which is shown upon the scale EOP, by the index KO fixed to the end of the
lever at K.

" Fig. 2, pl. 3. is a view of the machine when ready for work; The coulters
and spouts may be hung differently, as represented by the dotted lines, and
which is probably the better mode for hilly lands.
" and for a more particular description, for regulating the depths, distances,
etc. we beg leave to refer to the abovementioned Essay.

For Turnips, -- the large hopper is taken off, and a set of small ones sixed
upon the half-egg cavities at the end of the brass cylinders: The quantity is
regulated by a tongue screwing up and down, as described in the turnip drill (
fig. 1, pl. 2.)

For sowing beans or pease at wide intervals, viz. from 27 to 30 inches, I use
a drill with only one wheel and one cylinder, which a man wheels before him in
the furrow, or (what I find much better) it may be fixed in the body of a small
plough, (drawn by a single horse) with one stilt that passes between the wheel
and the seed-box, ( fig. 5, pl. 1.) By this means the wheel moves along a
smooth surface between the land-side and mould-board M, and the seed is
deposited at a regular depth: two inches answers very well for beans. With the
same small plough and drill I have sown both wheat and barley, at different
intervals from 6 to 12 inches, and 1 or 2 inches deep, with good success; and,
for small concerns, this cheap and simple apparatus will probably be found the
most eligible.

It is fixed to the plough by two pieces of iron going from the ends of the
drill; one to the beam at B, and the other to the stilt at C, and moving round,
on bolts, allow the wheel W to fall and rise with every accidental hollow or
eminence.

The low part of the coulter is knee'd or bent, to bring it to the same plane
with the land side of the plough.

Threshing Machines -- are now becoming general in the northern parts of the
country; they are all upon the principle of the flax mill; which principle was
first introduced into this county for threshing corn, by Mr Edward Gregson,
near 32 years since; the machine he used was worked by a man, who could thresh
with it 12 bushels of wheat in a day; but being hard work, and Mr Gregson dying
soon after, it was neglected. Mr Wm Menzie, who was servant with Mr Gregson at
the time, says "that his master took the idea from a small flax mill which a
Scotchman traveled the country with, for the purpose of swingling the flax
which the farmers grew for their own use: this portable flax mill was carried
in a cart from one farmhouse to another, being a cylinder of 5 or 5 feet
diameter, and 18 inches wide; the switchers were driven by his foot, with a
crank like a cutler's wheel; and that the threshing machine Mr Gregson had, was
made at that time, and exactly the same as the said flax mill." -- Mr Tho.
Gregson thinks that his brother Edward had seen something of a similar nature
in Scotland, probably the same which Mr D. Meldrum gives an account of, about
the same time, in a letter to Mr William Charge of Cleasby, in the county of
York, which he describes as being the same as the flax mill; that it threshed
150 bushels of oats a day, which dropped through a skreen into a winnowing
machine, that dressed at the same time.

Some time after this, Mr Oxley erected a threshing machine at Flodden, moved
by horses, in which the corn was fed-in betwixt two fluted rollers, and struck
by switchers, placed as those are in the present machines; only they are hung
on hinges. Those in use now, are fixed as were those of Mr Gregson's. The
complaint of Mr Oxley's machine was, that it did not thresh common oats clean,
probably for want of velocity; for it is found in the machines now used, that
if the switchers move with a velocity of 1500 feet per minute, they will not
thresh clean; and experience has proved, that to thresh common oats clean,
requires a velocity of 2500 feet per minute.

Mr Ilderton erected two threshing machines, one at Ilderton and another at
Hawkhill, worked by horses, the principle of which was to rub the grain out by
projecting pieces of wood, (on the circumference of a large cylinder) rubbing
against several fluted rollers: he used it many years, but it was frequently
necessary to put the straw twice through before it was perfectly clean.

We were informed by the late Sir Francis Kinlock, Bart. of Gilmerton,
Scotland, that while he was attempting to perfect Mr Ilderton's machine, he saw
a portable flax mill, made for the use of poor families, worked by a man. It
struck him that it would thresh corn, and he got one made, with the addition of
two smooth rollers for taking in the corn; the work being too hard for a man,
he sent it to Mr Mickle's mill, to have it tried by water: soon after, Mr
Mickle's son built a threshing mill at Kilbogie; and after ten or twelve had
been erected in the neighborhood, by other workmen, he applied to Mr Kinlock
to take out a patent, who told him that he did not look upon it as an original
invention, and that a patent would not be of any use. Some time after this, Mr
Mickle took out a patent (for England only) in his own name, for the purpose we
suppose of securing to himself his own combination of wheels, etc. for movement
of the various parts, as the leading principle of the machine had been applied
to the same purpose at least 20 years before. Mr Mickle is a very ingenious
mechanic and though it appears he has not the merit of being the original
inventor, yet he has added many useful improvements.


At their first introduction into this county, the corn and straw were thrown
out together upon the floor, and caused great confusion: to remedy this, a
skreen was added, through which the grain dropped into a winnowing machine, and
from off the skreen the straw was taken by a man: but a circular rake, invented
about eight years since, By Mr Balley, who first applied it to his machine at
Chillingham.
performs the operation much better; and at the same time saves a considerable
expense. This rake is now added to all those that have been lately erected; and
only causes an addition to the machinery of one light wheel. These machines are
moved both by water and by horses; two, four, and even six of the latter are
sometimes employed; the former is certainly the best power where it can be
obtained.

From a review of the whole, it appears that the principle of the flax mill had
been applied by different persons at different times, for the purpose of
threshing corn; and since its being more generally used, different persons have
invented and used various combinations of wheels and other contrivances to
effect the same purpose, and render the machine more perfect.

The simplest and most useful combinations and contrivances are certainly the
best: but whose are entitled to this appellation we do not pretend to
determine; the public must judge for themselves. -- The combination we shall
offer is different to any we have seen, for which reason, and being that where
the first circular rake was applied, we shall give

A description and calculation of a Threshing Machine erected at Chillingham.
In pl. 4, fig. 1, BB, is a horizontal board or table 5 feet long by 3 ft. 4
ins. broad, on which the corn CC is evenly spread, and presented to the
cast-metal fluted rollers RR (4 inches diameter) which take it regularly in,
and by their weight and sharp edges hold fast the straw, while it is struck,
switched, or threshed, by the switchers, or pieces of wood SSSS, fixed in the
cylinder DD, and projecting 3 inches from its surface; This cylinder is made
with strong arms, on which are fixed the switchers, and cased round with narrow
inch deals; the whole secured from flying off by strong iron hoops, surrounding
them at each end; the switchers are covered with plate iron, to prevent their
wearing.
these, when they strike the corn, move in an upward direction RE, with great
velocity, and throw the corn as it is threshed, and the straw as it leaves the
fluted rollers, against the circular rake KK, and upon the wire skreen G, from
whence the straw is taken by the rake, and delivered upon the sloping board L,
down which it slides to the floor N, while the corn passes through the skreen G
into the hopper H, and from thence to the inclined board I; but in falling from
H to I, a strong current of air, raised by the fanners FFF, blows the chaff
over the sloping board O, and the light corn against it, which falls into the
space P, and the chaff into M, while the good grain slides down the inclined
board II, to the floor at Q, from whence it is taken and put into a second
winnowing machine, in which are placed proper riddles to suit different kinds
of grain: This second machine is moved by a rope going over a pulley, fixed in
the axle T, and is set a-going, or stopped, at pleasure, by a stretching
pulley, as occasion requires.

Where the situation will admit of the board II, being placed about 4 feet from
the floor, the second winnowing machine may be placed directly under it, and
save the trouble of lifting the corn.

To find the velocity of the particular parts, -- we must divide the product of
the number of cogs in the driving wheels, by the product of the number of cogs
in the driven wheels, and the quotient will be the number of revolutions made
by the last moved part, for one of the first moving part.

The whole is put in motion by an overshot water wheel 14 feet diameter, which
makes from 5 to 6 revolutions per minute, according to the supply of water; on
the axle of this water wheel is fixed a large spur wheel aa, of 160 cogs (152
inches diameter) which drives a cast-metal pinion b, of 16 cogs (15, 28 inches
diameter) on the axis of which is placed another spur wheel c, of 63 cogs (60,
1 inches diameter) that drives the cast-metal pinion d, of 16 leaves, (15, 28
inches diameter) on the axis of which is fixed the cylinder DD, (4 feet
diameter, and 5 feet long) with the four projecting pieces of wood, or
switchers, SSSS, that switch or thresh the corn, as described above.

Then 160/16 x 63/16 =39,375, the revolutions of the cylinder for one of the
water wheel, which, multipled by 5,5, the medium revolutions of the water wheel
per minute, gives 216,562, the revolutions of the cylinder per minute; this
multiplied by 4 the number of switchers,

View of the THRESHING MACHINE Erected at Chillingham, 1739. With the Circular
Rake and ^ann^rs.
Dressed Corn Q

Light Corn P

C^^^^ M

Straw N



gives 866,25 the number of strokes per minute.

And as the diameter of the cylinder is 4 feet, the circumference will be
12,56; therefore 216,5625, the revolutions of the cylinder per minute,
multiplied by 12,56 feet, the circumference of the cylinder, gives 2720 feet,
the velocity of the switchers per minute.

The large spur wheel a, also drives the light cog wheel ^, of 63 cogs (60, 1
inches diameter) fixed on the axis kl, of the rake, for taking away the straw.

Then 1^^/^^=2,54 the number of revolutions, which the rake makes for one of
the water wheel, multiplied by 5,5 the revolutions of the water wheel per
minute, gives 13,97 nearly 14, the revolutions of the rake per minute; which
having 4 arms, will clear the screen of straw 56 times per minute.

The Rollers, -- are moved by the pinion b, of 16 leaves, working into the
slight cast-metal wheel f, fixed on the iron axis ii, of the lower roller, on
which axis is also fixed a small pinion g, of 8 leaves, working into another h,
of equal number, fixed on the axis This axis is fixed into the upper roller,
either by an universal joint, or with a square tapering end, to allow the upper
roller to rise and fall, according as the corn is fed-in thicker or thinner,
and the concave board RE, is hung on a bolt, to allow it to rise and fall with
the roller.
of the upper roller, which gives the two rollers an equable motion, for taking
in the corn.

Then 169/16; x 16/30 = 4,444, the revolutions of the rollers for one of the
water wheel, multiplied by 5,5 gives 24,44, the revolutions of the rollers per
minute.

And the diameter of the rollers being 4 inches, the circumference will be
12,566 inches; therefore 12,566 inches, the circumference of the rollers,
multiplied by 24,44, the revolutions of the rollers per minute, gives 307,1
inches of straw passing through the rollers per minute; which 307 inches receive
866 strokes of the switchers in that time, or nearly three strokes to an inch.

When the rollers are required to move swifter or slower, they may be driven
very conveniently from the end of the axle of the rake, by fixing a cast-metal
faced wheel on it, with three rows of cogs, (8, 10, and 13) working into a
shifting pinion of 8 leaves, fixed on an iron axle; at the other end of which
is put a small bevel wheel of 12 teeth, working into another of 8 teeth on the
end of the axle of the lower roller.

The Fanners, -- are moved by a crossed rope, passing over a pulley T, 10
inches diameter, fixed on the axis of the cylinder, and another V, of 8 inches
diameter on the axis of the fanners. Then as the axle of the cylinder makes
216,56 revolutions per minute, we have 216,56 x 10/8 = 270,7 revolutions of the
fanners per minute.

From the above it appears, that when

The water wheel makes 5 revolutions in 1 minute, The cylinder will make 216
ditto, The rollers -- 24 nearly, The rake -- 14 ditto, and clears the skreen of
straw 56 times per minute. The fanners -- 270 ditto, The switchers make 866
strokes per minute, and move with a velocity of 2720 feet per minute.
The rollers take in nearly 300 inches of corn per minute: The medium length of
good oats is about 30 inches; and, supposing half a sheaf put in at a time, a
whole sheaf will then be equal to 60 inches:

Therefore 300/60 = 5 sheaves per minute; which agrees with the usual rate of
going of this machine, when supplied with a medium quantity of water. From some
experiments lately made, 120 sheaves of oats were threshed in 22 minutes, and
yielded 12 bushels, which is at the rate of 33 bushels per hour, or 264 This
must be considered as a medium quantity; of short early oats 320 bushels might
be threshed in the same time; and of wheat with long straw, not more than 180
bushels: But a great deal depends on the care and constant attention of the
feeder; a trifling neglect in this point, will make a considerable deficiency
in the above quantities, which we find is too often the case. -- Where there is
plenty of water, so that a whole sheaf may be put in at once, the quantity will
be double to the above.
per day of 8 hours.

The expense, for the attendance on the threshing and dressing part of this
machine, is only that of three women, viz: One to feed-in, another to hand the
sheaves to the feeder, and the third to take away and riddle the corn after it
is winnowed; of course the expense of threshing and dressing 264 bushels is
only 1s. 6d.

The expense of threshing the same quantity by the flail, would be one
twenty-fifth part, The wages here for threshing are, one twentieth part of the
grain, when the thresher folds or bundles up the straw -- and one twenty-fifth
when the straw is taken away loose, as fatt as he threshes it; the thresher
assists in winnowing, and finds a woman for the same purpose; the farmer finds
a man and two women.
or 10 bushels, which at 2s. per bushel is 21s.; to which must be added 2s. the
expense of a man and two women, to assist in winnowing, making in all, 23s.

The expense of erecting a threshing machine of this kind, was from 70 to 80l.;
but since the advance of wood, iron, and wages, it will be now near 100l.

Machines of small dimensions are erected for about 50l. which, with 2 horses,
will thresh and dress 120 bushels of oats, or 60 of wheat, in 8 hours.

Rollers, or small Millstones, are added to many of these machines, for
crushing or grinding grain, for horses, swine, etc. Knives for cutting straw,
and many other useful appendages, might be added.

The Winnowing Machine is in universal use here; we believe very little, if any
corn is dressed by any other means: They were first made by a farmer of a
mechanical genius called ROGERS, who lived at Cavers near Hawick, and whose
grandson, now a carpenter there, still makes them, perhaps of as useful a form
as any other person, and at as low rates as from 2l. 8s. to 3l.

Old Rogers, we are told by his descendant, happened in the year 1733 to see a
machine, thrown out of the way as useless, in an old granary at Leith, of which
he took such notice, that, on his return home, he set about making one, the
utility of which soon recommended it to many principal farmers: in a few years
they were universally used, and are now become so absolutely necessary, where
large quantities of corn are to be dressed, that it would be attended with
considerable inconvenience to do without them; of such great utility has been
the superior discernment of this ingenious and unnoticed individual!

The present Mr Rogers says, he believes the machine his grandfather saw at
Leith, was brought from Holland: An anonymous remarker, who signs himself a
Scotch Farmer, states "that it was first introduced by the late celebrated
Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, along with the barley mill, from Holland, in the
year 1711;" and we have somewhere read or heard, that the Dutch brought it from
the Chinese, which is corroborated by the information we lately received from
the Honorable Mr Douglass, A son of the Earl of Selkirk.
who was shown (when on his travels in France) by the late Duke de
Rochefoucalt, a set of Chinese drawings, representing the culture of rice in
all its stages, from the first planting to its being prepared for sale, and
that the last drawing was a representation of the dressing or winnowing, which
was performed by a machine exactly similar to that we now use for the same
purpose.

Dr Desagulier's blowing wheel, which he presented to the Royal Society in
1734, is exactly on the same principles.

Two men and three women will winnow, dress and measure up into sacks, 250
bushels of oats, or 150 bushels of wheat, per day, -- the expense 3s. 8d.

A pair of pruning shears, represented in fig. 1, pl. 5, have been particularly
recommended by Mr Tweddell, of Threepwood, to the President of the Board, as
being superior to any other implement for the purpose of cutting hedges. --
They consist of a strong sharp knise 6 inches long, moving betwixt two
square-edged cheeks; the upper handle is 2 feet 6 inches long, and the other 2
feet 3 inches.

There are many other implements used in this county, but as we believe most of
them are such as are well known in other parts of the kingdom, it would be of
little use to describe them here.

CHAPTER VI. ENCLOSURES.
THE parts of this county capable of cultivation are in general well enclosed
by live hedges; the only exception is a small part of the vales of Breamish,
Till, and Glen: but even here, the advantage of having well-fenced fields is so
well understood, and so much desired by the tenants, that we hope, in eight or
ten years, the whole of this valuable district will be enclosed by proper
fences.

The size of enclosures varies with the size of farms. In some parts, from two
to six or eight acres; in the northern parts, where the farms are large, the
fields are from 20 to 100 acres.

The fences most generally used for new enclosures, are earth mounds; at the
base of which, and on the edge of the ditch out of which they are raised, are
planted the quicks, generally upon a turned sod six inches high; which we think
too low, as we always find the quicks grow much better when planted three sods
high, with the thickness of two surface sods laid under their roots. This in
most cases doubles, and in thin soil trebles, the surface soil, and forms a
thick bed of the best earth for the roots of the quicks to grow in, as will be
more clearly seen in the annexed sketch of such a sense, fig. 2, pl. 5, where
AB is the ditch, 4 feet wide at top; BCD the mound; the base BD, six feet wide;
and height CD, four feet. Q, the quicks planted upon three turned sods, at
least 15 inches high, with surface sods and soil 12 inches thick, under and
behind their roots. -- The expense of making this kind of fence, is 1s. 4d. per
rood of 7 yards, exclusive of quicks and railing.

The quicks should never be planted nearer each other than nine inches, and
upon good land a foot. Quicks four or five years old, with strong clean stems,
are always to be preferred to those that are younger and smaller.

It is a custom, in some parts, to clip young quicks every year; this makes the
fence look neat and snug, but it checks their growth, and keeps them always
weak in the Plate V.
Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

Fig. 3.

Fig. 4.

Fig. 5.

Fig. 6.

stem, and, when they grow old, open at bottom; while those that are left to
nature, get strong stems and side branches, which by interweaving one with
another, make a thick and impenetrable hedge, and if cut at proper intervals,
(of nine or ten years), will always maintain its superiority, over those that
have been clipped from their first planting. In point of profit, and of labor
saved, there is no comparison; and for beauty, we prefer nature, and think a
luxuriant hawthorn in full bloom, or laden with its ripened fruit, is a more
pleasing, enlivening, and gratifying object, than the stiff formal sameness
produced by the shears of a gardener.

Walter Trevelyan, Esquire of Nether-Witton, showed us a new mode of raising
fences: -- He erects an earth mound (fig. 3, pl. 5,) 7 feet wide at bottom AB,
4 feet wide at top CD, and 5 feet high; on the middle of the top he plants a
row of quicks Q, and on each side at 2 feet distance puts in willow slakes WW,
an inch in diameter, and 1 or 2 ft. long, sloping outward, which take root and
form a live fence, for the preservation of the quicks in the middle -- These
stakes are at first bound together by a kind of oddering; at the time we saw
them they had been only two years done, of course no judgment could be formed,
for some years to come, whether it possessed superior advantages to the mode
above-described: It appeared to us an experiment yet undetermined. In some
situations, we are inclined to believe, it may be very useful, especially in
cold, soft, marshy soils: Whether it will be superior in all, we still
entertain some doubts; but are persuaded, that a full trial will be given, by
the spirited improver who is making the experiment. -- The expense is 2s. 6d.
per rood of 7 yards.

Stone Walls are also used for fences in some situations; the usual dimensions
are 2 feet at bottom, 15 or 16 inches at top, and 4 to 4 feet high: About half
way up a row of through-stones are put, at the rate of 9 or 10 in a rood of 7
yards, and on the top a coping of sods, or stones set edge-ways; the latter is
preferable, as being the most lasting, and presenting a more awful aspect, to
deter the Highland sheep from attempting to leap them -- The expense of making
these walls is from 5s. 6d. to 6s. 6d. a rood of 7 yards, for winning and
walling: The expense of leading depends on the distance. -- Twelve or fourteen
cart load will do a rood.

The advantages of enclosing private property in this county principally arise
from separating lands of different qualities, which can, by these means, be
employed in such culture, or depastured by such stock, as the occupier thinks
most suitable; and, where sheep are kept, they feed with more facility and
readiness, being freed from the whims of the shepherd, and the teazings of his
dog; and, by separating the dry ground from the wet, a stock-master has it more
in his power to avoid that fatal malady, the rot.

Gates are made of various forms, but agree nearly in size, being generally 8
feet wide, and from 4 to 5 feet high, with 5 strong bars about 3 inches deep,
and a weaker one about 1 inch square, placed between the two lowest bars. --
The lighter a gate is, especially in the forepart, the better, provided it be
sufficiently strong; for this reason the top bar should be considerably
stronger than the rest, as it is the most liable to be broken, especially where
horses are kept, if not made so high that they cannot easily get their necks
over it. The most approved form is that represented, fig. 4, pl. 5.

Hanging Gates, so as to have a proper fall or tendency to shut of themselves,
being little understood by carpenters, we hope the following directions for
effecting that purpose may be acceptable.

Having set the post perpendicular, let a plumb-line, AB, be drawn upon it: on
this line, at a proper height, place the hook C, so that it may project 3
inches from the face of the post; and at a convenient distance below this,
place the lower hook D, 1 inches to one side of the perpendicular line, and
projecting 2 inches from the face of the post; then place the top loop or eye 2
inches from the face of the "hawtree," and the bottom loop, 3 inches: -- Thus
hung, the gate will have a tendency to shut in every position. For if the
weight of the gate be represented by the line CD, fig. 5, pl. 5, this, by the
resolution of forces, is resolvable into other two, CE and DE, the former
representing that part of the weight which presses in a perpendicular position;
and the latter, that part of the weight which presses in a horizontal
direction, and gives the gate a tendency to shut.


This principle has been long known and practiced, in hanging gates that open
both ways.

CHAPTER VII. ARABLE LAND.
SECT. 1. -- Tillage.
THE arable lands of this county being under various systems, and directed by
various opinions, the management of the tillage must differ considerably. -- In
the operation of ploughing, it is generally agreed that the breadth of the
furrow should be about 9 inches, and the depth from 4 to 6 or 7 inches.

It was formerly the general practice not to plough the lands intended for
fallow till after Spring seed-time, (and very often delayed till May, or even
June) but now the fallows are ploughed before Winter, to meliorate by the
frost. -- In the middle of April or beginning of May, those that are intended
for turnips or potatoes are harrowed and ploughed across, and, where necessary,
rolled with a heavy roller; the same operations are repeated two, or three, or
more times, until it is thought sufficiently fine and clean for sowing or
planting.

Those that are intended to be naked sallow for wheat, receive three, four, of
five ploughings through the Summer; but are seldom harrowed, it being thought
an advantage to wheat to have the land cloddy.

On those fallows where quickens or couch grass, etc. are found, every exertion
is used to extirpate them, by harrowing, gathering and burning, or leading off,
so long as the smallest remains are visible. The lime and manure are mostly
laid on before the last ploughing.

For barley, it is the general custom to plough only once; but the best
cultivators seldom sow this grain without giving two or three ploughings,
especially when the land is to be sown with clover and grass feeds.

Every other species of grain is sown after one ploughing, except when beans or
pease are to be drilled.

Trench Ploughing, is practiced by a few; it is an excellen mode for breaking
up grass lands, and is performed by two ploughs following each other in the
same furrow; the first plough paring off the surface, from 1 to 1 inches thick,
and turning it into the bottom of the last-made furrow: While the second
plough, going 3 or 4 inches deeper, turns upon it a sod of friable earth, which
being destitute of tough fibrous roots, harrows to a sine mould with little
difficulty.

This practice entirely obviates the objections to drilling upon clover lea,
and the additional expense will not be more than 4s. per acre, which, put in
competition with the advantages to be derived from it, will leave a
considerable balance in favor of the practice: in breaking up old swards, on
clayey lands, the expense is almost saved in the harrowing; on such soils it
will be found of great service, if they are thus ploughed in Autumn, they may
be easily drilled with beans or pease in the Spring, and the subsequent hoeings
performed with facility; operations that would be very difficult to perform,
when ploughed in the manner usually practiced.

The Ridges are of various forms and sizes. -- On the deep soiled lands, that
were used as arable some centuries since, the ridges are mostly very high,
broad, and crooked; It is a dangerous experiment to attempt to level and
straighten ridges of this description too suddenly; we have seen much mischief
done by it.
upon lands that have been lately brought into cultivation, they are straight,
nearly flat, and in general about twelve or fifteen feet broad; on dry lands,
they are quite flat, and alternately gathered and split. A breadth of fifteen
feet answers best for sowing broad-cast at two casts.

A few years since, the ploughing, and various other purposes, for which
draughts are wanted upon a farm, were performed by horses, which in ploughing
or harrowing are always yoked double, and driven with cords by the ploughman,
and in general plough an acre a day; but in the season of sowing turnips, one
and a half, or even two acres, are frequently ploughed, on fine light soils.
But since the great advance in the price of horses, oxen have been more used,
especially for the purposes of ploughing, and carting about home.

They are harnessed both with yokes and collars. Where three or four are used,
a boy is allowed to drive; when two, Two oxen are sound very sufficient for
ploughing light fallow lands in Summer; but for almost every other purpose, 3
or 4 are used.
the man that holds the plough drives with cords. They only plough half a day
at a time; one half of a team being used in the forenoon, and the other in the
afternoon.

SECT. 2. -- Fallowing.
The practice of making naked fallows on all kinds of soils, once in 3 or 4
years, was general through this county, till the introduction of turnips; in a
few years the fallows of the dry lands were covered with this valuable plant.
On such other soils as were found improper for this root, the naked fallows
still prevail, with an almost universal opinion, that it is absolutely
necessary to the fertility of the land; yet there are some few who dare to
doubt this long-established doctrine, and presume to think, that naked fallows
might be dispensed with in many situations, by cultivating leguminous crops,
drilled at wide intervals, to admit being ploughed, or horse-hoed between: to
which, if proper hand-hoeings be added, the land will be as well prepared for
wheat, as if it had been a complete naked fallow.

This is not advanced on speculation or theory; instances can be produced,
where no naked fallows have been made on fields of strong loam for 12 years,
yet they are as clear of quickens, couch-grass, or other pernicious weeds, as
any fields in the district, that have been under naked fallow two or three
times in the same period. It may be necessary to observe, that, previous to the
adoption of this system, the land was cleared of quicken, or couch-grass, by a
complete summer fallowing.


Whether fallowing is or is not necessary, has been much agitated of late
years; so much so, that the different partisans have obtained the appellation
of "fallowests," and "antifallowests:" It happens to be one of those subjects
which can never be determined by reasoning, opinions, or bold assertions; fair
experiments only can resolve it; and whatever may be the results of such
experiments, it may be justly concluded, they will be the same in similar
soils, climates, and situations.

Though we are diffident in giving a decided opinion upon so important a subject,
yet from observations made on the above facts, we cannot help being inclined to
think, that the quantity of maked fallow might be very much reduced, and in
another century will probably be totally abolished, if no fortuitous
circumstances arise to check the exertions and spirit for improvement, which
have been so prevalent of late years, and so generally diffused through this
district.

SECT. 3. -- Rotation of Crops.
The most prevailing rotation was, 1 fallow 2 wheat 3 oats 4 fallow, etc.
repeated for two, three, or four fallowings: -- Upon the strong lands along
the seacoast, instead of oats after wheat, they generally substitute pease or
beans, or beans and pease mixed; when laid down to grass, it is sown with grass
seeds, and continued in grass seven or more years.

On dry soils, after ploughing out from grass, the rotation was, 1 Oats 2 Oats
3 Turnips, sown broad-cast, limed and dunged and twice hand-hoed. 4 Barley or
wheat, sown up with clover and ray-grass, and continued in grass from four to
seven, or more years, depastured principally with sheep.


The best cultivators use the following rotations, according to soil,
situation, and circumstances.

Clayey soils.
1 Fallow 2 Wheat 3 Clover for 1 or 2 years, depastured with sheep. 4 Beans or
pease.
Strong loams.
1 Turnips, drilled at 30 inches intervals. 2 Barley 3, 4, Clover and grass
seeds; for 2 or 3 years, depastured with sheep, and a small proportion of
cattle. 5 Oats 6 Beans, or pease, drilled at 30 ins. intervals, horse and
hand-hoed. 7 Wheat, drilled from 9 to 12 ins. intervals, horse and hand-hoed.
Sandy and dry light loams, -- after being ploughed out from grass, 1 Oats. 2
Turnips, drilled at 30 ins. intervals. 3 Barley or wheat, drilled from 9 to 12
ins. intervals, hoed and sown up with clover and grass-seeds, depastured with
sheep, (and a small proportion of cattle) for three or more years.


This last rotation has been practiced of late years, and is becoming more
general, not only upon the turnip soils, but upon the strong clayey lands,
substituting naked fallows, or beans drilled at 30 ins. intervals, instead of
turnips; and those who have tried it on such strong lands, find, that after two
or three years clover and grass seeds, depastured with sheep, the land will
grow good crops of oats, which they could never get it to do under their old
system.

Those who have practiced the Norfolk system on thin light soils, find their
crops grow worse, especially the turnips and clover, and many have been obliged
to adopt this system, by which they find their lands renovated; and, instead of
having to complain, that their soil was "tired of turnips and clover,' they now
find, that it produces abundant crops, and that every rotation brings it nearer
its former fertility.

SECT. 4. -- Crops commonly cultivated.
WHEAT.
The preparation, for the greatest quantity of wheat raised in this county, is
naked summer fallow: -- Of late years considerable quantities have been grown
after turnips; it is also grown after rape, clover, beans, pease, tares, and
potatoes.

The kinds of wheat grown here include many varieties, and as they are known by
different names in different districts, we are afraid, that by barely
mentioning their names, a very different variety may be taken for the one we
mean; and though we despair of pointing out such marked distinctions as
accurately to distinguish them in all cases, the shades of difference being
often very small, yet we hope there are some leading features which may help us
to attempt an arrangement, and in some measure better enable our readers to
ascertain the variety intended; for this purpose we shall divide them into two
orders: viz. the smooth chaffed, and the downy chaffed, of which we shall
enumerate the principal varieties now grown in this district. We could wish to
see this subject undertaken by Professor Martin, who is well qualified to do it
justice.


1. Smooth chaffed: with a few short awns toward the top of the ear.

Zealand -- ears long and large, spicula very wide set, 9 in 3 inches, chaff
white, sometimes with a tinge of brown, opening and showing the grain; straw
very long, grain white and large.

White-Kent -- ears middle sized, 9 spicula in 3 inches, chaff white, opening
and showing the grain when ripe, straw shorter than the last, grain white.

Golden ear -- ears short, spicula very close set, 9 in 2 inches, chaff a
yellowish light brown, short; the grain white, and easily shook out by the wind.

Burwell-red -- ears long and large, spicula very wide set, 9 in 3 inches,
chaff a dark brown red, large and closed on the grain, straw long, grain red.
This variety has been much used of late years, especially upon crude or newly
broke up lands, with great success, and has in a manner superseded the common
red wheat.


II. Downy chaffed: with a few short awns toward the top of the ear.

Woolly-ear -- ears middle sized, spicula close set, 9 in 3 inches, chaff
white, closed on the grain, straw long, grain white.

Velvet ear, or little wheat -- ears small, spicula close set, 8 in 2 inches,
chaff white, closed on the grain, straw short, grain white, smaller, shorter,
and plumper than the last; The form of the grain of this variety is the most
perfect of any other we have seen, and from the shortness of the straw, it is
the best adapted to sow upon rich soils, where there is a danger of the crop
lodging.
and the appearance of the ear is less in every dimension.

The downy chaffed wheats have shorter straw, and are less liable to have the
grain shaken out by winds (the chaff embracing the grain more closely,) than
the smooth chaffed tribes, which is a considerable advantage; but then we are
apprehensive that this downiness makes them retain the dews and moisture upon
the ear much longer than the smooth chaffed kinds, and probably renders them
much more liable to be affected by those diseases which give a dusky dark shade
to the chaff, and a rusty cankering upon the straw; as we recollect few
instances of smooth chaffed or red wheat being troubled with this disease, of
course the downy chaffed kinds are most proper for windy open situations, and
the smooth chaffed to well sheltered enclosed districts.

The seed is selected with great attention from the most perfect samples, and
the practice of changing seed is thought advantageous; for this purpose more or
less new seed is every year imported from distant parts, as Kent, Essex,
Huntingdonshire, Cambridgeshire, etc. -- New seed is preferred to old, and that
immediately after being threshed, rather than what has lain long in a granary.

Steeping in chamberlye, and powdering with quick lime immediately after, to
make it sufficiently dry for sowing, is generally practiced; the smut is seldom
seen where this is properly performed, In a practice of 40 years, the Messrs
Culley have only had one instance of smut in their crops of wheat, and this was
where the seed had not been steeped; and for a number of years they have not
grown less than from four hundred to six hundred acres yearly.
and some go so far as to say, that it will cure smutty seed; A field at
Chillingham was sown in 1795 with wheat, in which were a few balls of smut;
one-third of the seed was steeped in chamberlye and limed; one-third steeped in
chamberlye, dried and not limed; the remainder was sown without either steeping
or liming, in the harvest of 1796; the whole had a few straggling heads of
smut, but appeared to be most in that which was unsteeped. -- Mr Thompson, of
Chillingham Barns, made a similar experiment, and had smut equally alike in the
pickled and unpickled, but the head ridges were considerably the worst; from
hence it appears that steeping in chamberlye is not a preventive in all cases.
-- It may be proper to remark, that there are more complaints of smut this
year, than any other we remember; in some places even barley was very much
affected. -- We believe, that on examination, the stamina will always be found
adhering to the balls of smut, from which a suspicion arises, that the cause
may be owing to some defect in those parts, probably from injuries received by
insects, weather, etc. as we frequently find the same ear bearing the most
perfect grains along with grains of smut. -- The same experiment was repeated
in 1796, and intended to be continued for some years.
-- it is done by throwing the wheat into a vessel full of chamberlye, stirring
it about with a strong stick, and skimming off the light grains as they appear
on the surface; when this is done, the liquor is let off, (by a plug or cock at
the bottom of the vessel) and the wheat taken out and mixed with quick lime;
after this, the sooner it is sown the better, because it is apt to heat and
spoil if suffered to continue in the sacks, or in large heaps; but if dried and
spread thin on a granary floor, will keep several days.

If the grain remains too long in very putrid chamberlye, its vegetative powers
will be injured; 5 or 10 minutes are as long as it should be suffered to
continue.

The quantity sown, is from two to three bushels per acre broad-cast, according
to times of sowing, nature and condition of the land, etc. -- Those who drill
at 10 or 12 inch intervals, find 1 bush. per acre amply sufficient.

The time of sowing, on the lands that receive a naked summer fallow, is
September and October; after drilled beans, October and November; and after
turnips, all through the winter, (as the land is cleared, and weather suitable,)
until the middle of March. -- In the year 1795, many hundred acres were sown in
Glendale Ward so late as the beginning of April, which was all well harvested,
and produced, on an average, about 24 bush. per acre, of excellent grain; in
many cases superior to that sown in the autumn: which was rather singular, as
it is generally expected that wheat sown so late does not produce the grain so
well perfected, as that which is sown earlier. -- This lateness of sowing was
occasioned by the snow lying so late in the spring. -- And we are disposed to
think, from many experiments, that on those light soils, the month of February
is the best and safest seed-time for wheat, maslin, and rye, of all others in
the year.

For spring sowing, the golden ear, and the Burwell-red wheats, are preferred
to all others; except where the land is in such high condition as to endanger
the crop lodging; then the velvet ear is used, as not being so apt to lodge,
from the shortness of the straw. In February 1792 a field of 5 acres was sown
(after turnips) with wheat: a part with Zealand, the remainder with Velvetear;
the produce from the Zealand was 60 bushels per acre, the Velvet-ear 48
bushels, but the latter was injured by a blight, which was attributed to the
moisture hanging longer on the chaff of the Velvet-ear, than on the other; from
which it appears, that even Zealand wheat may be sown in the spring with
advantage; the grain was as well perfected, as heavy, and sold for as high a
price, as any shown in the market that season.
-- The Triticum Aestivum, (Siberian wheat,) or spring-wheat, was introduced
and strongly recommended about twenty years since; but wherever we have seen it
tried, the crops have been uncertain, and produce small: and though this flinty
kind will ripen, if sown even as late as April, or beginning of May, yet it has
not been able to maintain a struggle with the varieties above specified, and is
now totally given up.

The culture whilst growing, of the broad-cast crops, consists only in
hand-weeding: -- Such as are drilled, are hoed once or twice, as well as
hand-weeded where wanted. These hoeings not only destroy the weeds, but make a
fine preparation for the clover and grass seeds; which seldom fail where this
operation is properly performed.

For drilling, -- we find that ridges of 78 inches wide, are the most
convenient; on these we drill 6 or 8 rows, the horse going in the furrow; 3 or
4 rows are deposited on each side; and being afterward deeply water-furrowed,
the land is kept much drier through the Winter, than when in broader ridges; a
matter of considerable importance to a wheat crop on moist soils.

The produce varies considerably, according to soils, seasons, culture, etc.
from 24 to 30 bush. per acre may be taken as a fair average crop, under
favorable circumstances, as high as 50 and even 60 bush per acre sometimes
occur.

The manufacture of wheat into flour for exportation, is principally carried on
at Alemouth, Waren, and a few mills near Berwick; what is done in the vicinity
of Newcastle and other places is principally for home consumption.

RYE
Was formerly the principal grain grown upon all the dry, sandy, and light
soils; but since the use of lime, and the introduction of turnips and
artificial grasses, it is rarely cultivated, ^xcept upon very sandy soils; The
soils which formerly were occupied in growing rye are now so much consolidated
and improved by the use of lime, that they produce abundant crops of excellent
wheat; several thousand acres of which are now grown every year after turnips,
where thirty years since, scarce a single bushel was ever produced.
it is sown after turnips or clover, from September all through the winter,
till the beginning of April.

The quantity sown is about two bushels per acre.

The produce from twenty to thirty bushels per acre.

Upon lands intended for turnips next summer, it is frequently sown in August
and September, along with rape, as spring feed for sheep, which often proves
very valuable in the month of April.

Manufacture. -- The principal part of the rye grown in this district, as well
as considerable quantities imported from abroad, is consumed in the southern
parts of the county, it being the most general bread of the laboring people in
that quarter: -- After being leavened, until it gains a considerable degree of
acidity, it is made into loaves, and baked in a large brick oven, or made into
thick cakes, 1 or 2 inches thick, called "four cakes," and baked on the girdle:
-- The bread is very firm and solid, dark colored, and retains its moisture or
juciness longer than any other bread we know.

MASLIN
(That is wheat and rye mixed) is sown in some parts of the county; the
preparation, quantity sown, and produce, are much the same as wheat; its
application is for household bread, for which purpose many people think it
superior to wheat alone, especially when the proportion of rye is betwixt and
of the whole.

It has been remarked, that when wheat and rye are grown mixed in this manner,
the grains of each are larger and more perfect than when grown singly, without
any admixture.

BARLEY
Is generally sown after turnips: -- In Glendale Ward a few farmers cultivate
it in drills, with 9 or 12 inch intervals.

The kinds most commonly cultivated are,

1st. The common long eared barley, which being early, productive, and best
liked by the maltsters, is by far the most prevalent. -- This variety is
distinguished from the next by the skin having a light red or purplish tinge a
little before it is ripe, and being marked with 7 dark red lines, running
longitudinally along the back of the grain, and may be called the red stroked,
or dark skinned barley.

2d. A variety of the long eared barley, the awns of which drop, or are easily
shaken off when ripe; from the grain being shorter, plumper, and rounder bodied
than the common sort, it is preferred by the millers for making into pearl
barley. -- This variety ripens later than the common kind, or red stroked
barley, by near a fortnight, and is distinguished from it by the grains being
closer set, and the skin having a light yellowish tinge, and not being marked
by dark red lines; it is also shorter in the straw, and may be called the
yellow, or pale-skinned long-ear'd barley.

3d. Battle-door, or sprat-barley, is sometimes grown, and is preferred, for
sowing upon land in high condition, where there is a danger of the other kinds
lodging; it is about three weeks later of ripening than the common kind.

4th. Bear, bigg, or four-rowed barley, used to be the only species of barley
cultivated in the county: -- It is now rarely sown, except upon raw, crude
soils, on which it is found to answer better than any other, more especially if
late sown, owing to the turnips having been kept longer than usual in a cold
backward spring, for the use of the feeding, and store stock.

The quantity sown is from 2 to 3 bushels per acre broadcast; when drilled at 9
to 12 inch intervals, it is found that from 1 to 2 bushels per acre is
sufficient.

The time of sowing, from the beginning of April to the latter end of May.

The produce, from 30 to 60 bush. per acre.

Manufacture. -- Great quantities are made into pot or shelled barley, not only
for home consumption, but for exportation: In the northern parts of the county
very few corn mills are now to be found without the appendage of a barley mill.

Barley, or barley mixed with gray pease or beans, is the common bread of
laboring people in the northern parts of this county; previous to grinding
they are mixed in the proportion of two parts barley, and one of pease or
beans; after being ground the meal is sifted through a fine sieve, made of wood,
to take out the rough husks and coarse bran; it is then kneaded with water,
made into thin unleavened cakes, and immediately baked on a girdle over the
fire.

In this district, barley or mixed meal, is seldom, if ever, leavened and baked
in loaves.

OATS
Are universally grown throughout every part of the county; they are sown after
every species of grain, as well as grass or clover lea.

The varieties, usually cultivated, are,

1st. Poland oat -- a variety of which, called Church's oat, from the name of
the person Mr Church first had them from Mr James Robson, apprentice of Messrs
Culley, who brought them out of Scotland, and gave Mr Church a handful; those
he brought to Fenton were lost.
who first introduced them, are now in high estimation, and are the best early
oat yet known for sowing upon loamy lands in good condition; they are early,
very productive, and much liked by the millers, who give twopence per bushel
more for them than the common oat. This variety is known by the grains being
remarkably short, large, plump, round, and well filled, and not in the least
tailed: a bushel generally weighs 46 lb.

2d. The Dutch, Friezland, or Holland Oat -- were almost the only species of
early oats grown here, before the introduction of the Church oat; they are now
only grown upon dry, light lands, to which they are better adapted than the
Poland oat.

3d. Peebles Oat. In some places it is called the red oat, probably from its
being not so fair as the common oat; but it is very different from the red oat
grown in the midland counties, and ought not to be called by the same name: For
this reason we call it Peebles Oat.
-- A variety of common oat, but much earlier, has been lately introduced from
Peebles shire, in Scotland; it is a very proper oat for hilly districts, not
only for its earliness, but in not being easily shaken by the wind: The grains
are the smallest of any other oat we know; but from the very thin skin, it
meals well, and is liked by the millers, and ripens nearly as early as the
dutch oat.

4th Common Oat The best seed of this kind of oat is got from Blainsley, in
Scotland.
-- is grown upon all such lands as are not thought in sufficient condition for
the Poland or Dutch kind.

5th. Angus Oat. -- A variety of common oat has been introduced of late years
from Angus-shire; it is a better bodied grain than the common oat; produces
more straw, and answers very well in early situations. But its being later in
ripening than the common oat, will militate against its general adoption, in a
country where early harvests are so desirable. This oat answers beyond every
other, in poor, dry, rabbit warren soils, from its throwing up so much straw;
and on such soils ripens early enough.

6th. Tartarian Oats, -- after several trials, by different people, about 20
years since, were given up, on account of the inferiority of the grain, and the
strong reedy straw being of little value for fodder: We now find them
cultivated in the midland parts of the county, on rather an extensive scale,
being found there more productive than any other kind they have tried; they
speak of some crops being as high as 80 bushels an acre; but we suspect these
are under peculiarly favorable circumstances, as we find that in comparison
with Angus oats, both grown in the same field, in the year 1795, they produced
no more than 40 bushels per acre, though estimated (by a strong advocate for
them) at near double that quantity; the Angus oats were more productive per
acre, and worth more to the millers by 3d. per bushel.

7th. Black Oats -- are seldom grown in this district; we do not remember
seeing them more than three or four times, and then only by way of experiment.

In point of earliness, they succeed each other, as classed above; the Angus
oat being at least three or four weeks later than the Poland and Dutch.

The quantity sown in general, is seven bushels per acre of the Poland, and six
of the Dutch oats: These quantities are necessary, as they do not tiller much,
and are large bodied grain; but for the other kinds, we think four or five
bushels sufficient.

The time of sowing, -- is March or April, and the early kinds are sown
sometimes as late as the middle of May.

The produce of common oats is from twenty to forty bushels per acre; of the
Poland and Dutch, from forty to sixty. There are some instances of seventy or
eighty bushels per acre, but these were generally attended with some favorable
circumstances. We have been informed by a principal corn merchant in Berwick,
that the oats grown in Glendale, are fold in the London market, for 1s. 6d. per
quarter more than any other oats presented there.


On fresh land, and crude moory soils, oats are probably the most profitable
crop that can be sown; old worn-out tillage, and strong clay land, are improper
for producing this grain; it being found, that in such situations, they are
scarce worth cultivating; such soils are much better adapted to the culture of
wheat, pease, beans, vetches, and other leguminous crops.

The Manufacture of Oat-meal, is carried on to a considerable extent, both for
exportation and home consumption; oat-meal being a principal article of food
with the great mass of inhabitants, not as bread, but in crowdies, or
hasty-pudding, (provincially "meal kail,") for breakfast and supper; the former
is made by pouring boiling water upon the oat-meal, and stirring it in with a
stick, or spoon shank, till it be so very stiff, that the stirring implement
can with difficulty be got round; it is then eaten with butter or milk: this is
the breakfast of many of the laboring people, especially in the southern parts
of the county; and with which they reckon they can work longer hours, than with
hasty-pudding, or a breakfast of bread and milk.

Hasty-Pudding is made by putting oat-meal gradually into boiling water, and
stirring it about with a peeled stick ("thivel") and letting it continue to
boil in that thickened state, until sufficiently enough, when it is taken off
the sire, and poured out of the pan into pots or dishes to cool, and then eaten
with butter, or more commonly skimmed milk; it is an agreeable, nutritive, and
healthy food, and is the general breakfast and supper of the laboring people
in the northern parts of the county.

BEANS
Have, time immemotial, been a prevailing crop upon all the strong lands in the
county, especially along the sea coast to the southward: they generally succeed
wheat, clover, or old grass. -- The kinds cultivated, are the large and the
small horse bean, and sometimes the mazagan; they are sown in February, four
bushels and a half per acre broad cast, and never hoed: The produce very
uncertain; 20 bushels per acre a fair average broad-cast crop.

In this district, the soil of which is so well adapted to the growth of beans,
it is surprising that drilling them should be totally neglected, and that this
beneficial mode of culture for both beans and pease, should be confined to a
few farmers in Glendale Ward and Tweed-Side: With these few they are drilled
from 30 to 34 inches distance; horse-hoed or ploughed between, and hand-hoed;
the crops good, and the wheat that succeeds, equal to that upon the summer
fallows adjoining. We find that two or three ploughings, or horse-hoeings
between the rows, and twice hand-hoeing in the rows, are generally sufficient.

The first horse-hoeing, or ploughing, takes the earth from the rows, and the
second turns it back again to earth up the beans which are then in full bloom,
and from 24 to 30 inches high. If the land be so very hard, that a plough
cannot penetrate it, the horse-hoe, described page 41, must be first used.

Where beans are intended to be drilled, we plough the land in Autumn,
immediately after the corn is off; gathering each ridge, and harrowing it
lengthways; then set it up in one-bout ridges at 30 inches distance; and if the
land be in broad high ridges, directly across the ridges, water furrowing after
the whole is done, and opening the hollow intervals into the water furrows;
this keeps the land dry, and exposes the greatest quantity of surface to the
influence of the atmosphere, and amelioration of frosts.

If any dung or manure be intended for the fallow, we put it in the hollow
intervals, and cover it by splitting the one-bout ridges with the plough, and
drawing a harrow once over, in the direction of the one-bout ridges; the beans
are then drilled upon them, by the drill plough, fig. 5. pl. 1. A field that in
the usual rotation would have been naked fallow, was thus prepared after oats;
and in February 1794, drilled at 30 inches, with large horse beans, 2 bushels
per acre, the produce 42; in November, it was drilled with wheat, 1 bushels per
acre, at 9 inch intervals, which was reaped in September following, the produce
36 bushels per acre; in 1796, another field was drilled with beans at 32 inch
intervals, the produce 45 bushels per acre; and in November drilled with wheat,
at 12 inch intervals: The crop in July 1797, is promising to be at least 42
bushels per acre; and both fields are as clean, or clear of quickens, or other
weeds, as any lands in the county, that were naked fallow: One of them has been
under this system for upwards of ten years.


Where the land is level, it may be ploughed into ridges of 66 or 78 inches
wide; on the former (with the large drill, fig. 2. pl. 3.) we drill two rows of
beans, and on the latter three: In the first case the horse goes in the furrow,
and the machine drills a row on each side of it, the distance of the rows 33
inches; in the latter case the horse may go on the top of the ridge, or, what
is better, two horses may be yoked to it, so that one may go in each furrow.

PEASE
Were formerly a more general crop than at present; they are mostly grown upon
such lands as have been worn out by running too long in ploughing. On such old
tillage lands, it is found that wheat, pease, vetches, or tares, are the only
species of grain that can be raised to advantage.
The early and late gray pea are the only kinds cultivated here; the latter is
usually sown in February or March, and the former in April: three bushels is
the quantity sown per acre, broad cast; and the quantity reaped depends very
much on seasons; no grain being so uncertain a crop as pease. A good crop is
reckoned at twenty-five to thirty bushels per acre. They are also cultivated in
drills, from 12 to 18 inch intervals, and horse and hand-hoed.

Spring Tares -- are grown principally for cutting, as green food for horses,
to supply the vacancy between the first and second cutting of red clover, used
for the same purpose and for the same intention.

Winter Tares -- have been lately introduced, and promise to answer well; both
kinds are grown upon the fallow lands, intended for wheat or late turnips: --
The winter tares are sown in September, and the other in March.

POTATOES.
Of this invaluable root, the varieties cultiviated here are very numerous, and
frequently changing; many of the kinds that were formerly in repute, being now
in a manner lost; as the true kidney, the rough white, the blood red, the
tawny, etc; and their places supplied by others.

For the Table, the sorts most in repute at present, are three or four
different kinds of long whites; one of which having a red end, is called
red-snout, or red-neb; and several sorts of round whites, and the pink-eye, or
red streak, which is a late potatoe, and the best for eating in the spring, of
any we know; -- it is frequently used till the beginning of July.

For Stock, the principal kinds used are, the champion and the black-a-moor, or
black-potatoe.

They are generally cultivated in drills, from 32 to 40 inches distance; whole
potatoes are seldom or never used for sets, but cut into pieces, containing one
or two sprouts or eyes. These are planted about 12 inches distance, in the
bottom of the drill, the dung laid upon them, and the soil turned upon the
whole, by the plough splitting the one-bout ridges. They are kept clean by
hand-hoeing, and ploughing between the drills; and as the stems advance in
height, they are earthed up by a common, or double mould board plough, with
which implements they are frequently taken up, by splitting the drills in which
they grow, and the roots gathered by women and children.

They are seldom grown for the use of stock, except for horses, to which they
are given raw, The practice of preparing potatoes by steam, has not yet taken
place in this county; we believe it would be a material improvement.
after the rate of two pecks per day each horse, and found very useful in the
spring, (when the straw and hay become dry) and are serviceable for preventing
grease or other disorders, by keeping the horses cool and open: They are
sometimes given to cattle and sheep in the spring, when a scarcity of turnips
prevails.

The mode of preserving them through the winter, is by laying them in heaps, upon
a piece of dry ground, and covering them with straw 6 or 8 inches thick, and
over the straw another cover of soil about a foot thick; which soil is got by
making a ditch from 12 to 18 inches deep round the heap: A bed of straw should
be laid at the bottom.

TURNIPS
Have not been used in this county as food for supporting cattle and sheep,
much above seventy years; Mr Edward Nisbet, who is now near 90 years of age,
says, that it is upwards of 70 years since Mr Proctor, the proprietor of Rock,
brought Andrew Willey, a gardener, to cultivate turnips at Rock, for the
purpose of feeding cattle; that Willey afterward settled at Lesbury as a
gardener, and was employed for many years to sow turnips for all the
neighborhood, and his business this way was so great, he was obliged to ride
and sow, that he might dispatch the greater quantity: The practice of hoeing
was also introduced at this time.
for this purpose they were first grown in the northern parts of the county; it
is but of late years they have been cultivated on part of Tyne-side.

The varieties, -- are the Green Top, the Red Top, and the White Top; which
last, is by far the most general and in the greatest repute, being superior to
the others in size and sweetness.

There is a small hard white kind, preferred by some on account (it is said) of
standing the winter better than most others, but it does not grow near so large
a quantity upon an acre.

At their first introduction they were sown broad-cast, and hoed by gardeners
and other men, at extravagant wages. The late ingenious Mr Ilderton, about
twenty-seven years since, had the merit of first reducing the price of hoeing,
by teaching boys, girls, and women, to perform the work equally as well, if not
better, than men. The mode he took was simple and ingenious: By a light plough,
without a mould-board, he divided the field into small squares of equal
magnitude, and directed the boys and girls to leave a certain number of plants
in each square. In a short time they became accurate, regular, and expert
hoers; and in a few years all the turnips of the country were hoed by women and
boys, at half the expense, and better than by men.

The present mode of drilling turnips was first introduced into this county
about the year 1780; the advantages with which it is attended have so far
recommended the practice, that very few are now sown broad-cast; The broad-cast
culture of turnips in the northern parts of the county, for many years previous
to this, was not inferior to any we ever saw; and in respect to accurate,
regular, clean hoeing, superior to what we ever observed in Norfolk, Suffolk,
or other turnip districts, which we have frequently examined.
and as we think it is an operation that may be serviceable in other districts,
we shall be more particular in describing the manner of performing it.

The land being made sine, prepared, etc. as in the broad-cast method, the
ploughman draws his first furrow as straight as possible. In returning he keeps
his far side horse in the new made furrow, and his plough at such a distance as
to form a one-bout ridge like L; by proceeding in this manner, the land, when
finished, will appear thus: LLLLLLLL The distance of these little ridges is
from twenty-seven to thirty inches. A less distance does not admit of ploughing
between the drills.

The next operation is spreading the dung; which is performed by a cart going
down every third or fifth furrow, and laying the dung in small heaps; women and
boys follow with small three-pronged forks, and spread it evenly in the bottom
of three or five furrows, that is, the one where the dung is dropped from the
cart, and those on each side of it: this done, the ploughman splits the
one-bout ridges before raised, and covers up the dung exactly in the middle;
but before the seed can be sown, these last formed one-bout ridges require to
be flattened at the top, by a small roller that flattens two ridges at once.
Upon the top, and exactly in the middle of these flattened ridges, the seed is
deposited by one or two drill machines, tied to the roller by a rope six or
seven feet long; at which distance they follow the roller, each machine being
guided by a man. See fig. 3, pl. 2.
When finished, the work appears in this form: Where S represents the feed, and
D the dung directly under it, which is wholly employed in promoting the
vegetation of the turnips.

The roller is drawn by one horse, driven by a boy. Setting up the ridges, and
covering in the dung, is performed by a common swing plough. The quantity of
seed sown, from one to two pound per acre; it being better to have an abundance
of plants, for fear of accidents. The quantity of dung used is from ten to
fifteen two-horse cart-loads per acre.

When the plants have four leaves, we begin to hoe; and as they have so much
room sideways, we leave them only eight or nine inches distance from one
another in the rows or drills. The hoers go sideways, and pull the surplus
plants, weeds, etc. into the hollow intervals between the one-bout ridges, and
the turnips are left as regular as if they were planted. This work is performed
by women and children, with the greatest care and exactness, at the expense of
four shillings per acre.

As soon as the plants are recovered, which will be in eight or ten days, a
small plough See fig. 3, pl. 1.
(five inches wide at the bottom behind, and eleven inches at top) drawn by one
horse, takes the earth from the turnip rows, and with the soil covers the
weeds, etc. which the hoers had pulled into the hollow intervals between the
ridges. A second hoeing takes place, when the plants are strong enough, and
otherwise necessary; and a few days after, the soil or earth before ploughed
from the turnip rows, into the hollow intervals, is now equally divided and
laid up to each drill or ridge again, by the same small plough and one horse,
or with a double mould-board plough. -- This finishes the business, unless the
land has been very wild and out of condition, and requires more hoeing and
ploughing between the drills.

If the drills are made in the same directions of the ridges at the next
ploughing for corn, the surface will be irregular, and the dung unequally
distributed. To avoid this, on dry level lands, the drills are made diagonally
across the field; but where the ridges are high, it is best to make the drills
directly across the ridges, and draw a plough down the furrows to take off the
water.

It is generally supposed that a weightier crop is produced by the drill than
the broad-cast method; Turnips drilled in this manner, were sold in 1793, for
8l. an acre, for feeding cattle and sheep, a much higher price than was given
for any sown broad-cast; and we have known instances upon thin, poor, light
soils, that the crop of turnips was of more value than the fee simple of the
land upon which they grew; which we hope will remove the doubts of those who
have suspected that this mode would not answer upon weak thin soils: To such
soils it is certainly the best adapted of all others.
but even admitting them equal in this respect, the superiority, as a fallow
crop, must be allowed to the drill; for the repeated ploughings in the
intervals, and hand-hoeings in the rows, effectually extirpate the whole race
of annual weeds; and so much surface being exposed through the winter, makes a
higher preparation for any succeeding crop. Another advantage is, the facility
with which they are hoed, as a boy or girl, nine or ten years old, can hoe them
with the greatest ease, and generally better than experienced broad-cast hoers,
who are apt to take too many plants away; while the young ones, from the
apprehension of making them too thin, will leave them at any distance you show
them.

The application of turnips in this county is mostly to feeding and rearing
cattle and sheep, and some small quantities for raising seed.

When used for cattle, they are always led off from where they grow, being
previously cleared of the earth and fibrous roots as they are pulled, in order
to keep them as clean as possible. When the cattle are tied up in sheds, which
we think much better than being out in the fields, they are foddered with
turnips eight or nine times a day, and with straw or hay twice; great attention
ought to be paid to keeping their cribs clean.

When the convenience of sheds cannot be had, they are given to the cattle in a
dry grass field, scattered as thin as circumstances will admit: A crib with
straw in it should be constantly in the field, for the cattle to serve
themselves whenever they choose.

For sheep, they are sometimes eaten upon the ground where they grow,
particularly if a dry, light sandy soil, but more generally led off into an
adjoining field, The fields into which the turnips are led to be eaten, are
such as are intended to be ploughed up next year for wheat or oats: -- Thus
every field in rotation reaps the benefit of having the turnips eaten upon it,
which we find much preferable to the system of eating them upon the field where
they grow.
which we think a much better and more economical practice; the sheep getting a
daily, regular supply of fresh food, and the shells being kept clean, are eaten
by young cattle, or those that are to be fattened next summer upon grass.

Sometimes every other ridge is led off, and the remainder eaten upon the
ground where they grow.

When eaten upon the ground, the sheep are not turned upon the whole at once;
but have it portioned out to them, by hurdles, or nets; so that they may have a
fresh break once a week or ten days.

For seed, the turnips of the best form are selected and transplanted in the
month of October, November, or December, into a piece of ground properly
prepared to receive them; in July or August following it is generally reaped,
tied up in sheaves, and when dry, put into a long stack, where it is kept
through the winter, and threshed out in April or May.

The trouble of selecting and transplanting is sometimes dispensed with; but
the seed raised in this manner is sold for one-half or one-third the price of
the transplanted seed; that is, when the transplanted seed is sold for 1s. per
lb. the other is sold for 4d. or 6d.

The produce is very variable, being subject to many casualties. -- The average
crop may be reckoned about 20 bushels, or half a ton per acre -- The land
should be good, and well manured after the crop; as we find the soil much
impoverished by it.

HISTORY OF DRILLED TURNIPS.
TO trace useful discoveries from their origin, through their various stages of
improvement, is in most cases both useful and entertaining; and teaches us not
to despair, though our first attempts may be unsuccessful; but rather hope,
that by perseverance, and varying modes and circumstances, we shall at last
attain the object sought for. The method of cultivating turnips, described
above, is an encouraging instance of this observation: -- as we find that Mr
Tull first cultivated turnips at three feet distance; -- for in his Essay on
the Principles of Tillage and Vegetation, under the article Turnips, page 96,
he says, "When I drilled upon the level "It is impossible to hoe-plough them so
well when planted upon the level, as when they are planted upon ridges; for if
we plough deep near to the row, the earth will come over on the left side of
the plough, and bury the young turnips; but when they stand on ridges, the
earth will almost all fall down on the right side into the furrow, in the
middle of the interval."
at three feet intervals, a trial was made between those turnips, and a field
of the next neighbor's, sown broad-cast at the same time, whereof the
hand-hoeing cost ten shillings per acre, and had not quite half the crop of the
drilled; both being measured by the bushel, on purpose to find the difference.
"And I have since found that turnips on the same land planted on ridges, with
six foot intervals, make a crop double to those that are planted on the level,
or even on ridges with three feet intervals."


"Drilled turnips, by being no where but in the rows, may be more easily seen
that those which come up at random; and may therefore be sooner singled out by
the hand-hoe, which is another advantage, because the sooner "The sooner they
are made single the better; but yet when they are not very thick, they may
stand till we have the best convenience of singling them without much damage;
but when they come up extraordinary thick, it will be much more difficult to
make them single, if they are neglected at their very first coming into rough
leaf."
they are singled out the better they will thrive. Page 98.

"We need not be very exact in the number or distance "The distance need not be
regular; for when a turnip has six inches of room on one side, and eighteen on
the other, it is almost as well as if there was one foot on each side."
we set them out at; we contrive to leave the master turnips (when there is so
much difference in them) and sp^re such when near one another, and leave the
more space before and behind them; but if there be three master turnips
together, we take out the middlemost. Page 100.

"Dung and tillage together will always attain the necessary degree of
pulverization in less time than ploughing can do alone; therefore dung is more
useful for turnips, because they have commonly less time to grow than other
plants. Page 102.

"I have had great crops of turnips in rows three feet asunder, and much
greater than I could ever obtain from rows thirty inches asunder. But one
reason why I like six foot rows better is, that the largest turnips are best
for oxen; and are pulled up and loaded with the least expense. -- I find that
the least competent number will (cateris paribus) always be the largest.
Preface, page ix.

"Several lands of turnips, drilled on the level of three foot rows, ploughed
and doubly dunged, and also horse-hoed, did not produce near so good a crop of
turnips as six foot rows adjoining, horse-hoed, though no dung had been thereon
for many years.

"There was no other difference, than that the three foot rows did not admit
the hoe-plough to raise half the artificial posture as the six foot rows did.
The dung ploughed into the narrow intervals before drilling, could operate no
farther with any great effect, than the hoe-plough could turn it up, and help
it in its pulverization."

From these extracts it appears, that Mr Tull cultivated turnips in rows, not
only on the level, but on the tops, of two and a half and three feet ridges,
and both horse and hand-hoed, as at present; but whether he put dung in the
bottom of those ridges is not so clear, from the expression, "the dung ploughed
into the narrow intervals before drilling." It is unfortunate that this
ingenious gentleman, to support a whimsical theory, should not allow that dung
was of any other use in vegetation, than in pulverizing the soil; though he is
obliged to admit, that for cabbages, turnips, carrots, and potatoes, it will
make the crops greater, and the cattle will like them never the worse. Page 41.


But his disciples entertained juster notions of the properties and value of
dung to neglect it, as will appear in the sequel.

We are informed by a gentleman who went to direct the management of an estate
in Dumfriesshire, in 1769, that Mr Craik, of Arbigland, near Dumfries, had then
drilled turnips betwixt twenty and thirty years; by taking the medium, his
first beginning would be about 1745. The mode he pursued was as follows: -- In
the Autumn, as soon as the corn crop was off, he ploughed his land into
two-bout ridges, in which state it continued all winter; next spring these
ridges were ploughed, and harrowed until sufficiently pulverized, and at last
split to make a hollow furrow for depositing the dung, which was covered in by
the plough going twice about, making a ridge near four feet wide; then this
two-bout ridge was harrowed, a single-wheel drill, turning round a hollow
cylinder of tin with holes in it, deposited the seed directly over the dung:
the drill had a small roller behind to cover in the seed, and was drawn by one
horse. When the plants were ready for hoeing, they were set out at ten or
twelve inches distance one from another, in the rows; and the intervals
ploughed between through the Summer, as often as necessary.

From this place it is probable that the practice had traveled into
Cumberland; for in the year 1755, Philip Howard, Esquire. of Corby, first
cultivated turnips in that county, in drills with four feet intervals; finding
the distance too wide, he reduced it to two feet, and continued it for ten
years before it was followed by the farmers, who now pursue the same mode with
little variation, except that they make the distance of the intervals about
twenty-seven inches. The one-bout ridges, in which the dung is deposited, are
here called stitches, and are flattened at the top by drawing a piece of wood
over them, instead of a roller or a harrow.

About the year 1756, or 1757, Mr Pringle, formerly a surgeon in the army, who
had an estate near Coldstream, in Berwickshire, was the first person in that
neighborhood who cultivated turnips in this manner: His drills were at three
feet and a half distance. Mr Cox, a sergeant, whom Mr Pringle brought home with
him for a servant, says, that his master took his hints from Mr Tull's book,
and that he also drilled all his corn crops, until he had overcome the annual
weeds.

Mr William Dawson, who was well acquainted with the turnip culture in England,
having been purposely sent to reside in those districts for six or seven years
where the best cultivation was pursued, with an intention not only of seeing,
but of making himself master of the manual operations, and of every minutia in
the practice, was convinced of the superiority of Mr Pringle's mode over every
other he had seen, either in Norfolk or elsewhere; and in 1762, when he entered
to Frogden Farm, near Kelso, in Roxburghshire, he immediately adopted the
practice upon a large scale, to the amount of 100 acres yearly. He began by
drilling at three feet distance; but a few years after, trying various widths
of intervals, he reduced it to two feet and a half, which he still continues.
As far as we have been able to obtain information, he was the first that used a
roller for flattening the tops of the one-bout ridges.

It may not be improper to remark, that Mr Pringle pursued this mode for
several years, yet none of his neighbors followed the example; but no sooner
did Mr Dawson (an actual farmer) adopt the same system, than it was immediately
followed, not only by several farmers in his vicinity, but by those very
farmers adjoining Mr Pringle, whose crops they had seen for ten or twelve years
so much superior to their own. It is also deserving of notice, that when Mr
Dawson settled at Frogden, the whole of that district was under the most
wretched system of cultivation, and the farmers unacquainted with the value of
turnips, artificial grasses, and lime. At first his practice met with many
opponents, and was ridiculed by the old, the ignorant ant, and the prejudiced;
but his superior crops and profits soon made converts: The practice in a few
years became general; and this district is now amongst the best cultivated in
the kingdom, the land trebled in value, and the aspect of the country greatly
improved. It is a pleasing reflection, that the example and exertions of one
man has been capable of producing so great, so lasting, and inestimable
benefits; and it is more than probable, that this mode of cultivating turnips
would have died away with Mr Pringle, and the practice been lost to this
district, had it not been for the discernment and intelligence of this
individual.

We remember seeing, about twenty-five years since, turnips cultivated in this
manner, by Mr Christopher Benson, of Stainsby, near Ripley, in Yorkshire, an
ingenious gentleman, and great advocate for drilling, and who had drilled all
his corn crops for many years: His nephew, Mr Donkin, informs us, that he had
cultivated turnips in this manner, more than twenty years before this, which
will be prior to the year 1750.

In Mr Benson's practice described by himself, in Dr Hunter's Georgical Essays,
page 379, the seed is drilled upon the dung, and that and the seed covered
together, by harrowing across the ridges: His nephew says "the dung and seed
were covered in by a double mould-board plough set wide, and then harrowed."
In this paper he very properly sums up the advantages of this mode of
cultivating turnips; he observes, "the seed being placed upon the moist dung,
will vegetate early in all circumstances of the weather; and the manure being
well covered, will be secured from evaporation in the hotest seasons: The
turnips being placed immediately over the manure, have a ready passage by means
of their tap roots, into rich bed of nutriment, which will accelerate their
growth, and increase their size. As the crop grows upon ridges, with a trench
on each side, it is obvious that the turnips will remain dry in the wettest
seasons, a circumstance of the utmost utility: To those advantages we may add,
the doubling of the soil, which I consider as an important article in all
situations where the staple of the land happens to be thin."

From a review of the whole it appears, that the present mode of cultivating
turnips, by drilling in rows at two feet and two feet and a half distance, had
occurred to different people in different parts, who all, at first, began
according to Mr Tull's directions, with the addition of dung put in the bottom
of the ridge; and after trying various width of intervals, found that the best
and most convenient distance was from twenty-four to thirty inches; but it is
very clear that Mr Tull is the root from whence this excellent practice first
originated.

This mode of cultivating turnips, is now spreading far and wide, with great
rapidity; besides this county, it is also the general practice of Roxburghshire
and Berwickshire, and has been lately adopted by the best cultivators in
various districts of Scotland, as well as different parts of England; amongst
which the county of Norfolk will particularly prosit by it, as a first-rate
cultivator who holds a large farm in that county, has procured the proper
apparatus from hence, and sent his son to be instructed in the different
operations; it has also found its way into Dorsetshire; we had the pleasure of
seeing it practiced with great success by the ingenious Mr Boswell of
Piddletown; and to the farmers of Devonshire, it has been particularly
recommended, as the best system known, by the celebrated Mr Marshall, who has
minutely examined, and is well acquainted with the agriculture of the greatest
part of the kingdom. This Gentleman has published the Rural Economy of
Nor-folk, Yorkshire, Midland Counties, Gloucestershire, the West of England,
etc.
-- And the President of the Board adds, that this gentleman informed him, that
the best cultivators, and most intelligent farmers he had ever seen, were those
who practiced this system on Tweed-side.

SECT. 5. -- Crops not commonly cultivated.
Ruta Baga -- has been tried by a few; but not so long as is necessary to draw
any positive conclusions respecting its comparative merits. With us, it is not
near so valuable as the common turnip. Hares are remarkably fond of it, and
will not touch the other turnips while there is one of these in the field.

Rape -- is seldom grown for feed, and perhaps not so often for sheep as it
ought, on lands improper for turnips. Upon lands that have grown early oats,
and are intended for fallow next year, it is sometimes sown in September, as
spring seed for sheep, to supply the vacancy between turnips and clover. For
this purpose a little rye is sown along with it.

Cabbages -- were cultivated, but gave way again to turnips; it being thought
that the latter answer as good a purpose, and are obtained with less trouble.

Carrots -- have been frequently tried; but have hither-to made little or no
progress, probably from the great trouble attending their cultivation, compared
with potatoes; which in some measure answer the same intention as food for
horses.

Flax -- was formerly cultivated in small quantities for family use, but is now
in a great measure given up; it having been found, that land which had grown
flax was so much impoverished, as to require an extra manuring, before it could
be brought to the same state of fertility as the rest of the field.

Woad, (Isatis Tinctoria.) -- This plant, the leaves of which are so useful in
dying, It is not only much used by dyers for its blue color, but also for the
basis of many other colors. It was with the juice of this plant that the
ancient Britons stained their bodies, to make them appear more terrible to
their enemies.
is cultivated at Newburn only, on the banks of the Tyne, by Messrs Rait,
Pollock, and Dun.

The ground is ploughed with a deep furrow before Winter, and made as fine as
possible against April, in which month it is sown, at the rate of 6 bushels per
acre, broad-cast; in about a fortnight after it makes its appearance above
ground, particular care is taken to keep it clear of weeds, which is done by
boys and girls from 10 to 14 years of age; Two workers to an acre, from the
beginning of April to December, is the general allowance.
who have each a spade about 5 inches long and 4 inches broad, which they use
with one hand to dig up the weeds, and with the other gather them; this process
is repeated two or three times before cropping; which is done by wringing off
the leaves of the plant with their hands, and putting them in baskets. -- The
first crop is generally gathered the latter end of July; the second, the last
week in September, and the third in November; but this is only from off such
parts where the second crop was gathered first: It is carried from the field in
carts to the mill, where it is ground into a green paste, and made into balls
about 3 inches diameter, when it is set upon ranges under sheds to dry, which
is done in two or three weeks; after this it is put into the house or pen, and
kept till all the fields are gathered, and afterward manufactured. Mr Rait, in
a letter to the President, states, that he had discovered that indigo might be
made from the juice that is pressed out by the mill, in manufacturing the
leaves; but it seems he has not yet accomplished it, as in a subsequent letter
he says, "my views upon the whole of this business terminate in one of two
points; the first is to have the particles of color separated from the liquor,
and made a marketable article by itself, as indigo is; failing of that, to
apply it to the use of vats, along with the liquor or juice, in which it is in
the most improved state we can arrive at."


SECT. 6. -- Corn Harvest.
The Corn Harvest -- in the vale of Till, and upon Tyneside near Hexham,
frequently begins the first week in August; while upon the cold backward soils
and situations, oats will be often uncut the latter end of October, or
beginning of November; but the most general harvest is in September. Most of
the corn is cut with sickles, by women; seven of whom, with a man to bind after
them, generally reap two acres per day -- Oats and barley are sometimes mown.

Wheat is set up in stooks of twelve sheaves each: oats and barley are
("gated,") set up in single sheaves; and when dry, bound tight at the bottom,
and led home, or set up in stooks of ten sheaves each. The stacks are mostly
round; but some of the best farmers set up their barley and wheat in long
narrow stacks, which keep the corn much better and dryer: And the practice of
placing corn upon stone pillars, with a cap or cover over them (to keep out the
mice) and a frame of wood over all, is gaining ground, and cannot be too much
recommended, as it not only prevents the mice getting to it, but keeps the corn
dry and airy: It is an excellent method for grain that is to be kept until
Summer; and one principal advantage is, that wheat may be led from the field
and set upon those stands almost as soon as reaped -- They are made both round
and oblong, but most of the latter.

CHAPTER VIII. GRASS.
SECT. 1. -- Natural Meadows and Pastures.
WHAT is generally understood by natural meadows, are such lands as are
overflowed by rivers, and produce a crop of hay every year, without any returns
of manure: Of this description of meadows we have very few in this county; what
are called meadows here, are such old grass lands as are employed for growing
hay almost every year, the greatest part of which are uplands: To enable them
to stand this severe cropping, they are, or ought to be, manured on the
surface, every third or fourth year: if this operation be neglected, they
impoverish very fast. Where they cannot conveniently be dunged as above, they
are depastured one year, and mown the other; or, what is better, depastured two
years, and mown the third; the produce, from 1 to 1 tons per acre, a fair crop;
the aftermath (or "Fog") is frequently let from 10 to 15 shillings per acre,
and is mostly consumed in fattening oxen and cows.

Lands that are intended for meadow, are "freed" (from being depastured with
any kind of stock) at different times in the spring, from the beginning of
April to the middle of May, as best suits the convenience of the occupier;
particular attention is paid to the mole-hills, dung, etc. being "scaled,"
Spread abroad.
and the stones and other matters that might obstruct the operations of the
scythe, are carefully gathered off.

Natural Pastures, or old grass land, are most prevalent along the sea coast,
these are depastured with both sheep and oxen; the general mode of stinting
being two acres to an ox, and the same quantity of ground to 8 or 10 sheep,
through the Summer, and from 1 to 2 sheep per acre through the Winter; the latter
are either the store flock, or ewes for fat lambs. -- Sometimes Cheviot wethers
3 years old in good condition, are put in those pastures after the fatting
cattle are taken out, and pay well if they get sufficiently fat to be sold to
the butchers about Christmas.

SECT. 2. -- Artificial Grasses.
The Artificial Grasses most commonly cultivated in this county are, red
clover, (trifolium pratense,) white clover, (trifolium repens,) and ray-grass
(lolium perenne:) with these some people mix rib-grass (plantago lanceolata)
and upon sandy soils, hop-medic This in some places is called hop-trefoil, a
name properly belonging to a very different plant, viz. -- Trifolium agrarium.
(medicago lupulina) is sown with success. -- Few of these grasses are ever
grown alone, except red clover, when intended to continue only one year; and
even then, a small portion of ray-grass (from one to three gallons per acre) is
generally sown with it, we think with much propriety, as it not only comes
early in the spring, but thickens the crop, and facilitates making the clover
into hay.

But when land is intended to continue for three or more years in grass, they
are generally mixed in the proportion of eight or ten pounds of red clover,
four pounds of white clover, and half a bushel of ray-grass per acre: to the
above quantities are sometimes added three or four pounds of rib-grass, and
hop-medic, as the soil suits. When red clover is grown alone, 10 or 12 pounds
an acre are sown upon dry friable soils, and from 14 to 18 pounds upon strong
loams or clays. They are sown in March, April, and May, upon lands fallowed the
summer preceding for wheat, or turnips succeeded by barley, and ought always to
be harrowed in, as well as rolled. Harrowing is particularly necessary upon
strong lands growing wheat; and across the ridges is the best mode of
performing the operation. We find, that where corn is drilled, and the
intervals hoed, it pulverizes the soil, and makes the finest preparation for
grass seeds of all others: where this is properly done, and harrowed once
across, after the seeds are sown, they seldom or never miss; long experience
having proved, that nothing requires a finer tilth than clover and grass seeds:
-- Upon the best soils, the clover and ray-grass mixed, are generally ready to
depasture with fat sheep by the beginning of April, and from May, through the
Summer, will carry six or eight sheep per acre, according to the luxuriance of
the crop and fertility of the soil; the second and remaining years, they are
depastured by the store flock. These pastures are frequently mown when the
ray-grass begins to flower, which not only increases the bottom grass, but a
quantity of excellent hay is obtained, of considerable value.

When the clovers are not depastured, but kept for hay, they are generally mown
about the latter end of June; the average produce about 2 tons per acre. The
second crop is rarely cut for hay, but depastured by cattle or sheep, chiefly
the latter: When cattle are put into a fresh clover "fog," especially in wet
weather, they sometimes hove, by the sudden fermentation of the clover; to
prevent this inconvenience, cattle are put upon it in the middle of the day,
when it is free from dew or any moisture, they being first filled with natural
grass, which hinders them from eating so greedily, as if put on hungry; if the
clover once pass, they seldom take any harm afterward: by using this
precaution, we have not had any cattle hoven, for several years. -- When very
much swelled, an instrument is used, (similar to that used by surgeons in
tapping for the dropsy) it is so contrived, that after being thrust in between
the hip and rib, (on the near side) one part pulls out, while a tube remains in
the orifice, through which an amazing quantity of fetid air escapes, and relieves
the animal; but they are very apt to hove again afterward.

We have heard of hoven cattle being relieved, by giving them an egg shell full
of tar.

The practice of keeping horses in the house, sheds, or fold-yards, all Summer,
upon cut clover, tares, etc. was introduced into this county, about the year
1770; it is now generally adopted by the best farmers, who find their horses
thrive better; are cheaper kept than depasturing at large; and also, that a
quantity of manure is gained by this means, which otherwise would have been in
a great measure lost, or of very little use; as the dung of horses, when
dropped in pastures, is mostly destroyed by insects, in the Summer season. --
An acre of good clover used in this manner, will keep from 2 to 3 horses, from
the beginning of June till the end of October, about 20 weeks.

Saintfoin, Lucern, and Chicory, have been tried on a small scale, but do not
seem to come into general use; the crops of clover being thought more valuable.

In order to draw any fair comparative value between the produce of old grass
lands and artificial grasses, the soil and situation ought to be exactly alike,
and experiments accurately conducted; for want of such data, no just
conclusions can be made; but we believe, that general observation and
experience have established an opinion, that the same lands which in a state of
old grass carried 3 sheep an acre, will, for the first year of clover and
raygrass, grass, depasture 5 or 6; on rich, old grazing pastures, the
difference will probably not be so great, and what they fall short in Summer,
will be made up by their superiority in Winter; on clayey soils, it would
certainly be a dangerous experiment to convert those rich grazing pastures into
tillage, as a certain portion of such is a valuable acquisition to every farm;
but they are so rarely scattered, that few farms are so fortunate as to enjoy
so desirable an appendage.

SECT. 3 -- Hay Harvest.
The hay harvest is seldom begun before the middle of June. The mowers cut from
half an acre to three quarters a day, and that very ill; the hay-makers are
equally indolent and inactive. After the grass is cut it is by some tedded,
strewed, or spread abroad, and repeatedly turned till dry; We never ted or
strew clover when mown, but turn it in the swathe, with the head of the rake,
backward and forward, until it be fit to put into large cocks, or pikes, which
we prefer to every other mode we have seen, as it preserves the leaves upon the
clover much better than when strewed abroad.
others, the day after it has been tedded or strewed, put in into foot cocks
(wappings) which can scarcely be too small; (if the weather keeps dry it is in
two days more, put into large cocks;) if the weather proves wet, we know no
mode by which it will save better, or waste the smell less, as the rain passes
through them, and a small quantity of air or sun dries them again, or they are
easily turned over. -- In either mode, when sufficiently dry, it is put into
ricklets (provincially pikes) of about half a ton each in the field; which
stand there for two, three, or more weeks, until a convenient opportunity
offers for leading them home, to be put into one large stack. In these
ricklets, the hay takes a first sweating, which prevents its heating when put
into larger masses.

For the purpose of drawing it together to be put into pikes, or ricklets, it
is either cocked, or put into large heaps, which are trailed in by one horse,
yoked to the ends of a long rope, put round the bottoms of those cocks or
heaps; upon the hind part of which, a boy gets with his feet, to keep it down,
and prevent its slipping over the top of the hay; when arrived at the place
wanted, one end of the rope is taken off the hook at the horses shoulder, and
being thus loosened at one end, the horse moves forward, when the rope draws
through under the hay and leaves it.

When the hay is neither put into cocks, nor large heaps, but remains in a
thick row, t^is then necessary to use two horses, viz.: -- One yoked to each
end of a strong sweeping rope; and two persons to get upon the rope with their
feet, one on each side the row, who rest with their arms upon the hay, and step
forward on the rope as the hay gathers. To prevent the hay from slipping off
behind, a small cord is fastened to the hind part of the sweeping rope; and
extended to each person's hand, which they let out as they step forward, or
find otherwise necessary. By either of the above modes, the hay grown upon a
field of 8 or 10 acres may be drawn together in a few hours, and is much more
expeditious than either fledges or carts.

When the large stack is made in the field, the "Pikes," are drawn to it, by
putting a strong rope round their bottom, the two ends of which are fastened to
the hind part of a cart, in which are yoked 3 or 4 horses. -- This saves the
trouble of forking and loading them in carts, and is done in much less time.

SECT. 4 -- Feeding.
O^^n. -- are mostly grazed in the eastern part of the county, and a few in the
vicinity of Whittingham; they are bought in May or June, and sold as they
become ready, to supply the large fleets of colliers and other trading vessels
belonging to Newcastle, Shields, Sunderland, Hartley, and Blythe.

Some few graziers buy only such oxen as are forward by having got turnips in
the Spring: these generally go off in June, and are followed by cows, heifers,
or kyloes; An excellent breed of small cattle from the Highlands of Scotland.
of which, those that do not get fat on the pasture, to be sold through the
Summer, are put upon fogs (aftermaths) and sold in November and December. The
cows are also bought in the spring months, and are chiefly used for home
consumption. The kyloes are bought at Falkirk-Trysts, ("meetings") or at
Newcastle Fair, in the Autumn, and wintered upon coarse, rough ground or straw:
(sometimes a few turnips are given in the Spring) and are sold all through the
Summer, as they become fit for the butcher, to supply Newcastle and other
markets. Those that are ready to go off in June, always leave the most profit;
beef being frequently sold at that season for a shilling a stone more than the
ordinary prices.

The profit of grazing, like all other speculations, varies with circumstances;
but we believe we may venture to average it at 3l. or 3l. 10s. for keeping on
grass from May Day to Michaelmas. Cows, in general, leave more than oxen, in
proportion to their weight; but they are subject to disorders of the udder,
that frequently reduce the profit, and deter many people from grazing them.

Some few graziers follow the old custom of keeping only one kind of stock upon
the same ground; whilst others, we think with more propriety, intermix with
oxen and cows, a few sheep, and two or three colts in each pasture; which both
turn to good account, and do little injury to the grazing cattle: In some
cases, sheep are a real benefit, by eating down and destroying the ragwort
(Senecio Jacobaeo) which disgraces some of the best pastures in the county,
where oxen only are grazed.

Sheep, that have been wintered upon turnips, are put to the earliest grass
that can be obtained; the clovers and ray-grass are generally ready in April;
the old grass lands not before May: In both situations they are continued till
shorn, and sold off, from the latter end of May, through all June and part of
July, from 2l. to 2l. 15s. each. In 1797 the prices were from 2l. 10s. to 3l.
10s each: The draft ewes, or shearling wethers intended for turnips next
Winter, succeed them, and thus a regular rotation is kept up. Of late years,
some farmers have sold their shearling wethers in July, (when only 15 months
old) to the butchers, for as high prices, as from 30 to 35 shillings each. In
1796, they sold from 40 to 45 shillings each; and in 1797, as high as 50
shillings, after shearing a fleece worth 6 shillings.

A large portion of the lands of this county being liable to the rot, and
unsafe for a breeding flock, the occupiers of such situations, venture ewes for
fat lambs for one year; these are bought in the Autumn, put to tup early, (some
in August) the lambs sold in May, June, and July; after which the ewes are
fatted, and sold in October and November. -- Such lambs as are early, and go
off in May, often sell for 20 shillings each; but the others average at about
12s. 6d. The price of fat ewes depends much on their being of a good or slow
feeding sort, and will vary from 24 to 30 shillings: The average may be called
27 shillings. -- The proceeds from long-woolled ewes will be: L. s. d. A fat
Lamb 0 12 6 Ditto Ewe 1 7 0 Carried over 1 19 6 L. s. d. Brought over 1 19 6
Fleece 0 4 6 2 4 0 Deduct prime cost 1 0 0 Profits on Ewe and Lamb, for one
year 1 4 0

The profits of those that have lambs, sold at 20s. will be 1l. 12s.

The Cheviot ewes are generally put to a large long-woolled tup, which
increases the size of the lambs: The proceeds are: L s. d. A fat Lamb 0 11 0
Ditto Ewes 0 14 6 Fleece 0 2 6 1 8 0 Deduct prime cost 0 13 0 Profit for one
year 0 15 0

Mr Hay of Lesbury, and Mr Watson of Waren, not having so ready a market for
the great quantities of bran, pollard and oat-chimmings, which their extensive
manufactures of flour and oat-meal produce, have applied it to feeding
different kinds of stock; they both agree that for feeding pigs, it is of
little value; one of the gentlemen says, that from some experiments he had
read, he was induced to enter largely on the business, and persevered in it,
till he lost upwards of a thousand pounds.

For Horses -- they both think it very valuable along with hay or straw,
instead of corn; Mr Watson allows his horses 6 bushels of bran, or 4 bushels of
pollard, and 2 of oat seeds per week, the average price of which is about 5
shillings; the horses are in high condition, and sleek as ravens, but not more
so than those that have 2 bushels of oats per week, the price of which at 2s.
per bushel is equal to the value of the bran.

For Cattle -- Mr Hay says, that "in the beginning of October, I tie up my
cattle in sheds, and place before every beast a crib for bran, and another for
turnips, and to each give a peck of pollard, morning and evening, with full
allowance of turnips, well cleansed and topped; I frequently mix oat sheeling
seeds and oat dust, which makes them fonder of the pollard, if stale or old
kept. Three months stall-feeding in this way is equal to 6 months in the usual
way."

In order to form some idea of the utility of the above mode, we must estimate
the expense of the pollard, in addition to the full allowance of turnips:
pollard being a finer kind of bran, is sold for 2d. a bushel more; of course
when bran is 10d. per bushel, pollard will be 1s. and allowing that an ox will
fatten as much in 10 weeks with the above keeping, as he will in 20 by the
common mode, the account will stand thus:

L s. d. 10 Weeks -- Pollard 70 bushels, at 1s. 3 10 0 Ditto -- Turnips, at 4s.
6d. 2 5 0 -- Attendance 0 10 0 6 5 0 L. s. d. 20 Weeks -- Turnips, at 4s. 6d. 4
10 0 Ditto -- Straw 0 10 0 -- Attendance 1 0 0 6 0 0

Hence it appears that feeding with pollard and turnips is not cheaper than the
common mode, even allowing that it is done in half the time.

Mr Watson put 6 oxen into a fold-yard (with a shed in it) on the 20th of May;
in 7 weeks they had eaten 360 bushels of bran and oat seeds mixed, with which
they had for the first three weeks coarse hay, the other four, cut clover. With
this their cribs were kept constantly full: The value of bran and oat seeds
amounts to about 6s. per per week each beast; of the hay and clover no account
was kept, but it cannot be estimated at less than 1s. which makes with
attendance 7s. per week each beast; near double the expense of grass, and more
than the improvement of the cattle would pay, though they were certainly in very
thriving condition.

Mr Watson once attempted to keep two heifers on bran only; they grew worse and
worse, and were obliged to have other food; when they got grass, they eat much
more bran than when they got bran alone.

For Sheep, -- these gentlemen allow 7 bushels per week per score, to their
store ewes on grass, that is 5s. 10d. per week, or 3d. per sheep besides grass.

Mr Hay wintered 150 ewes on 38 acres; they had 53 bushels per week of bran;
but this land would have wintered 70 ewes without any assistance, therefore the
bran was applied to the support of the 80 additional ewes; of course the
expenses per week will be L. s. d. 53 bushels of bran at 10d. per bushel, which
divided by 80 2 3 4 gives the expense per week of keeping a store ewe 0 0 6
which is near double the price usually paid for turnips.

Mr Watson is summering 175 ewes on Spindleston-Hill (a bare rocky pasture); to
this flock he allows 16 bushels of bran per day, or 112 bushels per week, which
at 10d. per bushel, is 6d. per week per sheep, besides the grass; they are in
excellent condition, but it is a price for keeping store ewes that most farmers
would state at.

To a flock of 65, year-old fat wethers, he gives 42 bushels of bran per week,
which is near 6d. per week per sheep; they are depastured upon good land, at
the rate of about 7 sheep an acre, which is scarcely double the number the same
ground would keep equally well without bran, of course these sheep cost above
1s. per week per sheep, a price that the appearance of the sheep does by no
means promise to repay.

These are all the facts that have come to our knowledge, respecting feeding
with bran; from which it appears that it is not so beneficial a practice as had
been represented to the Board.

CHAPTER IX. GARDENS AND ORCHARDS.
IN gardening we do not find any practices in this district but what are
generally known to the profession; and in respect to Orchards they are thinly
scattered indeed. -- The frosty nights, and north-east winds from the German
Ocean, which are so prevalent here in the spring months, are very inimical to
fruit crops; and it is probably owing to this circumstance that there is such a
scarcity of orchards: so much so that we believe nine tenths of the apples
consumed in this county are imported from Kent, Essex, and other southern
counties.

CHAPTER X. WOODS AND PLANTATIONS.
WOODS growing in a natural state are found mostly on the banks of rivers;
those of the north and fouth Tyne, the Wansbeck, Coquet, and their tributary
streams, have by far the greatest qu^nti^y. Of old oak timber, from eighty to
one hundred and forty years growth, the probable value may be about 60,000l. of
which two-thirds can only be said to be proper for building ships of great
burden.

The demand by the collieries and lead mines for small wood, has induced the
proprietors of woods on the Derwent, Tyne, etc. to cut them at an early age.
From twenty-five to thirty years growth is the general term for oak, elm, and
ash; but birch, willow, and aller, are cut sooner; and hazle for corf-rods
Corves are a kind of large wicker-work baskets, used for bringing coals out of
pits, made of rods from to 1 inch diameter.
once in three or four years.

The price of ash and elm is from 1s. to 2s. per foot; of oak, from 2s. to 3s.
per foot; of birch, aller, etc for pit props, six feet long, and from four to
six inches diameter, 4d. each; corf rods. 6d. per hundred. Oak bark last year
was sold for 9l. per ton. Under this management and at those prices, an acre in
thirty years will produce, on ^n average, 60l. clear of expenses; there has
been instances of an acre of wood, thirty-two years old, felling for 100l. and
another of sixty years growth, worth 200l. per acre; but these were in
particularly favorable situations.

In the management of these woods, the general practice is to cut all away
together. The system of Anthony Surtees, Esquire of Newbiggen, we think preferable;
he takes his away in patches; and as the older trees interfere with the younger
springs, and where a thriving healthy oak is in a convenient situation, he lets
it stand for timber; by this means the young spring is sheltered, and an annual
produce of upwards of 100l. is obtained from sixty acres of woodland.

Plantations, on an extensive scale, are rising in every part of the county;
and are almost in every instance doing well, and promise not only to repay the
spirited exertions of the proprietors, but will add greatly to the ornament and
improvement of the country.

Amongst the great variety of trees we have observed in those plantations, the
larch rises proudly pre-eminent above the rest, and in almost every situation
far outstrips the various species of firs and pines, wherever we have noticed
them planted promiscuously together. In many plantations in the northern parts
of the county, the spruce firs, between 20 and 30 years old, have died-off; and
this in so many very different soils and situations, that they are now in a
great measure discarded from the plantations that have been made of late years;
the cause of this failure has not been yet satisfactorily accounted for.

CHAPTER XI. WASTES.
THE commons -- in this county capable of being converted into profitable
tillage land are now very trifling, the greatest part having been enclosed
within the last thirty years; the whole amounting to near 120,000 acres. Of
this, the commons belonging to the manors of Hexhamshire and Allendale contain
50,000 acres, a great part (35,000) of which are high, exposed, heathy
mountains. These are to be converted into stinted pastures, not being thought
capable of any other improvement.

The increased value of such enclosed commons, depends (as we have stated in
our Report of Cumberland) entirely upon the system of cultivation pursued. Upon
Bulbeck-common there are lands which, in a state of common, were not worth more
than 1s. an acre, a part of which has been in tillage twenty-five years, and
grown three white crops successively, betwixt one fallowing and another. This
land is now dear enough at 4s. an acre; while Mr Hopper's of Black-Hedley, is
worth 10s. or 12s. His system is, when first broke up from heath, to pare and
burn, and plough in the autumn; next spring plough across, lime and sow oats;
then fallow and lime, 75 bushels per acre, and sow turnips; after which, oats
and grass seeds, four pounds red clover, five pounds white, and one bushel of
ray grass, and continue in grass six or seven years; then to plough for oats --
turnips -- oats -- and sow up with grass seeds as before. There are instances,
where the increased value is in the ratio of twelve to one, or even more; but
these are, where the commons were of no value to the proprietor, which is in
general the case. The stinted common of Holy Island was divided in 1790, the
allotments that were gotten for a right, which never let for more than 2l. are
now let for 14l. or 15l. per ann. and in a few years will be worth upwards of
20l.


The extent of waste lands -- or open mountainous districts, incapable of
affording profit by cultivating with the plough, is very great, as we have
before stated; considerable quantities of which are private property, and of
course may be depastured by sheep or other stock to the greatest advantage; of
those that are common, it would certainly be best for every man to know his own
share.

Draining would be highly useful to many parts of these districts; there are
also many excellent situations for planting, and of all other purposes to which
such lands are convertible, this species of improvement seems to us the most
promising to make the greatest returns.

CHAPTER XII. IMPROVEMENTS.
SECT. 1. -- Draining.
DRAINING -- is one of those improvements that has lately made its way into
Northumberland, and is now mostly practiced in the middle and northern parts of
the county; the theory is pretty well understood in those districts, and the
practice is becoming more prevalent every year. Hollow drains are generally
used, filled with stones, where they can be got; where these cannot be
obtained, (but at a great expense) sod drains are the only resource, especially
in the northern parts, where there is little wood.

SECT. 2 -- Paring and Burning.
Paring and Burning is not much practiced in the eastern and northern parts of
the county; in the midland and southern parts it is most prevalent, but even
there it is confined to old swards, and coarse, rough, rushey and heathy lands;
for the first breaking-up of such ground, it is certainly very convenient, and
preferable to any other mode we have ever seen; but though we are fully convinced
of its beneficial effects in such situations, yet we have our doubts whether it
could be used with advantage upon lands that have lain a few years in grass,
and that would produce good crops of grain immediately on being ploughed out,
which is not the case with coarse, rough, heathy lands, or even very old swards
on rich fertile soils; it being found that crops on the latter, are frequently
very much injured by "leaping" for two or three years; which paring and burning
entirely obviates, and ensures full crops to the farmer; who need not be under
any apprehension of his soil being ruined by it, provided he pursues the
following course: -- 1. Turnips. -- 2. Oats. -- 3. Fallow, well limed for
turnips. -- 4. Barley,
sown up with clover and grass seeds, and depastured with sheep for three or
four years, and afterward (if not intended to lie in grass) continue it in the
rotation mentioned page 64: It is the injudicious cropping, more than the ill
effects derived from paring and burning, that has been the chief cause of
bringing such an odium on this practice, which is certainly an excellent one in
some situations, and properly conducted; but like the fermented juice of the
grape, may be too often repeated and improperly applied.

The popular clamor against this practice, "that it destroys the soil," we can
by no means admit; and are inclined to believe, that not a single atom of soil
is abstracted, though the bulk of the sod or turf be diminished: this arises
from the burning of the roots or vegetable substances, which, by this process
afford a considerable portion of Alkaline Salts, phlogistic or carbonic matter,
and probably other principles friendly to vegetation; as we find those ashes
produce abundant crops of turnips, which fatten, stock much quicker than those
after any other dressing or manure we have ever seen, and the succeeding crops
of corn are so very luxuriant, as to tempt the injudicious cultivator to pursue
it too far; and for the sake of temporary gain, may be said to rip it up, as
the boy did with his goose that laid golden eggs.

SECT. 3. -- Manuring.
In some parts of this county, where the turnip culture is carried to such
extent, every exertion of ingenuity is practiced to raise a large portion of
Farm Yard Dung: for without this valuable article, it is well known that good
turnip crops are not to be expected, and the farmers of strong soils are
sufficiently sensible of the advantage of dung to their crops, not to use every
endeavor to increase its quantity.

The farmers of turnip soils, in order to have their dung sufficiently rotted,
lead it out of the fold yard in the winter, make it up in large dunghills in
order to increase the putrefactive process, and prepare it for that state of
dissolution, by which its component parts are ready to be assimilated into new
bodies; and in which state only, is can be of use in vegetation.

Upon the hill-farms around Cheviot, we have been often surprised, to see at
the doors of the shepherds' houses, such immense dunghills, the accumulation of
unnumbered years, probably centuries: to avoid this increasing nuisance, many
of them have ingeniously contrived to build their houses near a "Burn side" for
the convenience of having it taken away by every flood: notwithstanding they
have lands adjoining, upon which, if this manure was properly applied, the
greatest improvements would ensue, and considerable quantities of excellent hay
be produced, for the support of the flocks in winter storms, in which seasons
they are very often under the necessity of purchasing hay in the Lowlands, and
of having it conveyed on horseback to the top of these hills in the deepest
snows, at a very great expense. We were glad to see Mr Smith, Mr Marshall, and
a few others, departing from this trait of barbarism, and applying their manure
in a very proper manner.


Lime -- is found in many parts of this county, of an excellent quality. In
Bambro' Ward, where it has been long used, many intelligent farmers begin to
doubt of its efficacy, and the propriety of continuing to lay it upon their old
tillage lands. Upon the dry soils in Glendale Ward, where it has not been used
much above 40 years, Mr James Hall of Thornington, was the first person that
ever carried a cart load of lime across the river Till, for laying upon land:
The first year he prevailed upon his father to allow him to lead 10 cart load,
which had so wonderful an effect, that the quantity was increased next year,
and in a few years after, the use of it became general.
its effects are more conspicuous, especially upon such lands as have been
seldom or never limed. In its natural state, the soil of this district is dry,
duffy, light, full of fibrous, roots, and when in fallow, on passing over it,
you sink to the ancles; after being sufficiently limed, the fibrous roots
disappear, the soil becomes denser, firm to the tread, retentive of moisture,
and produces better and more abundant crops of grain than before: when laid to
grass, the effects of the lime appear to an inch, by the superior verdure which
takes place as far as it has gone. About twelve years since, when looking over
the farm of Thornington, with Mr James Hall, (the late tenant) we were
surprised with the sudden alteration in the verdure of the land, which took
place immediately at the junction of two ridges, one side was a fine dark
green, caten very bare, and covered with a thick mat of white clover and
ray-grass; the other was a dingy brown, principally composed of fine bent, and
sheep's fesque, and in a great measure neglected by the sheep: An explanation
was desired for so great a contrast, and Mr Hall informed us, that when this
parcel of land was last in fallow, the part which was eaten so bare, and looked
so green, was well limed; the other, which the sheep neglected, had never been
limed. It has been said, and repeatedly copied by writers on Agriculture and
Botany, that "sheep prefer the "Festuca Ovina" to all other plants:" In the
above instance, it was quite the contrary; from which, and from other
observations we have made, we are inclined to believe, that the idea has
probably originated more in conjecture than experiment. It has also been
remarked by botanical writers, that sheep refuse to eat ragwort, (Senecio
Jacobaea:") The fact in, they are so very fond of it, they will not allow a
plant to flower wherever they depasture.


Many of these dry soils, after being limed, grow white clover naturally; where
not limed, it seldom appears; but they cover principally with agrostis
capillaris (fine bent,) which is seldom eaten by any kind of stock, if they can
get other food: When land has been sufficiently limed, this plant disappears;
and wherever it is found, it may be safely concluded, that the soil on which it
grows has not had its due quantity of lime.

About seven years since Mr George Reed, of South-Middleton near Wooler,
cleared from broom, 30 or 40 acres of light, dry, channelly soil, that had
never been limed, which was sown with rye; the rye stubble was ploughed in the
Autumn, and the worst part of it limed at the rate of 100 bushels per acre;
next Summer the whole was drilled with turnips (dunged etc. as described page
89) which came up all alike, and continued to do equally well for three or four
weeks; but little or no rain falling in that period, and the weather continuing
droughty, those turnips upon the land which had no lime, died away; whilst
those upon that part which was limed were discernible to an inch, flourished
with unabated vigor, and produced an excellent crop, (for such land) worth at
least 4l 10s. an acre; many similar instances might be produced, but this is
the most striking we recollect to have noted.

The made of burning lime, in this county, is mostly in draw-kilns, of the form
of an inverted cone, with two or three eyes or mouths for drawing out the lime,
and admitting air: These kilns are kept burning and drawing perpetually. Some
of the large sale kilns will afford 40 or 50 cart load a day: A cart load of
coals is reckoned to burn two cart loads of lime.

The Price, at the kilns, is from 3s. to 4s. 6d. for 25 upheaped bushels.

The Quantity, laid upon an acre, is from 75 to 150 bushels.

The general practice of using lime, is to lay it up in heaps of three or four
cart loads each; and as soon as the clods are fallen, slacked, or reduced to
the state of quicklime, it is spread evenly upon the land, and harrowed and
ploughed in as soon as possible after: sometimes, instead of laying it up in
heaps of 3 or 4 cart loads each, it is laid upon the land in the clod state, in
little heaps of about a bushel each, which are covered with earth until
sufficiently flacked or fallen, and then spread abroad.

In either mode, or in whatever manner lime is applied, it certainly has the
greatest effect, when both it and the soil are in the most pulverized state.

Upon the turnip soils where very large quantities of lime are used, it would
be extremely difficult to get a sufficiency in the early part of Summer,
previous to the turnip season; in such situations, it is usual to lead as much
as possible through the Summer and Autumn, which is laid up in very large heaps
(from 50 to 150 loads each) and before Winter covered with sods, or thatched
with straw, to prevent the rain from penetrating it: If well secured, it is
found in a very quick state, in the Spring, sometimes a great portion of it
remaining unslacked.

The opinions respecting the good or ill effects of lime, are exceedingly
various; some asserting that it can never be used in too large a quantity;
whilst others contend, it is of no use whatever: Our own practice authorizes us
to say, that upon some soils, the application of lime, (or calcareous earth in
some other form) in considerable quantities, is absolutely necessary, in order
to bring them to their most fertile state, and to prepare them for the action
of other manures; whilst upon other soils, lime produces no sensible effect,
and if used in large quantities, will prove very detrimental. -- Thus may one
of the most valuable applications we know, for the improvement of many soils,
be condemned, by those who draw positive conclusions, from partial observations
of facts. The practice of paring and burning, we believe, owes the opprobrium,
which some have thrown upon it, to a similar mode of reasoning.

Stone Marl, has formerly been used in considerable quantities, near Tweedside,
but the more immediate effects of lime have entirely set aside the use of stone
marl.

Shell Marl is used with great advantage, at the rate of 20 or 30 cart loads an
acre, on the farms of Wark, Sunnylaws, and Learmouth.

Sea Wrack, Sea Ware, or Marine Plants -- driven ashore by the tide, are used
with great effect, wherever they can be had. Of these the fucus vesiculosus,
and its relatives F. serratus and inflatus, (Skeir Ware) are not held in much
estimation, and when used, require to be laid up in large heaps to putrify. If
laid upon the land, as the others are, when taken immediately from the shore,
they dry, and turn to a black coriaceous substane. The fucus digitatus
(Wassels) is the great favorite, and another species called May-weed, which we
cannot point out by its Linnaean name, not having had an opportunity of seeing
it, but from the descriptions we have heard, suspect it to be the young plants
of the fucus digitatus.

Coal Ashes -- are chiefly used in the vicinity of the principal towns, as a
dressing for grass land; for this purpose they are found of considerable
benefit, especially upon strong, coarse, and wet lands.

SECT. 4. -- Weeding.
Weeding corn is universally practiced; the broad cast crops are hand-weeded,
in which operation the thistles (being rather unpleasant to handle) are in some
parts drawn by a pair of large pliers ("nippers") with flat cheeks; in others
they are cut over by a weeding hook, made in the form of a L, with sharp edges
on the inside; but this mode of cutting is only a temporary relief, as they
spring again very soon after: pulling up by the roots ought certainly to be
practiced in every instance, as there is not a weed the farmer has to contend
with, more difficult to eradicate than the corn thistle, (Carduus Arvensis.)

The drilled crops, are both horse and hand hoed, at least twice each, and with
so much attention, that no kind of weeds are sussered to remain; the whole
being kept in the cleanest and compleatest garden-like culture.

The most prevalent weeds, that give the Northumbrian husbandman the greatest
trouble, are: Of the Perennial kind,
Triticum repens -- Couch Wheat. These all go under the general names of
Quickens, Couch, or Twitch grass; the Holcus principally on light dry soils.
Avena elatior -- Tall Oat. This is readily distinguished from the other kinds
of quickens, by its bulbous or granulated roots.
These all go under the general names of Quickens, Couch, or Twitch grass; the
Holcus principally on light dry soils. Holcus mollis -- Soft Holcus. These all
go under the general names of Quickens, Couch, or Twitch grass; the Holcus
principally on light dry soils. Seratulae arvensis, or Corn Thistle. Carduus
arvensis. Linnaeus has classed this plant with the Seratula; but Light-foot has
very properly removed it to the Carduus.
Corn Thistle.
Annuals.
Sinapis arvensis -- Wild Mustard. Charloc. Sinapis Alba -- White Mustard.
Charloc. Raphanus Raphanistrum -- Wild Radish. Charloc. Avena Fatua -- Wild Oat.


Those of less note, and more partial visitants, are

Galeopsis Tetrahit Hemp dead nettle Spergula arvensis Corn Spurry Anthemis
Cotula Stinking Camomile Polygonum Persicaria Peachwort Ranunculus arvensis
Corn Crowfoot Lythospermum arvensis Corn Gromil Veronica arvensis Corn
Speedwell Scandiae Pecten Veneris Shepherd's needle.
SECT. 5. -- Watering.
Watered Meadows -- were first introduced into this county by Messrs Culley,
about 26 years since; and notwithstanding the manifest advantages of this
operation, yet so slow is knowledge in making its way, that it was near 20
years before any other person ventured to pursue the practice, and profit by
the example: It is now beginning to spread in the neighborhood, and we hope in
a few years will be adopted in every situation that can derive benefit from it

Sir William Lorrain, with a spirit that marks his wish for improvement,
brought two men from Leicestershire, to drain his grounds at Kirkharl. This
business they seem to have understood and executed well; but we think they have
misled the worthy Baronet, in telling him they understood laying out land for
watering. We were sorry to see a first attempt executed in so bad a style,
which may tend more to discourage the practice, than forward its introduction.

SECT. 6. -- Embankments.
In the vicinity of Wooler, a large tract of low flat ground (called Haughs)
adjoining the rivers Till and Glen, being subject to be frequently overslowed,
an attempt was first made to embank them at Yevering, in the year 1787 which
answered the purpose, and soon after was adopted on the haughs of Turvilaws,
Doddington, Ewart, etc by which the lands that could not be let for more than
15s. per acre (from the great hazard of losing the crop) are now let for more
than double the sum.

The height of these banks is from 3 to 5 feet; the form is represented by a
section fig. 6, pl. 5, where the height CE is 4 feet, the base BA 15 feet, BC 5
feet, and the slope next the water CA, 13 feet. The side BC was faced up with
sods the green side out, cut from the ditch D, out of which was dug the
materials for forming the bank; In some situations it is best to cut the ditch,
on the side next the river, leaving checks at proper intervals, to prevent the
run of the water. These cavities fill up in a few years, with mud brought by
the floods; and the bank is in less danger of breaking when there is no ditch
at the back of it.
and the side CA, covered with green sods pared from the base BA, previous to
throwing up the earth.

The expense from 2s. to 3s. per rood of 7 yards.

CHAPTER XIII. LIVE STOCK.
SECT. 1. -- Cattle.
THE different kinds of cattle bred in this county are the short horned -- the
Devonshire -- the long-horned -- and the wild cattle.

The short horned kind have been long established over the whole county, the
other kinds are found only in the hands of a few individuals, who have
introduced them with a laudable view of comparing their merits with the
established breed of the country. -- They differ from the other breeds, in the
shortness of their horns, and in being wider and thicker in their form,
consequently feed to the most weight; in affording the greatest quantity of
tallow when fatted, in having very thin hides, and much less hair It is
probably from the thinness of their hides and hair, that they are accounted
tenderer than most other breeds.
upon them than any other breed (the Alderneys excepted); but the most
essential difference consists in the quantity of milk they give beyond most
other breeds: there being instances of cows giving 36 quarts of milk per day,
and of 48 firkins of butter being made from a dairy of 12 cows: but the more
general quantity is 3 firkins per cow in a season, and 24 quarts of milk per
day: Their color is much varied, but they mostly are an agreeable mixture of
red and white. From their being in many places called the Dutch breed, it is
probable they were originally brought from the Continent.

They have been much improved of late years, by the exertions and attention of
enterprising breeders; who have already improved them so far, as to be sold fat
to the butchers at 3 years old. The weight of the carcass is in general from 60
to 80 stone, (14 lb. to the stone) but there are instances of individuals
attaining much greater weight.

Sir H. Gray bred and fed two seven-years old oxen that weighed 152 stone 9 lb.
the four quarters only; and a spayed heifer, 132 stone, 6 lb. ditto. Mr Smith
of Togstone, a cow, 127 stone 11 lb. ditto.

But large size is not now considered as an excellence: Quick seeders, that lay
their sat upon the most valuable parts, and have the least offal in the coarse
parts, are the kind which every enlightened breeder wishes to be possessed of.

The long Horns have been introduced from the improved stocks of the Midland
counties, at different times and by different breeders; but have in most
instances given way again to the improved breed of short horns.

The Devonshire breed is only in the possession of Walter Trevelyan, Esquire. of
Nether Witton, who introduced them about three years since; their offspring has
not yet got to a proper age to form a judgment of their comparative merits.

The Wild Cattle -- are only found in Chillingham Park, belonging to the Earl
of Tankerville; and as it is probable they are the only remains of the true and
genuine breed of WILD CATTLE in Chillingham Park
that species of cattle, We are no strangers that there may be found in two or
three different Parks of the kingdom, breeds of cattle which pass under the
denomination of Wild Cattle; but are inclined to believe that they have been
contaminated by crossing, and that those in Chillingham Park are the only
remains, which answer the description given by Boethius, of this species of
cattle.
we shall be more particular in our description.

Their color is invariably white, muzzle black; the whole of the inside of the
ear, and about one third of the outside from the tip, downwards, red; horns
white, with black tips, very fine, and bent upwards. Some of the bulls have a
thin upright mane, about an inch and an half, or two inches long. The weight of
the oxen is from 35 to 45 stone, and the cows from 25 to 35 stone, the four
quarters; 14 lb. to the stone. The beef is finely marbled, and of excellent
flavor.

From the nature of their pasture, and the frequent agitation they are put
into, by the curiosity of strangers, it cannot be expected they should get very
fat; yet the six years old oxen are generally very good beef. From whence it
may be fairly supposed, that in proper situations, they would feed well.

At the first appearance of any person they set off in full gallop; and, at the
distance of two or three hundred yards, make a wheel round, and come boldly up
again, tosting their heads in a menacing manner; on a sudden they make a full
stop, at the distance of forty or fifty yards, looking wildly at the object of
their surprise; but upon the least motion being made, they all again turn
round, and gallop off again with equal speed, but not to the same distance:
forming a shorter circle, and again returning with a bolder, and more
threatening aspect than before; they approach much nearer, probably within
thirty yards, when they make another stand, and again gallop off: this they do
several times, shortening their instance, and advancing nearer; till they come
within a few yards, when most people think it prudent to leave them, not
choosing to provoke them further, as it is probable, that in a few turns more
they would make an attack.

The mode of killing them was, perhaps, the only modern remains of the grandeur
of ancient hunting. On notice been given, that a wild bull would be killed upon
a certain day, the inhabitants of the neighborhood came mounted, and armed
with guns, etc. sometimes to the number of an hundred horse, and four or five
hundred foot, who stood upon walls or got into trees, while the horsemen rode
off the bull from the rest of the herd, until he stood at bay; when a marksman
dismounted and shot. At some of these huntings, twenty or thirty shots have
been fired before he was subdued: on such occasions, the bleeding victim grew
desperately furious, from the smarting of his wounds, and the shouts of savage
joy that were echoing from every side: from the number of accidents that
happened, this dangerous mode has been seldom practiced of late years; the
park-keeper alone generally shooting them with a rifled gun, at one shot. --
When the cows calve, they hide their calves, for a week or ten days, in some
sequestered situation, and go and suckle them two or three times a day. If any
person come near the calves, they clap their heads close to the ground, and lie
like a hare in form, to hide themselves. This is a proof of their native
wildness, and is corroborated by the following circumstance, that happened to
the writer of this narrative, who found a hidden calf, two days old, very lean,
and very weak; on stroking its head, it got up, pawed two or three times like
an old bull, bellowed very loud, retired a few steps, and bolted at his legs
with all its force; it then began to paw again, bellowed, stepped back, and
bolted as before: but knowing its intention, and stepping aside, it missed me,
fell, and was so very weak, that it could not rise, though it made several
efforts; but it had done enough, the whole herd were alarmed, and coming to its
rescue, obliged me to retire; for the dams will allow no person to touch their
calves without attacking them with impetuous ferocity.

When any one happens to be wounded, or grown weak and feeble through age or
sickness, the rest of the herd set upon it, and gore it to death.

Dairy. -- This county cannot boast of its dairies; those who live in the
vicinity of Newcastle, and other populous places, make a handsome return by the
sale of milk, fresh butter, etc. but upon most of the large farms in this
county, dairies are not held in much estimation.

Breeding young cattle -- is practiced in almost every part of the county. Upon
the large farms, cows are kept more for this purpose than the profit of
dairying: there are instances of 50 or 60 calves being brought up in one
season, by one farmer, who did not milk more than fifteen cows. Calves are
certainly best reared with milk, but where such numbers are bred, many
different things have been mixed with, or substituted for, this nutritive and
natural diet; oats and b^an meal, oil cake, lintseed, boiled turnips, etc. are
used, and have their various advocates; but lintseed is most approved; eggs are
excellent for mixing in the calf's food; when cheap in the Spring, perhaps they
cannot be better employed. In the Summer the calves are turned to grass, and in
the first Winter get turnips and straw. After being a year old, they are kept
in Summer on coarse pasture; and in Winter on straw only.

Hiring Bulls -- for the season, is practiced in this county; as high as 50
guineas have been paid for a bull of the short-horned breed, for one season,
and from 3 to 5 guineas given, for serving a cow; but the more common premium
is a guinea.

SECT. 2 -- Of Sheep.
In this county there are three distinct breeds. -- The Cheviot sheep, the
Heath sheep, and the long-wooled sheep.

The Cheviot sheep -- are hornless, the faces and legs in general white. Many
of the Cheviot sheep have dark faces, and were more so formerly. We were
informed by Mr Chisholm, Mr Readhead, Mr Marshall, etc. that these dark-faced
ones grew equally as fine wool. were as hardy, and equally as good thrivers as
the white-faced ones; but that the people to whom they sold their sheep, and
especially tups, preferred white faces; for which reason, they have endeavored
to get quit of black faces.
The best breeds have a sine open countenance, with lively prominent eyes; body
long, fore quarters wanting depth in the breast, and breadth both there and on
the chine; fine clean small boned legs; thin pelts, weight of carcass when fat,
from 12 to 18 lb. per quarter; fleeces from 2 to 3 lb each, and sold in 1792,
for 11d. per lb. The wool is not all sine, there being in a fleece of 3 lb.
weight, only 2 lb. of sine wool, worth one shilling per lb. (when the whole
fleece sells at 10d. per lb.) and one pound of coarse, worth only 6 d. per lb.

They are bred only upon the hilly districts in the northwest part of the
county, and do not extend much farther south than Reedwater.

The best kind of these sheep are certainly a very hardy and valuable mountain
sheep, where the pasture is mostly green sward, or contains a large portion of
that kind of herbage; which is the case with all the hills around Cheviot,
where these sheep are bred; for as to the mountain of Cheviot itself, no kind
of sheep whatever are bred upon it; and we find it an universal practice,
amongst the most experienced sheep farmers, to depasture the heathy A RAM of
the CHEVIOT BREED.
A CHEVIOT EWE
districts with old sheep, (gimmers and wethers) but they never attempt to keep
a breeding flock upon them. Mr Robson of Chatto, informed us, that ewes and
lambs would not do upon his farms of Common Burn, near Wooler, and Felhope, and
Carshope, at the head of Coquet. On such situations, the gimmers are found to
be hardier, or do better than the wether sheep of the same age, called Dinmonts.


Blindburn is probably the highest and coarsest pasture in this county where
this kind of sheep are bred. We examined the herbage, and found, that the
ewe-pasture had a considerable portion of green sward, the coarsest parts of
which consisted of Nardus stricta Wirebent The English names inserted after the
Latin ones, are such as the Cheviot shepherds know them by.
Juncus squarrosus Stoolbent Scirpus caespitosus Deer hair Eriophorum vaginatum
the leaves Ling. In the county of Durham, Yorkshire, and some other parts,
erica vulgaris is known by the name of ling. This plant grows in wet mossy
places; it generally springs in February and March. The sheep are remarkably
fond of it, not only the flowering stem, but the roots; and will s^ratch away
the mossy soil six or eight inches deep, to obtain it. We have seen them
working up to the eyes for this purpose. The shepherds tell wonderful tales of
the nutritive powers of this plant; asserting, that sheep reduced by hunger,
will recover faster, and thrive much better upon this plant, than turnips. It
is certainly a valuable plant for three or four weeks; but after it has
flowered, the sheep totally neglect the flower stem (moss) and depasture only
on the leaves, (ling) It is somewhat singular that the Cheviot shepherds should
consider the flowering stem, and the leaves of this plant, as two distinct
species; nor could some of them be convinced to the contrary, until the plant
was taken up, and they were shown, that their moss and ling grew both from the
same root.


Eriophorum vaginatum the flowering Eriophorum vaginatum stem, Moss. Erica
vulgaris Heath or Hadder.


The shape of this breed of sheep has been much improved of late years; but all
those who have been aiding in making such improvements, readily acknowledge,
there is still much to be done; especially to the fore quarter, which they all
agree is very defective; but we hope it will not long remain so, as we think we
see a spirit of investigation arising amongst these breeders, that in a few
years will remedy not only this defect, but will discover others, which at
present they are not willing to admit. But as knowledge is progressive, we
cannot expect the perfection of this breed of sheep can be obtained at once; it
must proceed by slow gradations, as every other improvement has done; it is a
great point gained, that we admit defects, and are desirous to amend them.

That breed of sheep which brings the most profit to the farmer, will always be
pursued by him, whatever his situation; but that object, we presume, is not to
be obtained in this district from fine wool alone. Perfect mountain sheep
should be active, hardy, well formed, and quick seeders: these qualities will
always recommend them to the grazier, who will never purchase a slow feeding
animal, while he can get one of a different sort, though at a considerable
advanced price. But if to these qualities, so essential to the sale of a
mountain farmer's stock, can be added a fleece of fine wool, a breed of sheep
would then be obtained, the properest for a hilly district of any we have yet
seen. There is little doubt but this may be accomplished by proper selection;
and probably the best kind of Cheviot sheep, from their hardiness, and
producing a portion of fine wool, are the properest stock for laying the
foundation of so desirable an improvement.

Mr Robson, of Belford, (now of Chatto) says, he improved the shape of his
sheep very considerably; particularly the fore-quarter, and the wool, in having
less buttocks; by using three rams which he purchased in Lincolnshire,
thirty-three years since; and we know other instances of improvement, by using
tups of or Dishley blood. In all these cases, we do not find the sheep less
hardy, or wool of less value; but the carcass materially improved. Mr Smith, of
Woodhall, had some of his Cheviot ewes put to a tup of Mr Thompson's; the
produce of which were examined when 18 months old, by Mr Robert Thompson, and
the report was, that the form was amazingly improved, and the gimmers stood the
Winter remarkably well. This Gentleman is pursuing the experiment, and we hope
will find the produce of the third or fourth cross sufficiently active and
hardy for seeking their food on many of the hilly pastures around Cheviot.


Mr Readhead, of Chatto, is of opinion, that there are some situations amongst
the Cheviot-hills, where the South Down sheep might be successful; those who
are possessed of such, would do well to make a fair experiment; should it
succeed, a very great improvement of the Cheviot wool, in point of fineness,
would be derived by crossing with this breed: but probably what it gained in
fineness, it would lose in weight, for it is not the value per pound which
constitutes the farmer's profit, but the value per fleece; or rather, that
breed is the best, which brings the most profit in fleece and carcass jointly,
This criterion militates very strongly against the Spanish sheep; unless they
can be found with carcases of superior form, and inclination to fatten, to any
we have yet seen.
from the same ground, in equal times. Opinions and conjectures will never
decide this matter; it can only be done by fair experiments, conducted by
persons of judgment and impartiality.

The Mode of Management -- amongst the sheep farmers of these hills, is to
divide their flock into different parcels, viz. lambs, hogs, gimmers, ewes, and
wethers, and each parcel kept on such pasturage as is thought most proper for
them. Every parcel is attended by a shepherd, who is bound to return the number
of sheep delivered to him, either alive, or in his account of dead sheep, which
are in general sold at different prices, according to their goodness.

The ewes are 2 years old before they are put to the tup; and are kept till
five or six years old: the loss of lambs is sometimes very considerable, not
only on being dropped, but also from other disorders, as the "milk-ill," which
attacks them from 3 to 7 days old, the "quarter-ill," etc. which Mr Chisholm of
Clennel estimates at not less than 15 per cent. taking one year with another.
And Mr Smith of Woodhall says, that "although the Cheviot breed be as healthy as
perhaps any, yet there can hardly be an instance adducible of any of the
different sheep flocks coming all to the shears, much less the hogs; out of
which it is common to allow two out of each score."

The Heath Sheep -- have large spiral horns, black faces and legs, a fierce
wild-looking eye, and short firm carcasses (weighing from 12 to 16 lb. per
quarter) covered with long, open, coarse shagged wool. The fleeces weigh from
three to four pounds each; and sold, in 1792, for sixpence per pound. They are
an exceedingly active and hardy race, and seem the best adapted, of all others,
to high exposed heathy districts; such as we find them in possession of here,
from the western parts of the county of Durham, to North Tyne.

Mr Hopper, of Blackhedley, buys year old wethers of this kind of sheep for
10s. 6d. each, and two-year olds for 14s. which he depastures upon a heathy
moor of 4000 acres; from whence he takes them at 3 years old to turnips; and
sells, the May following, from 28 to 32 shillings each: he has tried the
Cheviot sheep in the same manner, but thinks the other a hardier and better
feeding sheep. Mr Hopper says, that the best sheep of this kind he has tried,
are bred about Moffat, in Scotland.


A RAM of the HEATH BREED


The breeders of this kind of sheep on the south west corner of the county, are
very confident, that they are a much hardier sheep than the Cheviot breed; and
upon their high exposed heathy mountains, where there is very little green
herbage, much more profitable; while the Cheviot farmers assert, that theirs
are equally hardy, and that the greater value of the fleece gives them a
decided superiority. We have before stated that the fineness of wool is not a
proper criterion, by which the merits of a breed of sheep are to be determined;
it can only be done by fair experiment, in which all the circumstances of the
case are included; but we do not find that this has ever been done by either
party, and though it is only opinion against opinion, yet both parties are so
positive, that they are ready to quarrel with any person who happens to express
an opinion of his own: we shall therefore content ourselves with stating, that
the question can only be properly decided by a parcel of each kind of ewes
(suppose 100) being depastured and kept in every respect equally alike, upon
some of those high, exposed situations, the height of which is much more
elevated, and the herbage much coarser than the Cheviot pastures; and almost
totally covered with Heath or Hather (Erica Vulgaris.) And at the end of five,
six, or seven years, that breed which has brought the greatest number of sheep
to market, and made the most profit, will deservedly be deemed the hardiest,
best, and most eligible, for such situations.

Until some experiment of this kind determine the matter; we hope, we shall not
give offense to either party by stating, that we have seen the heath sheep bred
with advantage upon higher and coarser pastures than Common Burn, or those
others around Cheviot, which are deemed improper for a breeding flock of the
Cheviot kind; and that it may probably turn out, that each breed is
particularly adapted to particular situations, the one to coarse exposed
mountains, where the luxury of green herbage is thinly scattered, or rarely to
be found: the other, to hilly pastures, where considerable portions of verdant
surface predominate, such as characterize the pastoral districts around Cheviot.

The long-woolled sheep, -- which formerly occupied the lower district of this
county, were called Muggs, probably from their faces being covered with a muff
of wool, close to their eyes. These being a slow feeding tribe, have given way
to the Dishley breed, which were first introduced into this county in the year
1766, By Messrs Culley.
and by their superior merit have so far made their way against every prejudice
and opposition, that it is probable in a few years there will be a difficulty
in finding a flock that is not more or less related to the Dishley blood.

The improved breed of long-woolled sheep -- are distinguished from other
long-woolled kinds by their fine lively eyes, clean heads, straight broad flat
backs, round barrel-like bodies, very fine small bones, thin pelts; and that
singular property of making fat at an early age, perhaps more than any thing
else, gives them a superiority over the other breed in this island.

The weight of the carcass in general is, ewes three or four years old, from 18
to 26 lb. per quarter; the wool upon an average, 7lb. a fleece; the length from
6 to 14 inches; sold in 1792, at 10d. per lb.

The most approved mode of management of this breed of sheep is as follows: The
ewes generally lamb in March, when we give them a few turnips to increase their
milk. The latter end of June or beginning of July the lambs are weaned, and
sent to middling pasture; but a good pasture would certainly be a more eligible
practice. The ewes are milked two or three times to ease their udders, and such
A new shorn RAM of the improved LONG WOOLED BREED.
as are not intended to be continued for breeding, are culled or draughted out,
and put to clover: when this fails, they get turnips, and are sold about
Christmas to the butchers, very fat; the price from 34 to 40s. each; frequently
measuring four or five inches thick of fat on the sides, and two or three
inches down the back, all the way from head to tail. And though this breed be
not eminent for much tallow, yet ewes under such circumstances have been known
to produce from eighteen to twenty-four pounds of tallow each.

The lambs, after being weaned, take the name of Hogs. They are generally put
to turnips the beginning of November, and continue at them till the middle of
April or beginning of May; when the wether hogs are put upon good pasture, or
second year's clover. The second Winter they have turnips until the clovers are
sufficiently grown to receive them, which is generally about the middle of
April: they are clipped or shorn about the middle of May, when we begin to sell
them, and are mostly all sold by the middle or end of June. Morpeth is our best
market, where the two shear wethers are generally sold for from forty to fifty
shillings a head; in 1797, they sold for 3l. per head on an average. At this
age they are equally fat as the ewes before described:

Of late years it has been customary to fell the shearling wethers, in June or
July, to the butchers, fatter than most other breeds will be at two or three
years old; the weight of these shearling wethers is from 18 to 21 lb. per
quarter.

We generally reckon one third of the ewes to have twin lambs. They are put to
the tup, so as to have lambs at two years old, and kept for breeding until
three or four years old, except such as are of particular good forms, or have
other valuable properties: these we keep as long as ever they will breed. Such
as are defective in shape, suspected of being slow feeders, or other
unprofitable qualities, we never put to the tup, or attempt to breed from them.

Letting Tups -- to serve ewes for the season, has been a practice in this
county for near 30 years, and is becoming more prevalent daily; the prices vary
from five to one hundred guineas, for the use of one sheep; and ewes are
frequently taken in to be served by a favorite ram, at as high rates as from 3
to 5 guineas each. The number of ewes to be served by a shearing tup, is
generally stipulated not to exceed 80, and for an aged sheep 120.

At the first introduction of this breed of sheep, a great prejudice was raised
against them, and clamorous outcries made, that their adoption would be the
ruin of the country, and no means were left untried to depreciate their value:
but every obstacle has been overcome by their superior merit, which seems now
to be universally acknowledged, as may be judged from the following
circumstance.

In October 1795, Mr Thompson of Chillingham Barns, having quitted a farm, he
advertised to sell by auction, 500 ewes, in lots of 5 each. L. s. d. The first
100 ewes, sold on an average for 21 0 0 per lot of 5 each. The second 100 for
20 2 6 ditto The first 100 gimmers for 29 0 0 ditto Several lots of the gimmers
sold for above 35l. each lot, one in particular for 38l. or 7l. 12s. each sheep.

The highest lot of ewes was 28l or 5l. 12s. each.

The purchasers amounted to upwards of 50, amongst whom were several, that a
few years before, were the most violent, and loudest exclaimers against any
"change or innovation," in the established breed of the country.

Breeding Sheep -- of the long-woolled kind, to be sold to graziers to fatten,
is practiced by the occupiers of such farms as do not afford a sufficiency of
turnips, or such as do not produce any: those who are in the latter
predicament, either take turnips for wintering their hogs, or put them upon
good old grass pastures. The wethers are generally sold in September and
October, being then shearlings, for, from 22s. to 26s. each; and the ewes three
and a half years old, from 18s. to 24s. each; in 1796, they were as high as 2l.
each.

There are few or no sheep bred in those parts of the county, called
Castle-Ward, Bedlingtonshire, and the south east corner of Morpeth Ward.

The modern maxims of breeding were introduced into this county by one of Mr
Bakewell's first disciples, upwards of 30 years since; previous to which, "big
bones" and "large size" were looked upon as the principal criteria of
excellence, and a sacred adherence to the rule of never breeding within the
canonical degree of relationship; but those prejudices are at this period, in a
great measure, done away; and the principal farmers of this district may now be
classed amongst the most scientific breeders in the kingdom, who have pursued
it with an ardour and unremitting attention that have not failed of success. It
is this knowledge of breeding, and the nice discrimination of selecting proper
stock for grazing, added to their improved mode of cultivation, that gives them
a celebrity of character, for their extensive knowledge in rural affairs, and
that has for some years back made this district a School for Agriculture, where
pupils from various parts have come to be instructed.


Salving -- was formerly universally practiced, and it was thought the sheep
could not do well without it. In the lower districts it is now almost totally
disused; and some of the hill farmers have laid it aside, and find their flocks
do equally well as before; and the wool sells for a much better price than when
it is salved; but it is of less weight, as may be naturally expected, from the
want of near of a pound of salve upon each fleece.

This salve is composed of 12 lb. of butter, and 4 quarts of tar, mixed well
together while warm, which quantity serves 24 sheep, the number a man will
salve in a day.

Milking. -- It used to be a general practice through all this county to milk
ewes after the lambs were weaned, for six, eight, or ten weeks; from this milk
great quantities of cheese were made, and sold for about 3d. per pound. When
kept to three or four years old, it is exceedingly pungent, and on that account
some people prefer it to cheese of a much better quality.

To milk ewes two or three times after the lambs are weaned is a useful
practice; but when continued to eight or ten weeks, it becomes very
detrimental, keeps the ewes lean, and ill prepared for meeting the severities
of Winter.

This custom has been long disused by the intelligent farmers in the lower
districts; and we are glad to sind it much laid aside by the most considerable
hill farmers. The profit of milking ewes for six or eight weeks is estimated at
8d. per ewe; and it is generally agreed they are decreased in value, at least
1s. 6d. per head; of course there is a loss of about 1s. per head by milking.
In one instance of milking long-woolled ewes, last Summer, there was a loss of
at least 3s. per head.

SECT. 3. -- Horses.
The best draught horses used in this county are brought from Clydesdale, in
Scotland; they are in general from 15 to 16 hands high; strong, hardy,
remarkable good and true pullers; a restive horse being rarely found among them.

Those bred in the county are of various sorts, descended from stallions of
different kinds, from the full blood racer, to the strong, heavy, rough-legged
black. From the full blood stallions and country mares, are bred excellent
hunters, road and carriage horses; and from the other kinds of stallions are
bred the draught horses, which in general, are middle sized, active animals,
well adapted to the husbandry of the country.

We have before observed, that since the price of horses had been so very high,
several oxen had been used for the draught; but whether with propriety or
advantage, will appear from

A comparative Statement between HORSES and OXEN, for the purpose of the
Draught.
BY way of preliminary it will be necessary to admit as data, That a horse
which eats 70 bushels of oats per year, will not consume of other food so much
as an ox that gets no corn; This is deduced from the following experiments.
Three working horses about 15 hands high, eat in 14 days. 96 stones of hay;
which is for each horse at the rate of 16 stones a week, with an allowance of
oats, 12 gallons per week.

Mr Thompson's of Chillingham Barns, 18 horses in 12 days, eat 430 stones of
hay; which is 14 stones per week, each horse: allowance of oats, 16 gallons per
week.

Mr Atkinson's of Yevering, eat per week, 13 stones of hay, 2 bushels of
potatoes, and 16 gallons of oats.

Mr Jobson's of Newtown, 5 years old working oxen, with a full allowance of
hay, had, each ox, 6 quarts of oats per day.

In 15 days 4 oxen eat 164 stones 7 lb. of hay, which is after the rate for
each ox, of hay 19 stones per week. of oats 10 gallons ditto.


Three days after, the same oxen were put to hay only; and in 7 days eat 79
stones 10 lb. or 20 stones each ox per week, which is only stone more, than
when they got 10 gallons of corn, in the same time. This is a singular
circumstance, and deserving of further investigation.

An unworked ox, 3 years old, was put to good old meadow hay, the 29th of
November, and eat 49 stones in 21 days; or per week, 16 stones 5 lb.

An idle horse (15 hands high) eat of the same hay, 20 stones in 10 days; or
per week, 14 stones -- had no corn.


but in the following estimate, we shall allow horses to eat as much as oxen,
as the difference is not yet sufficiently ascertained.

That the oxen are yoked at 3 years old, and are worked till six; and for the
first year require 8, to do the work of 2 horses; but after having been worked
a year, and become tractable and stronger, 6 are equal to 2 horses, either by
being yoked three at a time, or two, and driven by the holder with cords; of
course, the expense of a driver may be estimated to be saved for one half the
year.

That the expenses of a ploughman, the plough and other articles that are the
same in both teams, need not be taken into the account.

And that oxen, to work regularly through the year, cannot work more than half
a day at a time.

Expense of an ox per ann.
L s. d. Summering, -- Grass 2 acres, at 20s. per acre 2 0 0 Wintering -- L s.
d. on straw and turnips 2 0 0 but if on hay 4 0 0 The average is A great
portion of the soil of this county is improper for turnips; in those districts
hay is given, instead of turnips, for which reason we have taken the average.
3 0 0 Interest at 5 per cent, for price of the ox 0 10 0 Harness, shoeing,
etc. 0 15 0 6 5 0 Deduct for the increased value of an ox for 1 yr. 1 0 0 gives
the expense per ann. of an ox for the team 5 5 0 And the expense of 6 oxen 31
10 0 To which must be added the expense of a Carried over 31 10 0 L s. d.
Brought over 31 10 0 driver for a year 3 10 0 Total expense of a team of 6 oxen
35 0 0 An 8 ox team: L s. d. The expense of an ox per ann. being 5 5 0 8 That
of 8 will be 42 0 0 To which, add the expense of a driver 8 0 0 gives the
expense per ann. of an 8 ox team 50 0 0 Therefore the expense of a team of oxen
the first year, will be 50 0 0 ditto the second year 35 0 0 ditto the third
year 35 0 0 divided by 3 120 0 0 Gives the average expense per ann of an ox
team, from 3 to 6 years old 40 0 0 Expense of an horse per ann. L s. d.
Summering, -- Grass 2 acres, at 20s. per acre 2 0 0 Wintering, -- Straw 13
weeks, at 9d. per week 0 10 0 Hay 16 ditto, 1 tons, at 2l. per ton. 3 0 0 Corn
(for a year) 70 bushels of oats, at 2s. per bushel, 7 0 0 Shoeing and harness 1
0 0 Carried over 13 10 0 L. s. d. Brought over 13 10 0 Annuity to pay off 25l.
in 16 years, the purchase value of the horse at 4 years old. This is calculated
on the supposition, that a horse bought at 4 years old, will work 16 years; and
admitting his price to be 25l. then the question will be, to find what annuity
will pay off 25l. in 16 years, allowing compound interest at 5 per cent, which
by the rules laid down by the writers on algebra, will be 2l. 58. od.
2 5 0 15 15 0 Expense of a horse per ann. 15 10 0 Ditto of a two horse team 31
10 0

If a three horse team be used, the account will stand thus: L. s. d. The
expense of an horse per ann. being 15 15 0 3 That of 3 will be 47 5 0 To which,
add the expense of a driver 8 0 0 gives the expense of a 3 horse team 55 5 0

If the comparison be made with the horse team of many of the midland counties,
where they use 5 horses, yoked one before another in one plough; the account
will stand thus: L. s. d. The expense of one horse per ann. being 15 15 0 5
Carried over 78 15 0 L. s. d. That of 5 will be 78 15 0 To which add the
expense of a man to drive 18 0 0 The expense of a team of 5 horses will be 96
15 0 Ditto of 3 ditto 55 5 0 Ditto of 2 ditto 31 10 0 Ditto of 8 oxen 50 0 0
The average expense of an ox team, from 3 to 6 years old, that will do the same
quantity of work as 2 horses 40 0 0

The conclusions to be drawn from the above statement are so obvious as to need
little elucidation; but we cannot help remarking, how strong the force of
prejudice must be, to continue the use of 5 horses, and heavy, clumsy, unwieldy
wheel ploughs, where a simple swing plough, and 2 horses yoked double, and
driven by the holder, would do the same quantity of work, equally well, and at
one third the expense!

But before any proper conclusions can be drawn whether ox teams or horses are
the most eligible, it will be necessary to consider, whether the quantity of
land employed in supporting those animals be used in the most profitable mode
to the community, as well as the occupier.

With the latter, the first question for consideration is, whether 8 oxen used
in the team, or in grazing, will pay him the most money?

Suppose 8 oxen, at three years old, were put to the plough, and plough 6 acres
per week; which, at 3s. 4d. If to this 3s. 4d. be added 1s. 8d. the wages for
the ploughman and driver, it will make 5s. the usual price for ploughing an
acre in this district.
per acre, is 20 shillings; and if they work 48 weeks in a year, then their
whole earnings (after deducting 6l. for expenses of harness, shoeing, etc.)
will be 42l.: but if they plough only 5 acres per week, (which is probably
nearer the truth), then their whole earnings will be only 34l.

The same oxen put to graze, to pay the same money, should improve in value 5l.
5s. each, in the first case; and 4l. 5s. in the latter: but we are inclined to
believe, there are few situations, if the cattle are of a good quick feeding
kind, where they would not pay considerably more.

In respect to the community, the account will be nearly as follows: From the
above statements, we find that an ox for summering and wintering, requires 3
acres; -- therefore a 6 ox team will require 21 ditto And 2 horses for grass
and hay per ann. require 7 ditto For corn and straw 4 ditto Land necessary for
keeping 2 horses per ann. 11 ditto The difference is the quantity of land
required for a team of oxen more than horses. 10 acres

Hence it appears, that a team of 6 oxen requires 10 acres more land to
maintain them than a team of 2 horses, which will do the same work: and of
course, the produce which might be derived from this 10 acres, is lost to the
community: suppose it be one half in grass, and the other half in ploughing,
then we shall have, 5 Acres of clover, or grass. 1 Ditto of oats. 1 Ditto of
turnips, or fallow. 1 Ditto of wheat.


It would then send to market yearly, at the lowest computation, 7 Cwt. of
beef. 8 Quarters of oats. And 5 Ditto of wheat.


From this view of the subject, it appears, that if oxen were universally used
for the draught, in the room of horses, there would be a considerable
defalcation in the supply of the markets, both in corn and animal food. In this
county it is estimated that there are capable of cultivation, 800000 acres; and
allowing of this to be in tillage, that is 266666 acres; and that every 50
acres in tillage will require a team to manage it properly; of course there
will be at least 5333 teams, but for the sake of round numbers call it 5000
teams. L. Then 5000 x 7 cwts. beef = 37500 cwts. beef at 30s. 56250 5000 x 8
qrs. oats = 40000 qrs. oats at 16s. 32000 5000 x 5 qrs. wheat = 25000 qrs.
wheat at 40s. 50000 L. 138250

The value in provisions that would be lost in this county yearly, if horse
teams were abolished, and oxen used in their stead.


And the loss to the farmer would be the profit derived from the produce; which
by the usual mode of allowing one-third for the farmer's profit, would in this
case be about 10l.

SECT. 4. -- Swine.
The Berkshire pigs, and the large white breed, were formerly the most
prevalent in this county; but the small black Chinese breed has in a great
measure supplanted them, especially upon the large farms; and these are likely
to give way to a small white breed lately introduced, remarkably quiet,
inoffensive animals; on which account they are principally preferred to the
Chinese breed.

SECT. 5. -- Rabbits.
Rabbits are found in considerable numbers among the sand hills along the
coast, and are probably the most eligible stock for such situations, having
been sold of late years for 25. per couple.

SECT. 4. -- Goats.
Goats -- are kept in small numbers, on many parts of the Cheviot hills, not so
much as an object of profit, but the shepherds assert, the sheep slocks are
healthier where a few goats depasture. This probably may be the case, as it is
well known, that goats eat some plants with impunity, that are deadly poison to
other kinds of domestic animals.

The chief profit made of these goats, is from their milk being sold to
invalids, who come to Wooler in the Summer season.

SECT. 7. -- Poultry.
Poultry, -- in a district like this, where they are sold so low, are the most
unprofitable stock kept upon a farm; the value of the corn consumed by them,
being generally double to what they are sold for; and the laboring people are
so well convinced of their inutility, that they constantly and universally sell
them, knowing from experience, that if the value received for them be laid out
in either beef or mutton, it will be much more serviceable; and this piece of
economy is so well understood, that we believe there is scarce an instance of a
laboring person ever making use of poultry for his own family; they are always
considered as articles purposely bred to pamper luxuty.

CHAPTER XIV. RURAL ECONOMY.
SECT. 1 -- Labor, etc.
THROUGH the greatest part of this county, and especially upon the large farms,
there are very few servants kepts in the house; seldom more than two men and
two maids: but the ploughman, carters, barnmen, shepherds, etc. have each a
house and garden or yard to themselves, and are generally married. The
conditions of servitude for one year are: L. s. d. 2 Cows kept, o^ money in
lieu at 3l. each, 6 0 0 3 Bushels of wheat at 5s. per bush. 0 15 0 33 Ditto of
oats at 1s. 8d. ditto 2 15 0 12 Ditto of barley at 2s 6d. ditto 1 10 0 12 Ditto
of rye at 3s. 4d. ditto 2 0 0 10 Ditto of pease at 3s. 6d. ditto 1 15 0 24 lb
of cast wool at 6d. per lb. 0 12 0 1 Bushel of potatoes planted, a pig
tethered, keeping hens, etc. 2 4 0 Carriage of coals, six cart loads, 1 0 0 In
all 18 11 0

They are bound to sind a woman labourer to work for the following wages: for
harvesting 6d. per day, for hoeing turnips, In this branch of labor, the women
in the northern parts of the county excel: the writer of this note has at
different times visited Norfolk. Suffolk, and all the principal turnip
districts in the island; but never law turnips so well hoed, and completely
cleaned, or kept in such garden-like culture, as on these borders.
hay-making, scaling, weeding corn, etc. used to be 4d. per day, but was last
year raised to 6d. per day.

In addition to the above conditions, the shepherd generally has as many sheep
kept as are worth four or five pounds a year; but, if he has any under-shepherd
to keep to assist him, the number is increased accordingly. In the hilly
districts, their sheep sometimes amount to hundreds, besides six or eight neat
cattle.

An overseer or head servant has, in addition to the above, as much money as to
make his place worth from 20l. to 30l. a year.

Threshing is mostly done by the piece; a twenty-fifth part of the corn
threshed, being the general custom, if the straw be taken away unfolded; but if
the thresher folds the straw, he has a twenty-first part, and finds a woman to
dress the corn, and to work at all other work, for the same wages as the
others; he has straw for his cow in Winter, but pays for her Summer's grass.

The yearly wages of house servants are, for men, from 8l. to 12l. for women,
3l. to 5l.

The wages of day laborers, without victuals or any allowance of beer, are, s.
d. s. d. For Men, in Summer, 1 2 to 1 4 In 1796, the wages got up to 2s. and in
harvest to 2s. 6d, for men; and for women, to 1s. 9d.
Winter 1 0 to 1 2 Harvest 1 6 to 1 9 Women, ditto 1 0 to 1 3 s. d. s. d. --
for other work 0 6 to 0 8 Masons 1 8 to 2 0 Carpenters 1 6 to 2 0

Upon some of the large farms, a carpenter and smith are hired by the year.

The hours of working are from six in the morning to six in the evening, when
the length of lay will permit, with the following intervals of rest: H. M. At
breakfast 0 30 Ten o'clock 0 30 Dinner 1 30 Four o'clock 0 30 In all 3 00 hours
of rest, and nine of labor.

SECT 2. -- Provision.
The price of grain in this county fluctuates very much: betwixt the markets of
Newcastle and Hexham, and those of Alnwick, Berwick, and Wooler, there is
always a considerable difference; Wheat and barley, in Newcastle market, are
mostly sixpence a bushel higher; and in Hexham, nine-pence.
the prices in the northern parts being in general the lowest, on amongst the
lowest, in the kingdom, owing to the produce being so much greater than the
home consumption. This surplus affords large quantities to be yearly exported
from Berwick, Alemouth, and other places along the northern part of the coast

The average prices of grain at Berwick, in 1792, were, s. d. Wheat 5 0 per
bushel. Rye 3 4 ditto s. d. Barley 2 6 ditto Oats 2 2 ditto Pease 3 6 ditto

Fat stock being easily driven from one place to another, keeps the price of
butcher's meat more upon an equality in all the markets of the county.

The average price of butcher's meat is from threepence-halfpenny to
fourpence-halfpenny per pound; but in May and June it generally gets to
fivepence, and the two last years has been sixpence and sevenpence.

s. d. Butter 0 6 a pound of 16 ounces. Skim-milk and ewe cheese 0 3 ditto Fat
goose 2 0 Turkey 3 0 Duck 0 8 Chicken 0 6 s. d. Eggs, per dozen 0 3 to 0 6
Potatoes, per bush. 1 0 to 1 6

SECT. 3. -- Fuel.
Upon the edges of the moors, toward the western parts of the county, a few
peats are burnt; but in every other part, we believe, coals are universally
used.

The quantity consumed by a poor family, is from 5 to 7 cart loads a year.

CHAPTER XV. POLITICAL ECONOMY.
SECT. 1. -- Roads.
THE turnpike roads are mostly in good order; those that have an opportunity of
getting whinstone, or limestone, are the best; but they certainly would be
better if the surveyors would order the stones to be broken smaller and the
roads made wider. One great objection to some of these roads is the many steep
banks they are disgraced with, some of the worst might have been avoided; but
it seems the original setters-out of these roads had a predilection for
climbing and descending steep banks: this is notorious on both the roads upon
Rimside-Moor, without even the plea of being nearer; as the leveller road would
have been nearer, traveled in much less time, and with far less fatigue. Some
similar cases appear on the post road, which we hope will be remedied in the
next application to Parliament for a new act.

The township roads are in some places good, but by far the greatest-part are
deserving of a different appellation; the cause of this deficiency is in most
cases to be attributed to the neglect and manner of performing the statute-work.

One mode of remedying this neglect, would be to appoint a surveyor, with a
small salary, who should be empowered to collect the composition due for
statute-work, and ^mploy th^^ money for repairing the road where most necessary
for the public in general, without having regard to the convenience or
influence of individuals.

A book should be kept by the surveyor, and yearly examined, settled, and
signed by a committee of inhabitants, before it went to the magistrates. We
know from experience, that by this means the road would be much better made,
and in near double the quantity: for when a farmer sends his cart to perform
statute-duty, it seldom carries more than half a load, and the servants
practice every maneuver to put off time, and do as little as possible which
would not be the case with hired carts, as every inhabitant would be ready to
report any mal-practices.

SECT. 2 -- Canals.
In this county there are no Canals; and notwithstanding heir manifest utility
to a district like this, where such immense quantities of heavy articles are to
be conveyed; yet we believe, no attempt was ever made, or even so much as a
canal projected, in any part of the county before 1792, when some gentlemen on
Tweedside had it in contemplation to make a navigable canal, from the
collieries and lime works near Berwick, to Kelso in Scotland, and from thence
up the Tweed and Tiviot; but a survey being made by Mr Whitworth, it was dropped,
probably on account of the great expense.

The next public notice we can trace, was given by Mr Dodd, in 1794, of a canal
from Newcastle to Carlisle, or M^ryport, in Cumberland, to join the east and
west seas. This was to pass on the south side of Tyne: but Mr Chapman proposed
a line to pass on the north side of Tyne, the peculiarity of which was, that it
should come from Haydon-Bridge, to the upper parts of Newcastle, upon one level
without a lock, and the goods conveyed from thence to the river, either by a
kind of staircase of locks, or in wagons on an inclined plane. By this
proposal, the principal supporters of the grand canal were divided into-two
parties; the consequence of which was, that the money to complete the great
design of uniting the two seas, could not be raised, and of course it was given
up; one on the north side, proposed to stop at Haydon-Bridge, and another on
the south side at Hexham. The subscriptions for defraying the expense of the
north line, we were informed were filled; and application was made to
Parliament in 1797, to obtain an Act for making a canal on the north side, but
it met with so strong an opposition from the land owners, that it was thought
proper to withdraw it.

The subscribers for a canal on the south of the river still persevere in their
endeavors to accomplish the line to Hexham, or Haydon-Bridge; and we have not
heard that any opposition to the measure is intended by the proprietors of
lands, through which it is to pass.

SECT. 3 -- Fairs.
The principal Fairs in this County are: MAY
4th -- Wooler -- for a few cattle, sheep, horses, hiring servants, etc. 10th.
-- Allendale -- for cattle. 12th. -- Alnwick. -- A large show of both fat and
lean cattle. 14th. -- Haltwhistle -- for cattle, chiefly cows for grazing.


JUNE.
Tuesday before Belford. -- A few cattle and sheep. Whitsuntide. Belford. -- A
few cattle and sheep. Wednesday before Morpeth -- for fat cattle, sheep, etc.
Whitsunday. Morpeth -- for fat cattle, sheep, etc. Whitsun Eve. --
Stagshaw-Bank, (near Corbridge) -- so cattle, sheep, horses, etc.
Whitsun-Tuesday -- Whitsun Bank, (near Wooler.) -- A large fair for cattle,
horses, and great numbers of sheep, principally long-woolled hogs, and ewes and
lambs; and a hiring for servants. Friday in Trinity week. Berwick -- a few lean
and fat cattle.
JULY
4th -- Stagshaw Bank, (near Corbridge.) -- This is one of the largest sheep
fairs in the north of England; Upwards of a hundred thousand sheep are shown at
this fair.
principally of the black-faced heath sheep, which mostly come from the south
west of Scotland: there are also great numbers of cattle, horses, and swine.
Wednesday before the 22d. Morpeth -- for fat cattle, sheep, etc. Last Monday,
-- Alnwick, -- fat and lean cattle.
AUGUST
5th. -- Hexham -- Cattle, horses and sheep, chiefly lambs both of the Cheviot
and heath kind; from the vicinity of Langholm, (in Scotland.) 12th. --
Newcastle -- holds 9 days for horses; and for fat and lean cattle, on the last
or 12th. 23d. -- Belford -- A few cattle and sheep. 24th. -- Whittingham. --
for fat and lean cattle, and a few horses. The best show of fat cattle of any
fair in the county. This fair used to be held on the 4th of September, but was
altered a few years since.
26th. -- Elsdon, -- a few cattle.
SEPTEMBER.
Saturday after the 15th Bellingham, -- a few cattle, chiefly small cows. 19th.
-- Harbottle, -- for a few cattle, mostly steers and heifers. 27th -- St.
Ninians, (near Wooler) -- a very large show of sheep and cattle, with a few
horses. -- The sheep are-mostly draft or cast ewes, and shearing wethers.
OCTOBER.
First Tuesday -- Alnwick -- for fat and lean cattle. 2d. -- Rothbury, -- for
cattle, mostly for steers and heifers. 17th. -- Wooler, -- for very great
numbers of sheep, of the Cheviot and long-woolled kinds: a few cattle and
horses. 29th. -- Newcastle, -- for horses, cattle, and swine.
This is one of the largest fairs in the north of England. The horse fair
begins nine or ten days before the 29th, and continues every day in the town,
where great numbers of remarkable sine horses, for the field, the road, and the
carriage, are sold daily. The abundant choice of every kind, brings great
numbers of dealers from London and various other distant places: its celebrity
has increased very much of late years, and we believe it may be justly classed
amongst the first horse fairs in the kingdom.

The show of cattle is also very great, not only for the breed of the country,
but also for large droves of kyloes, (Scotch cattle) which are purposely driven
from the Highlands, to be sold at this fair. -- The fair on the 29th, is held
on the Town-moor, and is called the Cow-hill fair.

NOVEMBER.
1st. -- Rothbury -- for young cattle. 8th -- Hexham. -- Cattle. 14th. --
Allendale. -- Cattle, mostly small cows. 22d. -- Newcastle. -- Fat cattle,
chiefly cows: this fair is held in the town, and is called the "Stones fair."
22d. -- Haltwhistle. -- A few fat cows, and lean cattle for wintering.
SECT. 4. -- Markets.
Tuesday. -- Hexham, -- for corn and other provisions.

Ditto -- Belford. -- The chief support of this market, is the sale of corn,
great quantities of which are sold by sample, for exportation.

Ditto. -- Newcastle, -- a small market for provisions of various kinds.

Wednesday. -- Morpeth, -- for corn, butcher's meat, butter, etc and for fat
cattle and sheep: of the former on an average not less than 80 weekly; and of
sheep, and lambs 1600; Mr Thomas Spours, who has attended this market for
upwards of 40 years, says, that 30 years since, there was not half this number;
and he remembers, that for several weeks in the Winter, very few sheep or
cattle, if any, were exhibited.
which are bought up for the consumption of Newcastle, Shields, Sunderland, It
may be proper to remark, that 30 or 40 years since, the butchers of those
places were obliged to purchase a great deal of fat stock, in the neighborhood
of Darlington, and other parts of the county of Durham; the produce of the
north not being equal to their demands: but the scales are now turned, the
northern farmers being able, not only to supply the increased population of
those places, but to send great numbers of both fat cattle and sheep, every
year, to Leeds, Wakefield, Manchester, etc.
etc.

Thursday. -- Wooler, -- principally for corn, considerable quantities of which
are sold by sample, mostly for exportation.

Friday. -- Rothbury. -- This market is little more than nominal, there being
only one butcher who sells a few carcases, and which constitutes nearly the
whole of the market.

Ditto. -- Allendale, -- for corn, butcher's meat, and considerable quantities
of potatoes and garden stuff from Hexham; all for the supply of the mining
district to the westward.

Saturday. -- Newcastle. -- A very large market, and well supplied with corn,
butcher's meat, fish, poultry, butter, etc.

Dr Hutton, in his Plan of Newcastle, in 1772, states the annual consumption of
this place to be 5000 catttle, 10000 calves, and 147000 sheep and lambs.

Ditto. -- Alnwick, -- a large market for corn and provisions of various kinds.

Ditto. -- Berwick, -- for corn, butcher's meat, and other articles of
provisions; at both this market and Alnwick, considerable quantities of corn
are sold by sample for exportation.

SECT. 5. -- Commerce.
The commerce of this county is derived principally from the coal trade: the
ships belonging to the port of Newcastle, in 1772, are stated by Mr Pennant, to
be 3948, their tonnage, 758214 -- The principal exports are coals, lead, lead
shot, wrought iron, grindstones, pottery, glass, etc.

The exports from Berwick, are chiefly corn, flour, oatmeal, shilled barley,
potatoes, fish, eggs, wool, etc. coastways; which has increased very much of
late years: the foreign trade is chiesly to the north of Europe.

The number of vessels belonging to this port is about 40, making upwards of
3000 tons: the receipts of the customs are, upon an average, about 3000l. per
ann.

The port of Alemouth also employs a few vessels in exporting corn, flour, etc.

And a few vessels are employed in the Summer season, in carrying lime, from
the neighborhood of Bambro', to different parts of Scotland.

SECT. 6 -- Manufactures.
This county is not distinguished by any staple manufactures; the principal are
derived from, or connected with the coal trade and mines; as ship-building,
roperies, forges, founderies, copperas, coal tar, soda, or marine alkali, white
lead, potteries, glass works, etc.

Hexham has been long famed for its manufacture of gloves, which employs about
300 hands.

To establish manufactures of Woollens, two or three essays have been lately
made at Alnwick, Mitford, and Acklington; and a cotton Mill has been lately
erected at Nether-Witton; all of which, from present appearances, we hope are
doing well.

There is one species of manufacture carried on in this district, with an
agricultural production of small value, viz. that of straw, which is not only
made use of as a covering for the heads of the wives and daughters of the
humble cottager, but has also lately been converted into ornaments that might
accompany the richest and most splendid dress, which the palace or the
drawing room exhibits; and, for the honor of the plough, has not only been
converted into buttons for the men, but also into rings and earrings for the
ladies.

Agriculture is certainly benefited by manufactures in the consumption of its
produce, by the great number of people employed: but we do not find any new
modes of practice or improvements in agriculture, introduced in their vicinity,
or resulting from the exertions of those connected with them.

SECT. 7 -- Poor.
We do not find any mode of managing the poor in this county, different from
that generally used in other districts.

In those townships where they are collected and maintained in poor houses, the
rates are easier, than where they are relieved at their own houses. We are
inclined to believe that workhouses, under proper regulations, would not only
considerably lessen the rates, but the poor might be supported more comfortably.

SECT. 7. -- Population.
Of the population, we could not collect sufficient data, from whence even a
tolerable guess could be made.

CHAPTER XVI. OBSTACLES TO IMPROVEMENT.
In our journey through this county, wherever we enquired what was the chief
obstacle to improvement? the answer was universally, "Tithes!" -- An imposition
so pregnant with mischief, and so often the source of violent dissensions
betwixt the clergy and their parishioners, should if possible be removed,
either by purchase, commutation, or any other means, by which a fair equivalent
shall be rendered for them: for so long as they exist, it is impossible to
expect that agricultural improvements will be carried on to the extent of which
they are capable. In our Survey of Cumberland, we have shown the great
uncertainty of employing money in speculations of improving land; and that the
tithes, in such cases, are a large portion of a man's capital in trade, and not
a tenth of he natural produce of the earth, which some have thought was all
that was intended by the original imposers, who no doubt meant them for a good
purpose; but if through a succession of ages, a change of manners, of
sentiments, and of cultivation, has taken place, and the ill effects of tithes
be universally felt, and acknowledged to lesson the quantity of food obtainable
from a considerable portion of this kingdom, a change in the mode of paying
tithes would also be desirable; for the proprietors of such lands are not only
losers, but the community at large. It is surprising that a grievance of such
magnitude should have so long evaded the revision and regulation of the
legislature; and that it should be always so strenuously opposed by the clergy,
there being no wish to take any thing from them, but to render a fair
equivalent for what is their due; and which there would be little difficulty in
doing, notwithstanding the many objections that have been invented, to perplex
this most interesting question.

CHAPTER XVII. MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS.
SECT. 1. -- Agricultural Societies.
THERE never was any Agricultural Society in this county; and if any ever had
existed, it probably would have been soon dissolved, if we may judge from the
experiments that have been made in some neighboring districts, where we find,
that after a few years continuance, they have been given up; but whether from a
radical defect in the institutions, the non-attendance, and indifference of
members, or the injudicious distribution of prizes, we are not prepared to say;
but think that public farms are much more likely to promote improvements in the
Science of Agriculture.

SECT. 2. -- Weights and Measures.
Weights and measures -- are in a sad state of confusion; a pound, a stone, a
bushel, a boll, are rarely the same in different markets, and frequently vary
in the same market for different articles.

At Newcastle.
4 Beatments 1 Peck 2 Pecks 1 Kenning 2 Kennings 1 Bushel, Winchester. 2
Bushels 1 Boll.

At Hexham.
For Wheat, Rye, and Pease. 4 Quarts 1 Forpit 4 Forpits 1 Peck 4 Pecks 1 Bushel
2 Bushels 1 Boll, equals; 4 Winchester bushels. For Oats and Barley. 4 Quarts 1
Forpit 5 Forpits 1 Peck 4 Pecks 1 Bushel 2 Bushels 1 Boll, = 5 bushels,
Winchester.

At Alnwick.
3 Quarts 1 Forpit 4 Forpits 1 Peck 3 Pecks 1 Bushel, Winchester. 2 Bushels 1
Boll of Wheat. 6 Bushels 1 Boll of Barley or Oats.

At Wooler.
4 Quarts 1 Forpit 3 Forpits 1 Peck 3 Pecks 1 Bushel 6 Bushels 1 Boll

A stone of wool in some parts is 24 lb. in others 18 lb.; and a stone of every
other article is 14 lb.

The Board of Agriculture could not do the public a greater service, than by
bringing forward a regulation of weights and measures. One weight, and one
measure, derived from the same root, and increasing or decreasing in a ten fold
ratio, would introduce such simplicity, ease, and perspicuity, into all
transactions of business, (where calculations are necessary) as would prevent
the numberless mistakes and errors which are daily happening.

Preparations for remedying this great inconvenience, have been made at
different times; and we believe here are sufficient materials for perfecting
the measure, whenever it is thought proper to bring it forward.

SECT. 3. -- Vermin.
Moles and rats -- are two species of vermin which we think capable of being in
a great measure extirpated, or so far reduced, as to render their depredations
of little consequence. In Cumberland, a mole is rarely to be seen: this is in
consequence of every occupier of land contributing his due proportion toward
their destruction. A similar plan established in this county for destroying
vermin, we believe, would readily be complied with by every good farmer; and
the bad ones ought not to have it in their power to injure their more
industrious neighbors.

Crows -- of late years, have become a very great nuisance, not only for
rooting up wheat, and other grain, in a sprouting state; but clover and
protatoes, corn stacks, and young plantations, are greatly injured by them.
Last Spring, a collection of sixpence a plough was made by a few farmers in
Glendale Ward, for pulling down their nests. Many thousands were destroyed by
this means; and we hope the practice will be continued until they are found
less pernicious.

Foxes -- are very numerous, and very destructive to young lambs, in a district
like this, where so many sheep are bred; but while they are so anxiously
preserved for the chase, we despair of seeing any regulations take place for
reducing the numbers of this mischievous animal.

Dogs -- in every place are swarming: two thirds of them at least are kept by
people who have no manner of use for them; and are constantly complaining of
their inability to obtain food for their families. It would be doing these
people an act of justice, to exempt them from doing statute duty on the
highways, on condition they did not keep a dog; and to supply the deficiency
by laying a tax upon dogs, which tax should be applied toward repairing the
roads. Since the first edition of this report, the Legistature have thought
proper to lay a tax upon a certain description of dogs, but have exempted the
only ones, which are a nuisance to the community.


CONCLUSION.
Review of some particular parts.
IN taking a review of the foregoing report, we find, that the minerals are of
great importance to this county. In respect to the coals, it appears, that they
are not inexhaustible, and in two or three centuries will probably be so far
wrought out, that the metropolis will have to be supplied from other districts
with this necessary article, of a very inferior quality, and at a much higher
price.

The most striking parts in a view of the Agriculture, are the great extent of
farms: leases for 21 years, and the opulence, intelligence, and enterprising
spirit of the farmers: but the most prominent feature, is keeping a due balance
betwixt the arable and grass lands, so as always to have a large breeding live
stock, especially of sheep. -- Various systems of husbandry have been tried,
and the boasted one of turnips, barley, clover, and wheat, has been pursued
till the crops have evidently declined, particularly the turnips and clover;
and the only means of restoring such lands, has been by adopting the system of
three years arable, and three years grass, depastured with sheep, and a small
proportion of cattle: by this mode, nature has time to prepare a sufficient
lea-clod, which being turned up for the turnip fallow, will ensure a vigorous
crop of turnips, as it is well known they always flourish upon fresh land, or
where they find the remains of a lea-clod to vegetate in. It is from this
circumstance, and the peculiar and excellent mode of cultivating them, that
such great crops are produced, with not more than 10 or 12 cart loads of dung
per acre: crops that are seldom worth less than 4, 5, or 6l. per acre, for the
purposes of feeding cattle and sheep, have in some instances been sold for 7
and 8l. per acre. This mode of cultivating turnips in drills, is also of great
importance, being much superior to the broad-cast culture, not only for the
turnip crop, but for every other crop that succeeds them.

The proportion betwixt the quantities in arable and grass, varies according to
the quality of the soil, and other circumstances; but in most situations it is
usual to keep a certain portion of the best and richest old grazing lands,
constantly in grass, as a "corpse de reserve," in case the artificial grasses
fail; and on strong clayey soils, for depasturing a portion of the store flock
upon in winter; for this purpose, it is necessary upon such soils, to have a
much larger portion of old grass land, than upon dry loams; and which is
generally eaten lightly in the latter part of Summer, that there may be a good
aftermath, against the time the artificial grasses fail.

It is this union of stock and tillage, and pursuing the system mentioned in
page 64, that enables the farmers to pay such high rents; and which keeps the
land always in a due state of fertility, to produce the most profitable crops;
There is a certain state of fertility necessary for producing maximum crops of
grain; land may be too rich as well as too poor, for growing corn: we have
frequently seen crops of wheat rendered of little or no value, by the
injudicious application of a few cart loads of manure per acre more than was
necessary; upon lands made too rich, corn is very apt to lodge; which not only
injures the crop of grain, but entirely destroys the clover and artificial
grasses sown along with it.
and at the same time is managed and kept clear of weeds at the least expense.
The portion that is kept in grass for three years, breeds and fattens such a
number of sheep, as leave a considerable profit, probably equal, if not more
than the arable crops: the yearly profits of a sheep, being estimated at not
less than from 20 to 30s. 6 or 8 of which, an acre of clover will fatten, and
an acre of turnips about double the number.

But this system are obtained the principal advantages of folding, without any
of its inconveniences; for if on an average The 1st year's clover and grass
carry 7 sheep per acre for 20 weeks 2d. ditto 5 ditto 20 ditto 3d. ditto 3
ditto 20 ditto and the turnips 12 ditto 20 ditto that is 27 sheep per acre, for
20 weeks, which is after the rate of 540 sheep per acre for one week once in
six years; at the same time that the sheep are leaving, on an average, a profit
of 25 shillings a year each.

By this means, and the lime and manure laid on the fallow turnips, or drilled
beans: the lands are kept in the highest state of fertility, for producing all
kinds of grain and green crops; and the profits from the sheep, we presume, are
much greater, than could be obtained from the "folding-breeds;" by the mode of
folding practiced in Norfolk, and some other parts of the kingdom.

It our farms were stocked with those breeds of sheep, so much extolled for
their folding properties, and managed under the folding system, we are clearly
of opinion, (from having examined the various breeds,) that a very great
diminution of rental would take place in a few years. But when the Northumbrian
farmers are informed that the profits of a Norfolk sheep in "lamb, wool, and
folding, are only from 10 to 13 shillings per year," Sussolk report, by A.
Young, Esquire.
we need not be apprehensive that they will adopt this practice, the remnant of
a barbarous age; when the country was, for the most part, in open townfields
with appendant common; but which, we hope, will give way to a more enlightened
system; though this prejudice for Folding-sheep, like many others, will
probably require a series of years totally to extirpate it: the misfortune is,
that those who know the least about stock, are generally the most bigoted for
retaining the original breeds of the country; and the loudest to raise a
clamor, against innovation and attempts at improvement.

It will be proper to observe, that the sheep stock of this district has been
so much improved within the last 30 years, that they can now be sold fatter at
15 months old, than they used to be at more than double that age; yet we find
that the same childish arguments were used at that time, against changing the
"established breed of the country," as are used by some people at this day, in
favor of the worst breed of sheep in the kingdom.

This improvement in the sheep stock, has been accomplished by the practice of
hiring tups, at no inconsiderable prices; and which is now become so prevalent,
and so many competitors have entered the lists, that we hope the spirit of
emulation will not slacken, and that we shall see additional improvements every
year.

Having thus taken a short review of the most striking features of the
agricultural practice of this district, we shall next proceed to offer a few
hints on the

Means of Improvement.
To those few who practice the system of taking two white crops to a fallow,
and of continuing their land in tillage for nine, twelve, or more years, and of
sowing it up with common hay-seeds, white clover, etc. and letting it continue
as many years in grass, as it continued in tillage; we would recommend the
system in the article Rotation of crops, (page 64.)

Of drilling beans and pease; -- we have before expressed our surprise, that so
excellent a practice should be neglected in all that extensive district along
the sea coast, where they are so much cultivated; we hope that the good sense
and enterprising spirit of the wealthy farmers of this district will no longer
be swayed by old customs, but will be ready to make a fair experiment, of a
system which has been practiced on similar soils with success, and may, in all
probability, be equally beneficial on theirs. The difference betwixt a naked
fallow, and a crop of beans, is too striking to need any elucidation.

Watered Meadows. -- There are many parts of this county capable of deriving
great benefits from this practice, especially where the waters are unmixed with
vitriolic impurities, derived from their connection with coal mines, or strata
of aluminous earth. We have also our suspicions of such waters as are strongly
tinctured by infusions of peat-moss.

Draining -- is also another operation from which great advantages are to
result; but they should be hollow drains, executed with judgment and well
secured: and not surface drains, a foot wide, and six or eight inches deep;
such are mere temporary reliefs to a tenant, but no permanent improvement.

In the live stock of this county, there is certainly great improvement to be
made, and like many other branches of science, the more we investigate the
subject, the more we are convinced of its unlimited improvements: but
improvements of this kind are not so easily spread as those of cultivation. If
a farmer sees any modes of practice more beneficial than those he knew before,
he can readily adopt them; or if he discovers and selects a new variety of any
species of grain, more productive and more valuable than any hitherto known, it
multiplies so fast, that it is readily disseminated; but improved breeds of
stock are not so readily diffused; they are much flower in their propagation,
and much more easily contaminated, and are only to be preserved by attention
and judgment: when these become general, we may hope that improved breeds of
stock will prevail over the whole county; this period is probably more distant
than a true patriot would wish, but in the mean time we hope, that those who
are already possessed of improved breeds of stock, will not slacken in their
pursuits; that by their example, the knowledge and practice of breeding may, by
degrees, be better understood, and a spirit of emulation more generally
diffused. When we consider and reflect how slow that most valuable breed of
sheep (now best known by the appellation of the Dishley breed) has spread, and
how very small a part of this island they still cover, one would be almost led
to think that the breeders were not blessed with the senses of seeing and
feeling -- Mr Bakewell has been employed above 40 years in the important task
of improving this breed of sheep, to a degree of perfection unknown at any
former period; yet it is a very few years since many of his near neighbors
pursued a very different, and less lucrative species. To this day, we are
pretty well informed, that more than half the large fertile county of Lincoln
continue to breed a slow feeding, unprofitable kind, though adjoining the
county of Leicester: which is the more to be regretted, because that county
certainly produces more sheep than any other in the island, and perhaps we do
not hazard too much if we assert it as our opinion, that it sends more mutton
to market than any two counties in the kingdom. However, we flatter ourselves,
that the labors of the Board of Agriculture will have a happy tendency toward
opening men's eyes, and convincing them of the propriety of not only
cultivating the ground in a more masterly manner, but of stocking their
pastures with the most profitable animals.

Public Farms -- in every county, conducted by proper persons, would tend more
toward forwarding the perfection of Agriculture in all its branches, than any
other measure that has ever been suggested; and as the gentlemen of large
landed property would be the most interested in the results of such an
institution, they certainly ought to be the guardians and supporters of (...).
The principal expense would be at its first institution; when once got into a
proper system, it would require little, if any further aid.

If estates of 500l. a year, and upwards, were only to contribute 10l. per
thousand, yearly rent, it would, in this county, raise a sum sufficient for
setting forward the undertaking. We suppose the farms to contain from 700 to
1000 acres, of various sorts of land, some mountain pastures, and an
opportunity of converting a part of it into watered meadows. We know situations
of this sort that might be rented for five or six hundred pounds a year.

A farm of this kind would not only be a school, where youth might be
instructed in agriculture; but even experienced farmers might often visit it
with advantage, to learn, the results of new experiments, and adopt those that
promised to be useful -- It would be easy to enlarge on this subject, and
suggest many useful appendants to such an institution, should the gentlemen of
landed property ever think of carrying a scheme of this kind into execution.

CUMBERLAND.
A. ^^^tly a ^^rtile (...) with (...) of turnip soil: no Coal nor Lime. B.
(...) L^am*, no Coal nor Lime. C. (...) L^am no Coal* Limestone on the east
side (...). D. S^il (...)* Lime^^one about D. and to the westward. E. (...) a
light dry Loam: Coal and Lime in abundance* F. (...) gr^^^ p^r^^^n of dry loam*
no Coal nor Lime. G. (...) intersperssed with (...) fertile (...) no Coal nor
Lime. H. (...) Coal Lime, and L^^^ mines.


map of Cumberland

GENERAL VIEW OF THE AGRICULTURE OF THE COUNTY OF CUMBERLAND, WITH OBSERVATIONS
FOR THE MEANS OF ITS IMPROVEMENT; Drawn up for the Consideration of the BOARD
OF AGRICULTURE AND INTERNAL IMPROVEMENT.

BY J. BAILEY AND G. CULLEY.

Here stupendous Alpine mountains rear
Their rocky sides, and rushing torrents roar:
There the smooth expansive Lake, the fertile Vale,
And cultured Fields, and Gardens smile around;
And careless herds and stocks securely stray.
AGRICULTURAL SURVEY OF CUMBERLAND.
CHAPTER I. GEOGRAPHICAL STATE AND CIRCUMSTANCES.
SECT. 1. -- Situation and Extent.
THE county of Cumberland is situated between the latitudes of 54 degrees. 6 min.
and 55 degrees 7 min. North; and the longitudes of 2 degrees. 13 min. and 3 degrees. 30
min. West from London. Its length from St. Bee's Head, in a N. E. direction, to
Butter Burn, is 58 miles; and its mean breadth, in a N. W. direction, is 30
miles.

It is bounded on the east by Northumberland, 51 miles -- Durham, 7 on the
west, by the Irish Sea, 67 on the north, by Scotland and the Solway-Firth, 30
on the south, by Westmorland, 48 -- and Lancashire, 21 Making the whole
circumference, 224 miles and contains 1516 square miles, or 970240 acres.

SECT. 2. -- Divisions.
This county is divided into five wards, viz.: -- Cumberland Ward; Eskdale
Ward; Leath Ward; Allerdale Ward above Derwent; and Allerdale Ward below
Derwent.

SECT. 3. -- Climate.
In a county like Cumberland, enjoying such an extent of seacoast, and where
so large a portion is occupied by mountains, and those reckoned amongst the
highest in the kingdom, The highest mountains in the kingdom, are Feet.
Benevish in Scotland, 4,350 the highest in Scotland. Benlomond, ditto 3,210
Snowdon, in Wales, 3,456 the highest in Wales. Cross-f^ll in Cumberland, 3,4^0
the highest in England. Helvellin, ditto, ^,^^^ the highest in England.
Skiddaw, ditto, ^,^^^ the highest in England. Saddleback, ditto, 3,048 the
highest in England. Blackhouse heights, Selkirkshire 2,370 Ettrick, Pin, ditto,
2,200 Catter-^^^l, Roxburghshire, 1,602 Whe^^^side, Yorkshire, 1,350
Ingleborough, 1,239
the climate must be various. Along the coast, and for a considerable way up
the rivers, the snow seldom lies above twenty-four hours; but upon the
mountains the snow will continue for six or eight months: of court, the lower
parts of the county are mild and temperate, while on the higher grounds, and
upon the mountains and their vicinity, the air is cold and piercing; but the
whole is healthy, though subject to great and frequent falls of rain,
particularly in the Autumn, which makes their harvests very precarious and
expensive. This excess of wet, we believe, is more or less the case upon the
whole of the western coasts of the island.

We have been favored with the following Table, showing the perpendicular
height of rain that has fallen at Keswick, the last seven years; by the
ingenious Mr P. Crosthwaite, owner of the curious museum there.

1789 1790 1791 1792 1793 1794 1795 Inch. Inch. Inch. Inch. Inch. Inch. Inch.
January 8,5 5,9 11,4 4,5 5,7 5,7 1,3 February 9,1 4,0 9,2 4,9 9,6 11,2 5,3
March 1,3 1,3 3,1 9,6 5,3 6,5 4,7 April 4,2 2,3 3,3 11,6 1,8 5,4 5,7 May 3,7
3,6 4,0 6,5 1,8 3,3 2,7 June 7,0 5,1 2,0 2,7 4,1 1,6 3,3 July 5,3 6,3 8,2 3,9
2,6 2,5 2,0 August 3,5 5,8 5,9 6,0 8,8 3,1 6,4 September 7,3 8,4 2,8 10,6 2,9
8,1 1,1 October 8,1 6,1 7,1 6,7 6,2 9,4 12,8 November 6,1 5,0 8,7 5,8 3,4 6,9
11,7 December 8,1 10,9 7,8 11,7 7,4 8,0 10,6 Total in each year 72,3 64,7 73,5
84,5 59,6 71,7 67,6

SECT. 4. -- Soil and Surface.
The soil is various, but may be classed under four different heads.

1st. Fertile clays, or rather rich strong loams, occupy but a small portion of
this county: formerly this kind of soil was generally employed in grazing, or
the dairy; but since the introduction of growing wheat, it has been converted
into tillage, and produces excellent crops of grain.

2d. Dry Loams, including the various degrees from the rich brown loam, to the
light sandy soils. This is the most prevalent, occupying a greater portion of
the county than any other; not only the lower districts, but the fteep sides of
the mountains, are in general of this soil; and in many places, even their
summits are covered with a dry sound earth, producing green sward, with little
heath: we suppose at least one half of the lower, or cultivatable district, is
of this valuable soil, excellently adapted to the culture of turnips,
artificial grasses, the various species of grain, and of breeding and feeding
the most improved kinds of stock, particularly sheep, it being perfectly sound,
or safe from the rot.

3d. Wet Loam, generally on a clay bottom. The fertility of this soil is
various, depending on the thickness of the staple, and the nature of the clay
below: it is dangerous for sheep, but may be applied with advantage to keeping
cows for the dairy, breeding young cattle and horses, and to the culture of
wheat, oats, clover, and ray grass.

4th. Black Peat earth, is most prevalent on the mountainous districts,
particularly those adjoining Northumberland and Durham: it is also found on
moors or commons, in the lower parts of the county; in some places only a few
inches thick, upon a white sand, well known, by those whose lot it has been to
cultivate it, to be an ungrateful and unprofitable soil.

The surface is beautifully diversified with level plains, and rising
eminences; deep sequestered vales, and stupendous mountains; open, braky,
heathy commons, and irregular enclosures, in some parts enriched with tufted
groves and rising plantations; the whole watered with innumerable streams and
extensive lakes, abounding with fish of various denominations, which, with
plenty of game, add to the recreation and luxury of the inhabitants. -- It
naturally divides into two districts; the mountainous, incapable of being
improved by the plough; and the cultivatable, or all such parts as have been,
or can be improved by tillage.

The mountainous districts are separated into two divisions, one of which
bounds the east side of the county, and is the highest part of that ridge of
mountains, that divide the eastern and western coasts of the island, from
Derbyshire in England, to Linlithgow in Scotland. Cross-fell, Hartside-fell,
Geltsdale-forest, and Spadeadam-waste, are the names of that portion of the
ridge which passes through this county. These mountains are composed of strata
of different kinds of stone, and are rich in coal, lime, and lead-ore; but are
no way remarkable for any striking irregularities of surface.

The other division of mountainous district occupies the south-west part of the
county, known by the names of Skiddaw, Saddle-back, Helvellin, Wreynose,
Hardknot, Sca-fell, etc. etc. remarkable for their steep, broken, rocky sides,
and romantic shapes; and are in general one mass of that kind of stone, which
produces the beautiful blue slate, so much and so deservedly esteemed for
covering the roofs of houses. They are destitute of coal, lime, or metallic
ores; but in some measure repay this defect, by affording such valuable slates;
and producing that singular mineral substance, blacklead, which is found in
Borrowdale, and, it is said, no where else in the southern part of the kingdom.

The height, ruggedness, steepness of the sides, (in some places ornamented
with wood and projecting rocks) the varied forms, sublime assemblage, and
picturesque beauty of these mountains, and the lakes they environ, form scenes
that few other places, if any, in the island can equal; and have at different
times exercised the pens of many descriptive writers: -- it comes only within
our province to remark, that this kind of slaty stone appears to be very
friendly to vegetation: the soil which covers the steep sides of these
mountains, and found in considerable depth at their bases, is in great part
decayed slate; and the most fertile soils in the vales, we suspect, have a
large portion of this slaty matter in their composition; this is the case in
the vale of Keswick, and particularly at Mill-beck, and along the western base
of Skiddaw.

From a map of Cumberland, published by Messrs Hodgkinson and Donald, laid down
from a scale of two miles to an inch, we calculate, that Acres. The mountainous
districts contain, 342,000 Improvable common, 150,000 Old enclosures, 470,000
Lakes and waters, 8,000 Total quantity of acres in the whole county 970,000

SECT. 5. -- Minerals.
This county abounds with coal, lime, and lead-ore; it also produces blacklead,
copper, gypsum, lapis caliminaris, and excellent slate.

Coal. -- as observed in the last section, is found in many parts of the
eastern mountains; and, with not many exceptions, all along that tract
(extending in different degrees of breadth,) from Sebergham to Whitehaven, and
along the coast to Maryport, forming a district of about 100 square miles. --
Cannel coal is got in large quantities in the parishes of Caldbeck and Bolton.

Limestone -- abounds in most parts of the eastern mountains, and in the
parishes of Graystock, Dacre, Penrith, Broad field Common, etc. and in the
neighborhood of Egremont and Whitehaven.

Gypsum -- is got in the parishes of Wetheral, and St. Cuthbert's, Carlisle;
but has never been applied there as manure.

Lead-Ore -- is got in great abundance in Alston Moor; and, in a lesser degree,
in the parishes of Caldbeck, and Melmerby. -- In the lead mines is also found
the lapis caliminaris.

Copper-Ore -- is found also at Caldbeck, Melmerby, and at Hesket, but at
present not worked with that success which formerly attended them.

Black-Lead, -- is found only in Borrowdale, a few miles west of Keswick.

Blue Slates -- of an excellent quality, are gotten in Borrowdale, and inferior
sorts in some of the neighboring mountains.

Freestones -- abound in most parts of the county; some of which split into
good slate: but are more heavy, less durable, and require stronger timber to
support them, than the blue slate, and are also more subject to imbibe moisture.

SECT. 6 -- Waters.
Though this county enjoys an extent of 67 miles of seacoast, yet it cannot boast
of its navigable rivers; the tide flowing not more than two or three miles up
the greatest part of them; even the Eden, by much the largest, is perplexed
with shoals, and its navigation cannot be said to reach beyond Sandsfield,
though the tide flows a few miles further.

There are few places where water is so abundant and good, as this district is
blessed with; for besides the large rivers Eden, Derwent, Esk, etc. -- every
village, and almost every farm, enjoys the benefit of a pure spring, or is
visited by a rivulet. The larger rivers abound with Salmon, Trout, and various
other kinds of fish, and the smaller brooks with Trouts and Eels. It is also
ornamented with many beautiful and extensive lakes; which, with their pleasing
accompaniments, have of late years made the tour of the lakes a fashionable
amusement, and from whence considerable emoluments have resulted to the
neighboring inhabitants.

CHAPTER II. STATE OF PROPERTY.
SECT. 1. -- Estates.
THERE are probably few counties, where property in land is divided into such
small parcels as in Cumberland, and those small properties so universally
occupied by the owners; the annual value of these tenements, varies from 5l. to
50l. a year: but the generality are from 15l. to 30l. some few extend to 100l.
or a little more.

The rental of the largest estate in the county, is said to amount to about
13,000l. per annum.

SECT. 2. -- Tenures.
By far the greatest part of this county is held under lords of manors, by that
species of vassalage, called customary tenure; subject to the payment of sines
and heriots, on alienation, death of the lord, or death of tenant, and the
payment of certain annual rents, and performance of various services, called
Boon-days; such as getting and leading the lord's peats, ploughing and
harrowing his land, reaping his corn, haymaking, carrying letters, etc. etc.
whenever summoned by the lord.

We cannot pretend to be accurate, but believe, that two-thirds of the county
are held by this kind of tenure, principally in those small tenements described
in the last chapter. -- The remaining part is mostly freehold, which has
increased with the enclosure of commons, and sometimes whole parishe^, or
manors, have been enfranchised on these occasions. Copyhold and leasehold, are
rarely met with.

CHAPTER III. BUILDINGS.
SECT. 1. -- Houses of Proprietors.
DESCRIPTIONS of Gentlemen's seats, we presume, come more under the notice of a
topographical survey, than an agricultural one; we therefore must refer to
different tourists, and more particularly to Hutchinson's History of
Cumberland, now publishing.

SECT. 2. -- Farm Houses, etc.
Through the greatest part of this county, the farm-houses are remarkably well
built of stone; Except a small district in the neighborhood of Abbey-holm, and
the north-east extremity of the county, particularly in the parishes of
Bewcastle, Stapleton, Kirklinton, Kirkandrews, and Arthuret, where they are
mostly built of mud or clay, and Form a miserable contrast to the buildings in
the other part of the county.
the blue slate roofs, and white dashed walls, give them a look of neatness,
that is peculiarly pleasing, and prepossess a stranger with a favorable idea
of the cleanliness of the inhabitants; an idea which he finds well-founded, on
further investigation.

These houses have, for the most part, a kitchen and a parlour in front, a
toofall, back-kitchen, and milk-house behind, with four or five lodging rooms
above; the front contains five middle sized sash-windows, two below stairs, and
three above.

Where farms are so very small, no great extent of farm-offices are wanted; a
barn, a byer for housing their cattle in winter, and a small stable, are in
general all that is nenecessary: no regular plan for the form or site, seems
to have been adopted, every one building according to what he thinks the most
convenient for his stock and situation; but they are mostly built at each end
of the farm-house. Fold-yards, surrounded by proper offices, with a shed for
cattle, are very rare in many parts of the county; we believe they are most
prevalent in the parish of Hesket, and its vicinity; the best and largest we
noticed was at Lord Muncaster's.

We observed, in some parts of the county, a singular practice of covering the
perpendicular walls of their houses with blue slate, to prevent (we suppose)
any kind of moisture from penetrating them.

Repairs are generally made at the joint expense of landlord or tenant; the
former supporting walls, doors, and timber; and the latter thatch, slate,
glass, etc.

SECT. 3. -- Cottages.
Of this description of buildings, there are not many purposely erected for
laborers in agriculture, very few of that class being wanted in this county:
as the farms are so small, the occupiers and their families are generally
sufficient for the work without any foreign aid.

CHAPTER IV. MODE OF OCCUPATION.
SECT. 1. -- Size of Farms.
ON the large estates, there are some farms from 100l. to 150l. a year, few
reach 200l. and we only heard of four or five, that got as high as 3 or 400l. a
year, and one of 600l.; but the most general size of farms in this county, is
from 15l. to 50l. a year.

Cumberland farmers may be divided into three classes: the occupiers of large
farms; the small proprietors, (provincially " Lairds or Statesmen;") and the
small farmers.

It is to the first class, and the gentlemen farmers, that this district owes
the introduction of any of the modern improvements in agriculture; and we were
glad to find a spirit of enterprise arising amongst them, for the adoption of
new modes of culture, and improved breeds of stock.

To the small Proprietors, -- agriculture, we presume, is little indebted for
its advancement: these "statesmen" seem to inherit with the estates of their
ancestors, their notions of cultivating them, and are almost as much attached
to the one as the other: they are rarely aspiring, and seem content with their
situation, nor is luxury in any shape an object of their desires; their little
estates, which they cultivate with their own hands, produce almost every
necessary article of food; and clothing, they in part manufacture themselves;
they have a high character for sincerity and honesty, and probably few people
enjoy more ease and humble happiness.

The small Farmer -- is obliged to raise such crops as will pay him best for
the present, and avoid every expense, of which he does not receive the
immediate advantage, by which means, his farm, and himself, are always kept in
a state of poverty: many of these small farmers are also mechanics, and
agricultural laborers, that farm from 5l. to 10 or 12l. a year.

SECT. 2 -- Rent.
In the vicinity of towns, land lets from 2l. to 4l. an acre; farm; at a
distance from towns, from 5 to 30s. per acre; in general the average may be
stated at about 15s per acre; rent is almost universally paid in money.

SECT 3 -- Tithes.
Tithes are mostly taken in kind; a few parishes pay a modus in lieu of tithes,
and others are tithe-free, in consequence of a portion of common being given to
the improprietor.

SECT. 4 -- Poor Rates.
At Carlisle, 2s 0d. -- Wigton, 2s. 6d -- Aldston, 3s. 0d -- Harnington. 1s 6^
-- Kirkoswald, 1s 8d. -- And in many of the country parishes, they vary from
6d. to 10d. per pound.

SECT. 5. -- Leases.
The noblemen and gentlemen who enjoy the most considerable landed property in
this county, let no leases; some have verbal contracts for seven years, which
are next to none; and of those who let leases, the term is only for five, seven
or nine years; besides the usual reservations of mines, wood, etc. the tenant
convenants to pay the rent, cesses, taxes, and to keep all in repair; some are
confined to a certain quantity of tillage, and to fallow one-fourth yearly;
others are under no restraint of this kind; a few others are consined to lay on
a certain quantity of lime, and to sow with white clover and hay-seeds, the
lands that are laid to grass: these are the principal covenants that affect
agriculture. To enumerate such as are of a local nature, respecting the
performance of cusstoms, services, grinding corn, payment of chickens, etc.
would add little to the improvement of agriculture, or enlargement of rural
Science.

SECT. 6. -- Expense and Profit.
For the mode of investigating this subject, we must refer to the
Northumberland Report, page 33.

CHAPTER V. IMPLEMENTS.
THE Plough of this county is the swing plough, used through all the northern
counties, in which we observed no improvement.

To spend time in describing the harrow, roller, etc. that have been used in
almost every part of the kingdom for some centuries, would be augmenting this
Report to little purpose.

The Carts, through the whole of this county, are drawn by a single horse, and
probably originated through necessity, from the small farmer keeping no more
than one horse. In those times, simplicity and cheapness were only considered:
we recollect seeing some of those "tumble carrs," without one piece of iron
about them; the wheels were made of three pieces of wood, joined by pins of the
same material. It is probable they had the name of tumble carrs, from the axle
being made fast in the wheels, and the whole turning, or tumbling round
together: but this construction has given way to the wheel with a nave and
spokes, turning round a fixed axle; which is much more managable, in quick or
short turns. The price of a tumble carr is 5l. -- the price of the other kind,
7l. ready for yoking.


The advantages of single horse carts are so well understood in this county,
that we did not see any other used.

Three single horse carts are driven, without any difficulty, by a man, or a
boy, or even women and girls; along the coast, more than half the carts are
driven by females, and many of these under twenty years of age, with as fine
forms and complexions, as ever nature bestowed on the softer sex. We cannot
help saying, we were disgusted at seeing them put to this employment; and
especially, at their riding in so awkward a manner behind the cart-saddle.

Double mould-board Ploughs -- are used by some farmers, to form the one-bout
ridges for turnips and potatoes, and also for earthing them up.

Winnowing Machines -- have been lately introduced, and are now become very
general; twenty years since, corn was winnowed without any sort of machine; and
the farmer was under the necessity of waiting for a natural wind, sufficiently
strong to blow the chaff from the grain; and very often had to take it to some
eminence at a distance, where the breeze was more certain.

Threshing Machines, Drills for sowing the various kinds of grain, and horse
hoes, have not yet found their way into this district.

CHAPTER VI. ENCLOSURES.
THE mountainous districts are all open, and most probably will long remain so:
the cultivatable parts are a mixture of old enclosures and commons,
interspersed through every part of the county.

The size of enclosures, in general, is in proportion to the size of farms: the
ancient fields are small and irregular; the fences of various constructions;
walls, earth mounds, thorns, hazle, and other brush-wood, all lend their aid in
a greater or less degree; and, in two or three places, we observed large tracts
totally enclosed by whin-fences, Ulex Europeans. -- Furze. -- Gorse. -- Whins.
which have a very ragged, slovenly, and uncouth appearance, from the
numberless gaps where the whins have been destroyed by frost, an accident to
which this plant is very liable; nothing but the greatest necessity can justify
the use of whin-fences.

The fields of those commons that have been divided within the last thirty
years, are laid out in straight lines, and mostly enclosed by quick fences,
which in general have done very well.

The advantages that arise from enclosing, in respect to increase of produce or
value, must entirely depend upon the modes of management, pursued after the
enclosing takes place. From the abundant crops produced by land, which has
never grown grain before, the occupier vainly thinks, that it will always
continue to do so; and the deception is still increased, by the stimulating
effects of lime; but alas! after having got nine or ten crops, the golden
prospect vanished the farther they proceed, the more they are convinced of
their error; and growing corn having become a losing trade, the land is left to
grass: but what can it produce? already exhausted by repeated corn crops, and
over dozes of lime, it remains a spectacle of the bad effects of such culture,
and a warning to others to avoid the same course: even under this treatment,
the increased value is in the ratio of three or four to one; had these lands
been continued in tillage only three years at one time; the first year oats;
second, fallow, turnips, or rape: the third, wheat or oats, or (if the soil
suited) barley, sown up with clover and ray-grass, and depastured with sheep
for three, four, or five years, according to circumstances and situations, we
will venture to say, the land would have gone on improving, from rotation to
rotation; would have been more prositable, and put on a very different aspect
to what it does at present, and have been worth double the rent it now lets for.

The advantages arising from enclosing of commons, in respect to the
improvement of stock, is obvious; while in a state of common, every one turns
on what he pleases; and there is generally double the quantity of stock that
there ought to be. The consequence is, they make no improvement; they barely
exist; the yearly prosits how small! Should an enlightened breeder wish to
improve his sheep, how is he to effect it, while his ewes mix promiscuously
with his neighbor's slocks? If he had the best tup in the kingdom, can he be
sure that one of his ewes would be tupped by him, while there are probably not
less than a score of his neighbor's to contest the female with him? On the
other hand, if the common were enclosed, every one would stint with that
species of stock for which his allotment was best adapted, and in such numbers
as would insure profit: when he can confine his ewes within his own enclosure,
he can make whatever experiment he pleases, by putting a few, or many ewes, to
any particular tup, without any fear or apprehension of having a spurious
breed, by the interference of his neighbor's: he is also enabled to keep his
flock from many disorders: few commons but have some tracts of land liable to
the rot: how are they to be prevented from depasturing upon it? or if the scab,
or other infectious disorders, have taken place amongst any flock on the
common, how is he to avoid it?

To the question put by the Board, "has enclosing commons decreased
population?" -- We answer, that we cannot conceive, how enclosing of commons
can decrease population: unless an increase of corn and cattle, an increased
demand for laborers and mechanics of various denominations, tend to decrease
mankind; the contrary position must certainly hold good in an eminent degree.

The best account we could obtain of commons, divided by act of parliament,
were, Sowerby, about 25 years since. Sedbergham, about 30 years since. Stainton
20 Culgaith, 22 Carlton, 15 Skeleton, 25 Brampton, 14 Irthington Newby, Farlam.
12

At the last four places, the lord of the manor had 1-12th for his consent as
lord of the soil, and making the allotments freehold: at most of the others the
lord had 1-8th.

CHAPTER VII. ARABLE LAND.
SECT. 1. -- Tillage.
TILLAGE-LAND is here commonly ploughed by horses; a team of oxen, we believe,
is not to be found in the county: the horses are yoked double, and driven with
cords by the ploughman. An acre is accounted a good day's work; and on light
soils, an acre and a half.

The ridges are very narrow, from 5 to 7 feet, being the common breadth,
whether in corn or in grass.

Fallows for wheat or turnips, -- are ploughed once in the Autumn, by the best
cultivators, and four or five times in the course of the succeeding Summer.

Barley -- is sown on one ploughing after turnips: but after a white crop, (as
in rotation first) they plough twice, and manure with 20 or 30 cart-loads of
dung: some add lime.

Oats -- are always sown on one ploughing.

SECT. 2 -- Fallowing.
Fallowing for wheat and turnips, is practiced in many parts of this county;
four or five ploughings and harrowings, is the general practice: we saw some
very clean, and well managed, gathered up into neat narrow ridges, on which the
wheat was looking very healthy.

SECT. 3. -- Rotation of Crops.
The most prevalent system, through a great part of this county, is, to have a
crop of white corn every year while in ploughing: such cultivators make no
fallows, except ploughing twice, and manuring for barley, can be deemed such.

Where a field is ploughed out from grass, they have oats -- oats, -- barley,
-- oats; or, oats, -- barley, -- oats, -- oats, etc. etc. for nine or twelve
years, and then left to grass for seven or nine years. Some few sow hay-seeds
and a little white clover; but the greatest part leave it to nature. On asking
a farmer at Uldale why they sowed no clover, or grass seeds, he replied, "we
have no occasion, for the land is naturally girs-proud." Those that are
experienced in cultivation, will readily admit, that after growing from six to
twelve white crops in succession, it can scarcely be otherwise than
grass-proud. There is certainly grass in abundance; but of such kind, as no
good farmer would wish to be possessed of. This barbarous system is practiced
upon many dry loamy soils; which, after being thus left to grass, cover
amazingly fast with moss, probably owing to the bad cultivation and exhausting
crops of corn more than to the wetness of the climate, to which it is generally
attributed.


Where they fallow for wheat, the rotation is, 1 Fallow 2 Wheat 3 Oats, or
Barley 4 Oats, -- for 3 or 4 rotations, and then left for grass, for seven or
nine years; some few sow clover and hay seeds.


In those places where the turnip culture is practiced, the rotation is, 1
Turnips 2 Barley 3 Clover 4 Ditto 5 Oats. 6 Ditto.
Or, 1 Turnips 2 Wheat 3 Barley 4 Clover 5 Ditto 6 Oats.


We are glad to find, that two or three individuals have adopted the idea of
not taking two white crops in succession, and pursue the excellent rotation of
turnips, -- barley, -- clover two years, -- then oats, or wheat.

SECT. 4. -- Crops commonly cultivated.
Wheat is a modern production here; a general opinion used to prevail, that
wheat could not be grown in many parts of this county. We were informed that it
is not much more than 40 years, since Summer fallows for wheat were first used;
and it is not twenty years since Lord Muncaster introduced Summer fallows, and
the culture of wheat, in the neighborhood of Ravenglass, where it is now grown
in great abundance, as well as all along the coast to Scotland, and in the
neighborhood of Carlisle. The wheat that is sown after turnips or clover, is
trifling, the main supply is from Summer fallows; they generally sow two
bushels and a half per acre, in September or October, as the season suits, and
they reap from sixteen to thirty bushe's per acre.

Barley and Oats, being the grains from which the bread of the inhabitants is
made, were probably the first, and only corn, grown in this county for many
centuries; bigg or bear, with four rows of grains on the ear, was the kind of
barley formerly cultivated; but lately, the common early sort, with two rows,
has been introduced. They sow two and a half bushels per acre, in April or May,
and reap twenty-one bushels on an average.

The Common Oat, was the only variety grown in this county, and is now by far
the most prevalent; but of late years, a few enterprising individuals have
introduced the early varieties of this grain, with great advantage; they are
distinguished from the common oat by the name of layland oat, and are the Dutch
or Friesland oat. Last year Mr Falder, near Roes Castle, introduced the oat,
known on the east borders by the name of Church's Oat, (a variety, and perhaps
the best variety known, of the Poland oat) and which will, no doubt, answer
well on all the best rich soils in the county.


The quantity sown, -- is from four to six bushels per acre.

The time of sowing, -- March or April.

The Produce -- from 15 to 40 bushels per acre; but the average of the county
was stated to us, to be only 20 bushels per acre.

Pease. -- In a climate where so much rain falls, and where the harvest is so
precarious, the culture of pease would be attended with so many chances of
loss, and so few of gain, that we were not surprised to find them so generally
neglected. The difficulty of harvesting them, has probably first suggested the
idea, of building their stacks in the cloughs Where the main stem divides into
branches.
of trees, and afterward in slender high pyramids round the boles of tall
trees, to prevent them from blowing over: by this method, they can also lead
and stack them, in a damper or moister state; and as they do not come near the
ground by five or six feet, they are seldom troubled with mice. The greatest
diameter of the stacks is not more than six or seven feet; the height of many
twelve or fifteen; if the tree has not a sufficiency of convenient branches to
bear the bottom, they nail a stick or two across, to form a base. When
finished, they have a very singular appearance.

Turnips, were first cultivated in this county, to any effect, for the use of
cattle, by Philip Howard, Esquire of Corby in the year 1755: his first essay was
drilled at four feet distance; the crop amazingly good; the weight on an
average, 10 lb. each turnip; some weighed 25 lb; he afterward continued to
grow them at two feet, and two and a half feet distance, with constant success,
for eight or ten years, before any farmer followed the example; at last, Mr
Collins, of Wetherall, made a trial, and succeeded; others soon followed him

It is, therefore, about thirty years since a few farmers first began to
cultivate turnips; and considering with what tardiness new modes of practice
generally make their way amongst that useful class of society, it is no wonder
that the growing of turnips should, in a great measure, be still confined to
the vicinity where their cultivation originated, and we suppose, by the mode of
practice, that from this source may be traced the various patches of turnips we
observed at Netherby, Burgh, Dalton, and a few other places.

The land, after being made sufficiently fine by repeated ploughings and
harrowings, is set up in one-bout ridges Provincially "stitches."
at 30 inches distance; the dung is put in the bottom of the hollow intervals,
and covered with earth by the plough; the top of the one-bout ridge is
flattened by trailing a piece of wood over it, and on the flattened top the
turnip seed is sown by a drill, which a man pushes before him like a
wheel-barrow.

The drilled turnips are hoed, and set out a about eight or nine inches
distance in the rows, which are ploughed between by a small plough.

Hoeing broad-cast turnips is not understood; if any are sown this way, they go
unhoed; and if too thick, are hand-weeded. Mess. Williamson and Monkhouse paid
20s. per acre this year, (1793) for hand-weeding their broad-cast turnips.

The value of this excellent vegetable is not sufficiently understood in this
county, otherwise it must have made a more rapid progress. Probably this may be
owing to its being applied to feeding their own breed of sheep. We saw several
acres of turnips this year, that were sold for, from 3l. to 3l. 10s. per acre,
which a Northumberland grazier would have thought worth five or six pounds an
acre, for feeding the improved breed of long-woolled sheep.

Potatoes are cultivated in one-bout ridges, by almost every farmer, not only
for the use of their own families, but for sale, where the situation is not too
distant from a good market. It is only upon the estate of Sir James Graham, at
Netherby, that they are applied to feeding cattle and swine: and by Lord
Muncaster, to feeding cattle, who also gives them to his horses; Mr Lamb and Mr
Blalock favored us with the following particulars:

Mr Blalock feeds cows, and says, that 120 bushels of potatoes, with 16 stones
of oatmeal, will fatten a cow in three months, equally well as turnips, of 3 or
4l. value.

The small farmers apply potatoes to feeding swine: thirty bushels of potatoes
and ten of corn, made into meal, will fatten a swine of eighteen or twenty
stones weight, equal to corn of 1l. 15s. value. The potatoes are boiled, and
meal mixed with them.

From these data, the value of potatoes may be nearly estimated: L. s. d. The
expense of feeding a cow with potatoes and meal is 3 12 0 from which deduct the
value of 16 stones of oatmeal 1 12 0 leaves for 120 bushels of potatoes 2 0 0
L. s. d. The expense of feeding a swine with potatoes and meal is 1 15 0 deduct
the value of corn 10 bushels, fire, attendance, etc. 1 5 0 leaves for 30
bushels of potatoes 0 10 0

From the above it appears, that potatoes for feeding cows, or swine, are worth
no more than 4d. per bushel. They estimate a fair average crop of potatoes to
be 240 bushels per acre; the value at 4d. per bushel, is only 4l. out of which
the seed ought to be deducted, the other expenses attending the cultivation of
potatoes and turnips being much upon a par

The land on which these potatoes are grown, is a most excellent turnip soil,
and would produce turnips, almost any year, worth 5l. per acre for feeding
cattle or sheep. Mr D -- asks, "how can turnips be worth 5l. per acre, for
feeding cattle and sheep?" -- We reply, nothing is more common; they are
srequently sold for much more.
From the above statement it appears, that an acre of potatoes is of less
value, than an acre of turnips for feeding cattle. Mr Lamb has been long
convinced of this, and says, that the practice of applying potatoes to feeding
cattle and swine, is every year losing ground, and the culture of turnips,
which was pretty general here twenty years since, (but gave way to potatoes) is
now, in its turn, regaining the situation it so justly deserves.

SECT. 5. -- Crops not commonly cultivated.
Beans -- we were informed are seldom cultivated with success; the failure may
probably be owing to their being sown broad cast, without manure, and not hoed:
we would recommend, to some spirited cultivator, to try them in drills at 30
inches intervals, so as to admit of being horse-hoed, and ploughed between;
this mode we can recommend, on the successful practice of several years. See
Northumberland Report.


Cabbages -- have been cultivated by Lord Muncaster' Dr Harrison of Penrith,
and a few others in that vicinity.

Carrots -- have also been tried by Lord Muncaster, who found them a very
troublesome and expensive crop, owing to the abundance of weeds, occasioned by
the great rains and moisture of the climate.

Flax -- is cultivated in small quantities, on the northern extremities of the
county, for family use; but much less now than formerly

CHAPTER VIII. GRASS.
SECT. 1. -- Natural Meadows and Pastures.
NATURAL meadows are generally found in narrow strips by the sides of rivers.
"The largest tract of natural meadow, in this county, is in the parish of
Scaleby, which lets for 28s. per acre: also between the lakes of Keswick and
Bassenthwaite, there is a considerable extent of natural meadow.

Natural pastures are not very numerous in the cultivateable districts of the
county; unless such may be called natural pasture, which is left to nature to
cover with herbage after having been exhausted with growing corn. If by natural
pastures be understood such as have never been disturbed by the plough, there
will be found great abundance in this county; as not only all the commons in
the cultivateable districts, but the mountains may come under that denomination.

SECT. 2. -- Artificial Grasses.
Artificial Grasses, are here confined to a small number -- red clover,
(trifolium pratense) white clover (trifolium repens) common hay-feeds, with a
little rib grass (plantago lanceolata) and ray-grass, (lolium perenne.)

We were informed, that in 1752, no person in the county had thought of sowing
a field down with clover, or even hay-seeds; and that Philip Howard, Esquire. of
Corby, was the first who sowed a field with clover, and taught his countrymen
the use of artificial grasses; yet it is but a few that have benefited by his
laudable exertions.

Red Clover, is principally sown where the turnip culture, and summer-fallowing
for wheat, are practiced, and the land continues only two years in grass: it is
generally mown the first year, and depastured the second. The great objection
to growing this valuable grass, is the hoving of cattle, which may be obviated
by depasturing it with sheep, or by a little caution in having the cattle
pretty full, before they are turned into it, and to take care to put them to it
on a dry day. Some object to it, because they have taken a fancy that it
impoverishes the soil. Old Ellis says, "Clover is the mother of corn." We
believe that, could the Cumberland farmers be induced to make an experiment,
they would be of the same opinion, and would find their profits so superior to
what they are at present, that they would become converts to the cause. We hope
we do not exaggerate when we say, that the profits of red clover for two years,
would be double to that derived from the same quantity of ground sown with
white clover, rib grass, and hay-seeds; and that the profits of the succeeding
crop of corn would be nearly in the same ratio.

White Clover, has many advocates, and is certainly a valuable plant, where
land is intended to continue in grass for a few years, which is generally the
case here; and by those who sow any kind of grass seeds, it is in great repute;
it is seldom or never sown alone, but accompanied by what is here called common
hay-seeds, which are generally harmless, from the heat they mostly get in the
stacks, and their vegetative powers thereby destroyed: where that is not the
case, we fear more weeds than useful plants would be the produce; for when it
is considered, that of the useful plants which compose a good meadow, scarce
two of them flower and ripen at the same period; and as the time of mowing is
governed more by the weather, or other circumstances, than the collection of
useful seeds, it may happen, that not one valuable plant may then have its
seeds in that state of perfection, which is necessary for the reproduction of
its species; at the same time it is probable, that you may obtain the seeds of
many plants, which you would wish to avoid.

Rib Grass, is sown in some places where land is intended to continue in grass.

Ray-grass, has here but few advocates; a general prejudice against this plant
seems to have taken place, we think unjustly, for we are convinced, from long
experience, that under proper management, it is a valuable grass; it grows in
all soils, and in all situations; early in the Spring, and late in Autumn; and
even through Winter, on dry soils and in open weather: the only reasonable
objection we know of, is the great propensity it has to run to seed; but this
may be easily obviated, by eating it bare with cattle, or by mowing the pasture
just before it begins to flower, which increases the eatage, by the quantity of
bottom grass it sends forth after the operation.

It is the properest grass we know, to sow along with red or white clover; and
we would beg leave to recommend it, instead of common hay-seeds, so universally
sown in this county, with clover, both red and white.

SECT 3. -- Hay Harvest.
The hay harvest is here in the months of July and August; the modes of
management various, according to the nature of the grass, weather, and notions
of the farmer: we do not find any thing peculiarly excellent in their practice;
the only singularity is, that the occupiers of small farms, in some parts of
the county, put the whole of their hay into barns; the larger farmers stack
their's at the door.

SECT. 4 -- Feeding.
The most general system of grazing is, -- on the richest grounds, cattle with
a few sheep; on the less luxuriant, sheep only.

The kinds of cattle usually fatted are the native country breed, and Scotch
cattle, both Kyloes and the Galloway kind. Of these, they sind the Kyloes the
quickest feeders, the Galloway next, and their own country breed of long horns
the slowest.

The prosits of grazing cattle depend much on the skill of the buyer, in
selecting the quickest feeders; and, when fat, in selling them for their full
value; also, not unfrequently, on the state of markets.

The best grazing lands we saw were at Pap Castle, near Cockermouth, let at 3l
per acre; and the holm lands on both sides the Eden, near Carlisle, let at 2l.
10s. per acre, for the purposes of grazing only. Mr Tealson, of the former
place, buys in oxen and heifers in October, keeps them all Winter upon the
pastures out of which his fat stock has been recently sold, and gives them a
little hay in bad weather. After keeping them near twelve months, they leave,
on an average, a profit of 5l each; their weight, from fifty to sixty stone.
But this interligent gentleman was candid enough to confess, that he thought
sheep, mixed amongst cattle, a more profitable system; and we were glad to find
this mode practiced by all the best graziers in the county.

Of Sheep-grazing, there are two branches; first, feeding wethers; and,
secondly, ewes for fat lambs: they are both bought in the Autumn, are kept on
grass the whole time, and get no other food, except hay in stormy weather.

L. s. d. The profits are, a wether sold fat in October, 1 0 0 Fleece 3 lb. at
5d. 0 1 6 1 1 6 Deducting prime cost and expense of salving, 0 12 6 Average
prosit by feeding wethers, 0 9 0 L. s. d. Ewes, a fat lamb sold in June, -- 0 8
9 Fleece 3 lb. at 5d. 0 1 6 Ewe fat, sold in November, 0 10 6 1 0 0 Deduct
prime cost and salving, 0 8 0 Profit by feeding ewe and lamb, 0 12 0

There are a few who buy in wethers, to feed upon turnips, and sell them in the
Spring, to Manchester and Liverpool.

The kinds of sheep grazed are, the country breed, the true black-faced heath
sheep, and the Cheviot sheep. The most experienced graziers all agreed, that
the true black-faced heath sheep were quicker feeders, and a hardier race, than
the Cheviot. We wish to be understood, as not stating this as an ascertained
fact, but as an opinion of the Cumberland graziers and farmers.


CHAPTER IX. GARDENS AND ORCHARDS.
GARDENS and Orchards in this county, are considered only as conveniences to
private families; and not as objects of emolument, or commerce, as in some
other districts.

CHAPTER X. WOODS AND PLANTATIONS.
THIS county is far from being well wooded. The Irthing, Eden, and Caldew, are
the only rivers, whose banks produce any quantity of natural wood; and of
these, the banks of the Caldew seem to have the largest proportion of old
oak-timber. Of the value of the oak-timber proper for the purposes of
ship-building, we could obtain no satisfactory information, but suspect, from
what we saw, it is of small extent: we fear, the oak is not suffered to attain
a sufficient age for this purpose; as we saw a wood near West Ward (now
felling) of upwards of two hundred acres, that was little more than thirty
years old, the whole cut away, without leaving any to stand for ship timber.

Of late years, many plantations have been made near gentlement's seats, which
show, by their vigorous growth, how well adapted the greatest part of this
county is for the production of wood. From the nakedness of the country along
the coast, one would naturally conclude, that the situation was inimical to
that production; but Lord Muncaster's extensive and thriving plantations near
Ravenglass show, that the nakedness of the land is owing to other causes. If a
customary tenant plants wood, he cannot cut it without leave of the lord; in
some cases, the lord claims it as his own, which sufficiently explains why the
occupiers do not plant wood.


CHAPTER XI. WASTES.
THE extent of wasle lands, in this county, is very great: -- Of mountainous
pasture, 342,000 acres, which we suppose not capable of improvement from the
plough; yet many parts of these districts might be applied to planting, with
considerable advantage, and would probably in this way, make a better return,
than if the soil had been in such a situation as to admit of being converted
into tillage. We were glad to see a large plantation of larches thriving
exceedingly well, on the steep edge of the west side of Skiddaw, lately planted
by Mr Story. We hope the example will be speedily and extensively followed, by
every propriertor of similar situations; but, unfortunately, the greatest part
of these districts is in a state of common, and no improvement of this kind can
take place while they continue in that situation: of course, the first step to
improvement is a division, and for every proprietor to know his own part If
this cannot be done, the only means of improvement then left is, to convert
them from unlimited commons to stinted pastures.

The present value per acre, of these mountainous districts, may be nearly
estimated from the following data:

Mr Greenhow, of Thr^^keld, takes pasturage for his sheep on Skiddaw forest for
a year, at 5s. per score, which is threepence per sheep; and supposing an acre
keeps a sheep, then will threepence an acre be the yearly value of these
mountains. They can scarce be in a less productive state; an acre of wood, if
it only grew broom-sticks, would pay much better.

Of the Commons, in the less elevated parts of the county, there are many, with
large tracts of excellent soil, capable of being improved by judicious culture,
proper draining, and improved breeds of sheep, to many times their present
value; which is certainly very small, probably not more than from one to two
shillings per acre. In a county like this, that does not raise corn sufficient
for the consumption of its inhabitants, and where it is always one-fourth or
one-fifth dearer than in an adjoining county, it is lamentable to see such
extensive tracts of good corn land lying waste, of no value to its owners, and
of no benefit to the community. Instead of the present scarcity of grain, large
quantities might be yearly exported; and instead of the ill formed, poor,
starved, meagre animals that depasture the commons at present, an abundant
supply of good fat mutton would be had to grace the markets of the county, and
also to send off large supplies to Newcastle, Liverpool, Manchester, and other
populous manufacturing places.

It is difficult to say, what would be the increased value of such land, under
proper management; we think we cannot be wrong in stating, that it would be at
least from six to eight times the value to the proprietors. -- But of what
advantage would it be to the public?

Acres. We have already estimated that there are of improvable commons in the
lower part of the county, 150,000 Out of this deduct for banksides, proper for
planting, and other unfertile places, 30,000 There will be left for
cultivation, 120,000 Suppose this be put into a rotation of three years
tillage, and three years grass, then there will be in tillage yearly, 60,000

Suppose one-third for fallow, and of this, one half to be turnips, the other
half naked fallow for wheat, then will there be yearly, Acres bush. per ac
bush. per an. Price. val. per acre. Oats, 20000 at 30 is 600000 at 2s. pr bush.
is 60,000l. Wheat, 10000 at 20 is 200000 at 5s. pr ditto -- 50,000 Barley,
10000 at 30 is 300000 at 3s. pr ditto -- 45,000 Turnips, 10000 at 3l. pr acre.
-- 30,000 Naked Fallow, 10000 Carried over 60000 1100000 L. 185,000

Brought over L. 185,000 And suppose the grass land would only keep one sheep
per acre more, then will there be an increase of 60,000 sheep yearly; the
profit of which cannot be valued at less than 14s. each, the amount will be,
42,200 Total value of increased produce L. 227,000

CHAPTER XII. IMPROVEMENTS.
SECT. 1. -- Draining.
DRAINING, is one of those improvements which has been introduced of late years
into the northern counties; and where it is done with judgment, is, in many
situations, of the greatest consequence. -- Cumberland has not been behind its
neigbours in adopting this beneficial measure: we were glad to observe, in many
places, great advantages gained, both by hollow and surface drains; some done
with great art, by one or more hollow drains running in the direction of the
outburst of water, and cut deep enough to get through the bed of sand or gravel
in which the water runs, and by that means arrest the source, which drowns the
land below it; but the like intelligence has not in all places prevailed, for
we often saw the drains running in parallel directions, perpendicular to the
source, and at such distances, as the drainer thought the nature of the soil
required; this is more particularly the case, where surface drains are used.
The hollow drains are filled with stones when they can be got, otherwise with
sods.

SECT. 2. -- Paring and Burning.
This operation is seldom performed in this county, except on heathy, or coarse
grounds: the expense about 15s. per acre.

SECT. 3. -- Manuring.
Farm-yard dung, is here, as in most other places, the chief resource of the
farmer: where turnips are grown, it is wholly applied to their culture; where
they are not grown, it is used for the various purposes of dressing grass land,
and for the barley and wheat crops.

Lime, is found in great abundance in many parts of this county, and of an
excellent quality. The quantity laid upon an acre varies from sixty to an
hundred and fifty bushels; we found it a general opinion, that lime did little
good to land that had been long accustomed to it; and that those who had used
the large quantity of 150 bushels per acre, found their lands greatly
exhausted, and were now fully convinced of their error in continuing it so
long, especially in such large quantities. We have had many opportunities of
observing the abuse of lime, which, most probably, is one of the best manures
known, for particular soils and situations, and under peculiar circumstances,
and proper restrictions; yet, like many other good things, a superabundance may
be prejudical; or rather, we are sensible, that too often repeated, and in
large quantities, it becomes hurtful.

Lime is mostly laid on, while the land is in a state of fallow; but in some
places, we found it laid upon the grass land, one or two years before they
intended to plough it out. We doubt the propriety of the latter mode.

Tangle, or Sea-Weed, is used along the coast, wherever it can be got; the
quantity per acre is fifty or sixty cart-loads. This is known to be a valuable
manure, either for corn, turnips, or grass, wherever it can be had.

Slake or Mud, left by the tide, is used in the neighborhood of Ravenglass,
with good effect, on the grass lands, fifty or sixty cart-loads per acre.

Muscles, are also used in the neighborhood of Ravenglass, for manure, after
the rate of five or six cart-loads per acre; they are got on the sands
adjoining the coast.

Sea Sand. -- An accidental experiment of Lord Muncaster's showed its utility
in destroying moss, but it is not used as a manure.

Compost. -- It seems a general practice through every part of the county, to
make a compost of lime and earth, in the proportion of one cart-load of lime,
to four or five of earth; they use it as a top-dressing to their grass lands,
and find it very beneficial.

SECT. 4. -- Weeding.
All kinds of grain are sown broad-cast; the only weeding it gets is by hand:
hoeing a crop of corn, we believe, was never once practiced in the county.
Turnips and potatoes are the only crops in which weeds are destroyed by hoeing.

SECT. 5 -- Watering.
The only attempts we saw of this species of improvement, that had the least
resemblance to a watered meadow laid out by art, was at Bleatarn (about six
miles east of Carlisle,) belonging to Mr Richardson of Rickerby, to whom his
country is highly indebted, for the spirited example he has set in many other
improvements. We were sorry to find, there was little more water than what was
collected by rains; the ridges narrow and long; the trenches small, and
inadequate to carry a sufficient quantity of water, for the purpose intended.
It is unfortunate, that the first attempt should have been made in such a
situation, and under such circumstances, in a county so pregnant with
favorable situations, and the water of such an excellent quality,
uncontaminated with mineral particles, or infusions that are suspected to be
inimical to vegetation.

SECT. 6. -- Improving Heath Lands.
The best mode of improving peat earth, being a desideratum of great
consequence, the more facts that can be collected upon this head, the more
light will be thrown on the subject, and the more likely we shall be to obtain
the object sought for.

At Bleatarn, Mr Richardson has made great improvement, on a poor black moory
soil, growing very short heath, in its original state, not worth sixpence per
acre. He ploughs in Autumn, and lets it lie till the Autumn following; then
ploughs across; and the next Summer makes a complete fallow, which he limes,
after the rate of one hundred and fifty bushels per acre; and in April or May
following sows it with grass-seeds (without corn) in the following proportion
per acre: white clover, 8 lb.; red, 4 lb.; rib-grass, 4 lb.; ray-grass, 1
bushels; and common hay-seeds, 6 bushels.

Another mode is to plough up in the Winter, and leave it in that state through
the Summer, to rot, until next Spring, when it is ploughed across, and made
sufficiently fine by repeated harrowings, ploughings, and burning of the sods,
to sow with turnips in June: to the above quantity of lime is added 30
single-horse cart loads of dung. On a part of the fallow this year, we saw some
drilled turnips, worth 3l. an acre: in addition to the lime, they had fifty
single-horse cart-loads of dung per acre: but as dung is rarely to be procured
for improvements of this kind, we think, that a crop of rape might be got for
Spring seed, without dung, which would certainly be better than a naked fallow,
as in the first mode. The lands that have been laid down two years, were full
of grass, From many observations made on similar improvements, we have always
found the first and second years grass by far the most valuable; after this
they decline in value, and in a few years return to their original heath, if
not prevented by ploughing.
and excellent pasture for sheep; but to make them thus productive, they are
loaded with the following expenses, which, according to Mr Richardson's
estimate, including the various ploughings, harrowings, lime, dung,
grass-seeds, interest of money, etc. amount to 11l. 11s. 6d. per acre: from
which taking the value of the turnips 3l. leaves 8l. 11s. 6d. the expense per
acre, on the grass.

Near Naward Castle, Mr Ramshay has made great exertions in reclaiming
peat-moss, by throwing it up with a spade, into round ridges seven yards wide;
the top being from twelve to eighteen inches higher than the furrow, which is
cut deep enough to act as an open drain. In this state it lies all Winter: In
the Spring following, he covers it nearly an inch thick, with a compost, formed
of five loads of earth, to one of lime; and upon this dressing, sows, Common
hay-seeds, 12 bushels per acre. Ray-grass, 2 ditto. Rib-grass, 2 or 3lb. ditto.
Where the land is dry enough, they plough; and, to the above quantity of
grass-seeds, add a few pounds of white clover.

Mr Ramshay uses few hollow drains. Those that require to be three or four feet
deep, he slopes off at the into which the furrow drains empty. We saw some
lands that had been done two years; the ray-grass and rib-grass growing well;
the woolly holcus (holcus lanatus) in abundance: it comes naturally on all such
soils; but is a grass that few kinds of stock will eat, unless compelled by
hunger.

Mr Ramshay informed us, the expenses of making these improvements amounted to
10l. an acre; of course, both this and Mr Richardson's, to pay common interest
for the money expended, ought to let at 10s. an acre for a term of 21 years.

CHAPTER XIII. LIVE STOCK.
SECT. 1. -- Cattle.
THE Cattle, are a small breed of long horns, with a few exceptions of the
Galloway breed intermixed, particularly along the coast from Whitehaven to
Carlifle.

This breed of long-horns is not distinguished by any peculiar good qualities,
which is not to be wondered at, when it is considered that, probably at this
time, there is not one person in the county that pays any attention to its
improvement. Twenty years ago Mr Hazle, of Dalemain, had made some progress in
this business, and gained a very useful breed of long-horned cattle; but his
successors neglected them, and the labors of the good old man are totally lost.

The long-horned, and the Galloway polled cattle, are probably the best adapted
to this county of any other; but the kind of long-horns that occupy it at
present, may certainly be much improved, by paying proper attention, to breed
always from the best males and females that can be selected. This end would be
the readiest attained, by getting good bulls and heifers from the midland
counties, where the long-horned breed are brought to great perfection.

The Dairies are small, and mostly employed in making butter, of an excellent
quality. Those that are situated in the vicinity of towns, sell it weekly, by
the pound, to supply the consumption of the inhabitants. In other situations,
it is put into firkins of 56 lb each, and sent to distant markets.

The average quantity of butter from one cow, is generally estimated from one
to two firkins: some cows will give twelve quarts of milk at a meal, and make
seven pounds of butter per week; but the most general average is, seven or
eight quarts of milk at a meal, and from 3 to 5 pounds of butter per week,
through the Summer.

Skimmed milk cheese, is the principal kind made here, and chiefly consumed at
home.

On those farms that have a right of common, the grass lands are employed
through the Summer in growing hay, depasturing their cows, and sometimes young
cattle; but the latter are more generally summered on the commons, and in
Autumn brought into the old enclosures, till the approach of Winter, when all
the cattle are housed.

SECT. 2. -- Sheep.
The sheep bred in this county are only of two kinds, A HERDWICK RAM
and these two are probably something related; one of them is peculiar to that
high, exposed, rocky, mountainous district, at the head of the Duddon and Esk
rivers, more particularly known by the names of Hardknot, Sealefell, Wrynose,
etc.

Of this breed of sheep, (commonly called Herdwicks,) the ewes and wethers are
all polled or hornless, and also many of the tups; their faces and legs
speckled; but a great portion of white, with a few black spots on those parts,
are accounted marks of the purest breed, as are also the hornless tups; they
have sine, small, clean legs. We were told that the lambs, when dropped, are well
covered; the wool is short, and form as thick matted fleece, much finer than
that of the black-faced heath sheep; with which variety they seem to have been
crossed, as we suspect, from some of the rams having spiral horns, and from
some kemps or hairs being intermixed amongst some fleeces of the wool: they are
a lively little animal, well adapted to seek their food amongst these rocky
mountains, in many places stony and bare; and where covered, the soil is thin,
but the herbage mostly green, though heath is found on their summits. They have
no hay in Winter, and support themselves in the deepest snows, by scratching
down to the heath, or other herbage; indeed it seldom happens, but that some
parts of the mountains are blown bare, which the sheep find out. They do not
face the coming storm as reported, but, like other sheep, turn their backs on
it; and, in such weather, they generally gather together, and keep stirring
about; by which means they tread down the snow, keep above it, and are rarely
over-blown.

The loss per cent per ann. is of hogs Provincial term for sheep, from six
months old, till being first shorn.
from 5 to 10. -- Ditto ditto of old sheep -- 2 to 5.

The ewes are kept as long as they will breed lambs, and are often from ten to
fifteen years of age before they are sold: the wethers go off at four and a
half years old. Both ewes and wethers are sold from these mountains, and killed
without being put on any better pasture: we saw a carcass of one of the wethers
at Ravenglass, very good mutton, which weighed 11 lb. a quarter, and had 10 or
12 lb. of tallow. The ewes weigh from 6 to 8 lb. a quarter; the fleece weighs 2
lb. and soid last year at 6d. per lb. which we think much below its value.

The mountains on which these sheep are bred, happen not to be common, but
belong to Lord Muncaster; as do also the stock that depasture them, which have,
time immemorial, been farmed out to herds, at a yearly sum. From this
circumstance, these farms (three or four in number) have obtained the name of
Herdwicks; that is, the district of the herds; and the sheep, the appellation
of Herdwick sheep. They have obtained such a character for hardiness of
constitution, that Mr Tyson, We were told by Lord Muncaster's agent, that the
family of Tysons have lived in this sequestered spot above four hundred years.
who farms the principal flock, sells a number of tups every year into various
parts of the county, to improve the hardiness of other slocks; the price is
often as high as two guineas and a half.

The sheep, through the whole of this county (except the Herdwicks) have been
descended from the black-faced, coarse-woolled, heath sheep; but by crossing
with some other kind, (probably the Herdwicks) many of them have acquired a
large portion of white on their faces and legs; some have those parts speckled,
and others totally black; they are in general horned, high shouldered, narrow
backed, flat sided, strong boned, and many with thick, rough, hairy legs. The
wool is coarse and long, but falls short in both these respects to what is
produced by the black-faced sheep from Mossat and Linton in Scotland, and the
Kentmore sheep in Westmoreland; the fleece weighs from 3 to 4 lb. which sold in
1793 for 5d. per pound.

The management of sheep, over all this county, is very similar; through the
Summer the whole flock is depastured on the commons, and range at large without
any person to look after them: in November, the whole are gathered together and
salved; The salve is composed of butter and tar, in the proportion of sixteen
pounds of the former to four quarts of the latter. This quantity will salve
forty sheep.
the old sheep are turned again upon the common, but the hogs are kept in the
old enclosures; some part of which has been kept uneaten, to support them
through the Winter: on the approach of snow, the old sheep are brought to the
enclosures, or to some part of the common adjoining, and are daily foddered
with hay, while the storm continues. Those who have not a sussiciency of
enclosed ground for wintering their hogs, take wintering for them, in those
parts of the low country where they do not breed sheep; the price, 2s. per
head, to have hay in bad weather.

In Eskdale and Mitredale, they formerly kept their hogs in the house all
Winter on hay, and drove them to water once a day; but this practice is now
laid aside, and they winter them upon the enclosed grounds, which are
previously kept fresh for that purpose. They give no hay to their sheep here,
which are a good deal of the Herdwick blood.

The sheep are sold in Autumn, to graziers. The price of those from the eastern
part of the county, are, Wethers at 3 years old, 11s. to 13s. Ewes from 6 to 8
ditto, 6s. to 7s. From the south-west; Eskdale wethers at 4 years old, 10s. to
13s. Ewes from 6 to 10 ditto, 4s. to 6s. Skiddaw wethers at 4 ditto, 13s. to
14s. Ewes from 5 to 6 ditto, 6s. to 8s.

We have no hesitation in saying, that the breeds may be improved, for there
are few places where they have been more neglected. At Penruddock we observed
some singularly rough legged, ill-formed sheep; on asking an old farmer, from
whence they had that breed, or where they got their tups? He innocently
replied, Lord, Sir! they are sik as God set upon the land, we never change any!
The latter pare of this simple statement we readily believe; but that God set
upon the land such ill-formed, unprositable animals, we cannot so readily
assent to; and rather think, they have acquired their present ill-form, and bad
properties, by the indolence and ignorance of the owners. We wish we could
avoid adding, that the same practice which guides the men of Penruddock, is too
prevalent in every part of the county

We found, in general, that the sheep breeders here, like those in most other
countries, are very much attached to their own breed. As they have never tried
any other, they cannot be admitted as proper judges, of the comparative merit
of different kinds of sheep; but supposing, for the present, their own breed to
be well adapted to their situation, why not improve them, by selecting the best
males and females, and rear a better offspring of their own kind? or, by
hiring, or buying, some of Mr Tyson's BEST FORMED and FINEST WOOLLED Herd-wick
tups, instead of getting tups from Kentmore in Westmoreland, which appeared
(from what we saw) to have nothing to recommend them, (in our opinion) but size
and c^^rseness. The shape of these sheep is, in every respect, the reverse of
what it ought to be; the back narrow, the carcass long and thin, supported upon
large rough legs, with coarse hairy wool hanging down from their throats all
the way to their breast, which, on a wet day, gives them as much the appearance
of goats as sheep.

Within the last three years, a few long-woolled sheep have been introduced
into this county, from the Yorkshire Wolds, by Lord Muncaster; from
Northumberland, by Mr Blacklock, of Corby; Mr Richardson, of Rickaby; Mr
Porter, Carlisle; Mr Falder, near Roes Castle; Mr Lamb, Netherby; and probably
a few others: -- and since our visiting this county in 1793, to the above names
we are happy to add those of Mr Graham, of Barrock Lodge; Mr Losh, of Woodside;
Mr Stalker, of Lambsknow, etc.; who have not only hired tups at considerable
prices, but even purchased ewes at as high prices, as from 4l. to 5l. each.

SECT. 3. -- Horses.
The Horses are middle sized, from fourteen to fifteen and a half hands high,
of various colors; but bays and chestnuts seem the most prevalent; for a small
farm, where horses must answer for both draught and riding, they are probably
most suitable; but certainly might be improved, by stallions from the
North Riding of Yorkshire, the best breed of horses we know for the double
purpose abovementioned.

About 70 or 80 years since, teams of oxen, or oxen yoked with horses, were
very common; from that period, draught oxen gradually decreased; and for some
years past we were informed, there has not been an ox team in the county.

Almost every small farmer breeds his own horses, and generally more than are
necessary, for the cultivation of his farm; these are often purchased by
dealers, for the purpose of supplying the light horse regiments.

SECT. 4. -- Swine.
Swine are bred and fed here in considerable numbers; every farmer fattens one
or more of these animals, and most laborers and mechanics rear and feed each a
pig; at about 10 months old they are confined in the sty for the purpose of
fatting on barley or oatmeal, and potatoes: their weight is from 15 to 20 stone.

SECT. 5. -- Rabbits.
Some narrow tracts of light sandy ground along the coast, from Harrington to
Abbey-holm, are occupied by rabbits. There are also warrens in the parishes of
Wyberthwaite, Drig, and Heskit.

SECT. 6 -- Poultry.
The minute division of landed property occasions abundance of poultry: the
numerous waters, lakes and commons, facilitate the keeping of large flocks of
geese; which are fed on the stubbles, and supply the market plentifully, from
the latter end of October, to Christmas.

SECT. 7. -- Pigeons,
Are rarely found with the farmers; they are principally kept and bred by
gentlemen of property, as articles of luxury.

SECT. 8 -- Bees,
Are found through every part of the county, and in some situations are very
profitable. It is a prevailing opinion, that they thrive best in the vicinity
of Heath (erica vulgaris) Hence it would appear, that this plant abounds with
their favorite food; but as it is late of flowering, they should also be in
the neighborhood of a sheltered early situation, to enjoy the benefit of the
Spring flowers: where these cannot be united, it would probably be right to
remove them from one to the other, to suit the seasons.

CHAPTER XIV. RURAL ECONOMY.
SECT. 1. -- Labor.
FROM the number of small farms, there is an uncertainty of a day labourer
meeting with constant employment; as the occupiers want assistance only on
particular occasions.

On this principle we account for the high wages given in this county; through
the whole of which, there is an universal custom of giving the laborers
victuals, both men and women; the wages are,

For men, per day, 10d. and victuals; in harvest, 1s. and victuals -- For
women, hay-making, 8d. and victuals; -- harvest, 10d. and victuals. -- The
hours from 6 to 6.

The victuals are estimated at 8d. per day for men, and 6d. for women. Servants
kept in the house, are only hired for half a year, to prevent gaining
settlements. -- Their wages for that time are, a man, from 5l. to 7l. -- Women,
2l. to 3l -- Masons, without victuals, are from 1s. 8d. to 2s. per day;
Carpenters, 1s. 6d.

When work is done by the piece, the prices are as follows: s. d. Threshing
wheat per bushel 0 2 -- barley ditto 0 2 -- oats ditto 0 1 Ploughing per acre,
5 0 Reaping per acre, 5 0 Mowing ditto 2 6 Walling per square yard, 0 8

SECT. 2 -- Provisions.
Grain of all kinds is generally very high; the average price in 1793, was, s.
d. For wheat, 6 6 per bushel. Barley, 3 8 ditto. Oats, 2 8 ditto. Butchers'
meat from 0 3 to 4d. per lb. Butter, from 0 6 to 8d. per lb. Skimmed milk
cheese 0 3 per lb. Potatoes 1 0 to 1s 4d. pr. bu.

Poultry -- A stubble goose, 2s. -- duck 8d. a fowl 6d. -- eggs from 3d. to 6d.
per dozen.

Fish. -- Salmon, 6d. per lb. -- trout 3 d.

We suspect the butchers' meat, through all the markets of the county, is not
overloaded with fat: what we saw at Carlisle and Whitehaven was lean indeed! --
At the latter place, we did not see one carcass of decent mutton, -- the
greatest part of it would not have be^n suffered to appear in Newcastle, and
many other markets, that are accustomed to see good mutton; a joint of lean
Whitehaven mutton, is deater at 3d. p.r. lb than the same joint of a good sat
sheep is at 5d. on account of the greater proportion of hone to eatable meat,
in the former, to what it is in the latter.

The bread, geneally used in this county, is made of barley, or a mixture of
barley and rye; oatmeal is made into hasty-puddings, and eat with butter,
treacle, milk, or beer, for breakfast, and often for supper.

Potatoes, for several years, have been in general use, as a principal article
of food; few families dine without them; and we believe many a dinner and
supper are made of potatoes, with a little butter, or cream, for sauce; and in
many cases, only milk, or, where this cannot be had, a little salt.

SECT. 3. -- Fuel.
Coals are cheap and plentiful in most parts of the county; in several places
from 15s. to 30s. will procure a year's fuel, for a small family.

Peat and turf also abound, and are used instead of coals in some districts.

CHAPTER XV. POLITICAL ECONOMY.
SECT. 1. -- Roads.
THE roads are in general very good, both parochial and turnpikes, except the
road from Carlisle to Newcastle; some parts of which are very bad, and very
different to what the same road is, immediately on entering Northumberland.

The materials are excellent; in general limestone; but, in almost every
instance, not broken small enough by one half. If these hard stones were broken
so small, as to pass through a ring two inches in diameter, and the roads made
wider, and flat, or very nearly so, few counties in the kingdom would be able
to vie with Cumberland for excellent roads.

SECT. 2. -- Canals.
There are no canals in this county; in 1795, one was projected from Maryport
by Carlisle, to Newcastle, but did not take place; owing to a difference of
opinion, whether the canal from Newcastle, should pass on the North or South
side of Tyne.

SECT. 3. -- Fairs.
FEBRUARY.
20th. -- Wigton, -- for horses.
APRIL.
5th. -- Wigton, -- for cattle. 24th -- Penrith, -- for cattle. 25th. -- Boon
Wood, -- for cattle.
MAY.
First Wednesday, and every fortnight till Michaelmas. -- Cochermouth, -- for
cattle. 1st, 2d, and 3d Fridays. -- Hesket-New-market, -- for cattle. 28th. --
Aldston, -- for cattle.
JUNE.
3th. -- Ravenglass, -- for cattle. Tuesday before Whitsuntide. -- Abbey-holm,
-- for cattle and horses. Whitsun Monday, the Monday fortnight, and Monday
month after. -- Ross^^y-hill. -- A very great fair for cattle and horses: and
cattle are shown here every fortnight after, till Michaelmas. Whitsun-Tuesday:
and every fortnight after. -- Penrith, -- for cattle. Second Wednesday after
Whitsuntide. -- Brampton, -- for cattle, horses, and sheep.
AUGUST.
4th. -- Ravenglass, -- for cattle. 26th. -- Carlisle, -- for cattle and
horses.
SEPTEMBER.
2d. Wednesday. -- Brampton, -- for cattle, horses, and sheep. 18th. --
Egrement, -- for cattle. 19th. -- Carlisle, -- for cattle and horses. 26th,
27th. -- Penrith, -- for cattle.
OCTOBER.
10th. -- Cockermouth, -- for cattle and horses. 1st, 2d, 3d Saturdays, after
Old Michaelmas -- Carlisle, -- for cattle and horses: these are called Emptons,
probably from the cattle being bought to drive to the great fair of Hempton
Green, in Norfolk, held the 22d of November. 29th. -- Abbey-holm, -- for cattle
and horses.
DECEMBER.
21st. -- Wigton, -- for cattle and Christmas cheer, from whence it is commonly
called "Wallet-fair."
SECT. 4. -- Markets.
Monday. -- Cockermouth, -- for corn, butchers' meat, etc.

Tuesday. -- Penrith. -- A large market for corn, and all kinds of provisions.

Wigton, -- for corn, butchers' meat, etc. Brampton. -- A small market for corn
and other provisions.
Wednesday. -- Workington. -- A large market for all kinds of provisions.

Thursday. -- Whitehaven, -- for corn and provisions: a large market.

Longtown, -- butchers' meat and butter; no corn.

Kirkoswald. -- A small market for butchers' meat, etc.

Friday. -- Maryport, -- for provisions all kinds.

Hesket-New-market. -- A small market for corn, butcher's meat, etc.

Ravenglass. -- A small market for provisions.

Saturday. -- Carlisle. -- A very large market for corn, cattle, swine,
butchers' meat, and provisions of all kinds.

Keswick. -- A small market for butchers' meat, butter, etc.; and a few oats
and barley.

Egremont, -- for corn, and other provisions.

SECT. 5. -- Commerce.
The Commerce of this county consists, principally, in the exportation of coals
from Whitehaven, Workington, and Maryport, to Ireland, etc. The number of
vessels employed in this trade amounts to upwards of 300, from 60 to 120 tons
burden. This lucrative trade has arisen to its present importance, within the
last hundred years; it originated at Whitehaven, from the exertions of Lord
Lonsdale's ancestors, to whom the coal in that neighborhood principally
belongs.

Mr Curwen is the principal coal-owner at Workington, and Mr Senhouse at
Maryport. At all those places, coal cannot be wrought fast enough to supply the
demand; vessels have frequently to wait six or eight weeks before they can get
a loading; a certain sign of an increasing trade.

"We have not been able to ascertain at what period navigation was advanced in
Cumberland. A survey was taken by commission from the crown, in the year 1566,
of the trade and shipping of this county, (inter alia;) Whitehaven was then so
far from promising it would ever arrive at its present wealthy and flourishing
state, that it consisted only of six cottages, scattered on the beach, and
hidden in the creek from the eye of an enemy, and to this dejected port one
small bark only belonged, of nine or ten tons burden. Nay, it is not more
incredible than true, that there was at that time only one vessel appertaining
to the whole county, that was of ten tons burden. The whole exports of this
extensive county, were nothing but a small quantity of herrings and cod fish;
and the inhabitants knew so little of the luxuries and enjoyments of life, that
the whole of this great coast received no other imports than a little salt.

About the year 1582, the Earl of Lincoln being Lord High Admiral, caused an
account to be taken of the ships and mariners within this county; when all the
vessels amounted only to twelve, and not one carried eighty tons. The number of
mariners and fishermen were 198, of whom many had never navigated a vessel
superior to an open boat.

In 1607, Workington was the chief haven, and the place from whence certain
criminals, sentenced to banishment, were exported to Ireland. Hutchinson's
History of Cumberland.
"

Maryport, in the year 1752, consisted of only one farm-house; in that year
another house was built. It is now a neat, well built, middle-sized
market town, with a small and good harbor, enclosed by two piers; and in 1793,
contained 3445 inhabitants, which increase about 100 yearly. The ground upon
which the town is built, belonged to Humphry Senhouse, Esquire. To encourage
settlers, he sold off house and yard steads, reserving a ground rent. The land
around it lets for 2 or 3l. an acre, which would not have been worth more than
1l. had things remained as they were in 1752.

The quantity of coals exported from these ports, taken on an average of 11
years, (from 1781 to 1792) is as follows: Chaldrons. From Whitehaven 81940
Workington, Harrington, and Maryport 70870 152810

The receipt of customs at Whitehaven, from 17th June 1794, to 5th January
1795, (29 weeks) was 19832l. 17s. 8d.

The duty on coals exported from these ports, is 1s. 2d. per chaldron to
Ireland, and 5s. to foreign ports.

Butter, bacon, and hams of an excellent quality, form a part of the commerce
of this county. The article of butter, is said to amount to 30000l. per ann:
the whole chiefly for the London market; to which place, also, considerable
quantities of fresh salmon are sent from Carlisle.

SECT. 6. -- Manufactures.
The Manufactures are not extensive: printing cottons at Carlisle, and a check
manufacture (on a small scale) in most of the market towns, with four or five
cotton mills, erected of late years near Carlisle, Dalston, and Corby, with a
small factory of corduroys at the latter place, is all this county has to boast
of.

Whether the coal trade and manufactures have occasioned any improvements in
the agriculture of the county, is doubtful; but they certainly have encouraged
it, by making a very increased demand for its produce.

The lead mines on Aldston-moor affect the agriculture of this county very
little, being more intimately connected with Northumberland.

SECT. 7. -- Poor.
In most of the country parishes, the poor-rates are low, from 6d. to 9d. per
pound; which, we believe, is partly owing to a sort of pride existing amongst
the lower classes, of not applying for parochial relief, till they cannot
possibly subsist without it; and also to the number of Friendly Societies,
which have been established, and we hope are still increasing. Such useful
institutions are deserving of encouragement, by every person whose property is
chargeable with poor-rate.

SECT. 8. -- Population.
In Messrs Nicholson and Burn's History of Cumberland, published in 1777, the
number of houses are estimated at 20,000, and the inhabitants at 100,000: by
Houseman's notes, in Hutchinson's History of Cumberland, now publishing, they
amount to 97,200.

CHAPTER XVI. OBSTACLES TO HAPROVEMENT.
ONE great obstacle to improvement, seems to arise, from a laudable anxiety, in
the customary tenants, to have their little patrimony descend to their
children. These small properties (loaded with fines, heriots, and boondays, See
Tenures, page 178.
joined to the necessary expense of bringing up and educating a numerous
family) can only be handed down, from father to son, by the utmost thrift, hard
labor, and penurious living; and every little saving being hoarded up, for the
payment of the eventful sine, leaves nothing for the expenses of traveling, to
see improved modes of culture and to gain a knowledge of the management and
profits of different breeds of stock; and be convinced, by ocular proofs, that
their own situations are capable of producing similar advantages. And even
should they be half inclined to adopt a new practice, prudence whispers, that,
should the experiment fail, it would require the savings of many years to make
good the deficiency.

The customary tenure is allowed, on all hands, to be a great grievance and
check to improvement. Would not this be best done away on the division of
commons, as was the case at Brampton, etc. where Lord Carlisle had 1-2th for
his consent as lord of the soil, and for enfranchising the allotments. There
are other lords who ask 1-4th for their consent and enfranchising. The portion
given to the lords of manors, for their consent as lord of the soil, in most
parts of the kingdom, is one-sixteenth. The part to be allowed for
enfranchising will depend on the nature of the tenure.
The yearly value of the various customs, fines, etc. might be easisy settled
by commissioners; and twenty-five years purchase, on this value, be the price
of enfranchisement, which might be allowed out of the allotment, upon the
division of a common; or paid in money, at the option of the tenant.

On these terms, neither party would have reason to complain; but where a
tenant cannot enfranchise, under forty years purchase, it would be a humane act
of the legislature to relieve these bondagers, by law; or laudable in the Board
of Agriculture, to induce such lords of manors, to accept a fair equivalent for
these dregs of vassalage.

Letting no Leases, or leases for five or seven years, is another great
obstacle to improvement. To such proprietors of land we would beg leave to
hint, that no tenant will ever make improvements under the uncertainties of a
short lease, much less where there is none. A tenant may be well convinced,
that by proper culture, draining, improved breeds of stock, etc. he could make
his farm, in a few years, worth one third more than it is at present; but this
cannot be done without laying out money: suppose 100l. and suppose, by this
means, the increased yearly value of his crop is 20l. Now it is clear, it will
be six years before he can be repaid the principal and interest of the sum
expended. Should his lease expire in the fifth year, he would be a loser; and
should he have no lease, he might be turned off his farm at the end of the
second year. Under such circumstances, the chance of loss is much greater than
the prospect of gain. By reasoning in this manner, he concludes, that it is
safer to have his 100l. at interest at 5 per cent. than risk it in improving
his farm under such uncertainties; and that it will be the surest game, to take
every advantage of the farm in his power.

On the other hand, if his lease had been for twentyone years, he would have
foreseen, that, by laying out his 100l. he would gain 200l. and, as "the hope
of reward sweetens labor," he would have doubled his exertions, and gone on
from improvement to improvement; and at the expiration of his term, his
landlord would have the satisfaction of seeing his tenant had acquired a
competency, his farm increased in value, and the community benefited by the
increased produce. We have heard, it is true, some arguments urged in favor of
letting no leases; such as would have been used by a feudal lord, and which, we
are persuaded, cannot long be held by liberal and benevolent minds, enlightened
by science, or anxious to promote the true interests of their country.

The payment of Tithes in kind, is universally agreed to be a material obstacle
to the advancement of agriculture: according to the present mode of collecting
tithes, it is not a tenth of the natural produce of the land, but a tenth of
the capital employed in trade. If a man employs 100l. in trade, he receives his
profits, without any deduction; but if he should lay out this 100l. on a
speculation of improving a piece of land, (say, draining a bog) he finds, if
his scheme succeeds, that the produce is not all his own; the tithe owner
comes, and takes away one tenth, (which is probably all the profit, after
deducting common interest for the money expended;) and this, from off land that
never afforded any tithe since the creation, nor ever would have done, had not
this spirited improver laid out his 100l. on improving this bog, rather than
employing it in trade, where he could have received at least 10 per cent. for
his money. The bog would then have continued unprofitable, and the tithe owner
would have received no injury; for neither he, nor any of his predecessors, had
ever reaped any advantage from it. -- This obstacle certainly might be removed,
by giving a fair equivalent for tithes.

CHAPTER XVII. MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS.
SECT. 1. -- Agricultural Societies.
THERE are none in this county, nor we believe has any attempt ever been made
to form any.

SECT. 2. -- Weights and Measures.
The same confusion in weights and measures prevails here, as in many other
parts of the kingdom.

A Carlisle bushel, is 96 quarts A Winchester bushel is 32 quarts.
A Penrith bushel, is 64 ditto, for wheat and rye. A Penrith bushel, is 80
ditto, for barley, oats, and potatoes. A stone of tallow, wool, yarn, or hay,
is 16 lb. Ditto of butcher's meat 14 lb. but in many places 16 lb.
The pound is 16 ounces; by which butter, and various other articles are
weighed.

CONCLUSION.
MEANS OF IMPROVEMENT.
THE first that presents itself, is a reform in the culture of the arable
lands. To those who have been accustomed to take two, three, four, five, etc.
white crops in succession, we would recommend, to continue their lands in
tillage no more than three years at one time; and in the second year to fallow
for turnips, or wheat, according as the soil suits; after turnips, barley, or
wheat; and on the barley or wheat, sow red clover, white clover, and ray-grass;
To these may be added, hop-medic, and rib-grass, according to circumstances.
and continue in grass, two, three or more years, (according to situation and
circumstances.) Where necessity urges, the clover may be mown for hay the first
year; but would recommend to depasture it as much as possible with sheep, which
of all other stock are the most profitable, and the most improving for land
that has been exhausted by tillage.

It would probably be right, in most situations, to have one-third or
one-fourth of the farm in old grass, for the purposes of the dairy, and the
sheep stock in Winter; and we would observe, that where land is worth 40s. per
acre in grass, it would be a dangerous experiment to plough it up, in such a
climate as Cumberland possesses.

We know that in some parts of the kingdom, lands are let at higher rents, for
the purposes of tillage only; but then, their soil, climate, and situation, are
peculiarly good; and it is a question, whether, if these lands had been in old
grass, they would not have been worth more for grazing, than they are at
present for growing corn; probably as good as the land at Pap Castle, let at
3l. an acre, for grazing only,

The live Stock next offers itself for consideration. Of the properest breed of
horses, and horned cattle, we have before given our sentiments: it only remains
to suggest, what improvements may be made in the sheep; of which there ought to
be at least two, if not three, distinct breeds; that is,

For the lower districts, a breed of improved long-woolled sheep:

For the mountainous, a breed of mountain sheep, adapted to the herbage and
situation.

For the high, heathy ridge of mountains, on the east side of the county, the
true black-faced heath sheep are probably the best adapted; as we think them
the hardiest, and best calculated, for living altogether upon heath, of any
other breed we know; of course a little attention to the improvement of the
present breed, by good tups, of the true heath sheep, is all that is here
wanted. -- But for those mountains, on the south-west part of the county, which
have so large a portion of sound green sward, we think a fine-woolled sheep
might be kept to advantage; probably the South Down, or at least a cross
betwixt the South Down and the Herdwick sheep; from the known inclination these
breeds have to make fat, the carcass would certainly be as good, and the fleece
would as certainly be of double value, as that of the present breed.

L s. d. The fleece of the South Down sheep is 2 lb. at 2s. per lb. 0 5 0
Ditto, of the Skiddaw sheep, 3 lb. at 5d. ditto 0 1 6 Increased value of the
fleece, 0 3 6 But it is probable the wool may be deteriorated, by crossing with
the Herdwick sheep. If on this account we allow low is. 6d there will still be
an increased value of 2s. a fleece.

For the lower districts, a breed of improved long-woolled sheep, of 18 or 20
lb. a quarter, would undoubtedly be far more profitable than those that are now
bred and depastured upon it; and from the great portion of excellent turnip
soil, distributed through every part of the county, almost every breeder would
be enabled to fatten his own, if he pursued the rotation above recommended; and
he would find, that his wethers at 1 or 1 year old, would be much fatter than
the present breed are at 4 or 4 years old; and that they would be sold for the
following prices: L. s. d. A wether at 1 year old, 1 5 0 Wool, 1 fleece 8 lb.
at 9d. per lb. 0 6 0 1 11 0 Deduct for wintering on turnips 20 weeks at 4d. per
week, 0 7 0 Produce of a long-woolled wether at 1 year old, after deducting the
expense of wintering on turnips, 1 4 0 At Aspatria they feed their own sheep,
and sell their wethers at 4 years old to the butchers for 1 0 0 Wool, 4 fleeces
at 1s. 6d. each, 0 6 0 1 6 0 Deduct for salving 4 years 0 2 0 Produce of a
country bred wether 4 years old 1 4 0

From hence it appears, that the present breed of sheep are kept three years
for nothing, or that the improved breed of long-woolled sheep will leave as
much profit in one year, as the present do in four; or a flock of 25 of these
long-woolled sheep would leave as much profit as 100 of the present race, and
that for grass only, as the expense of wintering on turnips was deducted in the
above statement.

Enclosing of Commons, -- we have already pointed out, would be a great source
of improvement in this county, could it be done at a moderate expense, and on
equitable terms; the charges of obtaining an act of parliament, and the various
additions made thereto by the practitioners of the law, are in some cases three
or four times more than all the other expenses put together. Surely this might
be avoided by a general act. The House of Commons has already laid a
foundation, by the standing orders respecting such bills. -- If two-thirds of
the proprietors request a division, we see no reason why they should be put to
the expense of obtaining an act of parliament, because two or three, or
possibly only one, ignorant or ill-natured person or persons, are absurd enough
to oppose it.

Watered Meadows -- is another source of improvement, from whence great
advantages may be derived; the streams are not confined to any particular
district: they are found equally pure, whether they have their source from the
limestone rocks, on the eastern and middle parts of the county; or from the
immense mountains of blue slate rock, in the south-west district. Numberless
are the rivulets that might be employed, with the greatest advantage in
watering, and in most places would be turned over the land at the least
expense; being obliged at present, to be kept within their bounds by proper
fences, and seem to solicit their indolent owners to employ them, for their own
emolument, and the benefit of the public.

There are also many fine opportunities for employing the larger rivers; some
hundred acres of the flat tract of land below Keswick, to the top of
Bassenthwaite-lake, might be irrigated, and prevented from being overflowed by
embanking; a large portion near the foot of the lake, is capable of the same
improvement. In Eskdale, Lord Muncaster has a fine opportunity of watering an
extensive tract. We are glad to find that his Lordship has taken the hint, and
brought an experienced person from near Cirencester, in Gloucestershire, with a
view of introducing this species of improvement into this county; he purposes
irrigating about 200 acres, in different situations, and upon different soils,
and with water of different qualities.
-- Near Carlton, on the Pettril, on the Ellen, and at many other places, we
observed, where irrigation might be applied to great advantage.

We made an excursion to the Bishop of Llandaff's, at Colgarth Park, where that
respectable prelate has a most admirable situation for watering. -- He purposes
to have a man from those parts where the practice is best understood; a plan we
highly approve; and from his known scientific acquirements, enlarged ideas,
activity, and perseverance in every good pursuit, we have no hesitation in
saying, that future improvers will revere his memory, and admire the man, for
adding to the character of a good bishop, that of a good farmer; and for
blessing these northern regions, by the introduction of a practice, from which
so many, and such great benefits are to result. -- To this place, we hope, the
Cumbrians will resort, to be taught the most improved modes of irrigation; and
by introducing the practice into their own country, will reap the rewards which
it is so highly capable of affording, from this source of improvement.

Draining, -- has been practiced with great advantage, by a few enterprizing
individuals; but much remains yet to be done, in almost every part of the
county: to those who are unacquainted with the benefits of draining, we beg
leave to recommend it to their particular notice, as the first of improvements.

By Embanking, great advantages might be gained, especially on the marshes of
Burgh, Rowcliff, Abbey-Holm, and at the mouth of the Duddon. To point out the
mode by which this could be best accomplished, would require a more particular
survey; it is sufficient, on this occasion, to hint, that it may be done, and
that considerable benefits would acrue from it, not only to many individuals,
but to the public at large. The south-west part of Cumberland is in a manner
insulated, and cut off from all easy, safe, and ready communication with the
southern and western parts of the kingdom; on the one hand, by the barrier of
mountains which stretch from Kendal and Ulverstone, to Penrith and Keswick; and
on the other, by the slow of the tides over the Lancaster, Cartmel, and Duddon
sands; by which the passage is not only interrupted for several hours twice a
day, but also rendered very unsafe and dangerous: all which might be avoided,
by proper embankments, and at the same time a great quantity of land gained
from the ravages of the sea.


To the Notice of other Districts,

We would beg leave to recommend the use of singlehorse carts; having been long
convinced of their utility, we are glad to have an opportunity of stating to
the public a few facts, which will fully evince their superior advantages.

The horses of Cumberland are not of a large size, one fifteen hands high, of a
light form, that will answer either for riding or drawing seldom draws less in
a single-horse cart than 12 cwt. The common load for a draught horse of the
above size is, 15 The carriers from Brampton to Newcastle, over a hilly
country, carry frequently, 18 We met a carrier's boy driving five carts from
Longtown to Newcastle; in which were four ton; or on each cart, 16 cwt. A
single-horse cart carries ten pigs of lead, of twelve stone each, which is 15
From the above it may be fairly concluded, that the common load for a
single-horse cart, will be about 15 cwt. In most countries, a two-horse cart
seldom carries more than, 20 cwt. Nor a three-horse cart more tha, 30 Here a
boy or a girl drives two single-horse carts, which carry 30 Of course, two
horses, yoked in single-horse carts, will draw as much as three horses yoked in
one cart.

A common carrier at Carlisle, who many years employed a wagon, has laid it
aside, and now uses single-horse carts only; as he finds he can, by that means,
carry much greater weights.

There are few articles which may not be carried on a carriage of two wheels,
equally as well as upon one of four, except long timber; and as wagons are so
destructive to roads, The superior goodness of the roads in Cumberland may, in
a great measure, be attributed to the universal use of single-horse carts. --
Wherever wagons are used, they are the destruction of roads, especially in
hilly countries, where they are obliged to lock the wheels; the banks are in a
manner ploughed up with them, and the nine inch wheels are, in reality, no more
than three inch wheels by the artful mode of laying on the middle course of
tire, which is raised an inch above the rest; instead of being nearly exempted
from tolls, every horse drawing in a wagon, ought to pay treble to what should
be exacted from a horse drawing in a single-horse cart.
why should their use be longer persisted in, as it is clear that the same
number of horses yoked in single horse carts, will draw more than when yoked
six or eight together; -- they are easier loaded and unloaded, are much more
handy, for almost every purpose; and six or eight may be driven by a man and a
boy, which is a trifling additional expense. If a middle-sized Cumberland horse
draws 15 cwt. a large strong wagon horse will as easily draw 20 cwt. and which
is done in some parts of the kingdom.

For destroying Moles, -- a most excellent practice is prevalent here, for
every parish to let the taking of their moles, for a term of years, at a
certain yearly sum; which is raised in the same manner as the parochial taxes,
and does not now exceed a halfpenny an acre; which, they justly observe, was
much cheaper than they could have the ground scaled for, were the moles not
destroyed in this manner. It is a pity but there was a law to oblige every
parish in the kingdom, to destroy their moles in the same manner; which is done
so effectually here, that we scarce ever saw a molehill upon the enclosed
grounds of most parts of Cumberland.

WESTMORLAND
AAA. Range of Mou^tains (...) Coal, (...) and Lime B. fertile Vale* of various
Soils, clu^^^^ moist L^am and strong Clay Lime and (...) C. light moorish Soil
Lime and (...). D. Soil various (...) rich (...) and a (...) E. Mountainous
District inte^spersed with (...). Vales (...) no^ Coal some black Limestone and
plenty of the best (...) Slate F. Fertile Vale, (...) a good lime stone Soil no
Coal or ^^^^stone. G. Soil (...) o^ the East (...) and (...) partly a light
sandy soil and partly a strong and rich Loam plenty of Lime and ^^^^stone and
some (...) of poor Coal


map of Westmorland

GENERAL VIEW OF THE AGRICULTURE OF THE COUNTY OF WESTMORELAND, WITH
OBSERVATIONS FOR THE MEANS OF ITS IMPROVEMENT; Drawn up for the Consideration
of the BOARD OF AGRICULTURE AND INTERNAL IMPROVEMENT, BY MR A. PRINGLE, OF
BALENCRIEFF.

INTRODUCTION.
GREAT Britain had long availed herself of her naturally fortunate position for
commerce, which, encouraged by every means that the wisdom of the legislature
could devise, had been carried to an extent hitherto unequalled in the
universe; and the industry of her inhabitants, assisted by the fostering hand
of government, had brought many branches of manufactures to the highest state
of perfection; while the cultivation of her fields was left to the feeble
exertions of the husbandman, aided, only by bounties on the raising of flax,
and on the exportation of corn. It was reserved for our days, to behold a
Board, composed of the first officers of the state, and of persons equally
respectable for high rank, distinguished abilities, and independent fortune,
established to fix the attention of a great nation on the improvement of its
soil, and to direct and assist in the ancient and most important of all arts,
that of providing food for man.

The eyes of all Europe are already turned to this Board, which, it is
believed, is the first national establishment, on a great scale, that ever
existed in any country in favor of agriculture, and the advantages of which
now appear so obvious that it is a matter of astonishment that such an
institution was not sooner erected.

At the time of the landing of the Romans on this island, corn was raised only
on the coasts, and even so late as the expedition of Severus, tillage was
altogether unknown in those parts which lay between his wall and that of
Antoninus. But, under the dominion of that wonderful people, it soon came to be
considered as the granary of the western Empire, and immense quantities of corn
were annually exported for the use of the armies in Germany and in Gaul; and in
the year 359, when there happened to be an extraordinary demand upon the
continent, Julian ordered eight: hundred ships to be built, larger than the
common barks, and sent them to Britain for grain. It is not possible to
ascertain the capacity of these vessels, but it is probable, from privileges
that were granted to those who built ships above a certain size, that many of
them would contain more than ten thousand Roman modia, or upwards of three
hundred English quarters.

Considering the change of manners, it is not to be expected, that the days of
ancient Rome will be revived, when the most distinguished citizens united the
culture of the liberal arts with the tillage of their fields, and when the
highest Officers of the State, having left the helm of government, did not
disdain to lay hold of the stilts of the plough. When, however, we contemplate
the rapid progress which agriculture made in this island, in the rude days of
that superstitious people, who were governed in their time of sowing by the age
of the Moon, and the setting of the Pleiades, what may not be hoped for from
the spirit of an enlightened nation, fully excited and directed to its proper
objects by the newly established Board, under whose auspices, were but the
ravages of war to cease for a century, Great Britain would attain to an
incredible degree of wealth and cultivation? Enjoying a soil of great original
fertility, and a climate favorable to the growth of most branches of the
vegetable kingdom, its craggy mountains and verdant hills would be clothed
with lofty timber, or bleat with innumerable slocks, its meadows would rear the
stately bullock, and its fruitful plains would wave with the richest crops of
every grain that the influence of a British sun can pour into the lap of
plenty. The persevering hand of industry would even teach trees and plants to
flourish that at present are sickly and droop, and can hardly exist through the
severity of an inclement winter. In a few centuries more, others might be
cultivated with success, which, if directly transplanted to our climate, would
immediately perish When peaches were first raised in Italy, all the world was
surprised that they could be brought to perfection out of Persia. What would
Caesar and Diodorus Siculus say, were they told that the most esteemed wines of
Europe are produced in Gaul, Germany, and Hungary, where they imagined that
vines would not grow? Or Strabo, if he knew that figs can be propagated in the
north of Scotland? Or Lucullus, that cherries will grow almost any where, which
in his time were known only in Cerasus, and the milder climates of Europe?

Trees and plants, being altogether passive, accommodate themselves very slowly
to a change of climate; but the idea has been already No apology is due to the
author of J. W. Spencer's travels for the freedom that is here used with them.
thrown out, that even those of the torrid zone may be made to flourish in
northern regions, may become gradually inured to the climate, that the climate
it self may be changed for the better, and that some thousands of years hence,
reposing under their own olive trees, future Britons may quaff their own wine,
or sip their own tea, sweetened with the juice of their own sugar cane.

PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS BY THE BISHOP OF LANDAFF.
Extent of the County.
THE county of Westmoreland was surveyed in 1768, and a map of it, upon a scale
of an inch to a mile, was engraved by Thomas Jeffreys, geographer to his
Majesty, in 1770. It appears, from this map, that the greatest breadth of the
county, from its southern boundary, near Burton, to its northern one, near
Penrith in Cumberland, is thirty-two miles, and that its greatest length, from
east to west, is forty miles.

I covered this map very exactly with fine writing paper, except the Estuary
near Millthrope and Windermere lake; I then cut out a slip of the paper of an
inch in breadth, and of ten inches in length, and weighed it accurately; from
another part of the same paper I cut another slip, two inches in breadth and
five in length, and found it to be precisely of the same weight as the first
slip; and hence, as the surfaces of the two slips were equal, we may collect
that the paper was of an uniform thickness. The area of each of these slips was
ten square inches, and consequently covered a space on the map equal to ten
square miles; I then weighed the whole of the paper which had covered the map,
and by comparing the weight of the whole with the weight of what had covered
ten square miles, I found the number of square miles in the whole to be 844;
now there are 640 statute acres in a square mile, and consequently 540,100
acres in the whole county.

I measured this map in the ordinary way by resolving it into triangles, and
found its area to be equal to 636 square miles, or 407,040 statute acres.

Templeman, in his survey of the globe, makes the area of the county of
Westmoreland equal to 633 square miles, and consequently, according to him, it
contains 405,120 acres. The medium of these three different estimates (though I
am most disposed to rely on the first) is 450,772.

Professor Zimmerman, in his political survey of Europe, estimates England and
Wales at 54, 112 square miles, amounting to 34*631,680 statute acres.
Templeman, in the work above mentioned, says that England and Wales contain
49,450 square miles, or 31,648,000 statute acres; the mean of these two gives
33,139,840 statute acres for the whole surface of England and Wales, and hence
the county of Westmoreland may, in superficial content, be esteemed a
seventy-third part of England and Wales.

Proportion between the Cultivated and Waste Lands in the County.
In 1689, when a bounty was first granted on the exportation of corn, one-third
part of the land in England and Wales, or about eleven millions of acres, was
supposed to lie in uncultivated commons; if this was then a just proportion
between the cultivated and waste parts of the kingdom, we may safely conclude,
that much above one-third part of Westmoreland was then waste land; as it is
evident, from a bare view of the county, that few, if any counties in England,
have, in proportion to their whole extent, so much uncultivated land as this
has. The many enclosures which have taken place, during the last hundred years,
have lessened in some degree, the waste land of the whole kingdom; but no
enclosures of much consequence have taken place in Westmoreland. Instead of
one-third, I am disposed to conjecture that three-fourth parts of Westmoreland
consist of uncultivated land: I will state my reasons for this conjecture,
being as sensible as any person can be of the objections which may be made to
it; but in a matter where there are no data to proceed upon, a conjectural
argument may be allowed.

It appears, by the return made by the overseers of the poor to the House of
Commons, that the sum raised by assessment in all the parishes and townships of
the county, at a medium of three years, ending in 1785, amounted to 5,757l..
The town of Kendall, including Kirkland, is the only large town in the county;
it is found, by an actual survey made this year, to contain 8089 inhabitants,
having experienced an increase of 518 inhabitants since the year 1784; of the
present number 143, or about one fifty-sixth part of the whole, are paupers
living in the workhouse. The poor rates of this town amounted, according to the
same return, to 1125l. a year; this sum being subducted from the annual amount
of all the poor rates in the county, leaves 4632l. for the sum raised from all
the estates in the county, exclusive of Kendall. From particular inquiries in
various parishes, I am of opinion, that the poor rates do not, in this county,
exceed a shilling in the pound in the actual rental of all the lands; but a
shilling in the pound (supposing the sum annually raised to be 4632l.) will
give a rental of 92, 640l. All the land in Westmoreland, which can either be
ploughed or mown for hay, is worth at least a rent of a pound a statute acre on
an average; and hence it may be inferred, that 100,000 acres of such land, or
less than one-fourth part of the whole, would yield a rental equal to, if not
exceeding, the rental of the county. The high enclosed rough pastures are let
from one to five shillings an acre. But whether the uncultivated land in
Westmoreland be equal to three-fourths, or one half of the whole, it cannot be
questioned, that there is so much of it, as to render its improvement a matter
not only of individual concern, but of national importance.

Improvement of Waste Lands.
The uncultivated lands in Westmoreland are of various sorts, with respect to
soil and situation, and capable of different sorts of improvement. Some of them
consist of extensive commons in low situations, and are of an excellent soil;
these might be improved by enclosures, without any risk of loss by the
undertaking. Others constitute extensive mountainous districts, called by the
natives fells and moors; the soil of these is, generally speaking, an hazel
mould. In its natural state, it produces little else than a coarse benty grass,
heath, and fern; or, in the language of the country, ling and brackens. Many of
these fells are, in their present state, of so little value, that the liberty
of keeping ten sheep on them may be hired for sixpence a year. Supposing six
acres to be sufficient for the maintenance of ten sheep, the rent of such land
is a penny an acre; and the price of the fee simple of it, at twenty-four years
purchase, two shillings. Whilst there is an acre of such waste, improveable
land in Great Britain, it may be hoped that, when the legislature shall turn
its attention to the subject, no inhabitant of the island will be driven by
distress, to seek a subsistence in Africa or America.

Above forty years ago an experiment was tried in Spain, with respect to the
cultivation of waste lands. Several thousands of poor and vagabond people were
settled on them at the expense of the government. If this experiment has
succeeded (which may be easily known,) so far, as that the land has been made
productive, that the settlers have been increased, and that the government has
been reimbursed the whole or a principal part of its expense, it may induce
other governments to adopt the same or a similar plan. The giving a cottage,
and a few acres of land, under a small reserved rent, and perhaps under other
useful restrictions, to a poor man, is certainly a good way of improving the
land. When a man has lands of his own, he and his family will exert in its
cultivation, a quantity of labor which would not otherwise be brought into
existence. The value of this, otherwise non-existing labor is, in one respect,
nothing; it ought not to be reckoned as a part of the expense attending the
improvement of the land; and, on that account, many thousands of acres of land
might be brought into cultivation, which would not, in any other way, pay the
expense of improvement. The manner of improving moor-land, by paring, burning,
liming, etc. is well understood by some few individuals, and the advantage
resulting from it ascertained, by what has been recently practiced in some
parts of the county on private estates.

There are many barren mountains in this county which do not admit improvement
by paring and burning, and which are incapable of being profitably converted
either into arable or good pasture land: yet the highest and most craggy parts,
two acres of which do not afford sustenance for six months in the year to one
sheep, might, with a great prospect of success, be planted with larches; I say
with a great prospect of success, for I do not speak with certainty, not
knowing whether there are in Great Britain any plantations of larch made on
such exposed and rocky situations as are here spoken of: But, on the other
hand, it is known, that the larch grows in Italy on higher mountains than any
that we have in this island; and not only that it grows in Italy, where the
climate is less severe than in Great Britain, but that it grows in the north of
Russia, where it is much more severe; for at Archangel, in the latitude of 64,
ships are built of larch growing in that climate.

It may be of use to state the probable profit which would attend planting the
land in question with larch. A thousand acres of this sort of land might be
enclosed with a circular wall six feet in height, (where the stones can be
easily gotten, as they may in most parts,) after the rate of six shillings an
acre, or 300l for the whole; five hundred larches, two feet in height, (so as
to enable them to resist the long grass,) might be planted on each acre for
fourteen shillings; hence a plantation of 500.000 larches might be made for
1000l. Now 1000l. improved at compound interest, at the rate of 4l. per cent.
would, in sixty years, amount to the sum of 10 519l.; this is the accumulated
loss attending the enclosing and planting 1000 acres of rocky land in sixty
years. The rent of 1000 acres, at one penny an acre, is 4l. 3s. 4d. a year; in
eight years the larches would be out of all danger from sheep, so that the loss
of rent ought only to be estimated for eight years; but 4l. 3s. 4d. a year,
though improved after the same rate of compound interest, would not amount to
40l. in eight years; say, however, that it would amount to 81l. which is
allowing more than two pence an acre for the annual rent of the land, then
would the whole expense attending the plantation in sixty years be 10,600l. If
the amount of 81l for 52 years, be taken into consideration, the expense of the
plantation in 60 years will be 11,222l. I have here supposed sheep to be shut
out of the plantation for eight years; if it should be found, that sheep will
not crop the larch, and from more than one observation, I have reason to
believe that they will not, they need not be shut out at all; nor, on
districts, where nothing but sheep are depastured, need any fence be made. I
know the advocates for close planting, instead of 500, would require 5000
larches for each acre; I am not convinced of the utility of such close
planting, except where it is intended to nurse up oaks, or other kinds of wood;
but if that mode should be adopted, the thinnings, after twenty years growth,
would pay the expense of it. At the expiration of sixty years, suppose that
only 250 larches remained on each acre, or that one half had perished; the
probable value of them may be thus estimated. From a great many experiments
made by myself and collected from others, I find the annual increase in
circumference of the larch, at six feet from the ground, to be one inch and one
half on an average of several years; and this inference has been drawn from the
actual admeasurement of larches in different parts of England and Scotland, and
of different ages, from ten years old to fifty. On this supposition, the
larches would measure, one with another, ninety inches in circumference, at six
feet from the ground. A larch which measures ninety inches, at six feet from
the ground, would measure above seventy feet from the ground; but supposing
seventy inches to be the circumference at twenty feet, and the length of the
tree to be forty feet, neglecting the remaining top; then will its solid
content be eighty-five cubic feet, and the value of the tree, at ninepence a
foot, above three guineas. But as the trees are supposed to be planted in an
high, bleak, barren situation, their annual increase may not be so great as is
here supposed; instead of being worth, at sixty years after planting, three
guineas a piece, admit that they are worth only ten shillings each, then would
the whole plantation be worth 125,000l. and deducting the whole expense,
10,600l. as before estimated, there would remain a profit of 114,400l. The
present value of 114,400l. to be received sixty years hence, is above 10,000l.
(interest of money at 4l. per cent.) Ten thousand pounds at 4l. per cent,
purchases an income of 400l a year: by planting then, a barren estate, of a
thousand acres, is improved from 4l. 3s. 4d. to 400l. a year, reckoning the
value of a reversion as a present certainty. Sixty years is a great part of the
life of a man; but it ought to be considered as nothing in the existence of a
nation, or even of a family, which is a little nation. The waste lands in this
and other counties, are a public treasure in the hands of private persons; all
of them ought to be converted into arable, meadow, or pasture land, which are
capable of admitting, with profit, that kind of improvement. and such of them
as will not pay for that mode of improvement, ought to be covered with wood;
the high parts, and especially the sheltered dells in the high parts, with
larch, and the lower with oak, ash, etc. When a spirit of agricultural
improvement is fully excited, the individuals to whom such uncultivated lands
belong, will be prompted, by an attention to their own interest, to forward
every judicious plan which may be proposed, for rendering them more useful to
the proprietors and to the community; their present application to the
Summer-maintenance of a few miserable sheep, ought not to be persevered in, if
any other use can be made of them.

Coppices.
In some parts of Westmoreland, considerable portions of land are covered with
coppices, consisting principally of oak, ash, alder, birch, and hazel. These
underwoods are usually cut down every sixteenth year: The uses to which they
are applied are chiefly two -- hoops and charcoal The hoops are sold in the
wood at 5l. a thousand; they are generally manufactured in the country, and
sent by sea to Liverpool; the charcoal is sent to the iron furnaces in the
neighborhood. The value of a statute acre of coppice-wood, of sixteen years
growth, is variable from 10l. to 15l.; and if it consists altogether of oak,
its price may amount to twenty guineas; 6l. for the charcoal, and 15l. for the
bark; it being the custom here to peel the bolls, and all the branches of the
oak, which are equal to the thickness of a man's thumb.

It is an extraordinary thing, to see any trees left to stand for timber in
these underwoods, the high price of bark being a temptation to cut the whole
down. Fine saplings, from nine to twelve inches in circumference, at five feet
from the ground, and with bark as splendid as polished silver, are felled by
the unfeeling proprietor, with as little regret as if they were thorns or
briars. Of late, indeed, some few owners of underwoods have left standards, and
if they consult their interest, the practice will become general. As this is a
point denied by many proprietors of coppices, it may be of use to explain the
principles on which the observation is founded.

Suppose a statute acre of underwood to be, in the spring of 1794, sixteen
years old, and that the whole is then cut down and sold for 14l.; this sum
will, in sixty-four years, (reckoning compound interest at 4 per cent.) amount
to 172l. In 1810 another fall of underwood, of the same value, will be made;
the 14l. then arising, improved for forty-eight years, in the same way, will
produce 91l. In 1826 another 14l will arise from another fall of the underwood;
this sum, improved for thirty-two years, will amount to 49l. In 1842, another
fall will produce 14l. which, in sixteen years, will become 26l. And lastly, in
1858, or in sixty-four years from 1794, another fall will produce 14l. The
amount of the value of the five falls, thus estimated and improved, will be
352l. Let us now calculate the profit which would result, in the same time,
from the same acre of underwood, if it was managed in a different way. Instead
of cutting the whole down in 1794, let us suppose that 150 of the best young
oaks are left to stand for timber; the then value of these, at 2d. a tree, is
25s. this being subducted from 14l. the value of the whole coppice, leaves 12l.
15s. This sum, improved as before, will amount, in sixty-four years, to 156l.
(shillings and pence in these calculations being neglected.) The next fall in
1810 ought not to be valued at more than 10l. as 150 trees, then of thirty two
years growth, will do some injury to the underwood: 10l. in forty-eight years
will amount to 65l. The next fall in 1826 may be valued at 8l. and at that time
seventy five trees should be taken down; these trees will then be forty-eight
years old, and worth 15s. a tree, or 56l. in the whole; this added to 8l. the
value of the then underwood, makes 64l. which, in thirty-two years, will
produce 224l Without estimating the underwood in 1842, and in 1858, at any
thing, or the value of the pasturage for thirty-two years at any thing, let us
suppose the seventy-five remaining trees to be cut down in 1858, being then
eighty years old, and that they would, one with another, be worth 4l. a-piece,
or 300l. in the whole: The sum of the profits, thus arising, is 745l. or more
than double the other amount.

It is a general opinion in this, and, I believe, in other countries, that it
is more profitable to fell oak wood at fifty or sixty years growth, than to let
it stand for navy-timber to eighty or one hundred. According to the price which
is now paid for that commodity, either by the Navy-Board, or the East India
Company, I believe the opinion to be founded in truth. The following
observations contain the reason for this belief.

If profit is considered, every tree of every kind ought to be cut down and
sold, when the annual increase in value of the tree, by its growth, is less
than the annual interest of the money it would sell for: -- this being
admitted, we have only to inquire into the annual increase in the value of oaks
of different ages.

In the Philosophical Transactions, for 1759, there are some useful tables
respecting the growth of trees, by Mr Marsham; from these tables the two
following inferences may be drawn: -- 1. That it is highly profitable to let
young thriving oaks, which are not worth above 30s. a tree, continue standing.
2. That it is not profitable to let oaks of 80 or 100 years growth, continue
standing.


Three oaks, marked in the tables, No. 8, 11, -- 12, in April 1743, before they
began to shoot, contained eleven and one half feet of wood, and were altogether
worth, at eighteen pence a foot, bark included, 17s. 3d. The same trees,
sixteen years afterward, contained thirty-four and one half feet, and were
worth 2l. 11s. 9d. Now, if 17s. and 3d. had been improved at the rate of 7 per
cent. at compound interest for sixteen years, it would not have amounted to 2l.
11s. 9d.; and of consequence the proprietor, by letting such, oaks stand,
improves his property in as high a degree, as if he put out his money to
interest at near seven and a half per cent.

Three oaks, No. 2, -- 3, -- 5, in 1743, contained 100 feet of timber, and were
worth 7l. 10s. 9d. The same trees, sixteen years afterward, contained 132
feet, and were worth 9l. 18s. 6d. Now, 7l. 10s. 9d. the value of the trees in
1743, improved, at the low rate of interest of 2l. per cent. would, in sixteen
years, amount to a sum exceeding 9l. 18s. 6d. The proprietor, then, by letting
such trees stand, does not improve his property at the rate of 2l. per cent.

The oak, No. 1, in the third table, was worth 1l. 2s. 6d. in 1757, it gained
in one year one foot, or 1s. 6d. in value; if it had been worth 30s. and had
gained one foot, there would have been no prosit in letting it stand, as the
interest of 30s. at 5 per cent would have produced 1s. 6d. in the year; and it
is for this reason that I have fixed upon 30s. as the value of trees which
should be cut down; if they are cut sooner or later, the proprietor will be a
loser. It must not be supposed, however, that great precision can attend this
observation; since particular soils, or the greater or less thriving condition
of the wood, may render it useful to cut down trees before they are worth 30s.
or to let them stand a while longer. It ought to be remarked also, that large
trees sell for more per foot than small ones do, yet the usual increase of
price, is not a compensation to the proprietor, for letting his timber stand to
a great age. This may be made out from the following experiment:

On the 27th October 1792, I measured, at six feet from the ground, the
circumference of a very fine oak, of eighty-two years growth, from the time of
its being planted, and found it to be 107 inches: On the same day of the month,
in 1793, it measured 108 inches. -- There is not one oak in fifty (at the age
of this) which gains an inch in circumference, in one year. The length of the
boll of this tree was about eighteen feet; it contained about eighty-four feet
of timber, and was worth, at 3s, a foot, 12l. 12s. It gained in one year very
little more than a foot and one half of timber, or 4s. 6d. in value; but the
interest of 12l 12s. at 4l. per cent. amounts, in one year, to above twice the
value of the increase, even of this tree, which is a singularly thriving one.

I have been the more particular on this subject from a public consideration.
Many men are alarmed lest our posterity should experience a scarcity of oak
timber for the use of the navy; and various means of increasing its quantity
have been recommended with great judgment. In addition to these means, the
making a much greater than the ordinary increase of price on timber of a large
scantling, might be not improperly submitted to the consideration of those who
are concerned in the business. If the Navy-board would give 8l. or 9l. a load
for timber trees containing 100 cubic feet or upwards, instead of 4l. or 5l.
every man in the kingdom would have a reasonable motive for letting his timber
stand till it became of a size sit for the use of the navy; whereas, according
to the present price, it is every man's interest to cut it down sooner.

In the neighborhood of Ambleside there is found a stratum of gray limestone,
which, though it contains a little clay, might be as serviceable as the purest
sort for agricultural purposes; but, unfortunately for the improvement of this
part of the county, coal is so dear, that very little of this limestone is
burned. The lime which is used in the culture of the lands being either fetched
from Kendall, or brought up Windermere lake, at a great expense. As there is
great plenty of coppice wood in the district here spoken of, it may be useful
for the farmers and land-owners to consider, whether the burning of lime with
fagots in a flame-kiln, as is practiced in Suffex, may not be a more beneficial
application of the underwoods than the converting them into charcoal. Even the
spray-wood, here called chats, which is too small to be made into charcoal, and
which is now sold for sixpence a cart, or more generally left on the ground,
might be made into fagots, and mixed with wood of a larger size, so that no
part of the coppice would be lost. In Suffex they use 600 fagots, cut in the
Winter, and weighing, when dry in the Spring, thirty-six pounds each, for the
burning of 480 Winchester bushels of lime.

May I be permitted to hazard another conjecture, respecting the use to which
coppices might be applied, without injuring either the quantity or the quality
of the charcoal obtained from them? Pit coal yields, by distillation, about a
twenty-fourth part of its weight, of a thick tenacious oil, resembling tar. All
sorts of wood yield a similar oil by the same process: I do not know whether
the oil from wood be of an inferior, or of a superior quality to that from pit
coal; but I suspect it to be fitter for cordage, etc. In the ordinary way of
making charcoal, the whole of this oil is dispersed in the form of smoke; may
it not deserve to be inquired, whether this oil might not be saved with profit?
The process which is used in America, for extracting tar from the pine tree, is
little different from that by which charcoal is made in England. Whether the
quantity of oil which might be obtained from a pit of wood, when converted into
charcoal, would exceed in value the expense of procuring it, can only be
decided by experiment. The reader may form some guess at the quantity, from the
following statement: The black part of guiacum wood yields a tenth, the sappy
part a thirteenth part of its weight, of thick black oil. Sassafras wood, oak,
ash, alder, birch, etc. give by distillation, (and making charcoal is a species
of distillation) from a twenty-fourth, to a twelfth part of their respective
weights, of this oil. The difference in quantity arises from a diversity in the
texture, age, and dryness of the woods. I suppose that a cord of coppice wood
would weigh a ton, and that four cords would make one dozen of sacks of
charcoal, and that wood of this sort would yield a twentieth part of its weight
of oil; on these suppositions there is dissipated in making one dozen of
charcoal, 448 lbs. of oil, or one ton in every five dozen.

CHAPTER I. GEOGRAPHICAL STATE AND CIRCUMSTANCES.
SECT. 1. -- Situation and Extent.
WESTMORELAND is situated between 54 11 30, and 54 42 30, N. lat. and between 2
20, and 3 12, long. W. from London. It is an inland county, bounded on the N.
by the bishopric of Durham and Cumberland, on the W. by Cumberland and
Lancashire, on the S. by Lancashire and Yorkshire, and by Yorkshire and Durham
on the E.; and contains, according to the Bishop of Landaff's Preliminary
Observations, about 844 square miles, or 540160 statute acres: three fourth
parts of which, he conjectures to consist of uncultivated land.

SECT. 2. -- Divisions.
Westmoreland is divided into East Ward, West Ward, Kendall, and Lonsdale
Wards; and consists of 26 parishes.

SECT. 3. -- Climate.
The climate of this county, as may be expected from its vicinity to the
western ocean, over which the southwest winds blow for eight months of the
year, and bring the exhalations to descend in rain on the mountains, is
remarkably moist. The quantity of rain that falls in the west part in a year
has been ascertained by rain-gages kept at Kendall, and on the banks of
Windermere. In the wet year, 1792, it amounted to eighty-three ^^^es. In
ordinary years it amounts to forty-five or fifty inches, the lowest of which is
twenty inches above the medium quantity that falls in Europe. The air, however,
is pure and healthful, the Winters rather long and severe. In the Winter
1791-92, thirty-six pounds were paid for cutting only a horse track through the
snow upon less than ten miles of the road from Shap to Kendall.

SECT. 4. -- Soil and Surface.
The county in general is so mountainous and hilly, that a great proportion of
it must for ever remain undisturbed by the plough. Between these mountains
there are several very pleasant and fertile valleys, that want only trees and
hedge-rows to be truly beautiful. The most prevailing soil in Westmoreland, is
a dry gravelly mould; sand and hazel mould appear in various parts, but chiefly
in the E. and N.; clay is found on a few farms toward the Eden and Eastern
mountains, and a heavy moist soil on others in the N. parts of the county. Peat
moss makes its appearance in small patches in many of the vales, and abounds on
the tops of several high mountains, which, however, are in general covered with
a dry soil, upon a hard blue rock, provincially called rag. The soil that lies
upon a limestone bottom is uniformly esteemed the best.

SECT. 5. -- Minerals.
Notwithstanding its mountainous surface, no valuable mines have yet been
discovered in Westmoreland. Some trifling veins of lead-ore, have been found in
the Eastern mountains: coal is wrought only in the S. E. extremity of the
county, and in the neighborhood of Shap, where a bastard or crow coal is got.

Limestone, in almost inexhaustible abundance, is to be found in most parts of
the county, except among the Western hills, which afford an excellent kind of
blue slates, well known over almost all England.

Gypsum is got at Acron-bank, near Kirkby-Thore, and a few other places: it is
used for laying floors, but not at all as a manure.

Freestone is found in the Eastern parts of the county, and at Hutton-roofe,
about 10 miles from Kendall.

On the river Kent, about 3 miles below Kendall, a vein of beautiful marble was
discovered, about four years ago, in the lands of Daniel Wilson, Esquire of
Dallam-Tower, by some workmen who were building a barn, and the main quarry has
been opened on the estate of that gentleman. It has lately been found on the
opposite side of the river, in the property of -- Strickland, Esquire of Syzergh.

SECT. 6. -- Water.
Rivers. -- Of the numerous streams that rush from the mountains and water the
valleys beneath, there are only three that preserve their names to the ocean.
The Eden, which springs in Mallerstang, and having received in its course the
Eamont and the Lowther, and many little rivulets, enters Cumberland, and
running the whole length of that county, empties itself into the Solway Firth
below Carlisle. The Kent rises in Kentmere, washes the vale of Kendall, and
loses itself in the Estuary near Milthrope, the only seaport in the county. The
third is the Lon or Lune, which has its source in Ravenstonedale, and flows
through the vale to which it gives its name, till it enters the county of
Lancaster, below Kirkby-Lonsdale.

Betwixt the mountains several extensive lakes are formed, the beautiful
verdure of whose banks, with their shady groves, limpid waters, and pebbly
bottom, are particularly described in the Guides to the Lakes, offered to every
traveller who visits this part of the kingdom.

The rivers and lakes abound with many different kinds of fish, great part of
which is now carried to Lancaster and Liverpool.

CHAPTER II. STATE OF PROPERTY.
SECT. 1. -- Estates and their Management.
A Large proportion of the county of Westmoreland is possessed by a Yeomanry,
who occupy small estates of their own from 10l. to 50l. a year. The remainder
consists of larger estates belonging to Noblemen and Gentlemen, several of whom
are resident in the county, and take the management into their own hands.
Others entrust the care of their affairs, in a great measure, to stewards.

SECT. 2. -- Tenures.
The larger estates in Westmoreland are commonly freehold, and the small
tenements, mentioned in the last section, are generally held under the lord of
the manor, by customary tenure, which differs but little from that by copyhold,
or copy of court roll. In some manors the tenant pays only a heriot, and fine
certain, on death of the lord or tenant; in others the fine is arbitrary, on
death or purchase. On customary estates, the wood is generally claimed by the
lord of the manor.

CHAPTER III. BUILDINGS.
SECT. 1. -- Houses of Proprietors.
FROM the short residence the Author of this Report made in Westmoreland, he
cannot pretend even to enumerate the various seats of the great proprietors
throughout the county, and the neat snug boxes, belonging to gentlemen of
moderate fortune, that adorn the banks of its beautiful lakes.

SECT. 2. -- Farm Houses, Offices, and Repairs.
The lands of the statesmen and farmers in this county lie so intermixed that
their habitations and offices, which are often built together in little
straggling villages, must of necessity be very inconvenient for farming
purposes; but convenience has been little studied even on those farms whose
fields lie unmixed. The principal structure is a barn, which, at the same time
that it has a stable and cow-house underneath, is frequently large enough to
contain the whole crop of both corn and hay, so that it is rare to see a stack
of either. These barns are often twenty yards in length, five in width, and
five yards in height in the side walls. The expense of bringing all the
materials from a moderate distance, and of building a barn of such dimensions
with a slated roof, may be about seventy guineas. The houses are generally
covered with slates, which are found in several parts of the county. The slates
are not nailed on boards, but hung with oak pegs on laths, and plaistered in
the inside of the roof. A few houses are still thatched with wheat straw, which
is sold from 1s. 2d. to 1s. 8d. a threave of twenty-four sheaves.

The expenses of repairs are, for the most part, defrayed by the landlord.

SECT. 3. -- Cottages.
There are very few mere cottages in the county; the labourer and mechanic
generally reside in a small farm-house, and occupy more or less land.

CHAPTER IV. MODE OF OCCUPATION.
SECT. 1. -- Size of Farms -- Character of Farmers.
FARMS in general are so small, that it is rare to meet with one of 100l. a
year of rent, though there are some of even 200l. or 250l. a year.

It might be useful to know what proportion of the lands in the county is
possessed by that numerous and respectable Yeomanry already mentioned as
occupying small estates of their own from 10l. or 20l. to 50l. a year. These
men, in contradistinction to farmers, or those who hire the land they occupy,
are usually denominated statesmen. They live poorly, and labor hard; and some
of them, particularly in the vicinity of Kendall, in the intervals of labor
from agricultural avocations, busy themselves in weaving stuffs for the
manufacturers of that town. The consciousness of their independence renders
them impatient of oppression or insult, but they are gentle and obliging when
treated by their superiors with kindness and respect. This class of men is
daily decreasing. The turnpike roads have brought the manners of the capital to
this extremity of the kingdom. The simplicity of ancient times is gone. Finer
clothes, better dwellings, and more expensive viands, are now sought after by
all. This change of manners, combined with other circumstances which have taken
place within the last forty years, has compelled many a statesman to sell his
property, and reduced him to the necessity of working as a labourer in those
fields, which perhap he and his ancestors had for many generations cultivated
as their own. It is difficult to contemplate this change without regret; but
considering the matter on the scale of national utility, it may be questioned
whether the agriculture of the county will not be improved as the landed
property of it becomes less divided.

It is painful to one, who has in his composition the smallest spark of knight
errantry, to behold the beautiful servant maids of this county toiling in the
severe labors of the field. They drive the harrows, or the ploughs, when they
are drawn by three or four horses; nay, it is not uncommon to see, sweating at
the dung-cart, a girl, whose elegant features, and delicate nicely-proportioned
limbs, seemingly but ill accord with such rough employment.

A judgment of the refinement and civilization of a people has been often
formed from their treatment of the fair sex, and in this respect France was
formerly held up to the world as a model. Unfortunately the manners of nations
are too often painted by those who have been conversant only with persons in
what may be called high life; but were it allowable to apply this rule even to
France, and to look for specimens into the lower orders of society, (and it is
there surely that the most faithful representatives of national character or
manners are to be met with) it would be found that the women, even in the
boasted days of her monarchy, were doomed to the severest labor, to load the
dung-cart, to saw the wood, and to thresh the corn.

The common people of both sexes wear, especially in the winter season, instead
of shoes, cloggs, which differ from shoes in this, that the bottom part is made
of wood. The wood is generally either birch, alder, or sycamore; it is about an
inch in thickness, and a rim of iron is nailed round the bottom of it. A pair
of cloggs costs 3s. 6d.; they keep the feet warm and dry, and, with good care,
will last a twelvemonth.

SECT. 2. -- Rent.
The rent of the land varies with its situation and fertility. In all
situations, and of all qualities, it has increased greatly in its value within
these few years. This may be owing partly to the advance in the price of its
productions, and partly to improvements in the art of farming. At Shap,
Ambleside, and in Troutbeck, the best hay-meadows are let at about 50s. the
customary acre. Near towns the rent of the best fields to be mowed may be, at a
medium, rather above 3l. per acre. At Kirkby-Stephen and Appleby they are not
quite so valuable. Near Kendall, Burton, and Milthrope, some fields are let at
4l.; and at Kirkby-Londsdale there are a few which fetch above 5l. Lands of
inferior kinds may be hired for pasture at all varieties of price. In
Ravenstondale, where no tithes are paid, and where the land derives no part of
its value from its situation, there are between 2000 and 3000 acres enclosed;
four fifths of these are let from 4s. to 11s. the statute-acre, and the
remaining fifth from 20s. to 40s.

In the bottom of Westmoreland a farm of an hundred acres of enclosed land may
be hired upon lease for 150l. A farm containing much coarse pasture-land may be
had for 20s. or 24s. per acre. It is not always known whether these coarse
pastures have been measured, they being sometimes estimated by the number of
cattle they can maintain.

Besides the rent, the farmer is subjected to the payment of tithes, poor
rates, and road money

SECT. 3. -- Tithes.
In some parts of Westmoreland, tithes are taken in kind; in some, each farmer
has an opportunity of taking his own tithes; in others, the land is tithe free,
or pays a small prescription in lieu of tithes.

SECT. 4. -- Poor Rates.
From the best information he has been able to collect, the Bishop of Landaff,
in the Preliminary Observations, has stated the average of poor rates, not to
exceed a shilling in the pound, in the rental of all the lands in the county.

SECT. 5. -- Leases.
The mode of farming is nearly the same throughout the county; and the course
of crops is often pointed out to the farmer in his lease, which is generally
for seven or nine years, sometimes only for five or three years, at others for
fourteen, and in a few instances for twenty-one years. Some principal
land-owners grant no leases.

SECT. 6. -- Expense and Profit.
A long and intimate acquaintance with the management of farmers, would be
necessary to state any thing with precision, upon this part of the subject. It
has been said, that the general economy of a farm of 100 acres, at a rent of
as many pounds, does not differ widely from the following statement: 15 acres,
under crops of barley and oats, 35 acres in hay, and the remaining 50 acres in
pasture; that 10 dairy cows kept on the best of this pasture, might probably
yield 20 firkins of butter, and that the profit would be 60l. or 23l. per cent,
upon 260l. the capital employed.

CHAPTER V. IMPLEMENTS.
IT has long been known what angle the sail ought to form with the keel to make
the ship move in the water with the greatest velocity; but, to the present day,
was reserved the discovery of the angles which the component parts of the
plough ought to form with one another, and with the line of draught, in order
that that instrument might meet with the least possible resistance in the
performance of its operation. Agriculture cannot -- but advance with hasty
strides, when the principles of philosophy and the powers of mechanism are
directed to its improvement.

Ploughs. -- The ploughs of Westmoreland are light, and, although not neatly
constructed, they are perhaps not ill suited to the soil they are destined to
cultivate; some of them have a wheel at the extremity of the beam, which, it is
imagined, serves to keep the furrow of an equal depth. They are drawn most
commonly by two, but sometimes by three horses. The turnwrist plough has been
introduced into the county by the Bishop of Landaff, and may be of great
service in ploughing the sides of the hills, which are very numerous and steep
in the arable lands.

Carts. -- The carts are of various descriptions and sizes. Those most commonly
used may be fifty-two inches in length, thirty-six in breadth, and fourteen and
one half inches in depth, containing less than sixteen cubic feet. They are
mounted in some places upon clog-wheels, and have two-thirds of their length
before the axle, which is of wood. There is scarcely a farming wagon to be met
with in the county; it being a general opinion that four horses in four
separate carts will draw a greater weight than if they were yoked together in a
wagon.

The winnowing machines, which are here very common, and the harrows, are both
of the ordinary kinds. The drill husbandry being yet in its infancy, there are
few instruments for hoeing or drilling.

CHAPTER VI. ENCLOSING FENCES -- GATES.
EXCEPT a very few open fields on the east side of the river Eden, the whole
cultivated land in the county is divided, by hedges or stone walls, into
enclosures, many of which do not contain half an acre; there are a few of 8 or
10 acres, and in general they may contain from 3 to 5 acres.

The gates are of the most ordinary kind, being often made by the farmer
himself, of such wood as happens to be upon the estate.

CHAPTER VII. ARABLE LAND.
SECT. 1. -- Tillage, Fallowing, Rotation of Crops, and Crops commonly
cultivated.
Course of Crops.

WHEN a field of grass is overgrown with moss, which commonly happens in seven
or ten years, it is broken up with the plough in the beginning of March, and
sown about the first of April with oats, at the rate of seven and one-half
Winchester bushels upon the customary acre of 6,760 square yards. The crop is
reaped about the middle of September, and sixty bushels are reckoned a
tolerably good return.

Second Crop. -- The land is ploughed for the second crop as soon after
Candlemas as the weather will permit, and eighty or a hundred cart-loads of
stable-yard dung are laid upon the acre. It is ploughed again in April, and
sown with four bushels of barley or bigg: The harvest is earlier than that of
the oats, and fifty-four bushels are reckoned a good crop. Some farmers plough
three times for barley, but it is the general practice that is here described.

Third Crop. -- After the barley the land is ploughed in April, and eight
bushels of oats per acre are immediately sown upon it. The harvest is commonly
in September, and the crop is usually as good as the first was.

This is the most ordinary succession of crops, though it is sometimes broken
through by taking two crops of oats before the barley, which, in that case, is
followed by another of oats. The land is then left to itself, and the first
year it produces a light crop of hay of bad quality. In the third year the crop
is at the best with regard to both quantity and quality. In seven or in ten
years it is again mossed over, and is again ploughed up to undergo a similar
treatment.

Exceptions -- 1st. To this general mode of management there are several
exceptions, which perhaps it would be improper to omit. From Kirkby-Steven to
Brough and Appleby, and from that town to Temple-Sowerby, the soil is a deep
sand, which, by cultivation, becomes more compact, and more retentive of
moisture. The fields of grass, moss over sooner or later, according to the
quality of the soil; some, where the soil is thinnest, and the subjacent
stratum the poorest, it is judged necessary to break up after an interval of
only four or six years. In this part of the county there are particular farms,
where, after the second crop, which is oats generally inferior to the first,
the land is summer fallowed, planted with potatoes, or sown with turnips, which
last are given to the wintering stock of cattle and sheep. Dung is always laid
upon the fields designed for turnips and potatoes, and the remainder upon the
fallow, which is likewise invariably and always successfully limed at the rate
of seventy-five Winchester bushels per acre. What is so fallowed is sown, in
the middle of September, with two and one-half bushels of rye per acre. The
crop is reaped before a year goes round, and thirty bushels are reckoned a good
return. In the month of May, grass-seeds are sown amongst the rye, but are
never covered either by the harrow or the roller. Those fields which were
turnips and potatoes are sown with barley or oats, and grass-seeds, in the
following quantities to an acre: eight pounds narrow-leafed red clover seed,
which is preferred to the common broad-leafed clover, because it remains longer
in the ground; four pounds white clover, four pounds hop clover, four pounds of
rib-grass, and from five to ten bushels of hay seeds shaken from the crop of
the former year. These consist chiefly of Bent grass, which seems to be a
species of rye-grass, of the great Poa, or oat grass, and Dark grass, or
Flanders hay-seeds. The first year, whether it be hayed or pastured, the crop
is far more valuable than that of any natural grass in the neighborhood upon
soil of an equal quality; and the cattle, especially the horses, uniformly
prefer these artificial grasses to those which the land produces of its own
accord.

Exception 2d. -- In the immediate neighborhood of Kendall, where the soil is
gravelly or sandy, it is not unusual to take potatoes for the second crop, and
barley for the third; the land is then sometimes left to itself, but for the
most part the barley is followed by a crop of oats. A great many potatoes are
grown and consumed in the county. The price, at the time of taking them up, is
commonly 1s. 4d. per Winchester bushel; in the Winter and Spring it often rises
to 2s. The produce is variable, from 250 to 350 Winchester bushels per statute
acre. They are cultivated in various ways, but chiefly by the plough. The
inhabitants think that potatoes from fresh ground are of the best quality, but
the product is usually the greatest from an oat stubble. Sometimes the farmer
grows the potatoes at his own risk; at others he manures the land with 100
cart-loads of dung per customary acre, ploughs it once, and lets it in this
state at 2s. the perch to the manufacturers and laborers of Kendall, who
furnish the plants and the rest of the labor. The price they pay is high, but
reckoning little for the work they bestow upon it, which is conducive to their
health, they are often well satisfied with their crop which is sometimes very
great, the land being well adapted for the cultivation of this root.

Exception 3d. -- From Millthrope to Burton, and from Burton by Farlton to
Kirkby Lonsdale, both the farms and enclosures appear to be somewhat larger
than in most other parts of the county, and it is not quite so rare to see a
few acres of wheat. The land designed for this crop is summer-fallowed after
the first or second year from the ley, and is well manured with dung or lime,
or with both. It is sown in September, with wheat soaked in brine, or washed
with chamberlye, and dried with lime, at the rate of four bushels per customary
acre. Forty-five bushels are reckoned a good crop; and the harvest may be ten
days earlier than it is in the northern parts of the county. If the land is
again manured, it is sown with barley after the wheat; if not manured, it is
sown with oats.

SECT. 2. -- Crops not commonly cultivated.
It is painful to be obliged, in this section, to mention pease, beans,
turnips, clover, and rye-grass; but it is hoped the time is not far distant,
when they will be cultivated on every farm. Cabbages have been tried in the
fields near Kendall, and rape has lately been sown in small quantities, in
different parts of the county, with great success.

Flax and hemp are now rarely seen growing here, though, 50 years ago, a little
hemp was sown by almost every cottager and statesman.

CHAPTER VIII. GRASS.
SECT. 1. -- Natural Meadows, and Pasture.
EVERY occupier of land, whether statesman or farmer, having it in his power to
keep any number of cattle, through the months of Summer, upon joisted fields
where they may be kept at a cheap rate, or upon commons where they may be kept
almost for nothing, it is a principal object with him, to provide for them
plenty of Winter food. Hence his attention is chiefly directed to his crop of
hay. It has been already stated, that the quantity of land, at present under
culture, does not exceed one-fourth part of the whole county, or 135,000 acres.
Had all the arable land in the county been cropped with corn three years out of
twelve, there would have been precisely one-fourth part of the whole in
tillage; but there are many pastures of an inferior sort, which are very seldom
ploughed, and in the high parts there is a much smaller proportion of the land
in corn than there is in the low parts. In the very extensive manor of
Ravenstondale, although there are between 2000 and 3000 acres enclosed, there
are not sixty acres of corn; and it is probable that there are not in the
county more than 20,000 acres under crops of corn in one year. The remaining
115,000 acres are cut for hay, or depastured with fattening beasts and rising
stock, or with cows applied to the purposes of the dairy. From such an
inspection of the county as was had with a view to the framing of this Report,
the proportions used for these different purposes cannot be even guessed at;
but that for hay is perhaps the most considerable. A prejudice against the
artificial grasses prevails so generally over all the county, that it may be
almost literally said, they are never sown. When the land has produced a few
crops of corn, and it is judged that the moss is quite destroyed, it is left to
itself; and such is the humidity of the climate, and so strong is the
vegetation of weeds and natural grasses, that the very first crop has, by
actual experiment, been found to produce 120 stones of hay per acre, weighed
from the field. As every person who expects to have occasion for hay, hires a
field to supply him with that commodity, it is not often that hay is sold in
large quantities; and it is still seldomer that the quantity raised upon an
acre is exactly ascertained. When sold, it may bring from 4d. to 6d. a stone in
Winter and Spring, or from 4s. to 5s. a cubic yard. A cubic yard in the lower
part of a well-pressed mow may contain twelve stones of hay, and has been known
to sell as high as 7s. or 8s. In the southern and in the eastern parts of the
county, much attention is paid to the making of compost dung-hills, which, with
the dung that remains after manuring for the barley crop, are always laid upon
the hay grounds, and are thought considerably to retard the progress of the
moss. At Kendall and other places, where dung can be purchased, they are
manured after the first crop, and every third year while they continue in grass.

SECT. 2. -- Artificial Grasses.
It was mentioned in the last section of the former chapter, that crops of
clover, and rye-grass, had not yet entered into the general course, and
therefore nothing can here be said upon this part of the subject, except that
they have been tried on several farms, where they have fully answered the
expectations of those who made the experiment. Some hints concerning the
advantages of this practice may be seen in the conclusion to this little Work.

SECT. 3 -- Hay Harvest.
Although this is the principal harvest in most parts of Westmoreland, nothing
worthy of notice occurs upon the subject, except, perhaps, the celerity with
which the crop is got, it being generally carried into the barn, if the weather
is good, within three or four days after being mown.

SECT. 4. -- Feeding.
Fattening Cattle. -- The young cattle are kept on the lands of inferior
quality in Summer, and have straw and a little hay given them in Winter. When
three years old, if barren, they are either fattened in the pastures, or sold
to the graziers of Yorkshire and Lancashire from 5l. to 8l. a piece; if with
calf, from 7l. 10s. to 10l.

Ten thousand Scotch cattle are annually sold at Brough-hill fair in the end of
September. Though numbers of these are carried off by drovers to the south of
England, and many are brought by graziers from other counties, great quantities
remain in Westmoreland. They are wintered on the coarse pastures, and in the
straw yard; in May following the young ones are sent to the commons; and those
of an age proper for feeding are put upon the best grounds, and are ready for
the shambles in October.

Heifers are joisted upon tolerably good pasture from 10th May to Michaelmas,
at from 1l. 1s. to 1l. 7s. a head. Horses are grazed among fattening cattle for
3s. 6d. a week. Young horses are kept from Michaelmas to 5th March on the
inferior kinds of land, and have straw given them in bad weather for 2s. a week.

Fattening Sheep. -- Almost all the sheep in the county, except the wedders
after the first year, are brought from the mountains on the approach of Winter,
and kept in the enclosed grounds till the month of April. Some graziers stock
part of their pastures with wedders, or with ewes and lambs. The mutton and
lamb, which remain after supplying the consumption at home, are sent to
Lancaster and Liverpool.

CHAPTER IX. GARDENS AND ORCHARDS.
ALMOST every family in Westmoreland has a small garden for supplying them with
the common pot herbs.

There are several orchards in the county, which are said to be slourishing and
profitable. The common fruit trees succeed well in the low and warm vales, but
their culture is little attended to.

CHAPTER X. WOODS AND PLANTATIONS.
AT Whinfield Forest, and at Lowther-hall, the seat of the Right Honorable the
Earl of Lonsdale, there are very extensive plantations, where many of the trees
have grown to an uncommon size. Several of the oaks at Lowther-hall, have been
valued at fixty pounds a piece. There are many smaller plantations, and various
clumps of trees throughout the county, where the wood springs with a degree of
vigor, hardly to be expected in such bleak and exposed situations as many of
them are planted in.

On the division of Kendall common, part of a very high and rocky hill, not
being capable of any other improvement, was planted with Scotch fir, larch,
oak, ash, etc. etc. all of which are very thriving.

The banks of the lakes are likewise adorned with very beautiful coppices.

The Bishop of Landaff has planted, on some high ground near Ambleside, above
an hundred acres with oak, ash, elm, beech, sycamore, Scotch fir, and larch. He
is doubtful whether the climate be not too cold for any sort of wood, except
the fir and larch; the other kinds, after seven years growth, are alive, but
stunted; they shoot a little in the Spring, but that shoot perishes, as to its
greatest part, in the Winter. Some of them have been out down, but the new
shoots do not promise well. The firs and larches, but especially the larches,
thrive as well as he could wish.

CHAPTER XI. WASTES.
THE Wastes in this county are very extensive and valuable. They are depastured
chiefly with stocks of sheep, which are managed in nearly the same way, whether
the ground be in common, or in severalty.

In Winter, all the sheep are brought down to the enclosed fields, except the
wedders, which, being thought able to endure the severity of any storm or fall
of snow, are left to shift for themselves upon the wastes, where they remain
till they are four years and a half old, when they are sold from 9s. to 13s. a
head. Having dropped their lambs, the ewes, in the end of April, are sent back
to the wastes, where the whole flock pastures indiscriminately without an
attendant. The lambs are sometimes suffered to wean themselves; at others, the
teats of the ewe are fastened up to her udder by a plaster of coarse paper and
pitch. The value of the wool, and the expense of salving, are the same with
those mentioned, sect. 2. -- chap. 13.

Scotch Sheep. -- Great numbers of Scotch hogs and dinmonds are annually bought
at Stagshawbank fair in the month of June, and grazed on the wastes of this
county. On some they are found to answer very badly; on others they thrive
well, and are ready for the grazier a year earlier than those of the native
breed. There is here a strong prejudice in favor of these coarse-woolled
sheep, which there is every reason to believe is ill founded, the sort now
known under the name of the Cheviot breed being equally hardy, and much more
profitable from the superior value of their fleece.

Black Cattle. -- In addition to all these sheep, numerous herds of black
cattle are likewise to be seen upon the commons. A few of these are of the
breed of the county, and the rest are Scotch, either bought at Brough-hill fair
in the end of September, and wintered on the low grounds and in the straw-yard,
or purchased in the Spring from drovers, who fetch them from Galloway and
Dumbarton. In Autumn, they are either sold to the south-country drovers, or
wintered and fattened in the county.

Ponies. -- A few ponies of the Scotch breed are reared upon the commons; but
the practice not being general, it need not be dilated upon.

Geese. -- Great numbers of geese are bred upon the commons, and sold to the
Yorkshire drovers at about 1s. 4d. a head.

It is generally understood that no person shall send to graze on any common
more stock than he can winter upon his estate or farm, in right of which he has
a title to pasturage on that common. This regulation, however, is little
attended to, and the commons are almost always overstocked to such a degree,
that many persons do not think it worth while to avail themselves of their
right of commonage.

On stinted pastures, it is very ordinary to hire out the right of keeping both
cattle and sheep. A Summer's grass for an ox, or for ten sheep, on Forest Hall,
and Mosley common, is let at 4s.; on a part of Troutbeck common, where no sheep
are allowed to feed, an ox may be kept for 3s. 6d. and on another part of the
same common, an ox or ten sheep may remain all the year for sixpence.

CHAPTER XII. IMPROVEMENTS.
SECT. 1. -- Draining.
THE importance of having the land lie dry, and of preventing the water, which,
in wet weather, breaks out upon the declivities of the hills, from chilling the
fields below, is well known in Westmoreland. The method of draining is fast
improving, and the practice is daily gaining ground. The drains are generally
walled in the sides, and covered with large stones out of the reach of the
plough.

SECT. 2. -- Paring and Burning.
The operation of paring and burning is much practiced in Westmoreland, both in
improving moor lands, and in reclaiming rough pastures, that have been allowed
to return almost to a state of nature It produces excellent crops at first, but
the effect is diminished every repetition, and farmers are too apt to exhaust
the land by repeated crops of oats without any manure.

The expense is said to be from 15s. to 20s. per statute acre.

SECT. 3. -- Manuring.
Dung. -- To increase the quantity of his manure, and to apply it to the
greatest advantage, are by no means the least important of the various branches
of the farmer's avocation. In those parts of Westmoreland where
summer-fallowing is not practiced, the land designed for barley and potatoes
always receives the stable yard dung at the rate of 60, 80, or 100 single-horse
cart-loads an acre; and in Autumn, what remains is laid upon the hay-grounds,
at a rate per acre considerably less.

On some few farms in the neighborhood of Appleby, where summer-fallow and
crops of turnips may almost be said to enter into the general course, the dung
is carried in Winter from the yard to the fields, and laid down in a heap,
which is turned over two or three times, with a view to accelerate
putrefaction. Twenty cart-loads per acre are laid upon the turnip land and the
fallow, and its operation is always assisted by the addition of seventy-five
Winchester bushels of lime. Dung is sold at Kendall and at Milthrope for 1s. a
cart load.

Lime. -- In most parts of Westmoreland, limestone is sound in inexhaustible
plenty; but coals to burn it must be carried from such a distance, that its
application to the purposes of agriculture has not yet become general. When, by
the projected canal to Kendall, coals shall be brought into the heart of the
county, its use must soon become universal.

It is sometimes laid upon the land when it is in tillage, but for the most
part it is spread upon the surface of grass fields; and it has been found to
sweeten such as are coarse and benty amazingly.

In whatever way it is applied, and in whatever quantity, varying from 75 to
480 Winchester bushels an acre, it is always attended with wonderful effect.
The price at the kilns is 3d. or 4d. a bushel.

Composts. -- Much attention is paid to the making of compost dung hills in
many parts of Westmoreland. They are most commonly spread upon grass, and
experience has shown, that they at once improve its quality, and check for
years the progress of the moss. One hundred cart-loads of earth, rakings of the
roads, mud, or rotten leaves, and fifty of dung, carefully mixed with 300
Winchester bushels of lime, are laid upon three acres with great advantage.

Marl. -- This valuable manure was scarcely known in Westmoreland, till about
three years ago, when a species of rock marl was discovered on Bolton Common.
It is easily come at, and has been applied with advantage, upon a small scale,
at the rate of 80 single horse cart-loads to an acre. It is more than probable
that, if properly sought for, shell marl might be got in many of the low
grounds and marshes, with which Westmoreland abounds.

SECT. 4. -- Weeding.
The weeding of turnips and potatoes, is practiced in Westmoreland; but the
hoeing of turnips is in general so ill executed, that a gentleman of fortune in
the county has recommended to the Board of Agriculture, to send some
turnip-hoers from those districts, where this simple operation is better
understood.

The larger weeds are taken out from amongst the growing corn; but it is very
seldom that docks, ragweeds, etc. etc. are destroyed on the meadows and
pastures.

SECT. 5. -- Watering.
The fertility attending the overflowing of the Nile, and other muddy rivers,
has been long known and well explained, from their depositing the earthy,
oleaginous, saline, putrescent ingredients, with which, in their course from
the mountains, they become impregnated; but it is a late discovery in
philosophy which teaches us, that pure water is itself compounded of two
principles, and that one of its component parts is, by the process of
vegetation, converted into the substance of vegetables. This discovery enables
us to account for the utility of irrigating land, even with the clearest water,
which long experience has shown to be a most efficacious mode of improvement.

Those who have opportunities of applying water, and are not conversant in the
practice, would do well to imitate the example of the Bishop of Landaff, who is
making great improvements by watering, at Calgarth Park. It is practiced on a
small scale in many other parts of Westmoreland, and always with great success.

CHAPTER XIII. LIVE STOCK
SECT. 1. -- Cattle.
THE attention that was formerly paid to the breed of black cattle has rather
diminished of late years. They are long-horned, very much resemble the
Lancashire breed, and, when kept to a proper age, grow to a great size. As a
heifer of three years old can be sold for as much as an ox would fetch at four,
it is rare to see a oullock of the country breed; but to judge from those of
all ages in the pastures at Lowther-hall, they are excellent feeders, and
possess, in an eminent degree, the very desirable property of laying the fat
upon their backs and other valuable parts. The heisers and barren cows, if well
chosen, are confessedly good thrivers, and are in great request among the
graziers of Yorkshire and Lancashire. Not many years ago there was killed, at
Lowther-hall, a bullock of the country breed, whose carcass weighed one hundred
and thirty-two stones.

Dairy -- There are few counties in England, in which there is no great
manufacturing town, where more milch cows are kept in proportion to its size,
and where the produce of the dairy forms a greater part of the profits of the
farmer. It may be naturally supposed that he is particular in the choice of his
cows, and that they are remarkable for giving a great quantity of milk. Neither
supposition, however, is founded in truth. The farmer keeps just such cows as
he has bred, and they by no means yield so much milk as would be expected from
those of the Dutch, or even the Scotch breed, The Ayrshire breed is reckoned
the best for milch cows in Scotland, particularly in the neighborhood of
Dunlop. The comparative value of all the different breeds, in regard to
quantity of milk, etc. the Board of Agriculture proposes to ascertain.
upon a pasture of the same quality. Farmers in the country generally estimate
the expense of keeping a milch cow at five pounds a year, and the produce at
eight pounds. Cows in the country are kept for the sake of making butter, of
which great quantitles, of an excellent quality, are sent yearly to the London
market in firkins of 56 lbs net, at from 30s. to 35s. each. In the immediate
neighborhood of Kendall, the dairy turns out to better account by selling the
new milk, which is contracted for all the year at 1d. a quart, being the same
price which the London cow-keepers receive. The skimmed milk is sold at one
third part of that rate. The ordinary price of a good milch cow may be about
ten pounds.

SECT. 2. -- Sheep.
The breed of sheep, kept on the mountains and commons of Westmoreland, is
either native or a cross with Scotch rams. No attempt has yet been made to
improve either the carcass or the fleece. They are horned, dark or gray faced,
thick pelted, with coarse, strong, hairy wool. The whole stock upon a farm is
herded together, which is different from the practice in those counties where
sheep farming is thought to be the best understood.

Wintering -- Those store-masters who have not upon their own farms pastures
sufficient for the wintering of their young sheep, send them to the low grounds
from the 1st November to 6th April, and pay 2s. ahead for those that return.
They are so subject to the Black water (Sickness, or Middling-ill) that, at an
average, ten out of an hundred die before Christmas. After that, being very
hardy, they seldom die, and never of that disease.

Price. -- The wedders are sold in October, when four years and a half old,
from 9s. to 13s. each; the barren ewes at Lammas, from 8s. to 10s.; and the old
ewes about 6s. to be wintered in the enclosed grounds, and fattened with their
lambs the ensuing Summer.

Salving. -- In October, or the beginning of November, the whole flock is
salved so heavily, that a gallon of tar and 16 lbs. of butter are expended upon
thirty-five sheep. A man may be hired for this work at 1s. 8d. a day, in which
time he will not salve above ten or a dozen; or he will undertake to salve them
at 2d. ahead. The whole expense is about sixpence a-piece. It has been
repeatedly tried to substitute tobacco-liquor for the butter and tar, but it is
generally imagined that the wool is better for the sheep having been salved.
Near Kirkbysteven, this operation is performed with oil and tallow, at an
expense of 4d a head.

Wool. -- The wool is worth, on an average of years in time of peace, 5d a
pound. Part of it is sold to the manufacturers of Kendall, and part of it to
those at Bradford, and other places in Yorkshire. The ewes are said to bear the
best wool; and on an average of a flock fix fleeces weigh a stone.

Silverdale Breed. -- Silverdale, a small district in the neighborhood of
Millthrope, gives its name to the breed of sheep in this part of the county.
The soil is good, and on a limestone stratum, and a branch of the sea is nearly
contiguous to it. They are horned, white faced, and close woolled. They are
said to be native, and are much superior to the common sort, in regard both to
fleece and carcass. At the sale of a farmer's stock, in October 1793, the lambs
of this breed brought 10s. 7d. a-piece, the dinmonds 17s. 1d. and the ewes at
the age of three years and a half, 17s. 6d. or 17s. 8d. In the townships of
Burton and Holme, where this breed is kept, five sheep at an average yield a
stone of wool, which is worth 8d. a pound. At a medium of the whole parish of
Burton for eight years, from 1772 to 1779 inclusive, it required six fleeces to
weigh a stone.

It is not unusual for the proprietor to be owner of the sheep upon the farm.
In this case the farmer is to be considered as little better than a shepherd.
The flock is valued at the time of his entry, and again at his removal, and the
difference between these valuations is settled in money.

Experiments. -- 1st, Twenty Lincolnshire Mugg ewes, that had been tupped by a
ram of Mr Bakewell's breed, were brought into Westmoreland in the month of
December 1789, and lambed in February 1790. These Mugg ewes were tupped in 1790
by a common Westmoreland ram, and the dinmonds produced by this cross have
turned out the best sheep in the county, and weigh from 18 lbs. to 20 lbs. a
quarter, and are thought to be superior to those of the first breed.

2d. Six of the lambs produced from the tup of Mr Bakewell's breed and the Mugg
ewes, were rams. Four of these rams were put to ewes of the common breed in the
county, and the lambs sprung from this cross are much of the same size as the
ordinary breed; but they are broader on the back, and finer in the wool. As the
experiment has not yet been long tried, it must be left to time to show what
the result will be.

3d. The lambs produced by the Lincolnshire ewes, and their own lambs of
February 1790, are not so strong as these lambs of 1790, which the shepherd is
disposed to attribute to a scarcity of food in the Spring, rather than to any
defect in the breed.

4th. Thirty of this breed were left unsalved in 1791; they were in good
condition, and had no scab. These same were again left unsalved in 1792, and
broke out in scab early in 1793. It must be remarked, that the sheep at the
time of salving in 1792 were not in such condition as in 1791; so that it does
not appear, from this experiment, that there is any necessity for salving sheep
in good condition.

5th. The Lincolnshire ewes do not carry so much wool, nor is it of such a good
quality, as when they were brought into the county.

SECT. 3. -- Horses.
As there is but a small portion of the county under crop, the horses are not
numerous, nor has any considerable attempt been made to improve the breed of
these useful animals. They are small, not exceeding fourteen hands and a half
in height, are said to be hardy, but they are neither strong nor handsome;
sixteen or seventeen pounds are reckoned a good price for a horse at five years
old. Most commonly two, though sometimes three, and in the western part of the
county even four, are yoked together in a plough. They are often turned upon
the commons in the intervals of labor, which, as the farmer very probably has
neither turnips nor fallow, are very frequent in the summer months.

There being only one person in Westmoreland who uses ox teams, it may be
justly inferred, that the general opinion of farmers in the county is in favor
of horses. The writer of this Report has not such information upon the subject,
as to be able to draw the desired comparison between these useful animals.

SECT. 4. -- Hogs.
The swine of Westmoreland, though not large, are good in their kind. Farmers,
butchers, and others, who kill swine, often dispose of the hams to persons who
make a trade of curing them for sale. Perhaps there may not be any thing
peculiar in the mode of making hams in this county: but it is believed that a
detail of the process may be entered here without impropriety.

The hams are first rubbed very hard, generally with bay salt; by some they are
covered close up, by others they are left on a stone bench to allow the brine
to run off. At the end of five days they are again rubbed as hard as they were
at first, with salt of the same sort, mixed with rather more than an ounce of
saltpetre to a ham. Having lain about a week, either on a stone-bench, or in
hogsheads amongst the brine, they are hung up by some in the chimney amidst the
smoke, whether of peats or coals; by others, in places where no smoke ever
reaches them. If not sold sooner, they are suffered to remain there till the
weather becomes warm. They are packed in hogsheads with straw or oat-meal
seeds, and sent to London, Lancaster, and Liverpool, in such quantities as to
form one of the principal branches of export from the county.

In 1792, neat hams of 16 or 18 lbs. weight were sold as high as 5d. per pound
when green; when cured, in 1793, they were sold at 7d. a-pound. It has been
found by experiment that hams lose twenty per cent. of their weight in the
curing.

SECT. 5. -- Rabbits.
A few rabbits are kept in the neighborhood of Brough and Orton, and there is
a small warren in Ravenstonedale, but it is rare to see them in any other part
of Westmoreland.

SECT. 6. -- Poultry.
Considerable quantities of geese, ducks, and common dunghill fowls are reared
in Westmoreland. The two last are generally disposed of in the market towns in
the county, or carried to Lancaster; but great numbers of the first are sold to
drovers from Yorkshire.

Turkeys are seldom reared here, except in the farm-yards of men of fortune.

SECT. 7. -- Pigeons.
The few pigeons that are to be seen in Westmoreland belong generally to men of
fortune. When sold, they often bring 6d. a-piece.

SECT. 8. -- Bees.
Bees are common in Westmoreland, but there is nothing worthy of remark in the
way in which they are managed.

CHAPTER XIV. RURAL ECONOMY.
SECT 1. -- Labor, Servants, Laborers, Hours of Labor.
LABOR is dearer in Westmoreland than it is in almost any of the counties
either to the north or south of it. This probably is owing to the great number
of small landholders, or statesmen abovementioned, who doing the work upon
their own estates, with their own hands and those of their families, are
perhaps disinclined to labor for other people.

Servants by the year. -- A hind may be hired by the year at twenty pounds, a
house, a garden, and a patch of ground to grow potatoes; and an unmarried man
at from ten to twelve guineas a year, and board and washing.

By the day. -- The wages of an ordinary labourer are from 1s. 4d. to 1s. 8d.
a day; he begins to work between six and seven, rests an hour at dinner, and
leaves it off between six and seven in the evening. -- The laborers on the
highway from Shap to Kendall receive 1s. 9d. a day for nine months in the year,
and 1s. 6d. a day for the other three months.

By the month. -- On the large farms, in the seasons of hay and harvest, it is
not unusual to hire laborers by the month of four weeks, at the rate of 1l.
12s. 6d. and victuals. They breakfast on milk-pottage, and bread and cheese,
receive a pint of good beer in the forenoon, and another in the afternoon; they
dine on meat boiled, baked, or roasted, and potatoes or pudding; sup on cold
meat, and have plenty of common beer to drink through the day. They begin in
the morning as soon as the corn is dry, rest none but while at meals, and
continue as late as they can see to work. Four men may cut, tie, and stook a
customary acre in a day, leaving a stubble from nine to fourteen inches in
length.

Cutting of corn per acre. -- When done by the piece, the cutting of an acre by
the sickle, the scythe not being used in the reaping of any sort of grain, may
cost 9s. and if the crop be very heavy, 10s. or even 10s. 6d.

Cutting of hay per acre. -- The price of mowing a customary acre of grass
varies from 2s. 6d. to 3s. 6d. and a man usually mows an acre in a day.

Per. day. -- When hired by the day, a mower's wages may vary from 1s. 4d. to
1s. 10d. and victuals.

Mason's wages. -- Masons in summer have from 2s. 2d. to 2s. 6d. a day, or 1s.
2d. or 1s. 6d. and victuals; and in winter 4d. or 6d. less. At Millthrope a few
are hired all the year at 1s. 10d. a day, wet or dry. When they do their work
by the piece, and furnish every thing, they are paid 2s. or 2s. 6d. a square
yard for a wall of two feet in thickness built with lime; if materials are
furnished to their hand, they are paid 8d. or 10d. a-yard. Seven yards and a
half in length of a dry stone wall, five feet and a half in height, cost 1s.
6d. or 1s. 8d. in building.

Carpenter's wages. -- The wages of a carpenter or common country wright,
differ very little from those of a mason.

Thresher. -- A farmer's own servants generally thresh out the corn. When
persons are hired for this purpose, they receive about 1s. for threshing a load
of seven and a half bushels of oats, and 1s. 3d. for that of barley; and from
4d. to 8d. a boll of rye, consisting of two Winchester bushels.

Miller. -- Farmers commonly have their meal made from oats of their own
growing. The miller receives 4d. aload for drying the oats. If they are good in
quality, a load of seven and a half bushels will yield 176 pounds of meal,
besides paying the miller his toll for grinding, which is guessed to be about
four per cent. Wheat is made into flour for 4d. a-bushel. Numberless streams
rendering the precarious assistance of windmills unnecessary, there is but one
in the county, and it is employed in grinding bark for the tanners at Kendall.

Thatcher. -- A thatcher receives about 1s. 4d. a day and victuals, or 2s. 4d.
without victuals.

Slater. -- Slating is measured by the rood of forty-two and one-fourth square
yards, and costs in the workmanship 12s. or 13s. a rood: In the vicinity of the
state quarries, the slater will find all materials and labor for 45s. or 50s.
a-rood.

Tailor. -- A tailor gets in some places 10d; in others 1s. a day and board.

Mole catcher. -- The mole-hills are carefully spread in most parts of the
county, and the fields are cleared of moles at the rate of 3d. an acre where
they have not been catched before; 2d. an acre are paid the second year, and a
penny or three halfpence yearly thereafter.

Maidservants by the year. -- In some farmers' families, where they are hard
worked, maidservants receive 6l. a year. Their ordinary wages in other
families maybe about 4l. 10s. or perhaps 5l. When they do not change their
service, if strangers in the parish, care is taken to vary their wages every
six months, to prevent them from acquiring a settlement, to which they would be
entitled were they hired for a year, or were their wages to continue the same
for that period.

By the month. -- In hay-time and harvest, when hired for a month, they get
from 16s. to 24s. and board.

By the day. -- When hired by the day in harvest and hay-time, they receive 8d.
or 10d. and victuals, or 1s. 3d. or 1s. 6d. without victuals. At other season
they are paid with 8d. 10d. or 1s. a day. Their times of entry, and of leaving
off work, their hours of labor and of rest, are very various.

SECT. 2. -- Provisions.
It is not unusual to hear people exclaim against the increase of luxury, and
the alteration that has taken place in the mode of living in their time. The
labourer lives as well now as the farmer did forty or fifty years ago; the
farmer as well as the man of small landed property; and so on: And is this in
any respect to be regretted, or is it not much better for them all? But persons
generally cry out most loudly against the rank immediately beneath them,
without recollecting that their own mode has been changed in nearly the same
proportion as the one which they are so ready to condemn. Spencer's Travels.


Fifty years ago the price of butcher-meat at Martinmas was from 1d. to 2d. a
pound in Burton market, and eighty beasts were sometimes slaughtered in a day,
and bought to be salted for winter provisions. From that time, except a few at
Christmas and at Easter, no cattle were killed there till they were fattened
upon the pastures in summer. Farmers, in those days, seldom eat any
butcher-meat; they lived on bread and butter, and what other little matters the
farm afforded. Now laborers generally breakfast on that very ancient food
pottage, with the help of a little cheese and bread; they dine on butcher-meat
and potatoes, or pudding; and sup on potatoes, or pottage, or bread and cheese.

The bread generally eaten in the county is made from oat-meal. Water and
oat-meal are kneaded together into a paste without any leaven; this paste is
rolled into a circular cake of about twenty inches in diameter, and is placed
upon a thin flat plate of iron, called a girdle, under which a fire is put, and
the cake thus baked goes by the name of clap-bread, and is to be seen at almost
every table in the county. This very particular description of baking cakes may
appear too minute, or altogether unnecessary, and it owes its place here to the
request of some persons of rank who wished to see it recorded somewhere. The
meal is mostly ground to such a degree of fineness that a measure of sixteen
quarts will weigh sixteen pounds. Farmers, laborers, and manufacturers usually
have fifteen cakes made from sixteen pounds of meal, and as many baked in a day
as will serve their families for a month. Such of the gentry as eat this sort
of bread, most of them now eating bread made from wheat, have it baked much
more frequently, and also much thinner. A laboring man will eat sixteen pounds
of meal made into bread in a fortnight; the price of sixteen pounds of meal is
variable from 1s. 6d. to 2s. 6d.; the medium is 2s. which gives 1s. a-week for
each labourer for bread; his cottage and his fuel cost at least as much more.
His wages for three-quarters of a year are 9s. a-week, and 8 s. a-week for the
other quarter; but making allowance for broken days, 8s. a-week may be
considered as the full amount of the price of his labor; and indeed a good
labourer may be hired by the year at that rate. Hence there will remain 6 s.
a-week for the labor of the man, for the remainder of his own sustenance, the
sustenance of his family, and the clothing of them all.

The difference in the price of provisions in a county so small as
Westmoreland, cannot be very great. They are, however, somewhat cheaper in the
north and cast parts than they are in the south parts, which are more within
the reach of the markets of Lancaster and Liverpool. Beef in Kendall market, in
the month of October 1793, was sold at 3d. or 4d. a-pound, and a choice cut at
4d.; in spring it often rises to 6d. a-pound. Mutton, which in spring often
rises to 7d. a-pound, was sold at 3d. 3d. or 4d. Pork was sold at 3d. or 4d. As
all the bull calves are carried to market, veal is for the most part cheaper
than the other kinds of butcher meat, and yet in spring it is sometimes sold as
high as 5d. a-pound. Potatoes brought 1s. 4d. a bushel, or 5s. 6d. or 6s.
a-load; in spring they are often sold at nearly the double of these prices.
Oat-meal is bought in some places by a measure of sixteen quarts, at a price
which fluctuates from 1 s. 4d. to 2 s. 6d.; in others by a peck of 20 quarts,
which in summer 1793 was worth 3s. Butter was sold from 7d. to 9d. a-pound; in
winter the price seldom rises above 11d.; a stone of 16 lbs. of 20 ounces,
costs 11s. 6d. and a firkin of 56 lbs. neat, from 30s. to 35s. Cheese in the
country costs 3d. a pound, and new milk 1d. a-quart, which in Kendall is
contracted for all the year at 1 d.

A turkey costs 3s. 4 d. or 5s. according to its size; a goose 1s. 6d or 2s. or
when sold by weight 3d. a-pound; a hen from 7d. to 10d. and a chicken from 4d.
to 8d. Eggs fluctuate in their price from 2d. to 6d. or even to 9d. a-dozen.
Ducks are sold from 1s. 4 d. to 2s. a-pair, teal at 4d. a-piece, woodcocks at 4
s. or 5s. a-brace, and pigeons from 4s. to 6s. a-dozen.

Salmon catched in the Lune is sold from 4d. to 8 d. a-pound; that which is
brought from Carlisle from 3d. to 1s 2d. Char are sold at about 7s. a-dozen,
trouts at 4d. a-pound, mussels at 2d. or 3d. a-quart, flounders from 1d. to 6d.
a piece, eels at 2d. a-pound, and rabbits, without the skins, at 1s. the pair.
Honey in the comb costs 1s. a-pound.

SECT. 3. -- Fuel.
The eastern parts of the county are supplied with coal from Stainmore,
Blackburton, and Ingleton, in Yorkshire, but in other parts the most common
fuel is peat.

It is a question deserving the consideration of the Legislature, whether the
duty of coal, carried coastwise, might not in certain districts be taken off,
with great advantage to the state. The value of the improvements in agriculture
and manufactures which would attend such a measure, in counties ill supplied
with fuel, cannot be estimated, but it is presumed that it would very far
exceed the loss sustained by the removal.

CHAPTER XV. POLITICAL, ECONOMY, AS CONNECTED WITH, OR AFFECTING AGRICULTURE.
SECT. 1. -- Roads.
THE great roads leading through the county are kept in excellent repair by the
sums collected at the turnpike gates, and when these prove insufficient, by a
portion of the labor of the parish, or of the pound-rate, which may be levied
in its aid.

The parochial roads are made and kept in repair by six days labor of the
parish, and by a rate not exceeding sixpence in the pound, which the surveyors
may levy with the consent of the quarter sessions; some of these are tolerably
good, and others are annually improving. Many of them scarcely exceed the
smallest legal breadth allowed by statute, which is eight feet.

SECT. 2. -- Canals.
There is not at present any canal in the county; but one of great magnitude
has been projected from Wigan to Kendall. It is now executing, and when
finished, by introducing the coal of Lancashire into the heart of Westmoreland,
will be of the greatest service to its manufactures and agriculture. If the
coal can be afforded by the proprietors of the canal, at a cheap rate, the town
of Kendall may then emulate, in the cloth manufacture, Leeds itself. Another
canal, from the bottom of Windermere water to the sea, a distance of about 4
miles, is wanted; if this should ever be cut, the town of Ambleside would rise
to considerable importance; it would then be as well, or better situated for
trade, than Kendall is now.

SECT. 3. -- Fairs.
There is a great fair for cattle, horses, etc. at Brough-hill, on the 30th
September; -- there is a fair at Ambleside on the Wednesday after Whitsunday,
and on the 29th of October, -- at Appleby on Whitsun Eve, Whitsun Monday, 2d
Wednesday of June, and 21 August, -- at Kendall, April 27, and November 8 and
9, -- at Kirkby Lonsdale, on Holy Thursday, and 21 December, -- at
Kirkby-Stephen, on the Monday before the 20th March, October 2d, 27th, and
29th, -- at Millthrope on 12th May, -- at Shap, on the 4th May, -- at Orton, on
the 2d May, the Friday before Whitsunday, and second Friday after Michaelmas,
-- and at Old Town, on the 5th and 6th October.

SECT. 4. -- Weekly Markets.
There are weekly markets at eight different towns in Westmoreland; but the
only one of any note, is held at Kendall. The next in point of consequence is
held at Appleby, the county town.

SECT. 5. -- Commerce.
The commerce of Westmoreland is not yet so extensive as to have any sensible
effect upon its agriculture. Its exports are coarse woollen cloth, manufactured
at Kendall, stockings, slates, tanned hides, gunpowder, hoops, charcoal, hams,
wool, sheep, and cattle. Its imports are chiefly merchant goods, wheat, oats,
with a little barley, cattle and sheep.

Millthrope is a very trifling port, and the only one in the county.

SECT. 6. -- Manufactures.
The manufactures of Westmoreland are not of much greater importance than its
commerce. They consist chiefly of coarse woollen cloth, called Kendall Cottons,
properly, it is said coatings, gunpowder, stockings, silk and worsted,
waistcoat pieces, flannels, and tanned leather.

Most beautiful stockings, and carpets of strength and luster, little inferior
to those of Persia, are manufactured at Lowther for behoof of the Earl of
Lonsdale. A few of these have been sold from 63l. to 105l.; but as they are
wrought solely for his own use, or to be given in presents to his friends,
perhaps they do not enter with propriety into an enumeration of the
manufactures of the county. What is now the manufactory, was originally a
college, but, being only in its probationary state, was discontinued by the
late Lord Viscount Lonsdale. The Earl of Selkirk, and the late Duke of Athol,
were educated here; and an ash-tree, planted by his Lordship, is still pointed
out.

SECT. 7. -- Poor.
Westmoreland not being a manufacturing county, and landed property being
there, in general, minutely divided, the number of poor who apply for parochial
aid, is comparatively small. The poor rates in the parish of Kendall are 3s.
8d. in the pound of the actual rent, which is very near four times the average
of the rate throughout the county. Were it not unfair to draw a general
conclusion from one example, it might be inferred that the poor are most
numerous in manufacturing counties and towns.

SECT. 8. -- Population.
The inhabitants of Kendall were found, by an actual enumeration in 1793, to
amount to 8089, and the whole population of the county has been estimated at 35
or 36 thousand. As the number of births considerably exceeds the number of
burials, many of the inhabitants must migrate to other counties.

CHAPTER XVI. OBSTACLES TO IMPROVEMENT.
THE most material of these are customary tenures, where the fines are
arbitrary, or according to the improved value of the estate, where the wood is
the property of the lord, and where a lease for longer than three years is not
valid without his consent; want of leases, or very short leases, and the
collection of the tithes in kind.

CHAPTER XVII. MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS.
SECT. 1. -- Weights and Measures.
GREAT diversity of weights and measures prevails in Westmoreland, as is the
case in almost every county in Great Britain. The pound consists of 12, 16, 18,
or 21 ounces, and the stone of 14, 16, or 20 pounds. There is a Winchester
bushel, a customary bushel equal to three of these, a bushel of two bushels for
the sale of potatoes near Appleby, and one of two and a half for that of
barley. Rye is sold by the boll of two bushels, and potatoes by the load of
four bushels and a half heaped, or more generally a bag which holds seven and
one half bushels is filled and sold for a load of potatoes.

There is the statute acre of 4840 square yards, the customary acre of 6760
raised from the perch of six and one half yards, and a third acre on the
borders of Lancashire, raised from the perch of seven yards, containing 7840,
being the same as the Irish plantation acre.

SECT. 2. -- Supply of London.
London is not much indebted to this county for its articles of consumption.
The little it receives from hence consists chiefly of butter, bacon, hams, and
excellent blue slates, which form a cover for some of the best houses in the
capital. It is probable that, after being fattened in the southern counties,
some of its cattle and sheep reach Smithfield market.

CONCLUSION. Means of Improvement, and the Measures calculated for that purpose.
SECT. 1. -- Arable Lands.
CLOVER. In many counties of England the land is sown with grass seeds, and
left to lie for some years with a view to refresh and enable it to bear crops
of corn; but in Westmoreland it is ploughed and sown with corn in order to
prepare it for grass. When it has been cropped for three years, and it is
judged that the soil is sufficiently reduced, and that the moss is quite
destroyed, the land is left to itself to grass over. The first crop of hay is
never either weighty or good in quality; the second is generally very superior
in both these respects to the first, and so favorable are the climate and the
soil to the growth of grass, that the third crop is often so abundant as to be
let for two or three pounds per acre, and of a quality so excellent, that in
several places cattle are fattened upon it in Winter for the markets of
Lancaster and Liverpool. But even these best crops are far inferior in point of
value to those that would be produced by the same fields, were their natural
aptitude to grow grass directed to the production of clover and rye-grass. The
prejudice that prevails almost universally in Westmoreland against these
artificial plants is a great obstacle to the improvement of the husbandry of
the county, and must be overcome before the arable lands can be brought to that
degree of cultivation of which they are susceptible.

It is said that hay made of clover and rye-grass is much coarser than that
which is made of the natural grasses; and that these artificial plants giving
place to the natural ones, perish at the end of two or three years, and
therefore ought never to be sown at all.

The opinion is conceived to be ill founded which holds that hay made of sown
grasses is bad in quality; long experience and continued practice having shown
that horses are very fond of such hay, and that when even fed upon it alone
they are able to do a great deal of hard work. It can hardly be seriously
asserted that hay made of the trash produced spontaneously by the land the two
first years after it has been cropped with corn is better than hay made of
clover and rye-grass. The artificial grasses seldom or never perish at once at
the end of either the second or third year: they disappear gradually, making
room for the natural herbage to occupy their place, which it is imagined it
would be found upon trial to do with much more profit to the farmer than would
have accrued to him by managing his lands in the ordinary way; for the superior
value of the hay the first two years would far more than reimburse him for the
expense of the grass seeds, and he might still have his favorite natural hay
after these had died entirely out.

This is stated upon the supposition that the field was to be allowed to lie
eight or ten years in grass, as is the custom at present. If it were to be
broken up at the end of the first or second year, it would be sound in good
condition for bearing a crop of corn, the roots of clover, it is well known,
being a great improver of the soil: but this way of cropping the lands will
enter with more propriety into that part where an alteration of the present
course will be suggested.

In the year 1792, Mr Smith at Henridding in the parish of Burton, sowed a
close containing exactly two acres and a half Lancashire measure, with 48 lbs.
of red clover seed amongst a crop of barley, for which the land had been
slightly manured after fallow wheat. This field is in Lancashire, but being
situated within an hundred yards of the county of Westmoreland, it may be
mentioned here without impropriety, and it is selected merely because the
particulars respecting it are better known to the writer of this Report than
those in regard to any field of clover in the county that was the object of his
survey. It was mown in the month of July 1793, and it then yielded a crop of
twenty-two single-horse cart-loads of hay. It was mown a second time in
September, and produced eighteen of the same cart-loads. It was depastured with
nine sheep from the time the last crop was carried off till the beginning of
November, and the foggage was then tolerably good. Let the most strenuous
advocates for natural grass, say whether they ever had a crop so valuable!

Where the land is intended to be depastured, the argument will apply with
treble force; and the decided preference given by cattle of all kinds to the
green herbage of the artificial, over that of the natural grass, ought to
remove every doubt from the minds even of those who are the most strongly
prepossessed in favor of the present practice.

In front of Carus Wilson, Esquire.'s new house near Kirkby Lonsdale, there lies a
field of sixteen acres, which was sown with grass seeds amongst a crop of
barley in the year 1792. It was depastured in 1793, and maintained three times
more stock than he would have expected it to maintain, had it been left to
itself in the ordinary way. Farmers, the most prejudiced against sown grasses,
saw and confessed the force of the experiment; and, it is not to be doubted,
will follow an example which tends so materially to promote their interest.

The cultivation of clover is perhaps the greatest improvement in the art of
farming which has been discovered in modern times; and it is equally matter of
regret and of surprise, that what is at once so easy and so profitable is not
yet become universal, and it furnishes a strong instance of the difficulty with
which old habits and prejudices are rooted out, even when self-interest is
concerned in their extirpation.

Turnips. -- The climate and soil of the valleys of Westmoreland are well
suited to the cultivation of turnips, which must be carried on to a
considerable extent before the agriculture of the county can be improved in any
material degree. Experience has shown that this crop, and the mode of husbandry
usually connected with it, are able, not only to fertilise particular farms,
but even to, improve whole counties. The most profitable and the least
troublesome way of disposing of this crop is to fatten sheep with it. A
customary acre of turnips, if the crop is good, will feed twenty-five sheep
weighing sixteen pounds a quarter, from 1st November to 1st April; even
supposing the sheep made no advance in these five months, the very increase of
the price of the mutton from 4d. to 5d. or 6d. a pound, would bring a profit to
the farmer as considerable as it is easily calculated. When to this there is
added the value of what they would gain in point of weight, the profit, it is
hoped, will appear to be so great as to make the desire to grow turnips
irresistible, and quickly to increase the quantity an hundredfold beyond what
it is at present.

Where the land is very dry the sheep may be penned upon a small part of the
field of turnips, and shifted to another as those in the first part are eaten
up; but if there is a field of grass near at hand, the superior improvement of
the sheep will pay for the labor of carrying the turnips to be eaten on that
field where they will lie dry and clean, and where the turnips will be less
trampled on and abused.

Rotation of Crops. -- It is the general opinion of farmers in Westmoreland,
that their lands are better suited for grass than for bearing crops of corn,
and they are ploughed for three or four years, not with an expectation that the
corn will be more profitable than the grass, but in order to renovate them for
grass, and to destroy the moss, which in a few years over-runs all their ley
grounds: but there are some who are persuaded, that the neat profits of the
three or four years the lands are under crop, usually exceed the profits of any
other three or four years, while the same lands lie in grass, and they think
that their fertility for the production of either grass or corn would be
injured by ploughing for a longer term, or after shorter intervals of rest.

Whether the lands under the present system are most profitable to the farmer
when they are in corn or in grass, it is not necessary now to enquire, because,
with all due deference to the general practice and opinion of a whole county,
it is presumed that a mode of husbandry and a succession of crops may be
pointed out, which upon trial would be found far more profitable than those at
present followed.

The uniting what may be called the Clover and the Turnip Husbandry is the best
method hitherto discovered of keeping dry lands in a state of continual
fertility, and for this the light and friable soil of the valleys of
Westmoreland is well calculated. Instead of the common rotation of oats,
barley, and oats again, and then leaving the land to grass over of itself, the
following course of crops might be introduced with advantage, both to the
public and the individual. When an old close of good land is broken up it
should be sown with oats, as is done at present; after the oats it should be
manured and sown with turnips in drills thirty inches asunder, so as to admit
of being horse-hoed; next with barley or oats, and always with grass seeds at
the rate of about sixteen pounds of clover, and a Winchester bushel of
rye-grass to the statute acre. If it is intended to pasture the field, the
grass seeds can hardly be sown too thick; if it is to be made into hay, the
quantity of seeds abovementioned will be found amply sufficient. The first
year's crop of grass may be mown twice, or after the first cutting it may be
eaten by fattening cattle; or it may be eaten by sheep till the beginning of
June, saved after that and mown in August, and it will still produce a valuable
crop of foggage or after-math. It should be depastured with cattle or sheep the
second year, and the third year likewise, if it shall be thought proper to keep
the field so long in grass.

This course would preserve the land in a state of perpetual health and vigor,
did it not, taking pleasure in variety, dislike a too frequent repetition of
the same crops. After some rounds it will be proper to increase the quantity of
clover seed, and at last to bring it seldomer into succession, for if too often
sown it will be rejected entirely. When this is apprehended the course may be
varied or lengthened by the introduction of a crop of pease, or of drilled
beans where the land is deep and moist, and wheat after either of these, or
after a clean Summer-fallow, or by leaving the land some years longer in grass
than usual.

When it shall be proved and known that potatoes are a cheap and nourishing
food for horses, the demand for that valuable root will become nearly as
unbounded as that for turnips is; and even although they exhaust the land, they
may then be introduced into the course with much advantage to the farmer.

It is not pretended that the rotation of crops here recommended would suit all
the arable lands of Westmoreland; but it is believed that, on a very large
proportion of them, it might be followed with a certainty of success. The cold,
wet, stiff soils should be Summer-fallowed instead of being cropped with
turnips; wheat should be sown after the fallow, and clover, or oats, and then
clover after the wheat; but it is impossible, and were it possible it would be
improper, in a work of this general nature, to mention how all the varieties of
soil should be treated; and to descend to the minutiae of ploughing and sowing,
and ten thousand little matters that continually demand the farmer's attention,
and that are always varying with the weather. In these his own ingenuity must
assist him, and there all his ingenuity will be necessary; for his art, though
apparently easy, is attended with a thousand difficulties.

SECT. 2. -- Waftes.
There is room for great improvement in the management of sheep, as well upon
private estates as upon the commons; but while these last continue in their
present deplorable state, it would be in vain to attempt any alteration upon
their stocks. The case, however, is different with store farms properly so
called, where the breed or treatment of the sheep differs very little from that
of those upon commons, although there can be no reasonable doubt of their being
well adapted to the keeping a far more profitable sort than is to be found
there at present. There is no weight whatever in the argument which has been
often used against the introduction of such a breed from the scarcity of food
and the coldness of the climate, the British Wool Society having proved that
the finest breeds of Spain or of England will thrive on the wildest of the
Cheviot hills, and that very fine-woolled breeds may be propagated on the most
mountainous districts of Scotland. There are numbers of sheep at the Feroe
islands, which lie in latitude 63, and even in Iceland, part of which is beyond
the Arctic circle; they are to be found in great abundance on every farm; and
there nature sports in a great superfluity of horns, as if the scanty pittance
of food which the animal can pick up in that bleak and frozen climate were more
than sufficient for the support of the carcass and the fleece.

The extensive and valuable commons of Westmoreland loudly demand the
interposition of the legislature in a country that boasts of attention to its
interest. Some immediate alteration in their state, whether by division or by
sale, cannot be too eagerly pursued, nor too strongly inculcated; nor can it be
too generally made known, that there are many wealthy people living near some
of the best commons in the county, (which is a point of great importance) who
do not think it worth while to avail themselves of their right of pasturage.

Every person sees the necessity of some material change with regard to the
commons; and now that thinking men are turning their attention to this
important subject, there is no doubt that some plan will be fallen upon by
which both the public and the individual may reap the full benefit of these, at
present, dreary wastes, which are a reproach and disgrace to the nation. But it
cannot be expected that any measure however wise, or any proposal however
advantageous, can meet with universal approbation. It will probably be
reprobated by some whose prejudices it will alarm, and with whose little
interests it may be supposed to clash. Till something of greater consequence be
accomplished, the reduction of the stint, where such is already established, or
the establishment of a moderate stint upon commons that are perfectly free,
ought not to be delayed one hour; for at present they are of little, if of any
use, either to those having a right of commonage, or to the nation at large.

A general inclosure-bill for the whole kingdom would save the expense of
separate applications to parliament for the division of particular commons, but
there are many barren and rocky commons that would not be in any wise benefited
by enclosure; and although the interests of a few individuals ought to give way
to those of the community, there are numerous instances where both would be
injured by the operation of such a bill; for it would at once be ruinous to
many proprietors to be obliged to enclose each his share, often at an expense
greater not only than the value of that share, but in some instances greater
than the value of the fee-simple of that farm or estate in right of which he
claims, and prejudicial to the public, by interrupting the sheep-walks upon the
mountainous districts, which ought to be as free and open as possible.

The principal part of the stock kept upon the commons consists of sheep,
either of the breed of the county, or brought from Scotland. The ewes are
wintered in the enclosures, and sent back to the commons in April; the wedder
hoggrels are always wintered the first year on the low grounds at the expense
of 2s. a head, are sent back to the commons about the same time with the ewes,
and remain there till they are sold to the grazier. They may fetch at an
average 11s. a piece; add to this the value of the wool, and 15s. may be about
the sum received for every wedder sheep that arrives at the age of four years
and a half.

Scotch hogs are bought at about 8s. 6d. a piece, and are kept two years upon
the commons, when they may be worth 10s. 6d or 11s.; add to this the price of
three fleeces of wool, and the whole sum received for every sheep delivered may
be about 14s.; from this subtract the original price, two years interest of the
money, expense of herding for the first two months, of thrice washing and
clipping, of twice salving, the value of the risk of bad payment from the
drover or grazier, the loss by straying, and, what is often much more
considerable, by death, and say what profit remains.

It has been computed that one third of all the sheep in Westmoreland died in
1792. Great calamities are often exaggerated, though no doubt the loss must
have been prodigious when it was estimated so high.

Twenty shillings are reckoned an ordinary profit for keeping a Scotch beast a
year; subtract from this the price of wintering on the low grounds and in the
straw-yard, interest of the cost, value of the risk of drovers, loss by death
from fatigue estimated at 2 per cent, by disease, and now and then by one
tumbling into a peatmoss, and say what advantage arises from this adventure.

Seven shillings and sixpence are thought an ordinary profit for keeping a
little Scotch beast on a common from May to October; make the same deductions
as in the former article, with the exception of the value of the Winter's
keeping, and see how little remains for the rent of the land.

It is not possible to place this matter in a more striking point of view than
by repeating, that on several commons the liberty of keeping an ox, or ten
sheep, for a whole year, may be hired for sixpence.

Improvement of Wastes by Liming. -- Great portions of many of these might be
improved at a small expense by the application of lime, which is found in most
parts of the county, and might be cultivated with the certainty of great
advantage. When ploughed, great care ought to be taken to adopt a proper
succession of crops, and to lay the lands down with grass seeds in a very few
years; because, when exhausted by over-cropping, they are reduced to a worse
state than they were in before, and there is no way yet discovered of preparing
lands for a repetition of a hearty dose of lime.

By Paring and Burning. -- Many of the level moory parts might be converted
into arable lands by paring and burning, which are well understood by several
persons in the county, and have been practiced with more or less success on
some private estates.

By Planting. -- There are many thousands of acres utterly incapable of
cultivation by the plough; and, in the paper prefixed, the Bishop of Landaff
has shown, in a manner equally ingenious and novel, with what advantage these
might be covered with wood. It is well known that trees flourish with the
greatest vigor on soils far more barren, and in climates much colder, than
that of Westmoreland. There are stately oaks at Niagara, which, though not in a
high latitude, experience a degree of cold in Winter far beyond what is ever
felt in this country. On the western coast of America, in latitude 61, the very
summits of the hills are covered with wood, and there is plenty of trees at
Norton's Sound in latitude 64 55; and timber for the use of ships in the
British navy has been cut even at Kamtschatka, the very end of the earth, where
the soil is barren in the extreme, and covered with Summer snow, and where the
Winters are rigorous beyond the conception of an inhabitant of Europe.

That Westmoreland has been a wooded county, is evident from trees found in
mosses on the highest hills; and statutes and regulations made long after the
Conquest, since which time the climate has not been changed for the worse, are
full of the mention of forests, and chaces, and parks, and mastage, and
pannage, and vert, and venison, and greenhue, and regarders, and foresters, and
verderors, and an hundred other names and titles respecting the preservation of
the woods and the game.

The valuable plantations at Lowther-hall, the seat of the Earl of Lonsdale,
show how well calculated the soil and climate of Westmoreland still are for the
growth of timber, which, it cannot be questioned, would thrive over all the
county as well now as it did five hundred years ago. The profits of planting
are so distant, and so few persons, looking eighty or an hundred years beyond
the present day, are willing to sacrifice a paltry interest for the sake of a
remote posterity, that perhaps it may be necessary for Government to encourage
by premiums what in the end would turn out so greatly to the advantage of the
community. These might be distributed with much propriety by the Board of
Agriculture, whose income seems to be far too moderate for the support of so
important an establishment, the objects of whose superintendence are
innumerable, and the field of whose operations is extensive as the island
itself.

To the north of Shap lies a very extensive common called the Scars, where
between two and three thousand acres of level white land, in a state of nature,
offend the eye of every traveller, and cry aloud for improvement, the means of
which it contains in immense quantities of limestone upon its very surface. It
is more than twenty years since an act of parliament was obtained for a
division of this common, and that it has not been carried into execution is the
more to be regretted, as, in the opinion of very judicious persons in the
neighborhood, a large portion of it might be easily made as valuable as the
little closes of Shap, which are let from 30s. to 40s. an acre.

On the south of Shap lies another common called the Fells, which is, in
general, incapable of cultivation by the plough, but it is not ill suited to
the maintenance of sheep; and the remains of the celebrated Shap-thorn, near
the road to Orton, show that plantations would succeed even on those places of
it which are most exposed.

Near the mouth of the river Kent there is a marsh of considerable extent,
common to Haversham and Millthrope, and, like all the other commons in
Westmoreland, greatly overstocked. It would not be difficult to bank off the
sea from this marsh, and to convert it into corn fields; but if this were
thought not advisable, its value might be instantly more than doubled by the
establishment of a moderate stint, or still farther increased by a division.

Part of Crosby common might be easily converted into arable and good pasture
land, and two clumps of trees, of a considerable size, prove that its worst
parts might be planted with success.

From Crosby and Meaburn, a dry level common extends to within three miles of
Appleby. It is covered with heath, and is capable of various modes of
improvement.

The commons of Knock, Newbigging, Kirkby-Thore, and Marton, lie contiguous,
and form a tract of several thousands of acres, dry, soft, and improveable. A
great part of these is covered with strong brackens, and is superior in quality
to the soil of many farms in the neighborhood, and well suited to the
cultivation of turnips and clover.

This specimen of the commons in Westmoreland will, it is hoped, be deemed
sufficient; for it would be tedious and painful to enumerate them all. It is
difficult to behold the desolate state in which they lie, without surprise at
the nation having so long delayed taking measures for their improvement. The
wastes and commons in this county, and throughout England in general, have been
elegantly called a public treasure in the hands of private persons; it is to be
hoped that the time is not very distant when this important treasure shall be
opened, and its contents shall prove equally beneficial to the individual, and
to the public at large.

It is impossible to look forward without emotion to that day when these
neglected wastes shall have received that degree of improvement of which they
are susceptible; when they shall wave with valuable crops of corn, bleat with
profitable flocks, or be clothed with stately timber; when every little rill
shall be turned out of its natural course to fertilise the neighboring plain;
and when there may be seen in every corner the industrious husbandman, at once
enriching himself and advantaging the community in a manner the most
substantial!

Contemplating the matter in this view, who but must exclaim, what a noble
field for exertion! What a source of national wealth yet in store! More certain
than the profits of commerce, more permanent than those of manufactures!

Such are the reflections and observations that occurred in a Survey of the
state of the stock and husbandry in the county of Westmoreland, made in the
months of October and November 1793, at the request of the newly established
Board of Agriculture. What success has attended the attempt to place this
important matter in a just light, others will judge; but it will be doing no
more than justice to admit, that no pains have been spared in the execution of
this task, which others might have performed with more ability, but not with
greater alacrity or zeal.

It is impossible to conclude this Report without mentioning to the Board the
very flattering manner in which the person commissioned by them to make this
Survey, was received by all ranks and descriptions of persons in the county of
Westmoreland. Every possible aid was given by the two respectable Members of
the Board resident in the county. The other individuals who assisted him are
too numerous to be discriminated; but the writer of this paper will ever
remember their very polite attention with gratitude, and his short residence in
that part of the kingdom with peculiar feelings of pleasure and respect.

What gratitude is due to HIM, who first called the attention of the nation to
its most important interests, and whose unremitted efforts are directed to
promote the good of his country! How well does He deserve, and what a sure road
has He chosen to immortal fame, that will survive the ravages of time, and
smile at the fleeting celebrity of martial achievements!

ADDENDA.
TO the note, page 68, the reader is desired to add, -- The result of this
experiment was, that, in the harvest of 1797, such parts of the wheat, the seed
of which was pickled and limed, as well as that which was pickled and not
limed, was nearly free from smut; but that which was neither pickled nor limed,
had smutted ears in abundance, at least a hundred times more than the other: it
may be proper to observe, the seed was purposely taken with a few balls of smut
in it. -- This experiment is decisively in favor of steeping in chamberlye.

The following addition is also desired to be made, (at the bottom of page 69.)
to the paragraph on drilling, ending, "on moist soils." -- We have lately found
it most convenient to yoke two horses to the drill, one going in each furrow,
and to drill seven rows upon a ridge, of 80 to 84 inches wide, when the
intervals are 10 or 11 inches; and 90 inches wide, when the intervals are 12
inches.

With the horses yoked in this manner in a five-row drill, ten rows may be sown
upon ridges 10 feet wide, leaving a space on the top of the ridge, about 14
inches wide, for one of the horses to travel on; this is supposing the
intervals 12 inches wide; but, if the intervals be 10 inches, then the ridges
may be 9 feet wide. -- A light harrow is fixed to the drill, to cover in the
seed.

DIRECTIONS TO THE BINDER.
Map of Northumberland to face the Title Page Plate 1st Implements -- Page 40
Plate 2d Turnip Drill -- Page 42 Plate 3d Corn Drill -- Page 44 Plate 4th
Threshing Machine -- Page 50 Plate 5th Fences, etc. -- Page 56 Wild Cattle --
Page 122 Cheviot Ram -- Page 126 Cheviot Ewe -- Page ibid Heath Ram -- Page 130
Long-woolled Ram -- Page 132 Map of Cumberland -- Page 169 Herdwick Ram -- Page
210 Map of Westmoreland -- Page 239
The Reader is desired to correct with his Pen the following ERRATA.
Page 2, line 6, for country read county -- p. 2, l. 8, for county read country
-- p. 5, l. 10, put a comma after seams -- p. 19, l. 27, for ward read ward --
p. 40, l. 36, for or read on -- p. 41, l. 9, for CF read CE -- p. 46, l. 26.
for switches read switchers -- p. 47, l. 7, for they are read they were -- p.
81, l. 19, for country read county -- p. 87, l. 5, for that read than -- p. 91,
l. 31, for into rich read into a rich -- p 94, l. 19, for gathered first read
first gathered -- p. 113, l. 8, erase the comma after fatten, place it after
quicker -- p. 119, l. 20, for scandix read scandix -- p. 132, l. 22, for breed
bread breeds -- p. 140, l. 5, for 15l. 10s. 0d. read 15l. 15s. 0d. -- p. 151,
l. 7, for one read and one -- p. 162, l. 22, for have read and have -- p. 164,
l. 2, put a comma after fallow -- p. 178, l. 24, for Chapter read Section -- p.
180, l. 17, for or read and -- p. 182, l. 17, for improprietor read
impropriator -- p. 203, l. 29, for val. p. acre read val. p. ann. -- p. 208, l.
5. for seed read seed -- p. 211 l. 13, for form as thick read forms a thick --
p. 226, l. 23, for 1-2th read 1-12th -- p. 252, l. 30, for tw read two -- p.
258, l. 29, for would a yield read would yield.

Lately was published, Price 2s. 6d. sewed, Sold by Messes Robinson, London,
and J. Bell, Newcastle, An Essay on the Construction of the Plough, Deduced
from Mathematical Principles and Experiments.

With an Appendix; containing the Description of a Drill, upon a new
Construction, for sowing all kinds of Grain, in any Quantity, and at any
Distance.

BY J. BAILEY.


