Lithotomia Douglassiana: OR, An Account of a New METHOD of making the High
Operation, in order to extract the Stone out of the Bladder.

Which is much easier to the Patient, much sooner done by the Operator, and the
Cure much more certain, than after any of the other Methods now in Use.

By which also, several of the most dismal Consequences of the common
Operations are entirely prevented, such as Incontinency of Urine, Impotency,
Fistula's, etc.

Invented and successfully performed BY JOHN DOUGLAS, Surgeon.

Non est ut fidas his, qui mere audita recensent: Fidas autem illis serio, qui
ex Experientia propria loquuntur. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Woodward, next Door
but one to Temple Bar. MDCCXX.

Lithotomia Douglassiana: OR, An Account of a NEW METHOD of making the HIGH
OPERATION, in order to extract the Stone out of the Bladder, etc.
IN this new Operation, I cut on the lower Part of the Belly. In the common
Operations, viz. Cutting on the Staff, and cutting on the Gripe, they cut on
the Perinaeum, i. e. between the Testicles and Fundament.

This Section is called by Authors, The High Operation, or Hypogastrick Se^tion.

I have hitherto only ^et with three, that ever pretended to have made it: The
first of whom is Peter de Franco of Turriers in France, of which he gives the
following Account in his Treatise of Hernio's, (at the End of the 33d Chapter,
Page 139) published at Lions in the Year 1561, in these Words: "Histoire, Je
reciteray ce que une fois m'est advenu voulant tirer une pierre a un enfant de
deux ans ou environ: auquel ayant trouue la pierre de la Grosseur d'um aeuf de
poulle, ou peu pres, je fey tout ce que je peu pour la mener bas: and voyant
que je ne pounoye rien avancer partous mes efforts, avec ce, que le patient
estoit merueillcusement tormente, and aussi les Parens desirans qu'il mourust
plustost que de viure entel travail: Joint aussi, que je ne vouloye pas quil me
fut Reproach de ne l'avoir seu tirer, (qui estoit a moy grand folly) je
deliberay avec l'importunite du pere, Mere, and amiss, de Copper le dit enfant
par dessus l'os Pubis, d'autant que la Pierre ne voulut descendre bas, and fut
Coppe sur le Penil, un peu a Cost and sur la Pierre. Car je leuoys icelle avec
mes doigts, qui estoyet au fondment, and d'autre Cost en la tenant subiette
avec les mains d'un Serviteur qui comprimoit le petit ventre au dessus de la
pierre, Don't elle f^t tiree horse par ce moyen, and puis apres le patient fut
guary, (non obstant qu'il en fut bien malade) and la play consolidee: Combien
que je ne conseille a ^omine d'ainsi fair. Ains plustost user du moyen par
nous ino^nt^ du quel nous venons de parler."

This is (in his own Words) all that he says about it: Which, for the Benefit
of those that don't understand French, I shall translate into English, thus:

"He says, he had a Child about two Years old, who had a Stone in the Bladder
as big as a Hen's Egg, brought to him to cut: He used all his Dexterity to
force the Stone down to the Neck of the Bladder, but found it impossible to be
done: The Child was in that Torture and Misery, that the Parents wished him
rather dead, than he should live longer in so doleful a Condition. De Franco,
on the other Hand, thinking it would tend to his Dishonor not to take away the
Stone, at last resolved to make Trial, whether he could not bring it to the
very Groin, which he did, by putting his Fingers into the Fundament, and
raising up the Stone, he caused his Servant, on the other Side opposite to him,
to press it down to the Place intended for Incision; which he made, took out
the Stone, and, though the Child was very weak, recovered him, and healed the
Wound: But he advises others not to follow his Example; and, instead of it,
recommends the Operation which he calls his own Invention, and has described,
in the foregoing Part of the same Chapter."

The next to him, that is said to have performed it, is one Bonnet, of whom
Mons. Tollet, in the 5th Edition of his Lithotomy, published at Paris 1708,
gives the following Account, Page 139.

" Feu M. Jonnot m'a dit autrefois que M. Bonnet Chirurgien, qui praetiquoit il
ya tres-long-temps la Lithotomie dans l' Hotel Dieu de Paris, l'avoit assure
d'en avoir taille de cette faaeon. M. Petit, Maitre Chirurgien faaeon de cet
Hospital ma dit l'avoir vu pratique sur une Petite fille par le meme M.
Bonnet."

"Mr. Tollet says, that the late Mr. Jonnot (who was also a famous Lithotomist)
told him formerly, that Mr. Bonnet, a Surgeon, who practiced Lithotomy a
considerable Time ago in the Hotel Dieu at Paris, assured him, ( viz. Mr.
Jonnot) that he had cut after that Manner. Mr. Petit, Master-Surgeon of that
Hospital, also told our Author, that he had seen it practiced by the same
Bonnet on a young Girl."

Mons. Dionis, in the 2d Edition of his Course of Chirurgical Operations,
published at Paris 1714, Page 139, gives the following Account of the same Man,
viz.

" On nous assure que Monsieur Bonnet a pratique sovent cette Operation a
l'Hotel Dieu de Paris avec une heureux succes, and que meme Monsieur Petit luy
a vu fair."

"We are assured, that Mons. Bonnet, frequently and with good Success,
performed this Operation at the Hotel Dieu in Paris; and that Mons. Petit has
seen him perform it." This is all the Account that I have met with of this
Bonnet.

After him, Dr. Groenevelt was the next that performed it, of which he gives
the following Account in the English Edition of his Lithotomy, published at
London in 1710.

"I once had a Patient in Long Lane, Moorfields, upon whom I was obliged to
perform this High Operation; and very successfully extracted the Stone, by
making Incision near the Groin, the Patient soon recovering; which shows, that
Wounds in the fibrous Part of the Bladder are not always mortal."

Those are the only Three that I have met with, that ever pretended to have cut
above the Os Pubis, i. e. into the Belly.

Franco cut so first, because he had a Patient that he could not cut his own
Way, though, at the same Time, he had the Character of one of the best
Lithotomists of his Age. But though he succeeded, yet, it seems, he found such
Difficulties in it, that he would never do it again, and charges us never to
follow his Example; which one would have expected that he should have explained
in his Account of it, the better to deter others from the like Practice.

Bonnet is said to have done it several Times with Success; yet he don't
recommend it to others as a Rule of Practice, nor was ever imitated by any of
his Contemporaries.

Groenevelt did it but once, and says, he was obliged to do it: I suppose, in
some suchlike Case as De Franco's; and though he also succeeded, yet, instead
of recommending it, he only draws this Consequence from it, viz. That Wounds of
the fibrous Part of the Bladder are not always mortal.

Franco cut on the Hair above the Pubis, a little on one Side; Groenevelt near
the Groin: But not one of them tells us what lustruments they used, or which
Way they used them; whether they made a cross, oblique, or longitudinal
Incision; whether they made the Incision at once, or at several Times, or what
Position they put their Patient in; all which, and many more Circumstances,
ought to have been exactly described, before any one could be said to have
followed their Method; from whence I may very safely infer, that it will be no
easy matter to tell which Way any of them made their Operations, and yet it is
commonly asserted with the greatest Assurance (not with any Design to raise De
Franco's Reputation, but to lessen mine) that I made this Operation after De
Franco's Method, though he has told but very little of his Story, and I have
told none of mine.

Upon the Whole, I must say, that it is a Miracle to me, that after so much
Success, either they, or those that saw them do it, did not either continue the
Practice of it, or give us more substantial Reasons why they disapproved of it;
so far from that, they have not given us one Instance of a Patient's dying
after this Section.

This Operation is also recommended as a very probable Way by Roussecus,
Dionis, etc. yet not one of them was ever so far persuaded of it as to make the
Experiment, however several of them have undertaken (which none that ever made
the Operation thought fit to do) to describe the Method how it may be done, i.
e. to teach others to perform what they cannot do themselves; (which, in my
Opinion is the greatest Absurdity in Nature;) but to what Purpose, he that
makes the Experiment will see.

Having thus recited all the Instances that I have met with of the Stone in the
Bladder, being extracted through the Belly, in the Words of the Authors, That
every one may be a Judge of the Encouragement I had to undertake this Operation
from what has been done this Way before.

I shall next give an Account of the Objections made against the forementioned
Gentlemen's Operations, by some of the most authentic Authors that have
mentioned them.

First, Some say that the Urine from the Bladder, and the Discharge from the
Wound, will flow into the Cavity of the Abdomen or Pelvis, where Corrupting,
will occasion several grievous and incurable Symptoms, amongst whom is Dr.
Drelincount, etc. who expresses himself thus:

" Operatio Franconiana ut inventa est sic exolevit, quia dum perfunderetur
Vesicae fundum Urina Effluebat in Abdominis Cavum and Mortem inducit, i. e."

"The Franconian Section, viz. the high Operation, died as soon as it was
invented; because when the Fund of the Bladder is perforated, the Urine flows
into the Cavity of the Belly and causes Death."

Secondly, Others say that the Wound being made in the membranous Part of the
Bladder, will not heal again, amongst whom is Barbett, etc. who has these Words:

" Periculosa interim and in se molesta Operatio est, and quod si Labia
Vulneris in Vesia facti haud uniantur Musculis Abdominis, exulceratio vesicae
sequitur, magis dolorifica minus curabilis ipso Calculo, quae etiam incommoda
effecerunt quod minus Operationibus aliis haberi coeperit a practicis veris, i.
e."

"It Is a dangerous and in it self a troublesome Operation; and if the Lips of
the Wound made in the Bladder don't unite to the Muscles of the Abdomen, an
Ulceration of the Bladder will follow, more painful and less curable than the
Stone it self, which Inconveniences have made it less esteemed than the other
Operations by true Practitioners."

Thirdly, Mons. Thevinin, a very eminent Surgeon, in his Book of Chirurgical
Observations, published at Paris in the Year 1669, Page 68. gives this Account
of it, viz.

" L'hault appareil qui a este premierement pratique par de Franco n'est point
en usage a present, a Cause de l'incision qui'l oblige de fair au fonds and
corpse inferieur de la vessic qui apporte de grand accidens, i. e."

"The high Operation, first practisd by de Franco, is no more in Use, because
the Incision being made in the Fund and Body of the Bladder causes great
Accidents."

Fourthly, Others say that the Guts will burst out at the Wound, etc.

Thomas Fienus, in the 70th Page of his Book, De praecipuis Artis Chirurgicae
controversis, Edit. 1602. gives his Opinion of this high Operation, in these
Words:

" Praeter hactenus usitatam Sectionem exorcus est, Francisus Rousettus, qui in
Libro suo de Partu Caesario scribit, videri long securiorem and faciliorem
sectionis rationem futuram, si Venture aut Abdomen a Latere sub umbilico
aperiantur, and imposita per foramen manu vesicae corpus vulneretur and inde
calculus eximatur. Sed illa ratio non valet: vesicae enim vulnus lethale est,
and non potest consolidari, and quamvis aliquando legatur consolidatum, est
tamen rara avis, and temerarium nimis foret, and quia illam rationem nemo
secutus est, de ea non agimus, i. e."

"Besides the common Ways of Cutting, there is one Fr. Rousettus, who affirms in
his Book of the Caesarian Birth, that the Operation would be safer and easier,
if we cut through the Belly (a little below the Navel, and on one Side) and
into the Bladder, and then extracted the Stone through the Wound. But that
cannot be, because Wounds of the Bladder are mortal, and cannot be consolidated;
although we have some Histories of their being cured, it is a great Rarity, and
therefore it is too rash an Undertaking; and because no Body practices it, I Will
say no more on it."

The Answer to all which (not to descend to Particulars) is the happy Success
of my Operation.

The next Question that naturally follows, is, What could incite or encourage
me to undertake this high Operation, which those that had done it, had such an
indifferent Opinion of, which those eminent Authors (just quoted, and almost
every one else that have mentioned it) exclaimed so warmly against, and which,
by the common Consent of Mankind, was deemed impracticable?

To which I answer: That it was, first, because I was fully persuaded that the
great Danger, Tediousness, and frequent bad Consequences of the common
Operations, were entirely owing to the Structure of the Parts concerned, which
the best Operator could not avoid, if the Stone was of any considerable
Bigness, or of a rugged irregular Figure.

Secondly, Because I was as firmly persuaded, that all the Objections made
against the fore mentioned Gentlemen's Operations, (so far as they concern mine)
were very ill grounded; which is proved by the Success.

The Two Operations that are only in Use now amongst us are, First, That which
Surgeons call Cutting on the Staff, i. e. When a furrowed Probe is passed into
the Bladder, upon which they afterward Cut.

The other is called cutting on the Gripe, i. e. When they pass their Fingers
into the Fundament, and press the Stone outward, and then cut upon it.

In order to explain what I have just now asserted, viz. That the Danger,
Tediousness, etc. of the common Operations, are entirely owing to the Structure
of the Parts concerned. I shall first describe the Parts concerned in each, and
then make such Conclusions as naturally follow therefrom.

Cutting on the Staff is most in Use, and therefore I shall begin with it.

Parts concerned in Cutting on the Staff, or Great Apparatus.

Parts Cut:

They cut first through the Skin, on one side of the Rapha of the Perinaeum.

2 dly, Through the Accelerator Muscle.

3 dly, Through the Bulb of the Urethra.

Parts that are dilated.

The Incision being made, opens a Passage into the membranous Part of the
Uretha, at the upper-end of which is the Sphincter of the Bladder, through both
which the Instruments must pass into the Bladder, and the Stone, though enlarged
by the Thickness of the Forceps, must pass out.

They are both apt to be too much dilated by a large, and lacerated by a rugged
Stone.

The membranous Urethra, is about Two Inches long, more or less, according to
the Bigness of the Person.

It Is about as big (in a middle-siz'd Man) as to admit of a Goose Quill.

It Is much longer, and not so thick and strong, as the Urethra in Women, and
consequently more liable to be injured.

The Sphincter is a few circular Fibers; which keep the Bladder shut, and so
prevents the involuntary Discharge of the Urine.

The Genital Parts, which by the Nearness of their Situation are liable to be
injured, next after the forementioned, are:

First, The Vesiculae Seminales, i. e. the Reservatories of the Seed: They are
situate immediately behind the Sphincter, between the Bladder and Rectum, i. e.
the straight Gut.

Secondly, Their Ducts; which pass from them, and open about the Middle of the
membranous Part of the Urethra, by Two Orifices, which are covered by a sort of
a Caruncle, called, Caput Gallinaginis, or Verumontanum; which serves instead
of Valves, to hinder the involuntary emission of the Seed.

Thirdly, The Prostatae; which are situate a Little below the Vesiculae
Seminoles, between the membranous Urethra and straight Gut.

The Structure and Situation of the Parts being thus stated, it will not be
difficult to deduce all die forementioned Inconveniences from them, viz.

First, The Danger of this Operation (to say no more) will appear from a
Computation of the Number of those that do and do not escape after it; which is
(in general) occasioned by the Length and Streightness of the Passage before
described, Figure and Bigness of the Stones, Force required to extract them,
etc. Whence the forementioned Parts, etc. are lacerated and contused to too
great a Degree, and thence excessive Pain, Hemorrhagy, Loss of Strength, etc.
too great to be mastered.

Secondly, Every one that has made, or seen any Number of these Operations
performed, cannot but be sensible of the Tediousness of them (and consequently
of the Pain the Patient must needs suffer) which is owing to the Length and
Streightness of the Passage (which cannot be altered, as is commonly supposed,
by enlarging the External Orifice,) Number, and Necessary Largeness of the
Instruments used; Number, Bigness, and Figure of the Stones, etc.

Thirdly, The bad Consequences that frequently follow this Operation (in those
that escape with Life) are, Incontinency of Urine, Impotency, Fistula's, etc.
which every one must be satisfied of, that have seen any Number of them: In
some of whom you will observe ^n Incontinency of Urine, in others Impotency, in
others Fistula's, in others all of them; any one of which is very little better
than the Stone itself.

Cause of the Incontinency of Urine.
It Is caused when the Sphincter of the Bladder is over-stretched by the
Bigness, or lacerated by the Asperitys of the Stone; because it can never
afterward do its Office as before; And so the Urine flows involuntarily Day
and Night; which keeps them always wet, from whence none of the most agreeable
Scents arise.

Cause of the Impotency.
It Is occasioned by the Laceration of the Ducts of the Vesiculae Seminales, or
the Verumontanum; and that by the Bigness or Asperitys of the Stone, as before:
So when the Wound heals, the Ducts, or Verumontanum; are stopped by the
Callous, so that the Seed can no more flow into the Urethra.

Cause of Fistula's.
These Parts are Membranous, Nervous, or Spermatick, as Authors call them, and,
of Course, very unapt to heal when wounded, lacerated, or contused; which is
also increased by the constant Passage of the Urine, Gravel, etc. through the
Wound, and so they turn fistulous; and then all or a great Part of the Urine,
which should pass through the Yard, passes through the Fistula left in the Wound;
whence People are made nauseous to themselves and others.

The Great Hildanus, page 733, expresses the Danger of this Operation in these
Words:

" Ingens ac magnus Calculus ut per Collum Vesicae extrabatur, propter ejus
angustiam longum requirit tempus, interim aeger ingentibus affligitur
Doloribus, Vesica, ipsiusque Fibrae dilacerantur, Sanguis copiose profluit,
vires dissolvuntur, maximoque cum Cruciatu aeger vel in ipsa Operatione aut
paulo post extinguitur, i. e."

"When a large Stone is extracted through the Neck of the Bladder, because of
its Streightness, it takes up a long Time: In the mean Time, the Patient
suffers intolerable Pain, the Bladder and its Fibers are tore, there is a great
Flux of Blood, Loss of Strength, and the Patient, by reason of the great
Torture, dies, either in or soon after the Operation."

The late Mr. Couper, in his Comment upon Bidloo, has the following
Observations on the Accidents which happen from the Structure of the Parts.

"This Part of the Urethra, viz. that between the Prostatae and the Bulb, is
liable to be wounded, and sometimes perforated, by too hastily introducing the
Conductor into the Bladder, after an Incision is made in the Perinaeum in
Cutting for the Stone; whereby the Operator afterward thrusts his Forceps
between the Bladder and Rectum."

"This Inadvertency, I Am persuaded, is very often practiced by the Pretenders
to Lithotomy, and frequently proves fatal to the Patient: One would think it
hardly possible, that a Man in his Senses, and but tolerably acquainted with
Anatomy, could commit such Errors; yet, of this I have met with more than one
Instance, when being called to dissect the Deceased, in whom such Operators
have been so unfortunate as to leave the Stone still in the Bladder."

So much to show the unavoidable Danger, etc. of Cutting on the Staff.

The other Operation in use is Cutting on the Gripe.

Parts cut.

They cut (farther off of the Rapha of the Perinaeum than in the foregoing
Operation) 1. Through the Skin: 2. The Fat: 3. Part of the Erector Penis: 4.
Some confiderable Blood Vessels: 5. A Part of the Levator Any: 6. Into the Body
of the Bladder above the Sphincter.

This Operation cannot always be practiced, because our Fingers are not long
enough to bring down and keep the Stone fast against the Perinaeum in grown
People. Though, when it can be done,

The Inconveniences of it are,

1. When the Stone is rough, it is troublesome, painful, and tedious, to make
the Incision on it. 2. The Arteries, which are cut, are often very large. 3.
When the Stone is rough, it pricks, and contuses the Bladder in several Places,
by being pressed hard against the Perinaeum; whence several dangerous and
deadly Symptoms ensue. 4. The Wound in the Bladder being depending, is hindered
from aglutinating, by the Gravel and Urine passing through it, etc.
From all which, I think it is evident, that the rare Success of these
Operations, even in the best of Hands, (not to mention the Havoc that is often
made by Pretenders) is entirely owing to the Structure of the Parts concerned;
which is what I undertook to prove.

Advantages of this new Operation.

Whereas, in the other Operations, the Danger, etc. are owing to the Structure
of the Parts; in my Operation, by reason of the Structure of the Parts, they
are successfully prevented. E. G.

1. There can be no Impotency caused by it, because there is none of the Genital
Parts can be injured in doing it.

2. There can be no Incontinency of Urine caused by it, because the Sphincter
of the Bladder cannot be hurt in making it.

3. There can be no Fistula after it, if proper Care is taken of the Wound.

4. There can be no such Force required to extract the Stone, as will contuse
and lacerate the Parts, which, in the other Operations, are the Cause of
Symptoms too hard to be governed) because the Wound may be made as large as you
please, which cannot be done in them.

5. There cannot be any Flux of Blood, because there is no Occasion to cut any of
the great Vessels, etc. Thus the Defects of the others are supplied by this.

My Patient was between sixteen and seventeen Years of Age, and was cut two
Days before last Christmas, and in a Month's Time the Wound was perfectly
cicatriz'd, i.e. healed.

The Operation was over in one Minute, and I believe will never be above two.

He now performs all his natural Faculties as well as he had never been
troubled with the Stone.

There were two Physicians, two Surgeons, and an Apothecary, present at the
Operation: But to save them the Trouble of answering every little Prig's
impertinent Questions, I don't think it is proper to mention them.

The Stone was of the Bigness and Figure expressed in the Plate following.

a bladder stone The Natural Figure and Bigness of ye stone


Some say that I have robbed the Dead of their Right, and endeavored to impose
on the Living, by putting my own Name to another Man's Work, and pretending
that it is a new Operation, though, at the same Time, it was practiced by its
first Inventor, De Franco, above 150 Years ago.

De Franco (whose Memory I reverence, because he was certainly an excellent
Surgeon, and one of the best Lithotomists in his Time) is so far from valuing
himself upon the High Operation, which he was once forced to make, that he owns
himself to be very much to blame for doing of it; and desires no Man afterward
to follow his Example; and in the Room of that, in the preceding Part of that
very same Chapter, recommends another which is made on the Perinaeum, which he
assumes, and, with a great deal of Pleasure, calls his own Invention.

Hildanus is also of the same Opinion, and expresses himself thus, Page 730.

" De quarto operandi modo, in Lithotomia usitato, qui merito Lithotomia
Franconiana appellari potest."

And so he goes on to describe and recommend that Operation, which De Franco
owns in the 33d Chapter of his Book, to be his proper Invention: But it is not
the High, but an Operation in the Perinaeum, that is assumed by the one, and
commended by the other.

In Page 732, he has these Words:

"Franciscus Rousettus Lib. de partu Caesario concludere voluit, semper
calculum eo in Loco exsecandum esse, illudque minori cum periculo fieri posse.
Lithotomiam proinde illam Franconianam vocat, cum tamen D. Franc. eam minime ad
Imitationem praescripserit, sed express in Libro suo, se stolide egisse
fateatur, adeoque unumquemque, ne ipsum hac in part imitetur, sed precedentem
operandi modum amplectatur, Hortetur."

" Franciscus Rousettus, in his Book on the Caesarian Birth, asserts, that we
ought always to cut for the Stone through the lower Part of the Belly, because
it can be done with a great deal less Danger; and then calls it De Franco's
Method, notwithstanding De Franco never prescribed it as a Rule; so far from
which, he confesses in his own Book, that he acted foolishly in doing it; and
therefore advises us never to imitate him in it, but in the Operation just
before described."

He concludes his Story thus:

" Cum dicto igitur D. Franco, fideli atque industrio cuivis Chirurgo
periculosae hujus Lithotomiae Administrationem iterum atque iterum dissuadeo."

"Therefore, with the forementioned De Franco, I again and again dissuade every
faithful and industrious Surgeon from performing this dangerous Operation."

From all which I conclude, that instead of being an Honor to De Franco, to
have had his Name put to it, it would have been a real Injury to the Memory of
the Dead, to have made him the Author of an Operation, that he blamed himself
for doing when alive.

Nay, I Am so far from having an Opinion of De Franco's Operation, as he has
described it, that I think it is fully as inconsistent and impracticable as
Talicotius's Project of restoring lost Noses.

All the Analogy between his and mine, is, that they are both made in the
Belly. But his was made in one Place of the Belly, and mine in another: His,
with his own Instruments, (which he has not mentioned) mine with mine: His were
used after one Manner, mine after another: And those, I think, are the most
material Differences betwixt any two Operations, viz. The Variation of the
Place upon which the Operation is made, of the Number, Figure, and Size of the
Instruments, and of the Method of using them.

The two forementioned Operations, called, Cutting on the Staff, and Cutting
on the Gripe, are both made on the Perinaeum: The Design of both is the same,
viz. To extract the Stone out of the Bladder; yet no Man ever was so absurd as
to call them both the same Operations, for the Reasons beforementioned.

The late famous Mr. Rau, Professor of Physic and Surgery at Leyden, and the
forementioned De Franco, and several others, as Celsus, Guido, Marianus, etc.
had each a particular Method of Cutting on the Perinaeum, to which every one
gave his own Name, and why should not I be allowed the same Liberty.

But supposing that my Operation was, in every Tittle, the same as De Franco's;
yet, if it is found to be a safer and easier Way of relieving the Miserable,
it is nevertheless new; for that Operation was as much dead, before mine, and
thought as much impracticable, (which the general Opinion of the Town on this
Occasion abundantly proves) as it was 150 Years before De Franco was born.

I readily grant, that one Operation, though successfully performed, is not
enough to satisfy the Public that it is the safest Method; but it is enough to
me, who, before the Operation, thought myself very sure of Success, else I had
never attempted it. But now I have performed it, and seen the whole Process of
the Cure, I Am in no manner of Pain about the future Success of if; nay, I dare
venture to prophecy, that not one in ten will die, nor one in fifty want a
perfect Cure, that do after the common Methods; and there fore do (what never
any did before) recommend it as the most easy safe, and speedy Method of
extracting the Stone, (exclusive of all others) in Males, and when the Stone is
large, in Females.

I have had a great many vile, malicious and salfe Reflections cast upon me, on
this Occasion, by a Set of Scioli, who (because they never did anything out of
the common Road themselves) envy every Man else that does.

The Imputation of Novelty (says the great Mr. Lock) is a terrible Charge among
those who judge of Men's Heads, as they do of their Perukes, by the Fashion, and
can allow none to be right but the received Doctrines. Truth scarce ever
carried it by Vote any where at its first Appearance: New Opinions are always
suspected, and usually opposed, without any other Reason, but because they are
not already common: But Truth, like Gold, is not the less so, for being newly
brought out of the Mine.

Magna est Veritas, and prevalebit. FINIS.
INDEX.
PLACE where this new Operation is made Page 3 An Account of three Surgeons
that have made the High Operation P.4 The Opinions of some of the most eminent
Authors about it P. 10 Remarks on the two Operations now in Use, viz. Cutting
on the Staff, and Cutting on the Gripe; whereby their Inconveniences are
explained P. 14 The Advantages of the New Way explained P. 21 The common
Objection, viz. That this is not mine but De Franco's Operation, fully
answered, etc. etc. P. 23
Advertisement.
IN a short Time will be published, Anatomia Chirurgo Necessaria: Or, a
Description of all those Parts of Anatomy, that are absolutely necessary to be
well understood by Surgeons, with their practical Uses, as mentioned in my
printed Syllabus.

For the Use of Students of Surgery.

Qui fructuosa non qui multa soit sapit. Printed for Tho. Woodward.

BOOKS printed for Tho. Woodward near Temple Bar.
1 A Syllabus of what is to be performed in a Course of Anatomy, Chirurgical
Operations and Bandages. By John Douglas, Surgeon.

2. General Observations and Prescriptions in the Practice of Physic, on
several Persons of Quality, etc. by an eminent London Physician, who was
Contemporary with Dr. Gifford, Dr. Ridgley, Dr. Meveral, Dr. Andrews, and Sir
Theodore Mayerne, Physicians in Ordinary to King James, and King Charles the
First. Inscribed to Sir Samuel Garth, Knight.

3. A. short and easy Method to understand Geography; wherein are described,
the Form of Government of each Country, its Qualities, the Manners of its
Inhabitants, and whatsoever is most remarkable in it. To which are added,
Observations upon those Things of Importance that have happened in each State.
With an Abridgement of the Sphere, and the Use of Geographical Maps. Made
English by a Gentleman of Cambridge, from the French of Mr. A.D. Fer,
Geographer to the French King.

4. Mathematical Elements of Physics proved by Experiments; being an
Introduction to Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy. By Dr. William James Gravesande,
Professor of Mathematics and Astronomy in the University of Leyden, and Fellow
of the Royal Society of London. Made English and illustrated with 33 Copper
Plates, revised and corrected by Dr. John Keil, F.R.S. Professor of Astronomy
in Oxford.

5. Christiani Hugenii Libellus de Ratiociniis in Ludo Aleae: Or, the Value of
all Chances in Games of Fortune, Cards, Dice, Wagers, Lotteries, etc.
Mathematically demonstrated. Price 1 s.


