THE PRINCIPLES OF BRIDGES: CONTAINING THE MATHEMATICAL DEMONSTRATIONS OF The
PROPERTIES of the ARCHES, the THICKNESS of the PIERS, the FORCE of the WATER
against them, etc.

TOGETHER WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS and DIRECTIONS drawn from the whole.

By CHA. HUTTON, MATHEMATICIAN.

NEWCASTLE: Printed by T. SAINT; and sold by J. WILKIE in St. Paul's Church
Yard, and H. TURPIN, in St. John's Street, London; and by KINCAID and CREECH,
Edinburgh, 1772.

PREFACE.
A Large and elegant bridge, forming a way over a broad and rapid river, is
justly esteemed one of the noblest pieces of mechanism that man is capable of
performing. And the usefulness of an art which, at the same time that it
connects distant shores by a way over the deep and rapid waters, also allows
those waters and their navigation to pass smooth and uninterrupted, renders all
probable attempts to advance the theory or practice of it, highly deserving the
encouragement of the public.

This little book is offered as an attempt toward the perfection of the theory
of this art, in which the properties, dimensions, proportions, and other
relations of the various parts of a bridge, are strictly demonstrated, and
clearly illustrated by various examples. It is divided into five sections: the
1st treats on the projects of bridges, containing a regular detail of the
various circumstances and considerations that are cognizable in such projects:
The 2d treats on arches, demonstrating their various properties, with the
relations between their intrados and extrados, and clearly distinguishes the
most preferable curves to be used in a bridge; the first two or three
propositions being instituted after the manner of two or three done by Mr.
Emerson in his Fluxions and Mechanics: The 3d section treats on the piers,
demonstrating their thickness necessary for supporting any kind of an arch,
springing at any height, and that both when part of the pier is supposed to be
immersed in water, and when otherwise: The 4th demonstrates the force of the
water against the end or face of the pier, considered as of different forms;
with the best form for dividing the stream, etc. and to it is added a table
showing the several heights of the fall of the water under the arches, arising
from its velocity and the obstruction of the piers; as it was composed by Tho.
Wright, Esquire of Auckland, in the county of Durham, who informs me it is part of
a word on which he has spent much time, and with which he intends to favor the
public: And the 5th and last section contains a dictionary of the most material
terms peculiar to the subject; in which many practical observations and
directions are given, which could not be so regularly nor properly introduced
into the former sections. The whole, it is presumed, containing full directions
for constituting and adapting to one another, the several essential parts of a
bridge, so as to make it the strongest; and the most convenient, both for the
passage over and under it, that the situation and other circumstances will
possibly admit: not indeed for the actual methods of disposing the stones,
making of mortar, or the external ornaments, etc. those things I do not descend
to, but leave to the discretion of the practical architect, as being no part of
the plan of my undertaking; and for the same reason also I have given no views
of bridges, but only prints of such parts or figures as are necessary in
explaining the elementary parts of the subject.

As my profession is not that of an architect, very probably I should never
have turned my thoughts to this subject, so as to address the public upon it,
had it not been from the occasion of an accident in that part of the country in
which I reside, viz. the fall of Newcastle and other bridges on the river Tyne
on the 17th of november 1771, occasioned by a high flood which rose about 9
feet higher at Newcastle than the usual spring tides do. -- And this occasion
having furnished me with many opportunities of hearing and seeing very absurd
things advanced on the subject in general, I thought the demonstrations of the
relations of the essential parts of a bridge, would not be unacceptable to
those architects and others who may be capable of perceiving the force of them,
and whose ignorance may not have prejudiced them against things which they do
not understand.

In the 4th section there is one thing forgotten to be remarked, viz. That in
determining the best form of the end of the pier to be a right-lined triangle,
the water was supposed to strike every part of it with the same velocity: had
the variably increased velocity been used, the form of the ends would come out
a little curved; but as the increase of the velocity in the best bridges is
very small, the difference in them is quite imperceptable.

THE PRINCIPLES OF STONE BRIDGES.
SECTION I. Of the Projects of Bridges, with the Design; Estimate, etc.
WHEN a bridge is deemed necessary to be built over a river, the first
consideration is the place of it; or what particular situation will contain a
maximum of the advantages over the disadvantages.

In agitating this most important question, every circumstance, certain and
probable, attending or likely to attend the bridge, should be separately,
minutely, and impartially stated and examined; and the advantage or
disadvantage of it rated at a value proportioned to it: then the difference
between the whole advantages and disadvantages, will be the neat value of that
particular situation for which the calculation is made. And by doing the same
for any other situations, all their neat values will be found, and of
consequence the most preferable situation among them. -- Or, in a competition
between two place, if each one's advantage over the other be estimated or
valued in every circumstance attending them, the sums of their advantages will
show whether of them is the better. And the same being done for this and a
third, and so on, the best situation of all will be obtained.

In this estimation, a great number of particulars must be included; and
nothing omitted that can be found to make a part of the consideration.

Among these, the situation of the town or place for the convenience of which
the bridge is chiefly to be made, will naturally produce a particular of the
first consequence; and a great many others ought to be sacrificed to it. If
possible, the bridge should be placed where there can conveniently be opened
and made passages or streets from the ends of it in every direction, and
especially one as nearly in the direction of the bridge itself as possible,
tending toward the body of the town, without narrows or crooked windings, and
easily communicating with the chief streets, thoroughfares, etc. -- And here
every person, in judging of this, should divest himself of all partial regards
or attachments whatever; think and determine for the good of the whole only,
and for posterity as well as the present.

The banks or declivities toward the river are also of particular concern, as
they affect the convenience of the passage to and from the bridge, or determine
the height of it, upon which in a great measure depends the expense.

The breadth of the river, the navigation upon it, and the quantity of water to
be passed, or the velocity and depth of the stream, from also considerations of
great moment; as they determine the bridge to be higher or lower, longer or
shorter. However, in most cases, a wide part of the river ought rather to be
chosen than a narrow one, especially if it is subject to great tides or floods;
for, the increased velocity of the stream in the narrow part, being again
augmented by the farther contraction of the breadth, by the piers of the
bridge, will both incommode the navigation through the arches, and undermine
the piers and endanger the whole bridge.

The nature of the bed of the river is also of great concern, it having a great
influence on the expense; as upon it, and the depth and velocity of the stream,
depend the manner of laying the foundations, and building the piers.

These are the chief and capital articles of consideration, and which will
branch themselves out into other dependent ones, and so lead to the required
estimate of the whole.

HAVING resolved on the place, the next considerations are the form, the
estimate of the expense, and the manner of execution.

With respect to the form; strength, utility, and beauty ought to be regarded
and united; the chief part of which lies in the arches. The form of the arches
will depend on their height and span; and the height on that of the water, the
navigation, and the adjacent banks. They ought to be made so high, as that they
may easily transmit the water at its greatest height either from tides or
floods; and their height and figure ought also to be such as will easily allow
of a convenient passage of the craft through them. This and the disposition of
it above, so as to render the passage over it also convenient, make up its
utility. -- Having fixed the heights of the arches, their spans are still
necessary for determining their figure. Their spans will be known by dividing
the whole breadth of the river into a convenient number of arches and piers,
allowing at least the necessary thickness of the piers out of the whole. In
fixing on the number of arches, take always an odd number, and rather take few
and large ones than many and smaller, if convenient: For thus you will have not
only fewer foundations and piers to make, with fewer arches and centers, which
will produce great savings in the expense, but the arches themselves will also
require much less materials and workmanship, and allow of more and better
passage for the water and craft through them; and will appear at the same time
more noble and beautiful, especially if constructed in elliptical, or in
cycloidal forms: for the truth of which it may be sufficient to refer to that
noble and elegant bridge lately built at Blackfriars, London, by Mr. Mylne. And
here I cannot help remarking that the Gentleman who, a few years since in a
pamphlet on the Principles of Bridges, censured Mr. Mylne and Mr. Muller
concerning elliptic arches, has very much exposed himself, and absurdly
criticizes them through his own want of mathematical knowledge, which he
somewhere in the same pamphlet affects to despise. He brings to my mind an
expression of (I think) Mr. Henry Fielding somewhere in his works, That a
person does not speak the worse on a subject for knowing something about it. I
do not however make this remark through any particular disrespect for this
Gentleman, concerning whom I know nothing farther, any more than I do about the
other two Gentlemen, but only to prevent others from being prejudiced and
misled by the authority of his ipse dixit. -- If the top of the bridge be a
straight horizontal line, let the arches be made all of a size; if it be a
little lower at the ends than the middle, the arches must proportionally
decrease from the middle toward the ends; but if higher at the ends than the
middle, let them increase toward the ends. A choice of the most convenient
arches is to be made from the 4th and 5th propositions, where their several
properties, etc. are demonstrated and pointed out; Among them, the elliptic,
cycloidal, and equilibrial arch in prop. 5, will generally claim the
preference, both on account of their strength, beauty, and cheapness or saving
in materials and labor: Other particulars also concerning them may be seen
under the word ARCH in the Dictionary in the last section, And as the choice of
the arch is of so great moment, let no person, either through ignorance or
indolence, prefer a worse arch because it may seem to him easier to construct;
for he would very ill deserve the name or employment of an Architect, who is
incapable of rendering the exact construction of these curves easy and familiar
to himself; but if, by chance, a Bridge-builder should be employed who is
incapable of doing that, he ought at least to be endowed with such a share of
honesty as to procure some person to go through the calculations which he
cannot make for himself.

Next find what thickness at the keystone or top will be necessary for the
arches. For which see the word KEYSTONE in the Dictionary in the last section.

Having thus obtained all the parts of the arches, with the height of the
piers, the necessary thickness of the piers themselves are next to be computed
by prop. 10.

This done, the chief and material requisites are found; the elevation and
plans of the design can then be drawn, and the calculations of the expense form
thence made, including the foundations, with such ornamental or accidental
appendages as shall be thought fit; which I shall leave to the discretion of
the Practical Architect, as being no part of the plan of my undertaking,
together with the practical methods of carrying the design into execution. I
shall however, in the Dictionary in the last section, not only describe the
terms, parts, machines, etc. but also speak of their dimensions, properties,
and any thing else material belonging to them; and to which therefore I from
hence refer for more explicit information in each particular article, as well
as to these immediately following propositions, in which the theory of the
arches, piers, etc. are fully and strictly demonstrated.

SECTION II. Of the Arches.
PROPOSITION I.
LET there be any number of lines AB, BC, CD, DE, etc. all in the same vertical
plane, connected together and moveable about the joints or angles A, B, C, D,
E, F; the two extreme points A and F being fixed: It is required to find the
proportions of the weights to be laid upon the angles B, C, D, etc. so that the
whole may remain in equilibrium.

diagram

Solution.
FROM the several angles having drawn the lines Bb, Cc, Dd, etc. perpendicular
to the horizon; about them, as diagonals, constitute parallelograms such, that
those sides of each two that are upon the same one of the given lines, may be
equal to each other; viz. having made one parallelogram mn, take Cp = Bn, and
form the parallelogram pq; then take Dr = Cq, and make the parallelogram rs;
and take Et = Ds, and form the parallelogram tv; and so on: Then the said
vertical diagonals Bb, Cc, Dd, Ee, etc. of those parallelograms, will be
proportional to the weights, as required.

Demonstration.
BY the resolution of forces, each of the weights or forces Bb, Cc, Dd, etc. in
the diagonals of the parallelograms, is equal to, and may be resolved into two
forces expressed by two adjacent sides of the parallelogram; viz. the force Bb
will be resolved into the two forces Bm, Bn, and in those directions; the force
Cc into the two forces Cp, Cq, and in those directions; the force Dd into the
two forces Dr, Ds, and in those directions; and so on: Then, since two forces
that are equal, and in opposite directions, do mutually balance each other;
therefore the several pairs of forces Bn and Cp, Cq and Dr, Ds and Et, etc.
being equal and opposite, by the construction, do mutually destroy or balance
each other; and the extreme forces Bm, Ev, are balanced by the opposite
resistances of the sixed points A, F. Wherefore there is no force to change the
position of any one of the lines, and consequently they will all remain in
equilibrium. Q.E.D.

Corollary.
HENCE, if one of the weights and the positions of all the lines be given, all
the other weights may be found.

PROPOSITION II.
IF any number of lines, that are connected together and moveable about the
points of connection, be kept in equilibrium by weights laid upon the angles,
as in the last proposition: Then will the weight on any angle C be universally
as ^; that is, directly as the sine of that angle, and reciprocally as the
sines of the two parts or angles into which that angle is divided by a line
drawn through it perpendicular to the horizon.

Demonstration.
BY the last proposition the weights are as Bb, Cc, Dd, etc. when Bn = pC, Cq =
rD, Ds = tE, etc. But, since the angle ABb is = the angle Bbn, and the angle
BCc = the angle Ccq, etc. as being always the alternate angles made by a line
cutting two other parallel lines; also the sine of the ABC = s. Bnb, and s. BCD
= s. Cqc, as being supplements one to another; by plane trigonometry we shall
have (Bn=) Bbxs.ABb / s.ABC = (Cp=) Ccxs.cCD / S.BCD, (Cq=) Ccxs.BCc / s.BCD =
(Dr=) Ddxs.dDE / s.CDE, (Ds=) Ddxs.CDd / s.CDE = (Et=) Eexs.eEF / s.DEF, etc.

Hence Bb Cc s.ABC / s.ABb s.BCD / s.cCD, Cc Dd s.BCD / s.BCc s.CDE / s.dDE, Dd
Ee s.CDE / s.CDd s.DEF / s.eEF, etc.

Or, by dividing the latter terms of the first of these proportions each by s.
bBC, and then compounding together two of the proportions, then three of them,
etc. striking out the common factors, and observing that the s. bBC is = s.
BBc, the s. cCD = s. CDd, etc. we shall have Bb Cc s.ABC / s.ABbxs.bBC s.BCD /
s.BCcxs.cCD, Bb Dd s.ABC / s.ABbxs.bBC s.CDE / s.CDdxs.dDE, Bb Ee s.ABC /
s.ABbxs.bBC s.DEF / s.DEexs.eEF, etc. Q.E.D.

Otherwise.
SINCE Cp or Bn Bm or nb s. Bbn or s. ABb s. bBC or s. BCc 1/s.BCc 1/s.ABb, and
Cp or qc Cq or Dr s. cCq or s. CDd s. Ccq or s. BCc 1/s.BCc 1/s.CDd; it is
clear that Cp is as 1/s.BCc; that is, the forces mB, pC, rD, etc. are
reciprocally as the sines of the angles which they make with the vertical line.

And since Cc is = Cpxs.Cpc / s.Ccp = Cpxs.BCD / s.cCD; therefore any force Cc
is as s.BCD / s.cCBxs.cCD. Q.E.D.

Corollary.
IF DC be produced to h; the sine of the hCB being = to the sine of its
supplement BCD, the weight or force Cc will be as s.hCB / s.BCcxcCD; which
three angles together make up two right angles.

PROPOSITION III.
TO find the proportion of the height of the wall above every point of an arch
of equilibration: That is, if GHIK be the top of a wall supported by an arch
ABCD; it is required to find the proportion of the perpendiculars BH, CI, etc.
so that all the parts of the arch may be kept in equilibrium from falling, by
the weight or pressure of the superincumbent wall.

diagram

Solution.
THE lines of equilibration in the former propositions being imagined to become
indefinitely small, they will constitute a curve of equilibration, and the
weights will press upon every point of it, and will be respectively equal to
the perpendiculars BH, CI, etc. drawn into their respective breadths, supposing
them to be indefinitely narrow parallelograms: Also the angle hCB will become
the angle of contact formed by the tangent and curve, whose sine is equal to
the angle itself or its measure, and the angles cCB and cCD become equal to the
angles cCh, cCk, or equal to the angles ICk, ICh, whose sines are equal,
because the angles are supplements to each other. These values being
substituted in the expression in the corollary to the last proposition, we
shall have the force Cc or parallelogram Ci as ^ or as ^.

Now supposing these narrow parallelograms to stand upon indefinitely small
equal parts of the arch, their breadths will be directly as the s. kCI and
inversly as radius; hence the parallelogram IC x s. kCI is as ^, and
consequently the altitude IC as ^ or as the ^; CP being perpendicular to CI,
and the radius all along equal to unity.

But the angle of contact kCD is as the curvature of the arch, and that again
is inversly as the radius of curvature; wherefore IC is as ^ or as ^, putting R
for the radius of curvature to the point C; that is, the height of the wall
above any point, is reciprocally as the radius of curvature and cube of the
sine of the angle in which the vertical line cuts the curve in that point, or
reciprocally as the radius of curvature and directly as the cube of the secant
of the curve's inclination to the horizon.

Corollary 1.
HENCE, if the form of the arch, or nature of the curve ABCD be given, the form
of the line GHIK bounding the top of the wall or forming the extrados, may be
found so, that ABCD shall be an arch of equilibration, or be in equilibrium in
all its parts by the pressure of the wall.

For, since the arch is given, the radius of curvature and position of the
tangent at every point of it will be given, and consequently the proportions of
the verticals BH, CI, etc. And by assuming one of them, or making it equal to
an assigned length, the rest will be found from it; and then the line GHI etc.
may be drawn through the extremities of them all.

Corollary 2.
AND if the line GHIK, forming the top of the wall be given, the curve of
equilibration ABCD may be found. And the manner of finding them both, the one
from the other, we shall teach in the two following propositions.

Corollary 3.
IF the arch ABCD be a circle; the radius of curvature will be constant, and
the angle kCP always measured by the arc DC, supposing D the vertex of the
curve; and then CI will be everywhere as the cube of the secant of the arc DC.

PROPOSITION IV.
HAVING given the Intrados, to find the Extrados. That is, given the nature or
form of an arch, to find the nature of the line forming the top of the
superincumbent wall, by whose pressure the arch is kept in equilibrium.

Solution.
LET D be the vertex of the given curve ABCD, and K that of the required line
GHIK. Put a = DK, x = AP the abscissa, y = PC the ordinate, z = DC the arch,
and R = the radius of curvature at the point C.

Now, by the last prop. CI is as ^. But, by similar triangles, as y z 1
(radius) z/ y = sec. kCP; therefore CI is as z3/Ry3. Again, in every curve
whose ordinate is refered to an axis, the radius of curvature R is = z3/ yx-
xy; wherefore CI will be as yx- xy/ y3, or CI = yx-xy / y3 x Q; where Q is a
constant quantity whose value will be determined by taking the expression for
the given perpendicular DK at the vertex of the curve.

Corollary.
HENCE then, as either x or y may be supposed to flow uniformly, and
consequently either of their second fluxions equal to nothing, by striking
either of the terms out of the numerator of the above value of CI, and then
exterminating either of the unknown quantities by the equation of the curve,
the value of CI will be obtained; as is done in the following examples.

EXAMPLE 1. To find the extrados of a circular arch.
diagram

LET Q be the center and D the vertex of the given circular arch, K the vertex
of the extrados, and the other lines as in the figure.

Put a = DK, r = AQ = QUOTH = the radius, x = DP, and y = PC = RI.

Then ^, and ^, by making x = 0, Hence ^. But, at the vertex x is = 0, and then
CI is ^. Consequently the value of Q is = ar. And the general value of CI or ^
is ^.

Otherwise, By making y constant.
THE notation remaining as before: we have ^, ^, and ^. Hence CI or yx-xy / y3
x Q becomes ^. This when y = 0, gives a = Q/ r, and Q = ar as before. And
consequently CI or ^ is ^ as before.

Hence the equation to the curve KI is ^ or ^.

Corollary 1.
HENCE KIG is a curve running up an infinite height toward G, the
perpendicular AG being an asymptote to it: And the curve is accurately as
represented in the figure, when the thickness DK at the top is 1-15th of the
span.

Corollary 2.
BUT the curve KIG is quite inconvenient for the form of the extrados of any
bridge; diagram however a straight horizontal line IK might be used instead of
it, if the materials of which the arch is built, could be so chosen, as that
they might increase in their specific gravity from DK toward CI, continually
as the cube of the secant of the arch from D. And this again perhaps would be
quite impracticable: But if a circular arch and a right line at the top were
necessarily required, the proportion of DK to the radius DQ may be found so as
the arch may be nearly in equilibrium thus:

When KI is a right line, then KR in the figure to the example, must be
nothing; or rather when the curve crosses the horizontal line, then KR is equal
to nothing; put its value then, as found above, equal to o, and we shall have
^, and from this equation, by assuming one of the quantities, a, y, the
corresponding value of the other may be found for the point where the curve
crosses the horizontal line; so from hence the general value of a is ^. Now
this value of a or DK evidently becomes = 0 when the arch consists of the whole
semicircle; but when the arch is less than the semicircle, a will have a
finite value, and between 60 and 120 degrees many arches of equilibration of a
certain thickness at top may be found. Thus, if the half arch DC contain 30
degrees; then its sine y or PC is = r; which being substituted for it in the
above general value of a, we have a = 73-6/37 x 3\2 r, or = r extremely near;
that is, DK is = of DQ or of 2PC the span when the curve cuts the horizontal
line directly above the point in the circle which answers to 30 degrees. And if
DC were an arch of 45 degrees; then y = r1/2, and a = 32-2/14 x r = 16 r/100,
or 1/9 of the span nearly. Also, if DC were 60 degrees; then y = r3/4, and a =
1/14th of r = 7 r/100, or 1/16 of the span nearly. -- So that in each of these
cases the points C and D would be in equilibrium; but then about the middle
parts between D and C, or rather nearer to D than to C, the materials should be
a little lighter than at D and C, and the exact proportion in which their
gravity should be diminished, might easily be found by calculation; so in the
first case, in particular, the specific gravity of the materials in the middle
of the arch between D and C, that is at 15 degrees from D, should be to that at
D or C, as 278 to 284, which is but a very inconsiderable decrease, and may be
very well neglected. -- In the first two cases, the thickness at the top would
be too much; but in the latter one, when the whole arch is 120 degrees, the
thickness is just about that which the best architects now allow; and in
greater arches the thickness would become too little. So that an arch of nearly
about 120 degrees, is the only part of a circle that can be used with any
degree of propriety.

EXAMPLE 2. To determine the extrados of an elliptical arch of equilibration.
diagram

SUPPOSE the curve in the above figure to be a semi-ellipse, with either the
longer or shorter axe horizontal; and let h denote the horizontal semi-axe AQ,
and r the vertical one DQ, and all the other letters as in the last example.

Then, by the nature of the ellipse, ^; hence ^, and ^ by making x constant.
Then ^ is ^. But when x is = 0, this expression becomes a = rQ/ hh, and then Q
= ahh/ r; consequently CI is ^, the same as in the circle. -- And the same
expression may be brought out by making y constant.

Hence the nature of the curve KI is thus expressed, ^, and is of the same kind
with that in the last example. -- But the elliptic arch may take a straight
line at top better than the circular one, when the longer axe is horizontal,
because the arch is flatter, or of a less curvature; and worse than the
circular arch, when the shorter axe is horizontal.

EXAMPLE 3. To determine the figure of the extrados of a parabolic arch of
equilibration.
diagram

PUT a = KD, r = DQ, h = QA, x = DP, and y = PC = RI.

Then, by the nature of the curve, hh yy r x = ryy/ hh; and hence x = 2 ryy/
hh, and x = 2 ry/ hh, by making y constant. Then CI = x/ y2 x Q is = 2 rQ/ hh =
a constant quantity = a; that is, CI is everywhere equal to KD.

Consequently KR is = DP; and since RI is = PC, it is evident that KI is the
same parabolic curve with DC, and may be placed any height above it.

EXAMPLE 4. To find the figure of the extrados for an hyperbolic arch of
equilibration.
diagram

PUT a = KD, r = the semi-transverse, and h = the semi-conjugate axe, x = DP,
and y = PC = RI.

Then, by the nature of the hyperbola, ^; hence ^, and ^, by making x constant,
Wherefore CI or ^. But when x = 0, this expression becomes rQ/ hh= a; hence Q=
ahh/ r, and consequently CI or ^ is ^.

Whence the equation to the curve KI required will be ^.

Scholium.
In this hyperbolic arch then, it is evident that the extrados KI continually
approaches nearer to the intrados; whereas in the circular and elliptic arches,
it goes off continually farther from it; and in the parabola, the two curves
keep always at the same distance; observing however that by the distance
between the two curves, in each of these cases, is meant their distance in the
vertical direction.

EXAMPLE 5. To find the extrados for a catenarian arch of equilibration.
diagram

LET a = KD, x = DP, and y = PC = RI, as before; also let c denote the constant
tension of the curve at the vertex.

Then, by the nature of the catenary, y is = c x hyp. log. of ^; hence, taking
the fluxions, we have ^, and ^, by making x constant. Wherefore CI or - xy/ y3
x Q is c+ x/ cc x Q. But at the vertex x is = 0, and CI = a = Q/ c;
consequently Q is = ac. This being written for it, there results CI = c+ x/ c x
a = a + ax\ c.

Hence, for the nature of the curve KI, we have KR = ( a + x - CI =) x - ax/ c
= c- a/ c x x.

Corollary.
AND hence the abscissa DP is to the abscissa KR, always in the constant
proportion of c to c - a. So that, when a is less than c, R and the curve KI
lies below the horizontal line; but when a is greater than c, they lie above
it; and when a is equal to c, KR is always equal to nothing, and KI or the
extrados coincides with the horizontal line.

As a diminishes, the line KI approaches nearer to DC in all its parts, till
when a entirely vanishes, or is so little in respect of c as to be omitted in
the expression c- a/ c x x = KR, the two curves quite coincide throughout.

Scholium.
As we have found above that the extrados will be a straight horizontal line
when a is equal to c, I shall here make a calculation to determine, in that
case, the value of c, and consequently of a with respect to x and y, or a given
span and height of an arch.

Now the equation to the curve expressed in terms of c, x, and y, is y = c x
hyp. log. of ^; and when x and y are given, the value of c may be found from
this equation, by the method of trial and error. But as the process would be at
best but a tedious one, and perhaps the method not easy in this case to be
practiced by every person, I shall here investigate a series for finding the
value of c from those of x and y in a direct manner.

Since then y is = c x hyp. log. of ^, by taking the fluxion of this equation,
we have ^ by writing d for 2 c; and by expanding this expression into a series,
it becomes y = x d/ x x 1 - x/2 d + 1^3 x2/2^4 d2 - 1^3^5 x3/2^4^6 d3 + 1^3^5^7
x4/2^4^6^8 d etc. and, by taking the fluents we have y = dx x 1 - x/2^3 d + 1^3
x2/2^4^5 d2 - 1^3^5 x3/2^4^6^7 d3 + 1^3^5^7 x4/2^4^6^8^9 d4 etc. and hence, by
dividing by x, we have y/ x = d/ x x 1 - x/2^3 d + 1^3 x2/2^4^5 d2 - 1^3^5
x3/2^4^6^7 d3 + 1^3^5^7 x4/2^4^6^8^9 d4 etc. or, by writing v for y/ x and w
for d/ x, it is v = w - 1/2^3 w + 1^3/2^4^5 w3 - 1^3^5/2^4^6^7 w5 +
1^3^5^7/2^4^6^8^9 w7 etc. Then, by reverting this series, we have w = v + 1/6 v
- 37/360 v3 + 547/5040 v5 - 337/5600 v7 etc. And hence, by squaring, etc. and
restoring the original letters, it is ( d = xw2 =) c = x x y2/ x2 + - 8 x2/45
y2 + 691 x4/3780 y4 - 23851 x6/453600 y6 etc. where a few of the first terms
are sufficient to determine the value of c pretty nearly.

Now, for an example in numbers, suppose the height of the arch to be 40 feet,
and its span 100, which are nearly the dimensions of the middle arch of
Blackfriar's Bridge at London. Then x = 40, and y = 50; which being substituted
for them in this series, it gives c = 36.88 feet nearly. So that to have made
that arch a catenarian one, with a straight line above, the top of the arch
must have been almost of the immense thickness of 37 feet, to have kept it in
equilibrium.

But if the height and span be 40 and 100 feet, as above, and the thickness of
the arch at top be assumed equal to 6 feet, then the extrados will not be a
right line, but as it is drawn in the figure to this example, which figure is
accurately constructed according to these dimensions.

It may be farther remarked, that the curves in these last three examples, viz.
the parabola, hyperbola, and catenary, are all very improper for the arches of
a bridge consisting of several arches; because it is evident from their
figures, which are all accurately constructed, that all the building or filling
up of the flanks of the arches will tend to destroy the equilibrium of them.
But in a bridge of one single arch whose extrados rises pretty much from the
spring to the top, one of these figures will answer better than any of the
former ones.

EXAMPLE 6. To determine the extrados of a cycloidal arch of equilibration.
diagram

LET DZQ be the circle from which the cycloid DCA is generated, and the other
lines as before.

Put a = DK, x = DP, and y = PC = RI; also put d = DQ the diameter of the
circle, and z = the circular arc DZ.

Then, by the nature of the cycloid, CZ is always equal to DZ = z; and, by the
nature of the circle, PZ is ^; wherefore PC or ^. Hence ^; but ^ by the nature
of the circle; therefore ^; and then ^, making x constant. Hence ^. But when x
= 0, CI is = a = Q/2 d; therefore Q = 2 ad; and then the general value of CI is
^.

Consequently ^ will express the nature of the curve KI; which resembles that
for the circle and ellipse, as evidently appears by comparing the figures
together, each of them being accurately constructed. But this figure seems to
be rather better than either of them, as the extrados approaches rather nearer
to a right line, and extends farther out before it is bent upwards.

Other examples of known curves might be given; but those that have been put
down already, seem to be the fittest for real practice; and there is a
sufficient variety among them, to suit the various circumstances of
convenience, strength, and beauty.

I shall now proceed to another general problem, which is the reverse of the
last one, and determines the figure of the intrados for any given figure of the
extrados, so that the arch may be in equilibrium in all its parts.

PROPOSITION V.
HAVING the Extrados given, to find the Intrados. That is, having given the
nature or form of a line bounding the top of a wall above an arch; to find the
figure of the arch, so that by the pressure of the superincumbent wall, the
whole may remain in equilibrium.

Solution.
PUT a = DK the thickness of the arch at top, x = DP the abscissa of the
intrados DC, z = KR the abscissa of the given extrados KI, and y = PC = RI
their equal ordinates.

diagram

Then, by the last proposition, CI is = yx- xy/ y3 x Q; but CI is also
evidently equal to a + x - z; therefore a + x - z is = yx- xy/ y3 x Q = Q/ y x
the fluxion of x/ y; where Q is a constant quantity, as used in the last
proposition, and always to be determined from the nature or conditions of each
particular case.

Hence then, by substituting in this equation the given value of z instead of
it, as expressed in terms of y, the resulting equation will then involve only x
and y together with their first and second fluxions, besides constant
quantities. And from it the relation between x and y themselves may be found,
by the application of such methods as may seem to be best adapted to the
particular form of the given equation to the extrados. In general, a proper
series for the value of x in terms of y is to be assumed with indeterminate
coefficients; which series being put into fluxions, striking out of every term
the fluxion of y; and the result fluxed again, striking out from every term of
this also the fluxion of y; the last expression drawn into Q being equated to a
+ x - z, there will be produced an equation from which will be found the values
of the coefficients of the terms in the assumed value of x.

But in the particular case when z is always nothing, or the extrados a right
horizontal line, a different and easier process obtains, as in this following
example.

EXAMPLE. TO find an arch of equilibration whose extrados shall be a horizontal
line.
diagram

Making the notation as in the proposition, we have z = 0, and therefore a + x
= Q/ y x the fluxion of x/ y.

Now assume y = x/ v; then x/ y = v, and Q/ y x flux. of x/ y = Qvv/ x; that
is, a + x = Qvv/ x; hence ax + xx = Qvv. Then, by taking the fluents, we have 2
ax + x2 = Qv2; hence v = 2 ax+ xx/ Q, and consequently ^. Then the fluent of
this is ^; but when x = 0, this is Q x hyp. log. of 2 a; therefore the correct
fluent is ^.

Or the fluent might be otherwise found thus.

THE equation a + x = yx- xy/ y3 x Q, supposing y constant, becomes a + x = Qx/
y2, or ay2 + xy2 = Qx multiply by x, and then axy2 + xxy2 = Qxx and hence, by
taking the fluents, 2 axy2 + x2 y2 = Qx2; consequently y2 = Qx2/2 ax+ xx, or ^.
And then the rest will be as above.

Now the value of Q will be found by writing in this equation some particular
correspondent known values of x and y: thus when P arrives at Q, then x = DQ =
r, and y = QA = h; these being substituted for them, we have ^, and
consequently ^. Wherefore the general value of y is thus, ^.

Hence, when Q is = a, the curve DC is the catenary; and in general the
ordinate is everywhere to the corresponding ordinate of the catenary whose
tension at the vertex is a, as h is to ^.

If x were desired in terms of y, it would be thus. Put A = the hyp. log. of a,
and ^; then ^: Again, put N = the number whose hyp. log. is Die + A; then ^; and
hence ^, or a + x = KP = N2+ a2/2 N.

By taking AQ = h = 50, and DQ = r = 40, also DK = a = 6. Then the hyp. log. of
^ is = the hyp. log. of ^ the hyp. log. of 15^26784 = 2^7257487; by which
dividing h = 50, the quotient is 18^343584. So that the ordinate y will be
constantly in that case equal to 18^343584 x the hyp. log. of ^. Also
1/18^343584 =.05451497 is = D, and A = hyp. log. of 6 = 1^7917594; then N = the
number whose hyp. log. is 1^7917594 +.05451497 y. And then by assuming several
values of one of the letters x, y, the corresponding values of the other will
be found from one of the two equations above.

And in this manner were calculated the numbers in the following table; from
which the curve being constructed, it will be as appears in the figure to the
example. -- And thus we have an arch in equilibrium in all its parts, and its
top a straight line, as is generally required in most bridges; or at least they
are so near a horizontal line, that their difference from it will cause no
sensible ill consequence. It is also both both of a graceful figure, and of a
convenient form for the passage through it. So that there can be no good reason
for neglecting to use it in works of any consequence.

The Table for Constructing the Curve in this Example.
Value of KI Value of IC 0 6.000 2 6.035 4 6.144 6 6.324 8 6.580 10 6.914 12
7.330 13 7.571 14 7.834 15 8.120 16 8.430 17 8.766 18 9.168 19 9.517 20 9.934
21 10.381 22 10.858 23 11.368 24 11.911 25 12.489 26 13.106 27 13.761 28 14.457
29 15.196 30 15.980 31 16.811 32 17.693 33 18.627 34 19.617 35 20.665 36 21.774
37 22.948 38 24.190 39 25.505 40 26.894 41 28.364 42 29.919 43 31.563 44 33.299
45 35.135 46 37.075 47 39.126 48 41.293 49 43.581 50 46.000

The above numbers may be feet or any other lengths of which DQ is 40 and QA is
50. But when DQ is to QA in any other proportion than that of 4 to 5, or when
DK is not to DQ as 6 to 40 or 3 to 20; then the above numbers will not answer;
but others must be found by the same rule, to construct the curve by.

In the beginning of the table, as far as 12, the value of KI is made to differ
by 2, because the value of IC in that part increases so very slowly.

Other examples of given extrados might be taken; but as there can scarcely
ever by any real occasion for them, and as the trouble of calculation would be,
in most cases, extremely great, they are omitted.

SECTION III. Of the Piers.
PROPOSITION VI.
To find the distance QM of the center of gravity of the given circular arc AD,
from DQ the versed sine of the said arc, QA being its right sine.

Solution.
PUT r = the radius, z = any arc DR, and x = its sine TR or QS.

diagram

Then, by mechanics, the force of a particle z of the curve placed at R is TR x
z = xz; and the force of all the particles will be equal to the fluent of xz;
which must be equal to QM drawn into the whole line; that is, QM x z = the
fluent of xz, or QM = 1/ z x fluent of xz. And this is a geneneral theorem,
whether z be a line, surface, or solid; supposing the two former to be affected
with gravity.

Now, by the nature of the circle, ^; and therefore ^; the correct fluent of
which is ^. Consequently QM is ^; which, when x = QA, and z = the arc AD,
becomes ^ the distance from DQ required.

Or, since ^, the same distance QM will be expressed by r x DQ / ARD.

Or, lastly, since r x QUOTH is half the square of the chord AD, the same distance
QM will be equal to AD2/2ARD or AQ2+QUOTH2/2ARD.

Corollary.
When ARD is a quadrant, then AQ = QUOTH = r, and the rule is QM = ( rr/ARD =
rr/.7854x2 r =) r/1^5708. Or QM = r nearly, or = 7/11 r extremely near.

PROPOSITION VII.
THE figure being the same as in the last proposition, in is required to find
the distance Qm of the center of gravity of the arc ARD from the sine AQ.

Solution.
As in the last proposition, QM will be = 1/AR x the fluent of SR x AR.

But, putting z = AR, x = QS = RT, r = the radius, h = DQ, and s = QA, we shall
have ^, and ^; hence ^; the correct fluent of which is ^.

Consequently Qm is = h - r + s- x/ z ^ r = h - r + AS / z ^ r And when R
arrives at D, it is Qm = h - r + sr/ A.

Or, since r is = ss+ hh/2 h, the same distance Qm will be = hh- ss/2 h + hh+
ss/2 h ^ s/ A; where A is the whole arc ARD.

Corollary.
When ARD is a quadrant, then h and s are each = s, and the rule is rr/ A, the
same as in the corollary to the last.

PROPOSITION VIII.
To find the distance QM of the center of gravity of the space AIKDSA from KQ;
supposing DA to be a circular arc whose sine is AQ, its versed sine QUOTH, and AI,
IK, parallel to DQ, QA respectively.

Solution.
Draw RS, ST parallel to DQ, QA. And put a = DK, r = VD = VW the radius of the
circle, x = TS = KR, and z = the area DSRK.

diagram

Then, as in prop. 6, we shall have QM = 1/ z x the fluent of xz.

But z is = RS x x, and ^. Consequently xz is ^: the correct fluent of which is
^.

Wherefore QM is ^, putting m = VK and y = VT. And when SR arrives at AI, then
QM is ^; putting A for the whole space AIKDW.

Corollary 1.
WHEN DA is a quadrant; then the space AIKDSA or AIKQ - ASDQ is ^, and QA = QUOTH
= r. Wherefore, in that case, QM = 3 a+ r/ a+^2146 r x r = 3 a+ r/3 a+^6438 r x
r.

Or QM is = 3 a+ r/3 a+ r x r = 9 a+3 r/9 a+2 r x r nearly. Or, rather, it is =
3 a+ r/3 a+9/14 r x r = 42 a+14 r/42 a+9 r x r extremely near.

Corollary 2.
WHEN a is nothing, then (AD being a quadrant) QM is r/1.2876. Or it is 7/9 r
very nearly.

And when a is = 1/9 r, then QM is r/1.4657. Or 15/22 r very nearly.

Lastly, when a = 1/15 r, which is nearly the proportion in pretty large
arches; then QM is = r/1.406. Or 5/7 r very nearly.

PROPOSITION IX.
To find the distance of the center of gravity of the space kiDSA from the sine
QA of the circular arc ASD; where ki is perpendicular to QAk, and the rest of
the lines as in the last figure.

Solution.
Put a = kA, s = AQ, m = kQ = a + s, r = VW = VD the radius, z = any variable
space krSA, and x = TS the sine of the arc SD. Also A = the space kiDSA.

Then rS = m - x, and, by the circle, ^; hence ^; consequently ^; the correct
fluent of which is s2- x2/2 x m - s3- x3/3. Wherefore the distance from VW is
Vm = s2- x2/2 z x m - s3- x3/3 z for the general space krSA.

And when S arrives at D, x is = 0; and then Vm is = s2 m/2 A - s3/3 A = 3 m-2
s/6 A x s2 = 3 a+ s/6 A x s2 = 3kA+AQ / 6kiDSA x AQ2 = the distance of the
center of gravity from VW.

Corollary.
WHEN A coincides with W, or the arc a quadrant, then s is = r; and the rule
becomes as in Corollary 1 to the last. Also the 2d Corollary to that may be
understood here, making the same suppositions as in it.

Scholium.
THE four preceding propositions are premised as necessary to the examples to
the following general one, which determines the thickness of the piers
necessary to resist the spread or shoot of any given arch, and that whether the
whole or part or none of it is immersed in water. Instances only of circular
arcs are here given; because that in determining the drift of the arch,
whatever its curve may be, it will make little or no difference by supposing it
to be circular.

PROPOSITION X.
To find the thickness of the piers of an arch, necessary to keep the arch in
equilibrium, or to resist its shoot or drift; independent of any other arches.

diagram

Solution.
LET IKDA be the half arch, and IHGL the pier to support it, moveable about the
point G, and bisected by the perpendicular OF.

Through the center of gravity of the arch AIKD draw MN perpendicular to AQ the
semispan, and meeting DN drawn parallel to AQ in N. And continue QA to meet GH
in B.

Put a = DK, h = DQ = MN, c = AM, A = the area or section AIKD of the arch, d =
AL = BG, e = FE, and x = AB = GL the required breadth of the pier.

Now (by prop. 63 Emer. Mechan.) the weight of the arch is to its pressure in
the direction AB, as NM is to MA; hence h c A cA/ h = the force or shoot of the
arch in the direction AB; which being drawn into the length of the lever BG =
d, we have cdA/ h for the efficacious force of the arch to overset the pier, or
to turn it about the point G. Again, ex is = the area of the section of the
pier; which being supposed to be collected into the middle line OF, it may be
considered as a weight appended to the end E of the lever EG; therefore ex x EG
= exx will be the efficacious force of the pier to prevent its being
overturned. And that the arch and pier may be just kept in equilibrium, we must
make the force and resistance equal to each other, that is exx = cdA/ h Hence
then x = 2 cdA/ eh = 2AMxALx A/DQxEF will be the breadth or thickness of the
pier required.

In the above investigation it is supposed that the whole of the pier was out
of water: But if any part of it OL be supposed to be immersed in water, that
part will lose so much of its weight as is equal to its bulk of water; and
since the specific gravity of water is to that of common stone, as 1 is to 2,
or as 2 to 5, it is evident that OL will lose 2 parts in 5 of its weight. Hence
then, putting g = OG, since OG x GL = gx is the area immersed, therefore gx =
the weight lost by the immersion; which being taken from ex the whole, we shall
have ex - 2/6 gx as the weight remaining appended to E; then this being drawn
into GE = x, and the product equated to the efficacious force of the arch as
before, we have exx - 1/5 gxx = cdA/ h; and hence x = 10 cdA/ h^5 e-2 g for the
thickness of the pier when it is immersed in water to the height expressed by
g. -- Or, because g will be nearly equal to d, the theorem for the thickness
may be x = 10 cdA/ h^5 e-2 d = 10AMxALx A/DQx5OF-2AL.

Corollary 1.
When DA is a quadrant, the arch is a complete semicircle; and then h is = r, ^
as in Cor. 1 to prop. 8, and by the same Corollary c or r - QM is ^.
Consequently cA is ^.

This value being substituted in the two preceding theorems, we have ^
thickness of the pier when it it is dry. -- Or, if n express what part a is of
r, or DK = 1/ nth of DQ or QA, the same thickness will be ^.

And the thickness when AL is under water will be ^. -- Or, if a = r/ n as
before, the same thickness will be ^.

Corollary 2.
diagram

WHEN HG is = BG in the last figure; then the arch and pier will be as in this
annexed figure. And, e being then = d, the two general theorems will become x =
2 cA/ h = 2 AxAM / DQ for the thickness of the pier when dry, and x = 10 cA/3 h
= 10 AxAM / 3DQ = the thickness when under water.

So that, in this case, it makes no difference of whatever height LA the pier
is to the springing of the arch. For though the drift of the arch be increased
with the length of the lever or height of the pier, the weight of the pier
itself, which acts against it, is also increased in the same proportion.

Scholium.
IN the investigation of this proposition, the sections of the arch and pier
are used for their solidities, as being evidently in the same proportion, or in
that of their weights, since they are of the same length, viz. the breadth of
the bridge.

By the above rules, together with those in the four preceding propositions,
the necessary thickness of a pier may be found, so that it shall just balance
the spread or shoot of the arch, independent of any other arch on the other
side of the pier. But the weight of the pier ought a little to preponderate
against or exceed in effect the shoot of the arch; and therefore the thickness
ought to be taken a little more than what will be found by these rules; unless
it be supposed that the pointed projections of the piers against the stream,
beyond the common breadth of the bridge, will be a sufficient addition to the
pier, to give it the necessary preponderancy. -- But there is one very material
thing, on account of which the thickness of the piers may be much diminished;
viz. by the stones of the wall above the voussoirs being bonded in with those
of the pier and with one another, the pier will carry part of their weight;
which will not only diminish the weight of the whole arch and wall, but will
also both add the same to the weight of the pier, and lengthen the lever EG, by
moving the center of gravity a little nearer to L; but then also M will be a
little nearer to Q, so that AM will be longer, and the effects of the change of
the centers of gravity may be supposed nearly to balance each other. -- In the
foregoing propositions I have considered circular arches only, as it will make
no difference of any consequence, to suppose the arches of any other curve of
the same span and pitch. But this 10th prop. is general for all curves.

I shall now add a few examples of the calculation in numbers, to show the
manner, and in them also to point out the easiest methods of calculation.

EXAMPLE 1.
SUPPOSING the arch in the figure to the proposition to be a semicircle whose
height or pitch is 45 feet, and consequently its span 90 feet; also suppose the
thickness DK at top to be 6 feet, and the height LA to the springing 18; and
let it be required to find the thickness GL of the pier necessary to resist the
drift of the arch.

This will be immediately found by Cor. 1, in which AQ is = 45, AL = 18, and n
= r/ a = 45/6 = 7.

Then the first expression ^ will become 540/2415 = 10^988, or 11 feet nearly
for the thickness of the pier when dry.

And the latter expression ^ will give 540/2163 = 11^61 feet for the thickness
when 18 feet are under water.

EXAMPLE 2.
In the same figure, suppose the span to be 100 feet, the height 40 feet; also
the thickness at top 6 feet, and the height of the pier to the springer 18 feet
as before.

Here the figure either is or may be considered as a scheme arch, or the
segment of a circle, in which the versed sine QUOTH is = 40, and the right sine QA
= 50; also DK = 6, AL = 18, OF = 64.

Now, by the nature of the circle, the radius VD = r is = QA2+QUOTH2/2QUOTH =
502+402/80 = 50; hence VQ = 51 - 40 = 11; and the area of the semi-segment ADQ
will be found to be 1490.9998, or 1491 nearly; which being taken from the
rectangle AIKQ = AQ x QK = 50 x 46 = 2300, there remains 809 = A the area AIKD.
Then, by prop. 8, QM will be = VD2-VQ2/2 A x VK - VD3-VQ3/3 A =
51^252-11^252/2x809 x 57 - 51^253-11^253/3x809 = 33^58; and consequently MA =
AQ - QM = 50 - 33^58 = 16^42.

Then, the first expression 2ALxAMx A/DQxEF will become 36x16^42x809/40x64 =
13^67, or 13 feet nearly = the thickness of the pier when dry.

And the latter expression 10ALxAMx A/DQx5OF-2AL will give
180x16^42x809/40x320-36 = 14^508, or 14 feet nearly = the thickness when 18
feet are under water.

EXAMPLE 3.
diagram

LET the arch be of the gothic kind, as in the annexed figure; in which DA is a
circular arc whose center is V, its sine DQ = 50 = the height of the arch, its
versed sine AQ = 40 = the semi-span, the thickness at top DK = 6, and the
height AL of the pier to the spring = 18 as before.

Here the radius VA = 51 as in the last example, and the semi-segment ADQ =
1491, also the same as in the last example; then the rectangle IQ is = AQ x QK
= 40 x 56 = 2240; from which taking the semi-segment, there remains 749 = A for
the area AIKD. Then, by prop. 9, VM will be equal to 3KD+DQ / 6 A x DQ2 =
18+50/6x749 x 502 = 37^83; and hence MA = c = 51.25 - 37.83 = 13.42.

Then the first expression 2ALxAMx A/DQxIL will become 36x13^42x749/50x74 =
9^889, or nearly 10 feet for the thickness of the pier when when it is all out
of water.

And the latter one 10ALxMAx A/DQx5IL-2AL will give 180x13^42x809/50x370-36 =
10^409, or 10 nearly = the thickness when 18 feet are under water.

EXAMPLE 4.
WHEN the arch stones only are laid, and the pier built no higher than the
spring, it will appear as in the figure to corollary 2. And then if, in the
first case, the arch be a complete semicircle whose diameter is 90 feet, and
the thickness everywhere DK = AS = 6 feet: It is required to find the breadth
of the piers.

The bounding arcs being quadrants, the area ADKS will be AD+KS / 2 x DK =
90+102/2 x11/14 x 6 = 144 x 22/7 = 452^4 = A. Now if TW be another concentric
quadrant bisecting the area ADKS, the center of gravity of TW may be taken for
that of the said area. And then, by the corollary to prop. 6, QM will be 7/11
QT; but since the quadrants QDA, QTW, QKS are in arithmetic progression, the
squares of their semidiameters QUOTH, QT, QK will be in the same progression, that
is 2QT2 = QUOTH2 + QK2, or QT = QUOTH2+QK2/2 = 452+512/2 = 48^094; hence then QM =
7/11 QT is = 7/11 x 48^095 = 30^605, and consequently MA = 45 - 30^6 = 14^4.

Then the former of the two expressions in corollary 2 to this proposition,
will give GL or 2 AxAM / DQ = 904^8x14^4/45 = 17^016, or 17 feet for the
thickness of the pier when out of water.

And the latter one 10 AxAM / 3DQ will become 4524x14^4/135 = 21^97, or nearly
22 feet for the thickness when the pier is immersed in water.

Scholium.
OR, because QT is nearly an arithmetic mean between QUOTH and QK, half the sum of
OD and QK might have been used instead of it, without causing any sensible
difference in the conclusion.

We might also exhibit general theorems for the thickness, in terms of the
radius only. For, taking QT or QW = QUOTH+QK / 2, by the corollary to prop. 6 we
have QM = 7/11 QW = QUOTH+QK / 22 x 7, and thence AM = c = AQ - QM = QA - 7QUOTH+7QK
/ 22 = 8QUOTH-7DK / 22. Also A = AD+KS / 2 x DK = QUOTH+QK / 2 x 11/7 DK = 2QUOTH+DK /
14 x 11DK. Then these values being substituted in the expression 2 AxAM / QUOTH we
shall have 16QUOTH2-6QDxDK-7DK2/14QUOTH x DK for the thickness of the pier when dry;
and the same expression multiplied by 5/3 will give the thickness when the pier
is immersed in water. And, farther, if DK be assumed equal to any part of DQ,
as DK = n x DQ; then the thickness in the former case will be QUOTH x 16-6 n-7
nn/14 x n, and in the latter QUOTH x 80-30 n-35 nn/42 x n.

Then, by assuming several values of n from 1/10 to, which are beyond the
limits of it, the several breadths of the piers corresponding to the several
values of the thickness of the arch, both when the pier is supposed to be out
of water, and immersed in it, will be found from these expressions as in the
following table; where the fractional part 1/7 or 2/15 is also given because it
is the most common proportion.

A table of the Breadth or Thickness of a Pier answering to the several
thicknesses of a semicircular arch, as in the foregoing example, QUOTH being the
radius or semi-span.
For the pier dry For the pier in water Thickness of the arch Thickness of the
pier Thickness of the arch Thickness of the pier 1/10 QUOTH.331 QUOTH 1/10 QUOTH.427 QUOTH
1/9 QUOTH.348 QUOTH 1/9 QUOTH.449 QUOTH QUOTH.368 QUOTH QUOTH.475 QUOTH 1/7 QUOTH 379 QUOTH 1/7 QUOTH.488 QUOTH 1/7
QUOTH.391 QUOTH 1/7 QUOTH.505 QUOTH QUOTH.420 QUOTH QUOTH.542 QUOTH QUOTH.455 QUOTH QUOTH.588 QUOTH

EXAMPLE 5.
BUT supposing the same figure in Cor. 2 to be a circular segment, whose chord
or span is 100 feet, and height 40 feet, also the thickness of the arch 6 feet:
To find the thickness of the piers.

Here the radius of the middle arc TW is QW2+QT2/2QT = 532+432/86 = 54 7/43;
hence TW is an arc of 78 6, and its length will be 73.8293; which being
multiplied by DK = AS = 6, we have A = 442.9758. Then, by prop. 6, QM will be
found = 532+432/2x73^8293 = 31^545. And consequently AM = 50 - 31.545 = 18.455.

Hence, by Cor. 2, it will be 2 AxAM / DQ = 885^9516x18^455/40 the thickness of
the pier when dry.

And 10 AxAM / 3DQ = 4429^758x18^455/120 = 26^101 = the thickness in water.

Otherwise.
BUT if the arch be supposed to increase in thickness from the top at D, where
it is 6 feet, all the way to the spring, where it is AS = 12 feet suppose; the
height and span being 40 and 100 as before.

Then QS = 62, QW = 56, and QT = 43. Hence the radius of the arc TW will be
QW2+QT2/2QT = 562+432/86 = 59^3452; and therefore TW is an arc of 70 40, and
its length = 73.1945. Consequently the area ADKS or TW x DK+AS / 2 will be
73.1945 x 9 = 658.75 = A. And, by prop. 6, QM will be 562+432/2x73^1945 =
34^053; and therefore AM = 50 - 34.053 = 15.947.

Hence, as above, 1317^5x15^947/40 = 22^918 will be the thickness of the pier
when dry.

And 6587^5x15^947/120 = 29^588 = the thickness in water.

EXAMPLE 6.
In a gothic arch whose thickness at top is 6, the span 80, and height 50 feet;
to find the thickness of the piers.

diagram

By the last example, TW is = 73.8293, its radius 54 7/43, and the area ADKS =
442.9758. Then, by prop. 7, we have ^; and hence AM = 40 - 27.718 = 12.282.

Then, by Cor. 2, we shall have 2x442^9758x12^282/50 = 14^752 for the thickness
of the pier when dry.

And 4429^758x12^282/150 = 19^045 the thickness when in water.

Also if the arch stones were supposed to lengthen all the way from the top
toward the lower end, the calculation might be made as in the last example.

Having, in these 2d and 3d sections, gone through the calculations for the
form of arches, and the thickness of piers; I shall now in the next section add
some investigations of rules for determining the best form of the ends of the
piers, with the force of the water upon them, etc.

SECTION IV. The Force of the Water, etc.
PROPOSITION XI.
TO determine the form of the ends of a pier, so as to make the least
resistance to, or be the least subject to the force of the stream of water.

Solution.
LET the following figure represent a horizontal section of the pier, AB its
breadth, CD the given length or projection of the end, and ADB the line
required, whether right or curved; also let OF represent the force of a
particle of water acting on AD at F in the direction parallel to the axe CD;
produce OF to meet AB in G, and draw the tangent FH, also draw EH perpendicular
to FH, HI perpendicular to OF, and FK perpendicular to DC.

diagram

Now the absolute force OF of the particle of water may be resolved into the
two forces EH, HF, and in those directions; of these the latter one, acting
parallel to the curve, is of no effect; and the former EH is resolved into the
two EI, IH; so that EI is the efficacious force of the particle to move the
pier in the direction of its axe or length: That is, the absolute force is to
the efficacious force, as OF is to EI. -- Then, since OF is the diameter of a
semicircle passing through H, by the nature of the circle we shall have OF EI
OF2 EH2 (by similar triangles) HF2 HI2 and the square of the fluxion of the
curve or line the square of the fluxion of the ordinate FK, because HF, HI are
parallel to the line and ordinate.

Wherefore, putting the abscissa DK = x, the ordinate KF = y, and the line DF =
z, we shall have as z2 y2 1 (the force OF y2/ z2) = the force of the particle
at F to move the pier in the direction EFG. But the number of particles
striking against the indefinitely small part of the line, is as y; this drawn
into the above found force of each, we have y3/ z2 = y3/ x2+ y2 for the fluxion
of the force, or the force acting against the part z of the line.

But, by the proposition, the whole force on DFA must be a minimum, or the
fluent of y3/ x2+ y2 must be a minimum when that of x becomes equal to the
constant quantity DC; in which case it will be found that ^ must be always
equal to a constant quantity q; and hence ^.

Now in this equation it is evident that x is to y in a constant ratio; but if
two fluxions be always in a constant ratio, their fluents x, y, are known to be
also in a constant ratio, which is the property of a right line.

Wherefore DFA is a right line, and the end ADB of the pier must be a
right-lined triangle, that the force of the water upon it may be the least
possible.

PROPOSITION XII.
TO determine the resistance of the end of a pier against the stream of water.

Solution.
USING here the figure and notation of the last proposition, by the same it is
found that the fluxion of the force of the stream against the face DF is y3/
x2+ y2; and since the fluxion of the force against the base is y, it follows
that the force of the stream against the base AB is to the force against the
face ADB, as (y) the fluent of y is to the fluent of y3/ x2+ y2. That is, the
the absolute force of the stream is to the efficacious force against the face
of the pier, as its breadth is to double the fluent of y3/ x2+ y2 when y is
equal to half the breadth.

Corollary 1. IF the face ADB be retilineal.
Putting DC = a, CA = b, and ^; as a b x y by similar triangles; hence x = ay/
b, and x = ay/ b; this being written for it in the general expression above, we
have ^ for the fluxion of the force on AD; the fluent of which, or bby/ cc, is
the force itself. And consequently the force on the flat base AB is to that on
the triangular end, as y to bby/ cc, or as cc to bb, that is, as AD2 to AC2.

And if AC be equal to CD, or ADB a right angle, which is generally the case,
then AD2 = 2AC2, and the force on the base to that on the face, as 2 to 1.

Moreover, as the force on ADB, when ADB is a right angle, is only half of the
absolute force, so it is evident that the force will be more than one-half when
ADB is greater than a right angle, and less when it is less; and also that the
longer AD is, the less the force is, it being always inversely as the square of
AD.

Corollary 2. IF ADB be a semicircle.
The radius AC = CD = a; then 2 ax - xx = yy, or ^, and ^; hence ^ becomes ^,
the fluent of which is aa- vy/ aa x y; and therefore the force on the base is
to the force on the circular end, as y is to aa- yy/ aa x y, or as aa to aa -
yy, or as 3 aa to 3 aa - yy.

And when y = a = AC, the proportion becomes that of 3 to 2.

So that only one-third of the absolute force is taken off by making the end a
semicircle.

Corollary 3. WHEN the face ADB is a parabola.
Then, the notation being as before, viz. DC = a, and AC = b, we have a bb x
yy; hence x = ayy/ bb, and x = 2 ayy/ bb; which being A TABLE of the natural
RISE of WATER, in Proportin to the Resistance or Obstruction it meets with, in
its Passage.
Construction of a modern bridge of 2 arches. Velocity of the Current in one
Second OBSTRUCTIONS, OR RESISTANCES. Stages of Accumulation in Floods
Construction of an ancient bridge of 3 or more arches. Resistance 1-11th 1-8th
1-4th 3-8ths 1-half 5-8ths 3-4ths 7-8ths Resistance 5-18ths Rise of Water
Proportional Rise of Water in Feet, Inches, and Parts. Rise of Water F. I. Pts.
F. I. Pts. F. I. Pts. F. I. Pts. F. I. Pts. F. I. Pts. F. I. Pts. F. I. Pts. F.
I. Pts. 0 0.133 1 foot 0 0.158 0 0.283 0 0.49 0 0.87 0 1.69 0 4.041 1 4.728
Uniform Tenors. 0 0.320 0 0.533 2 feet 0 0.635 0 1.133 0 7.96 0 3.48 0 6.77 1
4.164 5 6.9 0 1.28 0 1.2 3 feet 0 1.428 0 2.549 0 4.41 0 7.835 1 3.234 3 0.368
12 6.53 Ordinary Floods. 0 2.881 0 2.133 4 feet 0 2.539 0 5.439 0 7.89 1 1.928
2 3.08 5 4.656 22 3.6 0 5.11p 0 3.333 5 feet 0 3.967 0 7.083 1 0.25 1 9.763 3
6.316 8 5.024 34 10.31 Extraordinary Floods. 0 8.003 0 4.799 6 feet 0 5.713 0
10.199 1 5.64 2 7.339 5 0.934 12 1.476 50 2.112 0 11.525 Pier 12 Velocities
above seldom happen. Piers 20 Piers 40 Piers 60 Piers 80 Piers 100 Piers 120
Piers 140 Torrents above generally Inundations. Piers 50 River 132 Arches 140
Arches 140 Arches 160 Arches 160 Arches 160 Arches 160 Arches 160 Arches 180
This, next to one arch, which has no resistance, without the flood encroaches
on its crown, the most eligible mode. N. B. These several numbers,
respectively, show how high the wather is constrained to rise above its natural
level, or surface; which would otherwise, carry it off, in a free and
uninterrupted passage; therefore these numbers must everywhere be added to the
depth of water, below the fall, to give the true height of the flood. -- The
seven predicaments above show the excellence or imperfection of bridges, of
every construction, and in all states of a capacity, and the pernicious
consequences of all such as are not so. -- London bridge is nearly in the 6th
predicament of this table, and Westminster bridge nearly in the 2nd. At the 1st
of these the Thames, with a velocity of about 3 f. 2 in. per second, rises to
about 4 f. 7 in. and at the latter, with a velocity of 2.5 f. per second, to
only 2.5 inches. In this most common mode seldom sufficient in a flood, the
water soon encroaches on the arches, and changes the predicament. This table to
face page 77. written in the general expression, the fluent of it becomes the
circular are whose radius is bb/2 a and tangent y; and so the absolute force is
to the force on the parabolic end, as y to the arc whose tangent is y and
radius bb/2 a; that is, as the tangent of an arc is to the arc itself, the
radius being to the tangent as 2 to bb/ ay. And when y = b, the ratio of the
tangent to radius, is that of 2 to b/ a; or that of 2 to 1 when DC = CA. In
which case the whole force is to the force on the parabolic end, as the tangent
is to the arc of which the tangent is double the radius; that is, as the
tangent of 63 26 4 to the are of the same, or as 2 to 1.10714; which is a less
force than on the circle, but greater than on the triangle.

And so on for other curves; in which it will be found that the nearer they
approach to right lines, the less the force will be, and that it is least of
all in the triangle, in which it is one-half of the whole absolute force when
right-angled.

The annexed folding-out sheet shows at one view the rise of the water under
the arches arising from its obstruction by the piers, according to several
rates of velocity, etc.

SECTION V. Of the Terms or Names of the various parts peculiar to a Bridge,
and the Machines, etc. used about it; disposed in alphabetical order.
ABUTMENT, or BUTMENT, which see in its place below.

ARCH, and opening of a bridge, through or under which the water, etc. passes,
and which is supported by piers or by butments.

Arches are denominated circular, elliptical, cycloidal, catenarian, etc.
according to the figure of the curve of them. There are also other
denominations of circular arches according to the different parts of a circle:
So, a semicircular arch is half the circle; a scheme or skeen arch is a segment
less than the semicircle; and arches of the third and fourth point, or gothic
arches, consist of two circular arcs, excentric and meeting in an angle at top,
each being 1-3d or 1-4th, etc. of the whole circle.

The chief properties of the most considerable arches, with regard to the
extrados they require, etc. may be learned from the second section. It there
appears that none, but the arch of equilibration in the example to prop. 5, can
admit of a horizontal line at top; that this arch is not only of a graceful but
of a convenient form, as it may be made higher or lower at pleasure with the
same opening; that it, but no other, with a horizontal top, can be equally
strong in all its parts, and therefore ought to be used in all works of much
consequence. All the other arches require tops that are curved either upward or
downward, some more and some less: Of these the elliptical arch seems to be the
fittest to be substituted instead of the equilibrial one with any tolerable
degree of propriety; it is in general also the best form for most bridges, as
it can be made of any height to the same span, or of any span to the same
height, while at the same time its hanches are sufficiently elevated above the
water, even when it is pretty flat at top; which is a property of which the
other curves are not possessed in the same degree; and this property is the
more valuable, because it is remarked that after an arch is built and the
centering struck, it settles more about the hanches than the other parts, by
which other curves are reduced near to a straight line at the hanches.
Elliptical arches also look bolder, are really stronger, and require less
materials and labor than the others. Of the other curves, the cycloidal arch
is next in quality to the elliptical one, for all the above properties. And,
lastly, the circle. As to the others, the parabola, hyperbola, and catenary,
they may not at all be admitted in bridges of several arches; but may in some
cases be used for a bridge of one single arch which is to rise very high,
because then not much loaded at the hanches. We may hence also perceive the
falsity of those arguments which assert, that because the catenarian curve
supports itself equally in all its parts, it will therefore best support any
additional weight laid upon it: for the additional building made to raise the
bridge to a horizontal line, or nearly such, by pressing more in one part than
another, must force those parts down, and the whole must fall. Whereas other
curves will not support themselves at all without some additional parts built
above them, to balance them, or to reduce their parts to an equilibrium.

ARCHIVOLT, the curve or line formed by the upper sides of the voussoirs or
arch stones. It is parallel to the intrados or underside of the arch when the
voussoirs are all of the same length; otherwise not.

By the archivolt is also sometimes understood the whole set of voussoirs.

BANQUET, the raised foot path at the sides of the bridge next the parapet.
This ought to be allowed in all bridges of any considerable size: it should be
raised about a foot above the middle or horse passage, made 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.
feet broad according to the size of the bridge, and paved with large stones
whose length is equal to the breadth of the walk.

BATTARDEAU, or Coffer-dam, a case of piling, etc. without a bottom, fixed in
the bed of the river, water-tight or nearly so, by which to lay the bottom dry
for a space large enough to build the pier on. When it is fixed, its sides
reaching above the level of the water, the water is pumped out of it, or drawn
off by engines, etc. till the space be dry; and it is kept so by the same
means, if there are leaks which cannot be stopped, till the pier is built up in
it; and then the materials of it are drawn up again.

Battardeaux are made in various manners, either by a single enclosure, or by a
double one, with clay or chalk rammed in between the two, to prevent the water
from coming through the sides. And these enclosures are also made either with
piles only, driven close by one another, and sometimes notched or dove-tailed
into each other; or with piles grooved in the sides, driven in at a distance
from one another, and boards let down between them in the grooves.

The method of building in battardeaux cannot well be used where the river is
either deep or rapid. It also requires a very good natural bottom of solid
earth or clay; for, although the sides be made water-tight, if the bottom or
bed of the river be of a loose consistence, the water will ooze up through it
in too great abundance to be evacuated by the engines.

It is almost needless to remark that the sides must be made very strong, and
well propt or braced in the inside, to prevent the ambient water from pressing
the sides in, and forcing its way into the battardeau.

BRIDGE, a work of carpentry or masonry, built over a river, canal, etc. for
the convenience of crossing the same.

A stone bridge is an edifice forming a way over a river, etc. supported by one
arch or by several arches, and these again supported by proper piers or
butments.

A stately bridge over a large river is one of the most noble and striking
pieces of art. To behold huge and bold arches, composed of an immense quantity
of small materials, as stones, bricks, etc. so disposed and united together
that they seem to form but one solid compact body, affording a safe passage for
men and carriages over large waters, which with their navigation pass free and
easy under them at the same time, is a sight truly surprising and affecting
indeed.

To the absolutely necessary parts of a bridge already mentioned, viz. the
arches, piers, and abutments, may be added the paving at top, the parapet wall,
either with or without a balustrade, etc. also the banquet or raised foot way
on each side, leaving a sufficient breadth in the middle for horses and
carriages. The breadth of a bridge for a great city should be such as to allow
an easy passage for three carriages and two horsemen abreast in the middle
way, and for three foot passengers in the same manner on each banquet. And for
other less bridges a less breadth.

As a bridge is made for a way or passage over a river, etc. so it ought to be
made of such a height as will be quite convenient for that passage; but yet so
as to be consistent with the interest and concerns of the river itself, easily
admitting through its arches the craft that navigate upon it, and all the water
even at high tides and floods. The neglect of this precept has been the ruin of
many bridges, and particularly that at Newcastle, over the river Tyne, on the
17th of november 1771. So that in determining its height, the conveniences
both of the passage over it and under it should be considered, and the height
made to answer the best for them both, observing to make the convenient give
place to the necessary when their interests are opposite.

Bridges are generally placed in a direction perpendicular to the stream in a
direct line, to give free passage to the water, etc. But some think they should
be made not in a straight line, but unequal toward the stream, the better to
resist floods, etc. And some such bridges have been made.

Again, a bridge should not be made in too narrow a part of a navigable river,
or one subject to tides or floods: because the breadth being still more
contracted by the piers, will increase the depth, velocity, and fall of the
water under the arches, and endanger the whole bridge and navigation.

The number of arches of a bridge are generally made odd; either that the
middle of the stream or chief current may flow freely without the interruption
of a pier; or that the two halves of the bridge, by gradually rising from the
ends to the middle, may there meet in the highest and largest arch; or else,
for the sake of grace, that by being open in the middle, the eye in viewing it
may look directly through there, as one always expects to do in looking at it,
and without which opening one generally feels a disappointment in viewing it.

If the bridge be equally high throughout, the arches, being all of a height,
are made all of a size; which causes a great saving of centering. If the bridge
be higher in the middle than at the ends, let the arches decrease from the
middle toward each end, but so as that each half have the arches exactly
alike, and that they decrease in span, proportionally to their height, so as to
be always the same kind of figure, and similar parts of that figure: thus, if
one be a semicircle, let the rest be semicircles also, but proportionally less;
if one be a segment of a circle, let the rest be similar segments of other
circles; and so for other figures. The arches being equal at equal distances on
both sides of the middle, is not only for the strength and beauty of the
bridge, but that the centering of the one half may serve for the other also.
But if the bridge be higher at the ends than in the middle, the arches ought to
increase in span and pitch from the middle toward the ends.

When the middle and ends are of different heights, their difference however
ought not to be great in proportion to the length, that the ascent may be easy;
and then also it is more beautiful to make the top one continued curve than two
inclined straight lines from the ends toward the middle.

Bridges should rather be of few and large arches than of many and small ones,
if the height and situation will possibly allow of it; for this will leave more
free passage for the water and navigation, and be a great saving in materials
and labor, as there will be fewer piers and centers, and the arches themselves
will require less materials.

For the fabric of a bridge, and the proper estimation of the expense, etc.
there are generally necessary three plans, three sections, and an elevation.
The three plans are so many horizontal sections, viz. the first a plan of the
foundation under the piers, with the particular circumstances attending it,
whether of gratings, planks, piles, etc. the second is the plan of the piers
and arches, etc. and the third is the plan of the superstructure, with the
paved road and banquet. The three sections are vertical ones; the first of them
a longitudinal section from end to end and through the middle of the breadth;
the second a transverse one, or across it, and through the summit of an arch;
and the third also across, and taken upon a pier. The elevation is an
orthographic projection of one side or face of the bridge, or its appearance as
viewed at an infinite distance, and shows the exterior aspect of the materials,
and the manner in which they are worked and decorated.

Other observations are to be seen in the first section.

BUTMENTS, or abutments, the extremities of a bridge, by which it joins to or
abuts upon the land or sides of the river, etc. These must be made very secure,
quite immovable, and more than barely sufficient to resist the drift of its
adjacent arch. So that if there are not rocks or very solid banks to raise them
against, they must be well reinforced with proper walls or returns, etc. The
thickness of them that will be barely sufficient to resist the shoot of the
arch, may be calculated as that of a pier by prop. 10.

When the foundation of a butment is raised against a sloping bank of rock,
gravel, or good solid earth, it will produce a saving of materials and labor,
to carry the work on by returns at different heights, like steps of stairs.

CAISSON, a kind of chest, or flat-bottomed boat, in which a pier is built,
then sunk to the bed of the river, and the sides loosened and taken off from
the bottom, by a contrivance for that purpose; the bottom of it being left
under the pier as a foundation. It is evident therefore that the bottoms of
caissons must be made very strong and fit for the foundations of the piers. The
caisson is kept a-float till the pier be built to about the height of low water
mark; and for that purpose its sides must either be made of more than that
height at first, or else gradually raised to it as it sinks by the weight of
the work, so as always to keep its top above water. And therefore the sides
must be made very strong, and kept asunder by cross timbers within, lest the
great pressure of the ambient water crush the sides in, and so not only
endanger the work, but also drown the men who work within it. The caisson is
made of the shape of the pier, but some feet wider on every side to make room
for the men to work: the whole of the sides are of two pieces, both joined to
the bottom quite around, and to each other at the salient angle, so as to be
disengaged from the bottom and from each other when the pier is raised to the
desired height, and sunk. It is also convenient to have a little sluice made in
the bottom, occasionally to open and shut, to sink the caisson and pier
sometimes by, before it be finished, to try if it bottom level and rightly; for
by opening the sluice, the water will rush in and fill it to the height of the
exterior water, and the weight of the work already built will sink it; then by
shutting the sluice again, and pumping out the water, it will be made to float
again, and the rest of the work may be completed: but it must not be sunk but
when the sides are high enough to reach above the surface of the water,
otherwise it cannot be raised and laid dry again. Mr. Labelye tells us that the
caissons in which he built some of the piers of Westminster bridge, contained
above 150 load of fir timber of 40 cubic feet each, and was of more tonnage or
capacity than a 40 gun ship of war.

CENTERS, are the timber frames erected in the spaces of the arches to turn
them on, by building on them the voussoirs of the arch. As the center serves as
a foundation for the arch to be built on, when the arch is completed, that
foundation is struck from under it, to make way for the water and navigation,
and then the arch will stand of itself from its curved figure. A center must
therefore be constructed of the exact figure of the intended arch, unequal as
the arch is concave, to receive it on as a mould. If the form be circular, the
curve is struck from a central point by a radius: if it be elliptical, it ought
to be struck with a doubled cord, passing over two pins or nails fixed in the
focusses, as the mathematicians describe their ellipses; and not by striking
different pieces or arcs of circles from several centers; for these will form
no ellipse at all, but an irregular misshapen curve made up of broken pieces of
different circular arcs: but if the arch be of any other form, the several
abscissas and ordinates ought to be calculated, then their corresponding
lengths, transferred to the centering, will give so many points of the curve,
and exactly by which points bending a bow of pliable matter, the curve may be
drawn by it.

The centers are constructed of beams, etc. of timber firmly pinned and bound
together, into one entire compact frame, covered smooth at top with planks or
boards to place the voussoirs on, the whole supported by offsets in the sides
of the piers, and by piles driven into the bed of the river, and capable of
being raised and depressed by wedges, contrived for that purpose, and for
taking them down when the arch is completed. They ought also to be constructed
of a strength more than sufficient to bear the weight of the arch.

In taking the center down; first let it down a little, all in a piece, by
easing some of the wedges; there let it rest a few hours or days to try if the
arch make any efforts to fall, or any joints open, or stones crush or crack,
etc. that the damage may be repaired before the center is entirely removed,
which is not to be done till the arch ceases to make any visible efforts.

In some bridges the centering makes a very considerable part of the expense,
and therefore all means of saving in this article ought to be closely attended
to; such as making few arches, and as nearly alike or similar as possible, that
the centering of one arch may serve for others, and at least that the same
center may be used for both of each pair of equal arches on both sides of the
middle.

CHEST, the same as Caisson.

COFFERDAM, the same as Battardeau.

DRIFT, Shoot, or Thrust of an arch, is the push or force which it exerts in
the direction of the length of the bridge. This force arises from the
perpendicular gravitation of the stones of the arch, which, being kept from
descending by the form of the arch and the resistance of the pier, exert their
force in a lateral or horizontal direction. This force is computed in prop. 10,
where the thickness of the pier is determined that is necessary to resist it;
and is greater the lower the arch is, coeteris paribus.

ELEVATION, the orthographic projection of the front of a bridge on the
vertical plane parallel to its length. This is necessary to show the form and
dimensions of the arches and other parts as to height and breadth, and
therefore has a plain scale annexed to it to measure the parts by. It also
shows the manner of working up and decorating the fronts of the bridge.

EXTRADOS, the exterior curvature or line of an arch. In the propositions of
the second section it is the outer or upper line of the wall above the arch;
but it often means only the upper or exterior curve of the voussoirs.

FOUNDATIONS, the bottoms of the piers, etc. or the bases on which they are
built. These bottoms are always to be made with projections, greater or less
according to the spaces on which they are built. And according to the nature of
the ground, depth and velocity of water, etc. the foundations are laid and the
piers built after different manners, either in caissons, in battardeaux, on
stilts with sterlings, etc. for the particular methods of doing which, see each
under its respective term.

The most obvious and simple method of laying the foundations and raising the
piers up to water-mark, is to turn the river out of its course above the place
of the bridge, into a new channel cut for it near the place where it makes an
elbow or turn; then the piers are built on dry ground, and the water turned
into its old course again, the new one being securely banked up. This is
certainly the best method, when the new channel can be easily and conveniently
made; but which however is seldom or never the case.

Another method is to lay only the space of each pier dry till it be built, by
surrounding it with piles and planks driven down into the bed of the river, so
close together as to exclude the water from coming in; then the water is pumped
out of the enclosed space, the pier built in it, and lastly the piles and
planks drawn up. This is coffer-dam work, but evidently cannot be practiced if
the bottom be of a loose consistence admitting the water to ooze and spring up
through it.

When neither the whole nor part of the river can be easily laid dry as above,
other methods are to be used; such as to build either in caissons or on stilts,
both which methods are described under their proper words; or yet by another
method, which has, though seldom, been sometimes used, without laying the
bottom dry, and which is thus: the pier is built upon strong rafts or gratings
of timber well bound together, and buoyed up on the surface of the water by
strong cables, fixed to other flotes or machines, till the pier is built; the
whole is then gently let down to the bottom, which must be made level for the
purpose. But of these methods, that of building in caissons is the best.

But before the pier can be built in any manner, the ground at the bottom must
be well secured, and made quite good and safe if it be not so naturally. The
space must be bored into to try the consistence of the ground; and if a good
bottom of stone, or firm gravel, clay, etc. be met with within a moderate depth
below the bed of the river, the loose sand, etc. must be removed and dug out
to it, and the foundation laid on the firm bottom on a strong grating or base
of timber made much broader every way than the pier, that there may be the
greater base to press on, to prevent its being sunk. But if a solid bottom
cannot be found at a convenient depth to dig to, the space must then be driven
full of strong piles, whose tops must be sawed off level some feet below the
bed of the water, the sand having been previously dug out for that purpose;
and then the foundation on a grating of timber laid on their tops as before.
Or, when the bottom is not good, if it be made level, and a strong grating of
timber, two, three, or four times as large as the base of the pier be made, it
will form a good base to bulid on, its great size preventing it from sinking.
In driving the piles, begin at the middle, and proceed outward all the way to
the borders or margin: the reason of which is, that if the outer ones were
driven first, the earth of the inner space would be thereby so jammed together,
as not to allow the inner piles to be driven. And besides the piles immediately
under the piers, it is also very prudent to drive in a single, double, or
triple row of them around and close to the frame of the foundation, cutting
them off a little above it, to secure it from slipping aside out of its place,
and to bind the ground under the pier the firmer. For, as the safety of the
whole bridge depends on the foundation, too much care cannot be used to have
the bottom made quite secure.

JETTEE, the border made around the stilts under a pier, being the same with
Sterling.

IMPOST, is the part of the pier on which the feet of the arches stand, or from
which whey spring.

KEYSTONE, the middle voussoir, or the arch stone in the top or immediately
over the center of the arch. The length of the keystone, or thickness of the
archivolt at top, is allowed to be about 1-15th or 1-16th of the span, by the
best architects.

ORTHOGRAPHY, the elevation of a bridge, or front view as seen at an infinite
distance.

PARAPET, the breast wall made on the top of a bridge to prevent passengers
from falling over. In good bridges, to build the parapet but a little part of
its height close or solid, and upon that a balustrade to above a man's height,
has an elegant effect.

PIERS, the walls built for the support of the arches, and from which they
spring as their bases.

They ought to be built of large blocks of stone, solid throughout, and cramped
together with iron, which will make the whole as one solid stone. Their faces
or ends, from the base up to high water mark, ought to project sharp out with a
salient angle, to divide the stream. Or, perhaps, the bottom of the pier should
be built flat or square up to about half the height of low water mark, to allow
a lodgment against it for the sand and mud, to cover the foundation; lest, by
being left bare, the water should in time undermine and so ruin or injure it.
The best form of the projection for dividing the stream, is the triangle; and
the longer it is, or the more acute the salient angle, the better it will
divide it, and the less will the force of the water be against the pier; but it
may be sufficient to make that angle a right one, as it will make the work
stronger, and in that case the perpendicular projection will be equal to half
the breadth or thickness of the pier. In rivers on which large heavy craft
navigate and pass the arches, it may perhaps be better to make the ends
semicircular; for although it does not divide the water so well as the
triangle, it will both better turn off and bear the shock of the craft.

The thickness of the piers ought to be such as will make them of weight or
strength sufficient to support their interjacent arch independent of any other
arches. And then if the middle of the pier be run up to its full height, the
centering may be struck to be used in another arch before the hanches are
filled up. The whole theory of the piers may be seen in the third section.

They ought to be made with a broad bottom on the foundation, and gradually
diminished in thickness by offsets up to low water mark.

The methods of laying their foundations, and building them up to the surface
of the water, are given under the word FOUNDATION.

PILES, are timbers driven into the bed of the river for various purposes, and
are either round, square, or flat like planks. They may be of any wood which
will not rot under water, but oak and fir are mostly used, especially the
latter, on account of its length, streightness, and cheapness. They are shod
with a pointed iron at the bottom, the better to penetrate into the ground; and
are bound with a strong iron band or ring at top, to prevent them from being
split by the violent strokes of the ram by which they are driven down.

Piles are either used to build the foundations on, or are driven about the
pier as a border of defense, or to support the centers on; and in this case,
when the centering is removed, they must either be drawn up or sawed off very
low under water; but it is perhaps better to saw them off and leave them
sticking in the bottom, lest the drawing of them out should loosen the ground
about the foundation of the pier. Those to build on, are either such as are cut
off by the bottom of the water, or rather a few feet within the bed of the
river; or else such as are cut off at low water mark, and then they are called
stilts. Those to form borders of defense, are rows driven in close by the frame
of a foundation, to keep it firm; or else they are to form a case or jettee
about stilts, to keep within it the stones that are thrown in to fill it up; in
this case, the piles are grooved, driven at a little distance from each other,
and plank piles let into the grooves between them, and driven down also, till
the whole space is surrounded. Besides using this for stilts, it is also
sometimes necessary to surround a stone pier with a sterling or jettee, and
fill it up with stones to secure an injured pier from being still more damaged,
and the whole bridge ruined. The piles to support the centers may also serve as
a border of piling to secure the foundation, cutting them off low enough after
the center is removed.

PILE DRIVER, and engine for driving down the piles. It consists of a large ram
of iron sliding perpendicularly down between two guide posts; which being lift
up to the top of them, and there let fall from a great height, comes down upon
the top of the pile with a violent blow. It is worked either with men or
horses, and either with or without wheel-work. That which was used at the
building of Westminster bridge, is perhaps the best ever invented.

PITCH, of an arch, the perpendicular height from the spring or impost to the
keystone.

PLAN, of any part, as of the foundations, or piers, or superstructure, is the
orthographic projection of it on a plane paralled to the horizon.

PUSH, of any arch, the same as drift, shoot, etc.

SALIENT ANGLE, of a pier, the projection of the end against the stream, to
divide it. The right-lined angle best divides the stream, and the more acute
the better for that purpose; but the right angle is generally used as making
the best masonry. A semicircular end, though it does not divide the stream so
well, is sometimes better in large navigable rivers, as it carries the craft
the better off, or bears their shocks the better.

SHOOT, of an arch, the same as drift.

SPRINGERS, are the first or lowest stones of an arch, being those at its feet
bearing immediately on the impost.

STERLINGS, or Jettees, a kind of case made about a pier of stilts, etc. to
secure it, and is particularly described under the next word Stilts.

STILTS, a set of piles driven into the space intended for the pier, whose tops
being sawed level of about low water mark, the pier is then raised on them.
This method was formerly used when the bottom of the river could not be laid
dry; and these stilts were surrounded, at a few feet distance, by a row of
piles and planks, etc. close to them like a coffer-dam, and called a sterling
or jettee; after which loose stones, etc. are thrown or poured down into the
space till it be filled up to the top, by that means forming a kind of pier of
rubble or loose work, and which is kept together by the sides or sterlings:
this is then paved level at the top, and the arches turned upon it. This method
was formerly much used, most of the large old bridges in England being erected
that way, such as London bridge, Newcastle bridge, Rochester bridge, etc. But
the inconveniences attending it are so great, that it is now quite exploded
and disused: for, because of the loose composition of the piers, they must be
made very large or broad, or else the arch would push them over and rush down
as soon as the center was drawn; which great breadth of piers and sterlings so
much contracts the passage of the water, as not only very much incommodes the
navigation through the arch, from the fall and quick motion of the water, but
from the same cause also the bridge itself is in much danger, especially in
time of floods, when the water is too much for the passage. Add to this that
besides the danger there is of the pier bursting out the sterlings, they are
also subject to much decay and damage by the velocity of the water and the
craft passing through the arches.

THRUST, the same as drift, etc.

VOUSSOIRS, the stones which immediately form the arch, their under sides
constituting the intrados. The middle one, or keystone, ought to be about
1-15th or 1-16th of the span, as has been observed; and the rest should
increase in size all the way down to the impost; the more they increase the
better, as they will the better bear the great weight which rests upon them
without being crushed, and also will bind the firmer together. Their joints
should also be cut perpendicular to the curve of the intrados.

THE END.

