A TREATISE of DISEASES OF THE Head, Brain, and Nerves.

More especially of the ^ALSY, APOPLEXY, LETHARGY, EPILEPSY, CONVULSIONS,
FRENZY, VERTIGO, MEGRIM, inveterate HEADACHE, etc. with Directions for their
Thorough Cure; and how these and many other deplorable Nervous Distempers, may
be Prevented as well as Cured, and consequently many Lives saved, by the
Medicines herein, in English, prescribed without the least Reserve.

To which is subjoined, A DISCOURSE Of the Nature, real Cause and certain Cure
of Melancholy in MEN, AND Vapors in WOMEN: ^^structing Persons how to Cure
themselves absolutely of these perplexing and pernicious Disorders, with
Safely, Ease, and Expedition.

By a Physician

Man's Health more on his Head depends,
Than Child on Parents, or a Poor Man Friends:
If That be well, the Body feels no Pain;
But if distempered, Sickness soon will reign
In every other Part, in every Vein.
The Fourth Edition Corrected.

^^^nted, and Sold by the Author's Appointment, at the Two Blue Posts, ^n
Haydon-Yard in the Minories, London. 1721.

Price Stitched 1 s. 6 d. Bound 2 s.

Note, Those who think fit to leave Letters for the Author, at the place where
this Book is sold, are desired not to expect Answers without leaving with them
reasonable Fees.

ERRATA.
PAGE 20. Line 22. read Catalepsis. p. 26. l. the first, read known. p. 33. l.
13. read follows. p. ibid. l. 27. read Medicine. p. 44. l. 32. read
Acorus-Roots. p. 69. l. 31 read times p. 74. l. 12 read Vertiginous

What other litteral Faults may have escaped Correction, the Reader is desired
to amend.

The PREFACE.
THE kind Reception this Book has met with from the Public, appears by nothing
more than the quick Sale of the former Editions: There have not been many
Physic Books, in Respect to the large Number that have been published, of
which Three Thousand Copies have in so short a Time been disposed of; but its
having been well received, and so much called for, since out of Print, is not
the only Motive of reprinting it; the great good the Medicines prescribed in it
have done and daily do to abundance of People afflicted with Diseases of the
Head, Brain, and Nerves, as also to those oppressed with Melancholy and
Vapors, is another of much greater weight; for it being reasonable to believe
there are many hundreds of Persons troubled with those Diseases, who have not
yet seen it, and who by reading it may meet with their Cure, as vast Numbers
have already done, I thought my self for their Sakes, as well as my own
Advantage, obliged to send it again to the Press; and upon looking it over
carefully with that Intention, I did not find occasion for any very material
Additions, and therefore omitted some of slight Consequence I might have made,
purely because those who have bought the other Editions, might not think
themselves imposed upon or be obliged to buy this Fourth, which for that
Reasonis sent into the World again exactly as before, some very few Corrections
excepted.

Of all the Diseases incident to Mankind, there are none more dangerous and
mortal than those of the Head, and Brain, and this my Experience in the Cure of
those Diseases has convinced me of, though I must do my self Justice in
declaring, that I have had as few Patients miscarryed, considering the Number I
have in my Time at^ended, as perhaps any Physician before me: And have ^ured
some who have been so very bad, through delay or improper Medicines, that there
was scarce a Probability of restoring. The Melancholy Circumstances of Persons
so afflicted, is matter of great Concern, because we daily find ignorant Men,
who would be thought Doctors, tampering in those Diseases, as if there were no
danger in them at all; but this in our days is but what was in the days of our
Predecessors, though more now than then, the Art of Physic being surely never
more abused than at this time, and that because there is no Punishment
inflicted on them besides Reproach, which they so little care for, that from
their wonted Assurance they nothing less than laugh at.

The mature Consideration of this, and the Mischiefs I my self have seen in my
Practice, by insignificant or improper Medicines and Management, together with
the Success I have had in many desperate Diseases of the Head, first put me
upon writing this Treatise, this Fourth Edition of which, I am in hopes will be
as kindly accepted by those so afflicted, as I am sure they will upon Trial
find the Methods and Medicines directed to, answer what is said of them.

The Title Page tells you, It is a Treatise of Diseases of the Head, Brain, and
Nerves; and so it is, but as the Eyes, Nose, Tongue, Teeth, Gums, Jaws and
Palate, go to the making up of the Head, the Reader may expect perhaps, I have
treated of them also, which he will not find done, and that because it was no
way material here, any further than that in Chapter the 12th, where I speak of
Catarrhs or Defluxions, I have shown how those Humors affect those Parts, and
that many times by the removing those Humors, those Parts are relieved.

To this Treatise of Diseases of the Head, I have subjoined a Discourse on
Melancholy and Vapors, which though they are not properly Head Diseases, yet
bear such analogy to them, or at least so far affect either the Head, Brain,
Nerves, or all, that they come properly enough to be considered here; and I
persuade my self the Account given of them, will not fall very, short of any
Performance of the like Nature, at leastwise as to the main thing, I mean, the
Curative Part, which however, will be better understood upon the Patient's
Experience than by any thing I can say.

I had put my Name and Place of Habitation to this Book, but that I foresaw it
might not be so well as let alone in this censorious Age, therefore resolved
against it, not that I have any reason, I thank God, to conceal my self, or
need be ashamed either of one or the other; but to supply that want, I have
taken Care to make what I have written the more Plain and Intelligible, having,
in each Disease, not only prescribed what Methods are to be observed, and
Medicines I have found useful to many, but also directed, at the end of the
Book, where those peculiar ones I have prescribed in it, and always found to
stand me in stead on the most urgent Occasions are to be had, I me an by those
who do not understand how, or care not to take the trouble of preparing them
themselves; which by being taken and used at the Book directs, will by the Help
of God, work a perfect Cure, and the Patients have no Occasion to trouble
either themselves or me, for any further Advice or Direction.

This I thought good to hint, with an Assurance that what is written about the
several Distempers, is what the Patients afflicted, too truly find, and also
that the Remedies for Cure, are well adapted, replete with Power to effect what
is said of them, and which I have the Vanity to believe, the Patient will, in
some measure, give Credit to, upon the bear reading what he will find written,
though I am not so weak as to expect anything that is or can be said of them,
will or can convince him like his making Trial of them himself, my Encomiums on
'em, falling far short of what his own Experiencing will prove they deserve.
Therefore the Reader is desired to suspend his Opinion of the Book and
Medicines, till he has Read the former, and Tried the latter, whatever he
judges of the Author, who conceives, let what will be said or thought of him,
by the Method he has taken to serve the Public and Himself, if matters not, if
what is said and recommended in the Book, answer but the Patient's End.

The CONTENTS.
CHap. I. Of the Headache. Page. 1 Chap. II. Of the Megrim. p 8 Chap. III. Of
the Vertigo, Giddiness, or Swimming of the Head p 9 Chap. IV. Of Forgetfulness
or Dotage. p 14 Chap. V. Of Frenzy and Madness. p 17 Chap. VI. Of the Lethargy,
Carus, or sleepy Diseases. p 20 Chap. VII. Of the Coma, or unnatural Watchings.
p 22 Chap. VIII. Of the Apoplexy. p 24 Chap. IX. Of the Palsy and other Nervous
Diseases p 34 Chap. X. Of the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness, also Convulsions
and Cramp. p 41 Chap. XI. Of the Incubus or Nightmare. p 46 Chap. XII. Of a
Catarrh or Defluxion of Rheum hurting the Sight, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting,
Swallowing, etc. p 48
In the Discourse of Melancholy and Vapors.

Chap. I. Of Melancholy; its Nature, Cause and Cure. p 51 Chap. II. Of Vapors
or Hysteric Fits; their real Cause and Cure. p 64
A TREATISE OF DISEASES OF THE Head; Brain and Nerves.
CHAP. I. Of the Headache
THERE are Two sorts of Headache, the Recent or New, and Inveterate or Old
Headache: The former lasts but for a time only; and is either from Cold, hard
Drinking, heat of the Sun, violent Exercise, or the like; and goes away as
those Occasions wear off. The other is constant or lasting, with very little
abatement or intermission, is hard to be eased, and which on light Occasions,
has Extreme sharp Fits, so that the Patient cannot endure any Noise or vehement
Motion, or scarce any Light, but desires to lie in the Dark, and be still; for
Noise, if it be great, renders him almost crazed. But though, as in some, the
Inveterate, or Old Headache, continues always more or less, in others, it goes
away and returns by Fits.

They are both understood by the same common Name of the Heach-ach, but are
vastly different as to Cure, the first going away upon the occasion ceasing, as
I have already said, the other, being of long standing, is inveterate, and with
difficulty removed; it being caused either through much Blood, Disorder of the
Stomach, or sharp Humors contained within or without the Skull, inflaming the
Head, and depraving the Sense. If the Pain be attended with Heaviness, it comes
of Plenitude: If with pricking and shooting, it proceeds from sharp Choleric
Humors: If the Head seems distended without Heaviness and Beating, Wind is the
Cause; but if with Beating, there is Inflammation in the Films of the Brain: If
there be a Heaviness with Distention, it shows Plenitude of Humors within the
Films: If the Pain be outward, it is in the Films that cover the Scull; but if
inward, and at the Roots of the Eyes, the Films that cover the Brain are
grieved. The external Pain is in the Pericranium or the Membrane without the
Scull, and comes for the most part from external Cold, because a cold part will
easily suffer from the like Quality; the internal Pain is always in the
Meninges or internal Membranes.

But as the Headache, inveterate or old, proceeds chiefly from inward Causes,
either from some fault in the Head it self, or disorder of the Stomach, I shall
speak only of that, the recent Headache, as already said, going away of it self
upon a little Rest and Regularity, without any Medicines.

If the Pain proceeds from the Head essentially, there will be no Intermission,
but a continual Pain, or if the Pain does remit, it is but for a little time,
and returns again.

If it proceeds from the Stomach, the Pain will often cease, and return again;
also the Appetite will decay, especially if the Stomach abounds much with
Phlegm; but if the Stomach abounds much with Choler, there will be a Bitterness
in the Mouth, a gnawing Pain of the Stomach, a Nausea or loathing of Food,
trembling of the Heart and Inflammation, which are much increased after sleep.

If the Headache proceeds from the Head essentially, I always give my following
Cephalic purging Pills, which never fail moving off those Humors that infest
the Brain and its Meninges, whereby the Patient has instant ease.

But when the Headache proceeds from the Stomach, I ever give my Emetick
Powder, presently to be prescribed, which gently and safely, yet thorough, ly,
evacuates the offending Cause, and sets the Patient to rights, more especially
if in each Case my Cephalic Elixir, prepared as follows, on the intermediate
days be also taken.

My Cephalic purging Pills are thus prepared:
TAke of the best Turkey Rhubarb, half an Ounce; Troches of Agarick, an Ounce;
Citron Myrabolans, two Drams; Euphorbium, two Scruples; Rushia Castor, half an
Ounce; Turbith Root, the most gummy, Jallop Root, and Harmodacts, of each an
Ounce; Indian Spickenard, a Dram; the best English Saffron, two Drams; Ginger,
Cummin Seed, of each a Dram; Flowers of Rosemary, an Handful; bruise them all
small and affuse thereon in a Glass Cucurbit, a Quart of compound Pyony Water
doubly distilled; close up the Mouth of the Glass, that nothing may evaporate,
and set it in a Sand Heat for Six Days to digest, then let it cool; and when it
is quite cold, press out the Liquor very strongly in a Press, and to the
Liquor, put of the best Succotrina Aloes, two Ounces; Scammony, two Ounces;
Coloquintida, two Ounces; Mastich, half an Ounce; all in fine Powder; shake
them together very well in the same Cucurbit the Liquor came out of, it being
first washed very clean from the former Ingredients and dry; set it in the Sand
Heat again with the Mouth open, but let the Heat be greater than before, that
it may evaporate to the Consistency of an Extract, to which when cold add of
the best Salt of Amber, an Ounce; Camphir rubbed fine, half an Ounce; Flowers
of Antimony, an Ounce; the Volatile Salts of Hartshorn and Armoniack, of each
six Drams; Chemical Oils of Rosemary, Nutmegs, Amber and Lavender, of each a
Dram; mix all together very well, and keep it for use. Three Pills of this
Mass, about the bigness of a large White Pea each, are sufficient for one Dose

My Emetick Powder is thus made:
TAke the finest purified Salt Peter, six Drams; Salt of Tartar, two Drams; the
best Hungarian Antimony five Drams; powder them all apart very fine, and mix
them well together, then put the Mixture, by little and little at a time, into
a Crucible set in a Charcoal Fire, and made red hot, let the Mixture remain
therein till it is melted and flows like Water, then take the Crucible from the
Fire, and there will be at the Bottom of it a Mass, which when it is cold will
be hard and reddish; take it ^ut of the Crucible and powder it very fine and
put it unto a digesting Glass, and pour upon it as much Spirit ^f Rosemary,
Nutmegs, and Lavender, equal parts of ^ach, as will cover it three Fingers; set
it in a Sand Heat close covered for Twenty Days, or so long as till all the
Spirit, being soaked up by the Powder, seems dried away, and the Powder looks
greyish, then take it out and rub it a^ain in a Glass Mortar very fine, and add
to every Dram ^f it, sixty three Grains of fine Salt Peter subtily poudered,
mix them well together, and keep the Powder in a Glass close stopped for use.
Twenty Grains of it is a Dose for a grown Person.

My Cephalic Elixir thus.
TAke Flowers of Rosemary, Cammomile and Lavender, of each half a Pound; Sage,
Twelve Ounces; let them be all well dried and finely poudered, by grinding them
in an hot Iron Mortar with four Ounces of highly ^alcin'd Salt of Tartar; put
them into a Digesting Glass and add of a Man's Scull (that came by a violent
Death) rasped, four Ounces; Vitriol calcined till it is yellow, half a Pound;
Misletoe of the Oak, three Oun^es; Roots of Zedoary, Angelico, and Valerian, of
each two Ounces; Orange Peel, two Ounces; Cubebs, Cardamoms, Spickenard,
Cloves, Nutmegs, of each an Ounce; Camphir, an Ounce and half; compound Pyony
Water doubly distilled, as much as will overtop the Ingredients ^ix Fingers;
close the Digesting Glass with all in it, and set it in Horse Dung for a Month,
then take it out, and when it is cold, press out the Liquor from the
Ingredients till they are dry and fit for nothing; in the Li^uor dissolve the
finest Salt of Amber, four Ounces; and Elixirate it according to Art. Forty or
Fifty Drops of it is a Dose.

By the Signs before given, any one that is afflicted with the Headache may
distinguish and know his Case, and accordingly with the Medicines prescribed
may have his Cure, they having been long experienced by the Author to be the
most effectual in those Cases. The Pills are to be taken three at a time over
Night, which will the next Morning give four, five, or six easy Stools: Warm
Water Gruel, Broth, Posset Drink or Tea, are Liquors proper to be drank as they
operate, and the Patient keeping a little warm the days he takes them will be
the better. They may be repeated twice or thrice in a Week, as there is
Occasion, as also must be the Emetick Powder, which is to be taken by those
whose Stomachs being foul, etc. are the Cause of the Headache; but as the Pills
are to be taken at Night, the Powder is to be taken in a Morning in a Spoonful
of Water Gruel, with the same Observation and Care as directed for the purging
Pills.

And on the intermediate days of taking either the Cephalic Pills, or Emetick
Powder, it is necessary for the Patient to take the Cephalic Elixir, Forty or
Fifty Drops at a time, every Night and Morning in a Glass of Wine, Ale, Beer,
Tea, Coffee or what other Liquor, pleases best, which together with the Pills
or Powder will have wonderful Effects in altering and regulating those Humors
that create the Disorder and Pain in the Head.

A Gentleman about Forty Five Years of Age, was almost from his Minority
grievously afflicted with the Headache, which unfitted him for all Business; he
had taken many Medicines, used Bleeding, Cupping, Issues, Blisters, etc. which
but little more than palliated, or for a while eased his Pains, at length I
being sent to, with an Account of his Case, ordered my Cephalic Pills and
Elixir abovementioned to be given him, which greatly relieved him; but he
complaining also of his Stomach and want of Appetite, I ordered him likewise my
Emetick Powder just now prescribed, to be taken alternately with the Pills, by
which he found a sensible mitigation of his Pain, and at length a total
cessation of it, that he was perfectly cured.

A young Lady of One and twenty Years of Age, the only Daughter of a worthy
Gentleman, had been afflicted with a violent Pain of the Head from a Child,
which she was seldom or never free from, and when it was at the worst would
cause Vomiting. Her Parents had tried almost every body; some ascribed the
Cause to one thing, others to others; at last some body that had heard of the
success of my Medicines for the Head, recommended them, and my Opinion was
accordingly desired. I ordered her my Emetick Powder and Cephalic Elixir, the
last to be taken in an Infusion of Sage, Marjoram, Rosemary, Mint, and Virginia
Snake Root, made like Tea, which she willingly took, though the Snake Root made
it very bitter and strong, and by continuing them for above two Months she was
perfectly restored, and is since married, which her Parents, by means of her
Indisposition, ever before dispair'd of. I could give diverse other Instances,
but as I design brevity in this Treatise must be obliged to forbear.

CHAP. II. Of the Megrim.
THE Megrim is a vehement Pain in one half of the Head, either on the Right or
Left side thereof, afflicting either the Teguments without the Scull, or the
Meninges of the Brain within, agreeing in Quality and coming near the Nature of
the Old Headache, spoken of in the 'foregoing Chapter. If it be without the
Scull, the Part pained is most commonly so sore that the Patient can hardly
bear its being touched; if it be within the Scull, that Soreness is wanting,
and the Pain is the more vehement. Sometimes the Pain is more toward the
Occiput or hinder part of the Head, and sometimes more toward the Sinciput or
fore part of the Head, or near the Root of the Eye on that side which is,
pained. If it be accidental, it never afflicts the Patient but upon
extraordinary Occasions; but if it be habitual, it returns either at set
periods of Time, or keeps an uncertain irregular Course, being excited without
any apparent Cause, continuing long and with that vehemence that the Patient
thinks it will distract him.

From these Signs it appears, that as the Megrim is from like Causes of the
Headache, spoken of in the last Chapter, so the Cure is to be attempted; and
though many Authors have prescribed many Medicines both for one and the other,
yet they allow they are to be remedied, if such a thing be to be done, with the
same Medicines, which I also have experienced; and the best to do it, that ever
I met with, are what I have recommended in the former Chapter, and which if the
Patient keeps to, I mean both Pills, Powder, and Elixir, the former to be taken
as mentioned, alternarely, that is, one time the Pills, the next time the
Powder, and so on, and the Elixir the days on which neither the Pills or Powder
are taken, will undoubtedly free the Patient therefrom, if it be in the Power
of Medicine to do it. I have performed the Cure by them in several; and
particularly in a Gentlewoman who about the time her Monthly Visits left her,
was so afflicted with the Megrim, sometimes of one side of the Head, at other
times on the other, that she had very little Ease Night or Day; She relating
her Case to me, I gave her both my Pills, Powder, and Elixir, which in five
Weeks carried off her Pain perfectly, so that she was, and is as free from it
as ever in her Life, though it is many Months since.

CHAP III. Of the Vertigo, Giddiness or Swimming of the Head.
THE Vertigo, Giddiness or Swimming of the Head, is a Disease in the Cavities
of the Brain, causing the Patient to think all things turn round, and many
times causes him to stagger and reel, and sometimes to fall down, the Brain and
Senses being disturbed, but often times without any Pain, by a preternatural
Exagitation and Commotion, yet depriving not the Patient of either Sense or
Motion.

This Disease is twofold, one Simple, wherein the Sight remains unhurt, the
other Complex, wherein the Sight is darkened, as it were, with a Mist or Cloud,
and is called Scotoma.

The Signs by which the Vertigo is known, is, by what has been said, only when
the Disease is recent or but gentle, the Patient seldom falls, but staggers as
it were, a little, and is confounded in his Mind by a certain kind of
Amazement, from the sudden Exagitation of the Animal Spirits, so that if he be
walking he knows not where he is, but must be forced to stand still to consult
the place of his present Station, whither he is going and what is the Occasion,
because a strange kind of Forgetfulness seizes him, notwithstanding all this
while his internal Senses are not so disturbed, but that he knows he is about
Business, though the particulars be forgotten, which after a little pause he
recollects again, and becomes perfectly well.

Sometimes, as already said, this Affect is accompanied with Dimness and
Darkness of the Sight, representing variety of Colors, and things to look
double and treble, in which Case not only all the other Symptoms are existent,
but the Circumvolution or Rotation of Things seem to be with a great Violence
or Vehemence, insomuch that when the Paroxysm seizes the Patient, he will
necessarily fall, unless he catches hold of something to support himself.

This Disease happens chiefly in Winter, and to People that are fasting, and is
of very dangerous Consequence if not in time remedied; for it comes from Blood
and Humors in the Brain, but chiefly from cold Humors and flatulent Vapors
arising from the Stomach or other inferior Parts, causing a continual Pain in
the Head, Noise in the Ears, Dullness of the Senses, Loss of Smelling and
sometimes of Tasting; and if it comes by consent of the Stomach, then there
follows a gnawing Pain of the Stomach, Trembling, and sometimes Vomiting, with
a bad Digestion.

When the Vertigo has been of long standing, it generally terminates in a
Scotoma and too quickly then changes into pernicious Diseases, as the Falling
Sickness and Apoplexy. If it happens to old People it is the more dangerous,
because of the Weakness of their Brain, Smallness of their Heat and their
abounding much with Phlegm. If in any that have this Disease, Things appear to
their Eyes bloody and reddish, it foretells Madness; if purple Color, the
Falling Sickness especially such as have the Scotoma, or dark Vertigo.
Sometimes the Cause of a Vertigo has been from a Bladder of Water contained in
one of the Ventricles of the Brain, cast off from the vitiated Blood thither,
and is seldom if ever curable, though the Patient at the same time Eats, Drinks,
and Digests well. I never knew one cured when it had been so, but have been an
Eye Witness to those that have dyed thereof, and one particular Man of Seventy
odd Years of Age who was dissected, who, though he was troubled with a Vertigo,
was otherwise constantly in perfect Health. At first the Fits came upon him but
two or three times a Year, afterward they came once a Month, and as he grew
older and older, the Disease grew stronger and stronger, and the Paroxysms more
frequent and of longer continuance, till at length he had a Fit once a Week:
The last Fit he had, he complained that all things turned round violently, and
although he leaned upon a Table, called out vehemently for some body to hold him,
for else he should fall by the hasty turning round of Things. He desired to go
to Bed forthwith, which he did, and whilst he lay still, he seemed to be
somewhat pacified; but upon the least turning of his Head or any part of his
Body, he cried out that the Bed and House would be turned topsy turvy; and all
this while he had no Convulsion, Frenzy or Madness, or the least appearance of
a Fever, except about four or five Hours before his Death. As I said before,
when this Man's Head was opened, there was found a Bladder of Water about the
bigness of a Pigeon's Egg, lying in the 'foremost Ventricle of the Brain, which
alone was the Cause of his Death. The Cure of a Vertigo, if it be simple, is
not very difficult, it being to be done most commonly by Medicines that discuss
the flatulent Spirits, which trouble the Ventricles of the Brain, or that still
and quiet the too great Emanations of the Animal Spirits, and that comfort and
strengthen the Brain that is hurt or weakened by the said Flatulency and
Irregularities of the Spirits. The first is performed by heating Cephalicks
inwardly and outwardly, which have Power to discuss any Ventosity lodged in the
Cortex of the Brain. The second by Medicines that delight, comfort, refresh,
and strengthen the Brain.

Authors innumerate Medicines for both purposes, and those of Amber, Nutmegs,
Rosemary, Sage, Oranges, Lemons, Ambergreese, Musk, Peacock's Dung, and the
like; but the best thing that ever I knew to be universally successful, is my
Vertiginous Spirit following, of which fifty Drops being taken every Night and
Morning, in a Dish of Green Tea, or which is better, in Tea made of Rosemary,
Lavender, Carraway Seeds, Sage, Juniper Berries, and Sweet Majoram, will have
incredible Effect, more especially if a few Drops of the Spirit be Snuff'd up
the Nostrils twice or thrice a Day, and the Forehead, Temples, top of the Head,
and Nape of the Neck, be bathed with it; by which means the windy Vapors will
be dissipated, the Brain comforted, strengthened and fortified much more than
by any other Medicine that I know of whatever; only now and then it may be
proper for the Patient, the better to carry off the offending Cause, to take a
Dose of the Cephalic purging Pills, prescribed in the first Chapter, or rather
if he finds any Disorder of the Stomach, to supply their place with the Emetick
Powder therein also prescribed.

The Vertiginous Spirit is this.
TAKE Beat Roots, two Ounces; Marjoram, La vender, Rosemary, Time, Betony, Wild
Time, Sage, of each two Handfuls; Orange and Lemon Peel, of each an Ounce and
half; Coriander, Anise, Carraway and Fennel Seeds, of each an Ounce; Nutmegs,
two Ounces; Cloves and Mace, of each six Drams; Ginger, half an Ounce; best
Rushia Castor, half an Ounce; Species Diatrion Pipereon, and Species Aromaticum
Rosatum, of each an Ounce; Salt of Tartar, Six Drams; bruise small what is to
be bruised, and put all into a Retort, then pour upon them two Quarts of the
highest rectified Spirit of Wine; fit a Receiver to the Retort, which lute well
together, and set it in a sand Heat for Eight Days, then Distili, drawing off
all the Spirit, that the Ingredients may remain dry, then take out the Fire,
and when all is cold, which will be in a Day or Two, unlute the Receiver, and
pour out the Spirit, in which Dissolve Four Ounces of Camphir, and an Ounce of
Salt of Amber, and it is done. Keep it always very close stopped for use. Dose
Fifty Drops.

Being importuned by a Gentleman afflicted with a Vertigo to do what I could
for him, though he almost despaired of being cured, as indeed I did of curing
him, by reason he had tried almost all things before, and was therefore loath
to undertake him; but I say he greatly importuning me, I gave him a Bottle of
my aforesaid Vertiginous Spirit, with Directions to take Fifty Drops in the Tea
just now mentioned; which he did, as also snuffed, by my Order, some of it up
his Nostrils, and bathed his Head, Temples, etc. with the same, by which means
he was somewhat relieved; but complaining of Sickness at his Stomach, at which
time his Vertigo was worse, I gave him four Papers of my Emetick Powder, with
Orders he should take One every third Morning, and go on with the Spirit as
before, which he did accordingly, and found such Benefit that it is scarcely
credible to relate, he becoming thereupon, as it were a new Man, and able to be
about his Business, never having any the least sign of it after taking the
Medicines about five Weeks, and still continues in perfect Health, it being now
more than Two Years since.

CHAP. IV. Of Forgetfulness or Dotage.
FOrgetfulness is a Disease proceeding from malign Vapors, or an over hot, or
over cold and moist Temperament of the Brain, which renders the Animal Spirits
either too Volatile, that the Thoughts are not to be contracted, or else too
Torpid, diminishing the natural Heat, that the Person is dull, sluggish, has no
Memory, and can think of nothing as he should.

The Causes of those malign Vapors, or over hot, or cold and moist Temperament
of the Brain, are either Natural or Preternatural: If they proceed from Natural
Causes, as sometimes they do, from an ill Conformity of the Head and Brain, or
over great Thickness of the same, or from too strait or wide Passages, by which
the Spirits are either too much compressed or dilated, they are scarcely to be
remedied. But if the Causes be from Polson taken, or too many Narcotick
Medicines, or from over Watchings, too much Care, bad Air, Sickness, or the
like, they may in time be remedied; but if from Falls or Blows, that the Brain
is concussed, and the Animal Spirits dissipated or spent, are incurable; for in
Youth they breed Folly, and in People of Years Dotage,

But Dotage does not happen altogether to old People neither, for as it is a
Depravation of the Fancy and Rational Faculty, arising from an Irregular
Phantasm of the Brain, by a Fault of the Animal Spirits which are clouded,
darkened, made black, thick, and opacous, young People may be liable to it as
well as old. The Signs of Dotage in the beginning of the Distemper, are
perceived by the Patient's being much more Talkative than usual, (especially
those that are of few Words when they are well) and in those that used to be
very Taltative when well, it is perceived by their sitting very mute, taking no
Notice of any thing, and as it were thinking intentively on something, though
when asked, can give no Account of what. In the height of Dotage, in a mild
tempered Person, there is Fierce. ness, Ribaldry and Scurrilous Language, the
Motion of the Eyes quick, they being affected by Con^ent of the Brain,
Arteries, Veins and Nerves, the Pulse irregular and swift, with a Perturbation
in the Hypochondria, the Speech and Actions at the same time being altogether
unaccountable, incongruous and foolish, the Patient being apt to be busied
about Toys and Trifles, if not downright Folly, which shows the principal
Faculties of the Mind are extremely depraved.

These Diseases are commonly without any Danger attending as to Life, but if
they happen to Children very young, they oftentimes make the Child a Fool; but
taken in time are to be cured, and so are they many times in People of Years,
but not always, as shown before. I have known, when they have been taken in
time, that a proper Vomit and a Volatile Specific has roused up Nature's
Force, that the Patient has recovered, and found his Spirits more Vigete,
Lively, and his Memory quicker than at any time before, and that by taking my
Emetick Powder prescribed in Chapter First, and my Vertiginous Spirit in
Chapter the Third, and that in the Particular Case following.

A Gentleman of a Brisk and Airy Temper, quick Wit and Ingenuity, and of an
Excellent Apprehension, Judgment and Memory, fell first into Forgetfulness and
Loss of Memory, and after into a Dotage upon some Trouble of Mind, insomuch,
that he would talk very foolishly, ask the same Question over and over, and
would sometimes, without any Cause, fall a Laughing, at other times Crying,
just like a Child, which showed that his Intellectuals were really much
depraved, insomuch that I greatly questioned whether I could do him any
Service; however, upon his Friends earnest desire I would try, I sent him Three
Papers of my Emetick Powder, and a Bottle of my Vertiginous Spirit, with
Directions for his taking One of the Papers every other Morning, and Fifty
Drops of the Spirit every Morning besides, and also every Day about Four in the
Afternoon, and at Night mixed in a Glass of the Tea prepared with Rosemary,
Lavender, Carraway Seeds, etc. mentioned in the last Chapter, and to use the
Spirit also outwardly, as therein directed; which was accordingly done, and by
that time the Three Papers of Powder (which always vomited him well, I
enlarging the Dose a little) were taken, and also the Bottle of Vertiginous
Spirit taken and used, he grew better, his Memory being sounder and discourses
more rational; I therefore ordered he should persist in the same Course, which
he did for Three Months together, or more, and grew well, returning to his
perfect and sound Mind and Memory, and never had any thing more of it
afterward.

CHAP. V. Of Frenzy and Madness.
THE Frenzy though it be not a perfect Madness, yet as it is caused from an
Inflammation of the Membranes of the Brain, which hurts the Internal Senses, as
the Imagination, Judgment, etc. may be said to be a sort of Madness, and the
more as there attends those afflicted a kind of Fury, little and troublesome
Sleep, speaking without Sense, pulling, as though it were, Straws, or the like
from the Bedcloaths, being unruly, angry, raging, and the like, and which if
not timely remedied, terminates in down right Madness; but as it is what is
curable, there is no Danger, provided proper Applications be made; and the
first thing that is to be done is to Bleed, and after that to give Vomits and
Cephalicks, than which nothing can exceed my Emetick Powder for Vomiting, and
Cephalic Elixir for the other Intentions, both prescribed in Chapter the
First, they doing all, as it were, at once, I mean without any other Medicine,
if the Powder be repeated Twice or Thrice in a Week, in a Morning, and the
Elixir taken as therein directed. But where there is a perfect Madness and
Distraction, other Methods must be taken, as Cupping with Scarifications, large
Bleedings, Glysters, Blisters, Hypnoticks, frequent Purging and Vomiting, to do
which two last, nothing, I say, can be more prevalent than my Cephalic Pills
and Emetick Powder, given alternately as often as the Patient's strength can
bear them.

I know there are many who pretend to Cure Madness by some particular Methods,
others by such and such a peculiar Specific, but with what Success they know
best. One came to me once in behalf of a Friend of here is, a Man that had been
distracted for many Years, and had been in Madhouses, and other Places for
Cure, but to no Purpose. I told the Messenger the best Medicines I knew for
Cure, were my Emetick Powder and Cephalic purging Pills, some of both which I
gave her, with Directions to give him One Paper of the Emetick Powder one Day,
and resting the next Day, to give Four of the purging Pills the Day following,
and so every other Day the Powder or Pills, which was done, and the patient was
much better; but coming for more, the Messenger told me they were advised to
give him the following Drink, as one of the most certain Specificks for Madness
m the World. I answered I could not tell what Extraordinary Virtues were in it,
but they might give it notwithstanding his taking my Powder and Pills, which
they did, and the Man was soon after perfectly restored to his right Mind, but
when I heard it, I questioned whether that Medicine or mine had most
contributed to his Recovery, which they could not tell, nor indeed I, only as
he was amended by my Medicines before he took the Drink, I had Reason to think
well of them. However, that the Public may be the better for knowing it, if
there be any thing of what is said in it, I here give the Prescription just as
they related it to me.

TAKE Dodder of Time, Polypody of the Oak, of each Two Ounces; all the
Myrabolans, of each Three Drams; Seeds of Citrons, half an Ounce; Cloves, Three
Crams; black Hellebore, Two Drams; Leaves of Sage, Two Handfuls; Rosmary
Flowers, an Handful; Staechas Flowers, half an Handful; cut and bruise them,
and boil them in Three Quarts of Spring Water, to two Quarts, strain it, and
give a Quarter of a Pint every Day at Four a Clock in the Afternoon, and also
at Night.

But as there are various sorts of Madness viz: Discontented Madness from
Vexations, Losses and Crosses in the World; a Religious Madness; a Madness from
taking Poison or Poisonous things; a Madness from the Biting of the Tarantula;
a Madness from the Biting of a Mad Dog; a Love Madness, and a Womb Madness,
called Furor Vterinus, to which only Women are subject. I say as there are
Eight sorts of Madness, this Drink which I have prescribed, and was so much
commended as a Specific for Cure, I fear will not have the great Effect said
of it, though any that please may try it, which was the Reason of my giving the
Receipt of it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Lethargy, Caras, or Sleepy Diseases.
THE Lethargy is a Disease known by the Patients being continually sluggish,
and sleepy, scarcely answering if often spoke to, only opening their Eyes and
shutting them again, without taking the least notice of any thing that was said
to them; and so inclined to sleep are they, that if you shake them and rouse
them ever so much, they will hardly wake, or at leastwise long, but desire to
sleep, and are never satisfied without it, or indeed with it; so that the
Animal Spirits are, as it were, bound and locked up by extraordinary
Obstructions, there being attending a gentle Fever, an high Pulse, and Breath
weak; the Cause is from too much Phlegm, cooling the Brain in its Windings and
hindmost Cells, which occasions the profound Sleep, and the putrefying Humor
being extremely sharp and fretting occasions the Fever, which is in a manner
perpetual; and the slowness of Breath is caused from the Affection of the
Nerves of the Thorax or Breast.

The Lethargy differs from the Carus, because in a Carus there is no Fever. It
differs from a Catelepsis, because in that the Eyes, when the Patient sleeps
are open, and in the Lethargy shut.

All sleepy Diseases, if of long continuance, and those happen in Fat, Gross,
and Old People, are generally incurable, and by how much deeper the Sleep is,
or the Patient the harder to wake, by so much the more is the Disease
dangerous, and that especially if it happens after the going off of an Acute
Disease; and if the sleepy Disease be exquisite, and the Strength decays and
wastes, it is certainly never to be cured. But if it happens to one that is
Young, and in the Heat of Summer, and the Animal Functions be not much
impaired, and all the Natural Evacuations be perfect, there may be a Cure; to
accomplish which, Evacuations by Bleeding, Blistering and Purging, must be
made, the latter not by any thing better than my Cephalic Pills prescribed in
Chapter the first; and then for a Specific to repercuss the Humor that
offends, and strengthen the Brain, I cannot advise a more prevalent Preparation
than my Volatile Essence following; which discharges the Animal Spirits of
their Burden, and quickens them to an immense Degree. The Method to be
observed is this: First let the Patient Bleed in the Arm Twelve Ounces, or
according as he is in Age and Strength. After that apply a strong large Blister
to his Neck, or rather between his Shoulders; then the next Night, or next
Morning, which he pleases, let him take Four of the Cephalic Pills, which will
gently purge him, and every Night and every Morning, (excepting the Nights and
Mornings he takes the Pills) as also about Four in the Afternoon, let him take
Sixty Drops of my Volatile Essence in a Dish of Tea, or which is more
effectual, in a Dish of the Infusion of Rosemary, Lavender, Carraway Seeds,
etc. directed in Chapter the Third, which if followed strictly and the
Patient's Nostrils and Temples be rubbed several times a Day with a little of
the Volatile Essence, and a few Drops of it snuff'd up his Nose now and then,
will undoubtedly, by the Blessing of God, bring him to himself, if he be
curable, and prevent the Distemper for the future, if the Medicines be but for
a time continued.

The Volatile Essence is thus prepared.
TAKE Angelico, Marjoram, Rue, Rosemary, and Lavender Flowers, of each Two
Ounces; the best Castor, an Ounce; Ginger, Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, of each
half an Ounce; Salt of Tartar, Three Drams; Calamus Aromaticus, half an Ounce;
Species Pleres Archonticon, Three Drams and half; Euphorbium, a Dram; Rectified
Spirit of Wine, Twenty Ounces; bruise the Ingredients that are to be bruised,
and mix all together, and digest them in a Retort, well luted to its Receiver,
in Balneo Mariae for Ten Days, then distill and draw of the Spirit to dryness,
which when it is cold cohobate upon the Faeces, digesting and distilling as
before, and to the distilled Spirit add Spirit of Salt Armoniack and Spirit of
Hartshorn, both well satiated with their Valatile Salts, of each two Ounces;
Balsam of Peru, an Ounce; Oil of Amber, half an Ounce; Oil of Rue, a Dram;
Digest them again for Ten Days more, in which time it will have the Body of an
Essence, and be sit for Use, The Dose is Sixty Drops.

CHAP. VII. Of the Coma, or Unnatural Watchings.
THE Coma is a great Desire and Inclination to Sleep, but with an utter
inability to do it, arising from Narcotick Vapors which infest the Brain and
induce the drowsy or sleepy Indisposition, yet at the same time so trouble and
disquiet the Mind, that they cannot sleep at all, but wink with their Eyes and
often open them, having a doting kind of Discourse, attended with an inordinate
Motion of the Hands and Thighs.

It is caused sometimes by a great weakness of the Faculties of the Body,
either from some grievous Disease and violent Pains, or from immoderate
Evacuations, which have dissipated the Animal Spirits. Unnatural Watchings, are
when the common external sense is wearied beyond due or just measure, arising
from the continual uninterrupted Influx of the Spirits into the Organs, as we
find when we have over tired our selves by much Walking, Running or Riding, we
cannot sleep, though we greatly want and desire it, but tumble, and toss and
stretch.

Unnatural Watchings are also occasioned by too much Light, Noise, Cares of the
Mind, being too thoughtful or intent upon Matters, etc. all which hinder Sleep,
also Pains, Coughs, Fluxes, a hot Distemper of the Brain, hot, sharp, and salt
Vapors, which twitch and disturb the Spirits and Meninges of the Brain, making
People uneasy and restless; or from difect of such natural Vapors, as procure
Rest to the Animal Spirits, which long Abstinence from Food will cause, as also
Eating too much, especially Suppers.

When Watchings proceed from a Disease, and become a Coma of long standing, the
Cure is very doubtful, especially if they have their Speech hindered, or when
they breathe, a murmuring Noise be heard in the Throat, or a thin Humor
distills out of the Nostrils, or the Patient not able to swallow without
difficulty, for in those Cases it is dangerous, or at least they degenerate
into a Lethargy or Frenzy,

The Cure of a Coma or unnatural Watchings as they proceed from an Humor or
internal Cause, that interrupts the Quietude of the Spirits, is best
accomplished, especially in the Coma, by my Cephalic purging Pills and
Cephalic Elixir, prescribed in Chapter the First; and which if taken as
therein directed, will carry off those offending Humors, that the Patient will
have his Natural Rest, without taking Opiates and other Narcotick Medicines,
which, as they only palliate the Distemper, and give ease but for a while, do
in the end rather injure than relieve.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Apoplexy.
THE Apoplexy is a Disease of the Brain, suddenly depriving the whole Body of
Sense and Motion. Riolanus defines it to be an Abolition of Sense and Motion,
with Respiration hurt, which at last brings Snorting and Suffocation, by reason
of thick Phlegm flowing out of the Funnel, and obstructing the Larynx or
Windpipe, which also oftentimes and unexpectedly invades all the Ventricles of
the Brain, but especially the Fourth Ventricle, wherein, unless the Matter be
discussed in the Spinal Marrow, Death unavoidably follows. Fernelius says, that
an Apoplexy is a Disease bred by an Obstruction of the Rete Mirabile, the
Afflux of Arterial blood out of the Heart into the Brain, being thereby
intercepted. Willis says the Sense of the Word Apoplexy denotes Percussion, and
by reason of the stupendous Quality of the Distemper, containing, as it were
something supernatural, it is called Sideration or Blasting; for those struck
therewith, are, as it were, Planet struck, or struck with an invisible Power,
falling suddenly to the Ground, and being deprived both of Sense and Motion;
and the whole Animal Function ceasing, (save that they breathe) they lie for a
long season as if Dead, and sometimes, yea too often, are dead indeed, (many of
which I hope to show might have been, and how others may be preserved) but if
they revive, they are many times taken with an Universal Palsy, or else with
the Palsy of one Side. Riverius says it is a most deep Sleep, and a total
Privation of Sense and Motion, Breathing excepted, wherein the Patient neither
opens his Eyes, answers, or feels, when he is spoken to, or hurt, breathing
also with difficulty.

The Apoplexy is either accidental, coming of a sudden, and falling
indifferently upon any Man, though not at all pre-dispos'd thereto, for which by
the way, no Preventative Method can be instituted; or it is habitual, from a
constant Disposition in some People, because of which they are at first only
exercised with light approaches thereof, or rather Symptoms; afterward the
Paroxysms are evident, but gentle; but at length they become more obvious and
grievous, and of which at last they for the most part dye.

The Apoplexy is distinguished according to its Degrees, into Gentle, Strong
and Strongest: The Gentle, is that wherein the Patient breathes freely, and
easily becomes sensible again. The Strong. Apoplexy is that wherein the Patient
breathes with very great Difficulty, and, as it were, with Violence, Snorting
and Foaming at the Mouth. The Strongest and most Dangerous, is that in which
all Sense and Motion immediately cease throughout the whole Body, the Breath
also being stopped. In this there is neither Snorting nor Foaming, but the
Patients lie as if perfectly Dead; but if they do not quickly recover, they
ought not to be buried before Three Days be over, it having been known that
some so seized have in that space of Time revived again.

The Signs of an Apoplexy are Swoonings, sometimes falling Suddenly and
sometimes by Degrees, Sense, Motion, and Voice, being many times taken away,
sometimes only diminished, Respiration alone, and that with much difficulty,
remaining. Some Persons Sleep deeply, and, as it were, Snort or Snore; the
loosened Limbs being lift up, fall down with their own weight, in the manner of
dead Persons, and their Eyes are either wide open or quite shut, the Pulse at
the same time being strong and full, which has deceived many in the
Prognostics of this Disease; in many there is a Relaxation of the Sphincter
Muscles of the Anus and Bladder, so that the Excrements and Urine come away
involuntarily and insensibly.

An Apoplexy very seldom gives any Warning of its approach, unless in Persons
subject to Lethargies or Vertigoes, which in many are Forerunners of this
Disease, as also, in some, are Dimness of Sight, Trembling of the whole Body,
Incubus or Nightmare often afflicting, gnashing of the Teeth in sleep, and an
unusal Heaviness of the Body. It has likewise by many been observed, that
smoking much Tobacco, has caused in some Constitutions, the Apoplexy, and they
give Instances of such being seized while they have been smoking, and dyed;
and this they ascribe to its Narcotick Quality, and say by that means it is
Injurious to the Brain, and consequently disposes to Apoplexies: But I am of
another Opinion as to the thing in general; for if Tobacco had such a
pernicious Quality, the many Years it has been in Vogue, and the Multitudes of
People of all sorts that have taken it, would have discovered it in an eminent
Degree, and have obliged the World to leave smoking it long ago as
deleterious. But on the contrary, very many People live to a great Age, and in
as good a State of Health, though they have long and immoderately used it, as
those that take it not. It must indeed be allowed that it is not agreeable to
all Constitutions, but the same may be said of almost every thing else, whether
Food or Physic; and though we have had Instances of some dying of Apoplexies
that have taken Tobacco, yet it does not follow, that Tobacco was the Cause.
And I presume no wise Man will conclude from a few Instances of the
disagreeableness of any one thing to some Men, when vast Numbers of them on the
contrary side may be brought to warrant its Use, that it ought universally to
be avoided, or branded with a note of Infamy. My Sense of Tobacco is, That in
those Persons with whom it is found to agree, it is a very good Drainer of
Humors, and so may supply the place of Issues, or at least that fewer of them
may be necessary to those who abound with Moisture; for by its irritating, and
occasionally enlarging (from the great Afflux of the Saliva) the Secretory
Ducts of the Glandules about the Mouth, as it is evident there must be a great
Discharge, so a great Diversion is made from the Brain (though I allow the
greatest part of the Matter comes not immediately from thence, but out of the
Blood) whence it is advisable that the Persons who take it, should drink but
moderately, least otherwise they do themselves more Hurt by the Supply, than
they can receive Benefit by the Discharge. But there is another reason why
Tobacco may be useful to those who are disposed or subject to Apoplexies, I
mean to those to whom it is agreeable) and that is by the Vellication the Smoke
of it impresses on the Nerves of the Mouth, which it makes to contract, so that
by consent of Parts the whole Brain is analogously affected, whereby if the
Brain happens to be more lax than ordinary, and is disposed to receive a Flux
of Blood or Serum, as it will be after a Person has had and escaped one Fit, it
will prove a very useful Administration toward restoring the Tone of it, and
thereby preventing the Admission of Heterogenous Particles into the Tubes of
the Nerves, which cause the Symptoms.

And since I have spoken about Tobacco, I will add a Word or Two concerning
Snuff, which, as it causes not, through its frequent Use, any Sternutation or
sneezing, to those who take it constantly, is very prejudicial; and where
immoderately taken, by some Persons of some Constitutions, so relaxes the Tone
of the Brain, as to dispose to Apoplexies, and that because the Matter of it is
gross, and apt to lie long about the Extremities of the Olfactory Nerves, so as
continually to affect them, especially where they are ever and anon supplied
with more, which keeps the Pores of those Nerves continually open. It is the
Opinion of a very great Physician, That Snuff, as now a days used, renders
those Persons that take it, liable not only to Apoplexies, but also to the
Danger of receiving the Pestilence, if any such Distemper should reign, (which
God forbid) and that much sooner than others, since from the Symptoms, the
Pestilence appears to seize the Brain particularly; and the sudden Fate upon
Record of those that without any preceding Indispofition have, whilst the last
Sickness raged, fallen down in the Streets, was doubtless from the Pestilential
Miasms, being easily and at once admitted into the Brain by the Olfactory or
Smelling Nerves, rendered more open and lax by the profuse taking of Snuff in
those Days; those People that used it most, being the soonest and in the most
fatal manner, seized with that Disease. It may here be urged, that many, who
then used it, received no apparent Injury, or do those that take it now adays
find any harm by it: Be it so, I think the Objection may as well be urged in
favor of immoderate Drinking, many who long indulged themselves in that
practice, having yet lived to a great Age, when however it is evident that many
more have much shortened their Lives by it. But though Pestilencies, (from which
Thanks be to God we are at present free) or Apoplexies may not be occasioned by
the profuse taking of Snuff, yet the Vertigo and other Distempers which we find
debilitate or hurt the Brain, may reasonably be supposed from that practice
principally to arise.

The Causes of the Apoplexy we have accounted for, and also the Signs: I shall
now speak of its Seat, and then of its Prevention and Cure. The Seat of an
Apoplexy is without doubt in the more inward recess of the Brain, to wit, the
Corpus Callosum, and the proximate and immediate Subject of the Disease, is the
Animal Spirits inhabiting therein, for that the Understanding, Imagination and
common Sense are so deeply affected as to be perfectly darkened, and to suffer
a total eclipse; but the immediate Subject of this Disaffection is thought to
be the middle part of the Brain; because from, thence the Instincts of all
Spontaneous Motions proceed, and in this the Perception of all sensible things
are terminated.

From Histories and Anatomical Observations of Persons dying of an Apoplexy,
Blood has been found extravasated, or out of its proper Vessels, here and there
hi great Clots, compressing the Substance of the Brain. In others the Serous
Colluvies have overflowed the whole Head. In others a large Bladder of Water
has been found in one of the Ventricles, compressing the smaller Passages; from
which Observations it may be concluded, that the principal places sorely
affected are not the greater Ventricles, but the middle marrowy Substance of
the Brain and Cerebel, which is every where Porus and endued with very many
minute Passages, that both the Vital Spirits may flow in thither from the
Blood, and the Animal Spirits may flow forth.

The Cure of the Apoplexy is twofold, in the Fit, or out of the Fit; the Cure
out of the Fit, is properly speaking preventative, of which I shall treat after
I have shown what is to be done in the Fit.

The Patient being in a Fit, whether it proceeds from the Blood let out of the
Vessels, or a Serous or watery Humor, or the breaking of an Imposthume in the
Brain, or other invisible Cause, the Cure must not be the less neglected;
therefore immediately set the Patient as upright as may be, for some Hours,
(for the Disease being a sleepy one, if the Patient should be put to Bed it
might incline more to sleep, which is expressly against the Intention of Cure)
and let him Blood plentifully, for nothing is more capable of sooner relieving,
and this Distemper of all others, requires the most sudden Remedy, for the
Disention both of the Sanguiferous Vessels, and Habit of the Parts, being through
Bleeding removed, the Fibers which constitute both, must be presumed to
contract themselves by their Tonick Motion, but especially those in the Habit.
Afterward, or while this is doing, some proper Sternutatory must be blown up
the Nostrils with a Quil, the best of which I ever knew instantly to bring the
Patient to himself being my following Apoplectick Species, the Virtues of which
in one particular Case I will here give you.

A Gentleman being seized with an Apoplectick Fit, several Physicians and
Surgeons were called by the Bystanders, they all immediately endeavored to
let him Blood, but he would not Bleed, at length some one by, who knew I had
Medicines for Fits and Distempers of the Head, came for me, and told me the Man
was dead; if so, I said, I could not setch him to Life; but, it being the
common saying when there is danger, that the Patient is either dead or; dying,
in hopes the Messenger might be mistaken, away I went, taking with me a little
of my Apoplectick Species. When I got thither I beheld the miserable Object as
one dead indeed, he lying so very stupefied, as that no Life could be perceived
to be in him, and as a dead Man I looked upon him. Bleed I found he would not,
nor could any thing be got down his Throat, therefore I instantly blew a little
of my Species forcibly up his Nostrils, by which means he a little while after
began to stir, I then blew up a little more, upon which a large Evacuation of
Pus, Water, and Viscous Matter mixed with Blood, was immediately made,
whereupon he a little revived, and being almost come to himself, a very great
Flux of Blood (near upon a Quart) presently followed through his Nostrils, so
that in about an Hours time or a little more, after the use of the Species, he
perfectly recovered from his Fit, his Understanding, Speech and Senses being
all restored. This Danger being over, the next thing to be considered for him
was how to prevent any more Fits for the future; therefore I ordered him my
Cephalic Pills and Cephalic Elixir prescribed in Chapter the First, to be
taken as there directed, which had the desired effect.

My Apoplectick Species I thus prepare:
TAKE Lilly of the Valley Flowers, Lavender and Rosemary Flowers, of each Three
Drams; Marjoram, Betony, of each Two Drams; Galangal Pellitory of Spain, Rocket
Seeds, of each half a Dram; Nutmegs, a Dram and half; the best Castor, a Dram;
Powder them all very fine, and sprinkle them with Essence of Cloves, Essence of
Amber, and the best East India Oil of Cinnamon, equal parts of each, sufficient
to make them into a Paste, which then put into a small Digesting Glass well
luted, that nothing may evaporate, set it in a very moderate Sand-Heat tilt all
the liquid is thoroughly imbibed, and the Powder become dry; then take the
Glass out of the Sand, and when it is cold take out the Powder and rub it in a
Glass Mortar, adding to it, Flowers of Benjamin, a Dram; Volatile Salt of
Amber, a Dram and half; Yellow Precipitate, artfully prepared and very finely
poudered, Three Drams; mix all together very well, and keep it in a Glass very
well stopped, that no Air may get to it, for Use.

In a Fit of the Apoplexy, besides Bleeding and using my Apoplectick Species
above prescribed, the Mouth of the Patient must, if possible, be opened and
kept so, and something given to drink, if it be no more than about Twenty Drops
of Spirit of Sal Armoniack or Hartshorn, in a Glass of fair Water, also the
Arms, Hands, Thighs, Legs and Feet, are to be chafed or rubbed with Oil of
Amber, or the like; also a Glister is to be given him forthwith, if it be
possible to be done, likewise Cuppings, with Scarifications, Blisters and
Issues, which latter take up so much more time to relieve, than there is to be
had in such dangerous Cases, the only present Help in the Exigency, is
Bleeding, and the Use of my Apoplectick Species, with Anointing, unless any
thing can be gotten down the Throat as just now mentioned.

As the Recovering a Patient out of a Fit of the Apoplexy, when there is so
much Danger, and Life is so imminently threatened, is a very happy thing, so to
prevent the Fits for the future, or secure those from them, that have the
Symptoms of them, is not a much less good Service; for we have seen and known
many that have had one Fit after another, and each Fit more dangerous, till at
length Life has been carried away indeed, therefore though it be difficult to
prevent the Fits, yet I persuade my self, if the Patient follow the Rules I
shall lay down, he will not only be secured from more, while he is taking the
Medicines, but will find the very Cause of the Disease taken away so
effectually, that upon his desisting to take them he will hear no more of his
Malady.

Therefore let such that are subject to the Apoplexy, or in fear of that
Disease, take Three of my Gephalick Pills every fourth or fifth Morning, which
will gently purge him, calling away Humors from the Blood which infest the
Brain; and those Mornings he does not take the Pills, he is to take Ffty Drops
of my Cephalic Elixir in a Glass of fair Water, or mixed with a little Wine,
if the Water be too raw for his Stomach; as also the same Dose every Night
going to Bed; which Elixir is a Specific Midicine, corroborating the Head,
Brain and Spirits, and keeping the Blood in due order. And if he finds any
disposition to a Fit, by any of the Signs or Symptoms, mentioned to attend
Apoplexies, he should once a Week snuff up into each Nostril the quantity of a
very small white Pea of my Apoplectick Species aforementioned, at Night an
Hour or two before he goes to Bed which will purge the Head and Brain, and
discharge from the Nostrils and Mouth a large quantity o^ Viscous Humor, that
in those Cases infest the Brain, whereby the Patient will be much more
lightsome and easy, as by so much the Brain has been cleared of the Humor
offending it. Thus will no People, in my Opinion, be troubled with Apoplexies,
as we frequently see they are; I taking the Medicines I have recommended to be
such for those Purposes, as are not to be excelled; and hope those that use
them will have cause to say their Effect have not fallen short of my Account of
them.

CHAP. IX. Of the Palsy and other Nervous Diseases.
THE Palsy is a Resolution or Relaxation of the Nerves from their due Habit, by
which means Motion and Sense, sometimes one only, sometimes both together, in
the whole Body, or in some Part or Parts thereof, cannot be used or exercised
after their due manner.

It is a Disease either perfect, in which Sense and Motion are quite lost and
gone, or imperfect, wherein Sense or Motion are only decayed or diminished, so
as to occasion a Trembling or Shaking of the Parts affected, and in this
latter, if the Diminution be but small, it cannot be properly called a Palsy,
but a Stupor or a Numbness, which however is commonly the Forerunner of a true
Palsy.

A Palsy may be either from the hurt of the Motive Faculty, the Sense remaining
sound, or from the hurt of the Sensitive, the Motive remaining well. The Cause
may be either from a Solution of Unity in the Nerves, as by a Bruise from a
Fall or Blow, or by a Wound, or from a Relaxation of the Vertebrae of the Back,
suddenly caused, or it may come from innate Causes, or cold pituitous Humors,
which relax and dissolve the Tone of the Nerves, or from straitness or
narrowness of the Nerves caused by Obstructions, or by Constipation from some
Tumor, etc. or from thin, sharp, serous and windy Humors moved in the Bowels,
not only to the beginning of the Orifices of the Nerves, but to the very
Muscles and Tendons; or it may proceed from Causes external and foreign, as
from Narcoticks, or Poisons, immeasurably drinking strong Liquors, the taking
of Henbane, Opium, Quicksilver, Antimony, Arsnick, or the like. To the external
Causes may also be added the excess of Heat or Cold; by the first of which the
Spirits are wasted and spent, and by the latter they are obstructed in their
Passages by Congelation, etc. or it comes by Consent of Parts, and that for the
most Part in Scorbutic Habits of Body, but the general Causes of a Palsy, are
all those which hinder the Passages of the Animal Spirits into the Nerves and
Muscles, and in whatever part they are interrupted from flowing, there will be
a Palsy in that Part, it being impossible for the Nerves to act or perform
their Function as they ought, without being sufficiently filled and invigorated
by the Spirits.

In whatever place, I say, this Hindrance happens, whether about the Spinal
Marrow, or about the Conjugations or Branches of the Nerves proceeding
therefrom, it causes a Palsy either of more or fewer Parts, according as the
Nerves affected are more general or particular.

If the Nerves that take their rise near the Brain, or in the beginning of
their Passage from the Brain, or the spinal Marrow lying just under the Brain,
be hurt or affected, there is commonly a general Palsy, wherein also Breathing,
the Voice, Speech, and Swallowing with some excressive Motions do suffer hurt.
But if the Hurt is in the following Production of this Marrow, it makes those
Members only paralytick, into which its Branches or Nerves are inserted: But
the Palsy is so much the more general by how much the effect of the said spinal
Marrow is near to the Brain, or Original of the Nerves.

If the Eye be affected with the Palsy, the visive Nerves are originally hurt,
as also the Cerebrum it self. If the Tongue is Paralytick, the Conjugation of
Nerves serving the Tongue is hurt, and the Speech is also defective, and by
reason of its Community with the Auditory Nerve, if the defect be so great as
to cause a Total loss of Speech, the Patient is for the most part Deaf also. If
there be a Palsy of the Larynx, Jaws, Midriff, as also of the Bladder and
Fundament, the Nerves of the sixth and seventh Conjugations, are hurt about
their Original. If there be a defect of the Voice, the Recurrent Nerve is
affected. If there be a defect in Swallowing, the Nerves that go to the Muscles
of the Jaws are hurt; if there be danger of Suffocation, the Nerves that go to
the Midriff are hurt, though the Midriff (the Instrument of Breathing) can
otherwise, in some sort, perform its Office, for that it receives Nerves also
from the Spinal Marrow.

If the Sphincter Muscles of the Bladder and Anus be paralytick, there follows
an involuntary voiding of Urine and the Excrements, the Conjugations of Nerves
supplying those Parts, being generally affected or hurt.

If the Palsy is in the Legs, the Nerves affected are about the bottom of the
Spinal Marrow, and the Vertebrae of the Os Sacrum. And thus we must search out
for the place whence the Nerves spring, which are dispersed to those Parts
affected with the Palsy, and that being known, the Cure is the easier
accomplished. From these things it is apparent what Conjugation of Nerves are
most affected, when the Palsy is in this or that Part only; but when there is
an universal Palsy, there is, for the most part, an Affection of the whole
Genus Nervosum or Nervous System, which comes to pass from one or more of the
Causes already mentioned.

The Signs of the Palsy are manifest, to wit, Deprivation of Sense and Motion
of the Parts; the Eye, if that be affected, is weakened and depraved on that
side where the Part is affected for want of Nourishment; the Speech is much
altered; the Urine is most times white and thin by means of Obstructions. If it
comes from a Blow, Fall, Wound, etc. or upon an Apoplexy, Lethargy, Carus, or
other Effects of the Brain or Genus Nervosum, it will not quickly be cured; no
more will the Palsy in young People proceeding from a cold and moist matter,
because of the dissimilitude of the Disease to the Nature of such Patients. The
Palsy in old People is never perfectly cured, because they want Natural Heat;
and an inveterate Palsy is most commonly incurable.

The Cure of the Palsy therefore is uncertain, according as is the Cause and
Strength of the Disease, and Constitution of the Patient; nor is it in any
cured but by first and chiefly altering the whole habit of the Body, rectifying
the discracy of the Blood, and removing the Morbifick Matter offending, and
that at last by strengthening the Parts hurt, that they may for the future be
able to resist all other Assaults of the Disease.

To do this, Medicines must be both inwardly taken and outwardly applied.
Authors have not been sparing in their Prescriptions for that purpose, there
being numbers of them to be met with; but it is to be doubted many of them
would be found to be of very little, if any, effect; I have known many of the
(reputed) celebrated ones made use of, but the Benefit was not equivalent to
the Trouble, nor indeed can I say any one of the many I have met with, have
come near answering their Characters, though I my self have used them with the
strictest Care and Observation, which put me upon considering how to find out
those that might be effectual, and which I have accomplished so far, as to cure
in many Cases of that kind, I might say most; and even in inveterate Palsies,
by a constant Application of those Medicines, I know not what effects may be
produced, it may be more than I am willing to say, or the Patient expect.

The Medicines I speak of are only Two, one is my Paralytick Elixir for inward
use, which is this:

The Paralytick Elixir.
TAKE Pellitory of Spain, long Pepper, and Ginger, of each an Ounce;
Scorzonera, Cloves, Mace, and Cinnamon, of each Six Drams; Zedoary, Galangal,
Nutmegs, Wood of Aloes and Juniper Berries, of each Ten Drams; black Pepper,
Cardamoms, Dittany, Coriander Seeds, Alkermes Berries, Cubebs and Bay Berries,
of each one Ounce; Orange Peel and Citron Peel, of each Six Drams; Spicknard,
Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Chamomile Flowers, and Pennyroyal, of each an Ounce;
Salt of Tartar, half an Ounce; out, slice, and bruise the Ingredients as they
require, and put them into a Digesting Glass, and pour upon them a Pint and
half of compound Radish Water doubly distilled; let them digest close stopped
that nothing may evaporate, for Forty Eight Hours in a Sand Heat; and when
cold, strain off the Liquor, pressing the Ingredients strongly in a Press;
then, put the Ingredients into the Digesting Glass again, and pour upon them
another Pint and half of compound Radish Water, digesting and pressing out the
Liquor as before; mix the Two Liquors together in a fresh Digesting Glass, to
which put of the finest Succotrina Aloes, an Ounce; Salt of Amber, an Ounce and
half; Volatile Salts of Hartshorn and Armoniack, of each half an Ounce;
Camphir, an Ounce; digest them close stopped, in a Sand Heat, for Forty Eight
Hours, or so long as till it be Elixirated, which will be when the Aloes,
Salts, and Camphir, are perfectly dissolved and united with the Liquor. The
Dose is fifty or sixty Drops.

The other is my Nerve Fotus, for outward use, and is thus prepared:
TAKE Oil of Amber, of Turpentine, of Bays and of Spike, of each half a Pint;
mix them together and put them into a Glass Retort with Galbanum, and Gum
Elemi, of each an Ounce; let them stand a Week or Ten Days in digestion close
stopped, in a moderate Sand Heat. Then take Nutmegs, Cloves, Galangal, Cinnamon,
Zedoary, Pepper and Cubebs, of each an Ounce; Salt of Tartar, Two Drams;
rectified Spirit of Wine, Twelve Ounces; put them all into a Digesting Glass,
and let them stand in a Sand Heat for a Week or Ten Days; after which put them
to the other Ingredients in the Retort and distill them. First will come off a
Spirit, than a Yellow Oil, and at last a Black Oil, which mix altogether, and
add to them Four Ounces of Camphir, and digest them close stopped, so long as
till they are all united, and it is done.

The abovesaid Elixir is to be taken in Drops, Fifty or Sixty at a time, every
Night and Morning, in a Glass of the following Drink, which will keep the Body
soluble. With the Nerve Fotus the Parts affected are to be bathed, every Night
and Morning cold as it is, and is to be rubbed in with the Hand till it is all
dried in, and if the Spine or Backbone from the Nape of the Neck to the Rump
be bathed with it also, it will be so much the better.

The Drink to take the Elixir in, is this:
TAKE new Ale from the Tun, Four Gallons; White Wine, one Gallon; Juice of
Scurvy Grass, Three Pints; Juices of Tarragon, Watercresses and Brooklime, of
each one Pint; Shavings of Horseradish Roots, Mustard seed bruised, of each
Four Ounces and an half; put the Ingredients into a Bag, which put into the Ale
and Juices, first mixed together, let them work up all together; and when the
Fermentation is over, and the Drink settled, which will be in about Five or Six
Days, Bottle it off, putting a Clove slit into each Bottle, and also an Ounce
of White Sugar.

In half a Pint of this Drink the Drops are to be taken, and the Drink may be
drank by it self at Table, or any other time, if the Patient pleases. But where
the Case is slight, or the Patient cares not for the trouble of preparing this
Drink, the Paralytick Elixir may be taken in a Glass of Wine and Water, or any
other convenient agreeable Liquor.

By the Volatile and Operative Quality of the Drink and Elixir, a speedy
flowing of the Spirits will be let into the Genus Nervosum, for they not only
alter the Blood and Juices of the whole Body, but also remove the offending
Cause, circulate the Spirits, and give Strength, and that as well in all manner
of Diseases of the Nerves, as in the Palsy, and with that good effect, that
it is believed no Medicines can do more.

A certain Gentleman by a Fall from his own Coach hurt his Back, that he could
not stand upright, at length it brought on a Palsy, some part of the Nerves of
the Seventh Vertebrae being hurt in their Original; to cure him many things
were applied, but in vain, till being told of my Curing Diseases of the Head,
Brain and Nerves, he sent to me an Account of his Case; I gave the Messenger a
Bottle of my Paralytick Elixir, and another of my Nerve Fotus, which he taking
and using as I directed, became perfectly well in Twelve Days time, though he had
kept his Bed Seven Weeks before.

CHAP. X. Of the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness, also Convulsions and Cramp.
THE Epilepsy or Falling Sickness, is a Convulsive Motion of the whole Body,
coming by Fits, depriving the Sick suddenly both of Reason and Sense, wherein
the whole Body is contracted. Galen calls the Falling Sickness always a
Convulsion, but improperly, for it is not a true Convulsion, but a Convulsive
Motion of the whole Body, wherein all the External and Internal Senses are
abolished.

It is called the Falling Sickness, because many times the Persons afflicted,
fall down when their Fits come upon them; it is also called Morbus Sacer,
either because it does contaminate, as it were, the Sacred Soul or Life, or
because it is seated in the Head, the Sacred Temple of the Soul, as
Philosophers say, or else called so from the Greatness of the Disease, or
rather because it is a Disease not often cured (if it be inveterate) by Humane
Help, but by Divine Aid. It is also by Authors called Morbus Herculeus, and
that either because Hercules, as the Poets feign, was taken with this
Distemper, or because it is hard, like his Labors, and difficult to cure.
Others call it Morbus Puerilis, because Children when they begin to have Teeth,
are often seized with this Disease, also Morbus Comitialis, because it takes
Men on a sudden when they are in Company; also Morbus Lunaticus, because People
are generally seized with it, at certain times of the Moon, as the New and
Full; likewise Morbus Sonticus, because it is a Distemper that much afflicts
and hurts the Person who has it.

When the Fit comes, the Patient falls down, is plucked up together, trembles,
turns about, snorts, cries out, and foams at the Mouth, and makes a kind of
roaring or howling Noise, clashing or grating and closing his Teeth, fast
shutting and holding together his Fingers, voiding his Urine and Excrements
insensibly, and foaming at Mouth froth, like the White of an Egg worked with a
Wisk.

It is caused of gross Phlegm, or sharp Choler, obstructing the Passage of the
Spirits in the Ventricles of the Brain, which within pulls or twinges the
principal Nerves, and thereby causes a straitning of the Passage, by which
there follows a drawing back and shutting up of the Animal Spirits which cause
Sense; from defect of which there follows immediately all the Symptoms of this
Disease, and by which the Parts suffer a Convulsive Motion.

Though what has been said to be the Cause, yet there are many afflicted with
this Disease Hereditarily, from the same Diseasy Principle in their Parents, so
that they bring it into the World with them; but upon general Observation it is
a Disease chiefly occasioned by some Posterous Accident.

There are differences of this Disease according to its Cause, and the
Constitution it seizes on. One is recent, or but newly begun, the other
inveterate and of long standing. There is also another more mild, in which some
certain Parts suffer only a Convulsion; or else more grievous, wherein there is
a Convulsion of the whole Body. Another is periodical, coming once or twice a
Year or once or twice a Month, at New or full Moon, or oftener, but always
keeping its certain times, though others again I have known to be surpised with
the Fits unawares.

It is a Disease to some, from an Epileptick Disposition in the Brain, to
others from a preceding Cause in the inferior Parts, to others from Distempers
of the Stomach, to others from Worms, to others from the Womb, and to others
from hurts of the external Parts; it never seizes some till they are grown up
in Years, and others never but in their Infancy; but though it most commonly
happens to Children, yet it sometimes afflicts grown Persons, and it is
remarked by Galen to be a Disease incurable if it takes them after the Age of
Twenty five Years.

The Cure of this Disease is twofold, when the Disease is upon them, and when
the Fit is over.

When the Fit is upon them, Authors advise to give a few Drops of Spirit of
Hartshorn, Castor, or the like, in a Glass of fair Water, and to smell to the
same, rubbing the Nostrils a little with it, or with Oil of Amber. And when the
Fit is over, to prevent it for the future, they order Blisters, Glisters,
Purges, Vomits, Cuppings, and the like, and give Specificks inwardly, which
they prescribe, but they are so numerous that it is inconsistent with the
brevity I design in this Treatise, to note them, as it is judged they would,
many of them at least, be as insignificant if I did.

I have attended many Patients in my time both in and out of the Fits, and though
I have used many things recommended, I could not find any thing come near my
Epileptick Spirit following, both to recover Patients when in Fits, and to
rectify the Indisposition of the Parts in order to prevent them for the future.
But the Method I use when I see any one in a Fit, is this, I immediately blow a
little of my Apoplectick Species, prescribed in Chapter the 8th, up each
Nostril, and give inwardly a few Drops of the Epileptick Spirit, as Thirty to a
grown Person, and Five or Six to Children, in a Glass of fair Water, rubbing
the Nostrils, Temples, top of the Head and Nape of the Neck with a little of
the Spirit also, which almost Instantly, as soon as the Species begin to
operate, brings the Patient out of the Fit. After that is done, to prevent the
Fits for the future, I first purge the Patient with my Cephalic Pills
prescribed in the 1st Chapter, giving them, as there directed, according to Age
or Strength, every third or fourth Day; and in the intermediate days, I give
Thirty, Forty or Fifty Drops of my Epileptick Spirit, every Night and Morning
in a Glass of fair Water, which is the best Vehicle; and order the top of the
Head, Nape of the Neck, Temples and Backbone, to be rubbed with my Nerve
Fotus, prescribed in the 9th Chapter, every Night and Morning, which
wonderfully corrects and alters the Humors of the Body, and strengthens the
whole Man, especially if the course be continued for some time after the time
the Fits usually return, and I believe scarce One Patient in Twenty, where the
Disease is not Hereditary, will by this Method ever fail of being cured.

The Epileptick Spirit is thus made:
TAKE Forty Live Swallows; Six Young Magpies; Two Ravens; beat them all to
mash, Feathers and all; White Peacock's Dung, half a Found; Misletoe of the
Oak, and Male Piony Roots, of each Six Ounces; Castor, an Ounce; Man's Skull,
Four Ounces; Piony Seeds, Acorns Roots, of each an Ounce and half; the Blood of
a Deer fresh killed, Four Pounds; Lavender and Rosemary Flowers, of each Four
Handfuls; bruise them all small, put them into a Retort, and pour upon them of
the strongest compound Piony Water, Two Quarts; fit a Receiver to the Retort,
luting it well, and set it to digest for Forty Days in Horse Dung; then distill
in Sand with a Moderate Heat (lest the Ingredients burn) to dryness. To every
Pint of the distilld Spirit, add Spirit of Amber, Lavender, and Rosemary, of
each an Ounce; Spirit of Man's Skull, Elks-hoof and Hartshorn, of each Six
Drams; Tincture of Luna and Coral, of each Two Ounces; Volatile Salt of Amber
and Man's-Skull, of each half an Ounce; mix all together very well, and let it
stand close stopped in a Sand Heat till the Salts are dissolved, and the whole
is entirely incorporated, which will be in about Five Days, and it is done.
Dose Forty or Fifty Drops.

The like good Service will these Medicines I have now mentioned do in
Convulsions, which is a Disease from a forced Contraction of the Nerves and
Muscles toward their Original, which is the Brain and Spinal Marrow, wherein
the voluntary Motion of the Joints is hurt, the natural form and situation is
depraved or changed, and the Parts affected are annoyed with a most sharp Pain.

There are Four kinds of Convulsions, one when the whole Body is bended or
drawn forward, another when the whole Body is convulsed and drawn backward,
another when the Convulsion is equally both ways, so that the whole Body is
stiff like a Stake, that it cannot be moved any way, and the other is when it
happens to a particular Part, as the Hands, Arms, Legs, Thighs, Hips, and
sometimes remarkable when it happens to the Bowels, Stomach, etc. When it
happens to the Hands, Arms, Legs, etc. it is what is called the Cramp.

The Brain is oftentimes affected in this Disease, and sometimes the Marrow of
the Back or Spina Medullae, as also the Nerves and Muscles as said before. The
Signs are manifest, and the Causes many, as from Wounds, loss of much Blood,
cold Humors, Phlegm, the taking of Hellebore, Drunkenness, Surfeiting, pricking
a Nerve or Tendon, Worms, biting of venomous Beasts, or the like. But be the
Cause from what it will, I could never find the Cure better or sooner
accomplished than by the Method and Medicines a little before mentioned and
prescribed, which if followed as directed for the Falling Sickness, answers the
Intention so much, as I may presume to say nothing can do more. And one thing I
cannot but note before I leave this Chapter, which is, that for the Cramp of the
Legs, etc. which many People are often troubled with, there is not a better
Medicine upon Earth to bathe with, than my Nerve Fotus, mentioned in the 9th
Chapter, as they that use it will say.

CHAP. XI. Of the Incubus or Nightmare.
THE Nightmare, or, as some call it, the Hag, is a Nocturnal Disease arising
from thick Vapors which chiefly obstruct the hinder part of the Brain, by
which the Flux of Animal Spirits being stopped, Breathing is hindered, the Voice
intercepted, and the Body so oppressed (as it were between sleeping and waking)
with a weight lying upon the Breast and holding fast the Man, that,
notwithstanding all his Endeavors, the whole Faculty of moving seems for a
season to be abolished.

I say, in the time of the Fit, the Patient endeavors and strives with
vehemence to stir, move, and shake off his Burden, but in vain; for when the
Fit is off, and he comes to himself, he find's he is not moved an Hair's
breadth, but lies in the same Place and Posture, though he thought he struggled
strongly with what oppressed him, and that he cried out, when indeed he never
spoke one Word; but because of the great Oppression about the Heart and
Midriff, and fear of Suffocation, he commonly groans, and thereby expresses the
Weight of his Affliction with Fear and Terror. And though this Disease so
strongly seizes the universal Man in the Fit, as to abolish all manner of
external Motion, yet it hurts the Understanding and internal Senses but little,
nor indeed the common Sense of Feeling, because if any one, being by, does but
touch or pull the Patient, tho he be in the height of the Fit, he will
immediately come to himself, and perfectly remember and tell all the
Circumstances of the Affliction.

As from the great oppression the Patient groans, so also are the inward Senses
of many so disturbed, as that they believe it was a Spirit that held them, or
that they were hag-ridden (whence comes the Name) or that some Witch or Devil,
sometimes in one Shape, sometimes in another, as of a Dog, a Cat, Bear, etc.
lies upon and oppresses them, and will possitively tell you, and themselves
verily believe it, that they struck the Devil or Witch, when at the same time
they never stirred their Hands or Arms, as aforesaid, an Hair's breadth from
the Place.

This Disease happens to those who sleep on their Back, and rarely to those who
sleep on their Sides Those who have this Disease much and often, are in danger
of falling into the Apoplexy, Vertigo, Madness Palsy, or Epilepsy; many
Children dye of this Disease in the Night, by reason of abundance of thick
Vapors arising from the Milk they suck, by which means many Nurses have been
hardly and unjustly censured for Over-laying their Nurseries, when i^ Truth
they have dyed of this Disease. Those tha^ use a Temperate Diet, are seldom
molested with the Nightmare, but it chiefly happens to such as ar^ loaded with
Crudities, and are Intemperate; as also to Corpulent People, and Children, and
others who eat too much, especially at Night, and have bad Digestions.

The Indications of the Cure of this Distemper are threefold: First the Humor
or Matter that interrupts the Flux of the Animal Spirits is to be removed,
which is done by proper evacuating Medicines. Secondly, the discrasy of the
Blood is to be rectified and reduced to its prestine state of Health, which is
done by Specific and Alterative Medicines. Thirdly, the Parts affected and
weakened by the Force of the Morbifick Matter, are to be strengthened; to do
which, the same Order and Method, and the same Medicaments that I have
recommended in the last Chapter, for the Cure of the Falling Sickness, are most
proper, though truly, Medicines less in Power and Virtue than they are endued
with, might in this Disease serve the turn; though I cannot but say as they are
the most powerful, so they are more certain and speedy in their Operation, and
less of them than others will suffice to complete the Cure. I do therefore for
those Reasons recommend them, and assure the Patient that he will not be
mistaken in his Expectations of a Cure by their Use,

CHAP. XII. Of a Catarrh or Defluxion of Rheum, hurting the Sight, Hearing,
Smelling, Tasting, Swallowing, etc.
A Catarrh or Defluxion, or as some call it, a Distillation, is a flowing of
some Excrementitious Humors from the Brain to the lower Parts, as to the Eyes,
Nose, Mouth, Palate, Throat, Lungs, etc. so that the Brain is chiefly affected,
the concoctive Faculty of it being hurt, or the expulsive Faculty irritated and
stirred up, from an abundant Repletion of Phlegmatic Rheum, either generated in
the Brain from the hurt of the concoctive Faculty, or through the fault of the
Brain it self.

There are many kinds of those Rheums, some more thick, others more thin, some
acrid and salt, others more sweet, some flow more violently, others more
slowly. If it be hot, it is sharp and thin, flowing by the Nose and Mouth, the
Forehead and Face are hot, and the Nose many times swells. If it be cold, there
is a Pain and Dullness of the Head; the Humor that flows down is not sharp or
pricking, but the Patient is drowsy, his Eyes dazzle, his Hearing thick, his
Nostrils stopped, all his Senses dull, his Eyes and his whole Body heavy and
lumpish, and each of these is more or less, as the Humor falls more or less
upon that Part: If the Rheum falls upon the Eyes, they look red, swelled and
sore, damaging the Sight if not soon cured; if upon the Nose, there is Stoppage
of the Nostrils, loss of Smelling, and the Nostrils are sore, by the sharpness
of the Humor, and violent Sneezings follow; if it falls upon the Ears, it
causes Pain in them, Deafness, and oftentimes Imposthumes; if it descends upon
the Palate, it causes Inflammation of it, Relaxation of the Uvula (which old
Women call the falling down of the Palate) Swelling and Soreness, also hurt of
the Taste; if the Rheum falls upon the Throat, it causes Inflammation and
Swelling of the Glandules (vulgarly called the Almonds of the Ears, and deemed
their falling down) and hinders Swallowing, so that nothing can be got down but
with very great difficulty; if the Rheum rushes down upon the Lungs, it causes,
if it be sharp and violent, a dangerous Suffocation, or at least an Obstruction
of the Lungs, from whence often ensues shortness of Breath, difficulty of
Breathing, and a vehement Cough, which if not in time remedied, brings the
Patient into a Consumption; if the Catarrhous Humor translates itself upon the
Limbs. Joints, or Nerves, as it will in time if not carried off, there is Pain,
Weakness and Trembling.

Sometimes the superfluous Humor is thrown upon the Glandules of the whole
Body, which alters their Tone, so that if it happens upon the Glands of the
Mesentery, there follows a Watery Dispo^ition of the whole Body, which sometimes
endangers (...) Dropsy or other desperate D^sease.

The Causes of those Rheums are many, as Cor^upt Air, hot Liquors, and Spices
taken out of mea^ure; but the chief Cause is an over hot, or over cold, or
moist Distemperature of the Brain; but ^ome Authors say, that a hot Liver and
cold Stomach ^re the two chief Seminaries of Rheums. But as in every Catarrh it
is evident the Matter flows from ^he Head, that and the Brain are chiefly to be
taken ^are of; so as that they be purged with proper Purges, and after that
corroborated, the superfluous Moisture dried up, and the Part or Parts to which
^he Rheum flows, must at last be strengthened.

To accomplish this, I know nothing better than first to purge with my
Cephalic Pills, prescribed in ^he first Chapter, to be taken every other Day
till ^he Rheum is abated, and also on those Days you do not purge, to take at
Night going to Bed, and in ^he Morning at rising, a Dose of my Cephalic
Elixir, ^ikewise prescribed in the said first Chapter, and to ^athe all the
Head, Nape of the Neck, Temples and ^ehind the Ears, with my Nerve Fotus,
prescribed ^n the Ninth Chapter, which strictly followd, will ^oth remove the
offending Humor, corroborate ^he Head and Brain, and strengthen the weakened
^arts, beyond any thing perhaps known or used.

FINIS
A DISCOURSE OF THE Nature, real Cause, and certain Cure OF Melancholy in MEN,
AND Vapors in WOMEN:
Instructing Persons how to Cure themselves absolutely, of those perplexing and
pernicious Disorders; with Safety, Ease, and Expedition.

CHAP. I. Of Melancholy; its Nature, Cause, and Cure.
THOUGH Melancholy cannot be strictly said to be a Disease of the Head, yet as
the Head is oftentimes disturbed by it, it comes properly enough to be spoken
of here.

Melancholy, or as some call it, the Hippo, is a sort of Dotage arising from
disturbd Phantasms, filling the Person afflicted with anxious Thoughts and
Solitariness, being, as it were, ingulphed therein, with Pensiveness, Fury, or
Fever; some are afflicted with a deep Sadness or Pensiveness, without apparent
Cause, and a long continued Silence, or else an incongruous Talk at random of
some particular Thing. It is caused by a Distemper of the Animal Spirits, hurt
by a Malancholly Phantasm or Vapor, made misty, opacous, thick, and dark,
almost fixed and immovable, and from thence it is that Melancholy People are
Tenacious; for that all kinds of Objects are fixed in their Minds, according to
the Condition and Quality of the depraved Spirits; and this is acquired either
from a default in the Brain, declining from its genuine Whiteness, and
generating such like Spirits, or from a default of the Blood and Vital Spirits,
or from some degenerate Melancholy Matter, as Humor, Vapor, or both, mingled
with the Blood and Spirits. If it proceeds from the Brain, it is known by
Sadness, Fearfulness, Hatred, and other strange Imaginations; some think
themselves Beasts, some one thing, some another; some would kill themselves,
others are afraid, some laugh, some weep, some prophecy, etc. which shows it is
from Melancholy Blood.

The Species or Kinds of Melancholy are many, as first, that of the Brain,
when it declines in Quality or Substance from its Purity and Cleanness, which
is known by a perpetual and vehement Doting, arising either externally, from
strange Fancy and Imagination, as from Fear, Despair, and such like sad
Afflictions of the Mind, which dry up the radical Moisture, and cause Cares,
Watchings, etc. or internally, from a Melancholy Humor gathered together in
the Head, either by some cold or dry Matter left behind in the Brain, after
some hot Distemper, the thinner part of the Matter being resolved and gone; or
from a Melancholy Habit and Constitution, either Hereditary from the Parents
Blood, or from a cold and dry, or hot and dry Disposition of the Body, causing
either Doting with Laughter, or a dull Slothfulness, or Anger, Discontent and
Peevishness.

2dly, Another kind of Melancholy is that of the whole Body, the Blood having
acquired a Melancholy Habit, distributing the same to all the Parts, and then
to the Brain; this is known because the Dotage or Delirium is indeed continual,
but so that it is with some Exasperations and Remissions, with general Signs of
a Melancholy Habit.

3dly. There is another sort of that Distemper, called the Melancholy of the
Heart, when the Vital Spirits that are there bred, by reason of a cold and dry
Distemper, are made impure.

4thly, There is that which is Hypochondriacal, wherein Melancholy Juice
either cold and serous, or adust and burnt, in the Branches of the Vena Porta,
is gathered together in the Hypochondria, (which occasions the most common sort
of Melancholy, from whence, time after time, black Melancholy Vapors are
continually sent forth to corrupt the Animal Spirits in the Brain; and this is
known by its seizing the Patient by Intervals and certain Seasons, but in its
approach, it surprises without any Notice, except by windy Belchings and a Pain
distending the Stomach, with Anxiety of Mind, Difficulty of Breathing,
Palpitation of the Heart, Immoveableness of the Tongue, Mist or Darkness before
the Eyes, Noise in the Ears, and a Stupidity or Benumbedness in both Arms.
These Melancholy Vapors or Humors, are transmitted from the Hypochondria to
the Brain, either by the Orifice of the Stomach, as some imagine, or else by
the Branches of the Vena Cava, where they cloud and darken the Spirits.

5thly, There is Melancholy of the Womb in Women, which is discovered by a
Pain in the Left-side, and a manifest Pulse and Beating in the Back near the
Diaphragm, being caused by Stoppage of the Courses, or other Natural
Evacuations.

6thly, There is a Melancholy from Love, occasioned either from Philters or
Love Potions, or else from a Lustful Appetite, or Desire of Venery, caused from
an hot Constitution, and an over abundance of Seed; in which Case the Fancy is
not fixed upon one Person, but the Patient by Fits delights to be in the
Company of Men promiscuously, talks leudly, and is ready to call them to her,
though before, and at other times, she is very Chaste and Modest.

But as the sort of Melancholy which generally afflicts People, is that of the
Hypochonders, it may not be amiss to say something more at large of its Nature,
and after that of its Cause, before I come to show the Cure of it.

Hypochondriack Melancholy is a Collection of filthy and vicious Humors in
the Branches of the Vena Porta, Caeliacal and Mesenterical Arteries, by reason
of a Fault of the Concoction of the Spleen, without Putrefaction, thence
sending many Vapors, causing imminent Symptoms. It Is called Hypochondriacal,
because it possesses the place of both Hypochonders, viz. that part of the
Body, which under the Bastard or short Ribs, reaches as far as the Loins, on
both sides, comprehending with the Muscles the Bowels themselves, and called
Melancholy, when the Brain is affected by Consent.

Those that are afflicted with Hypochondriack Melancholy, find a Rawness,
Windiness, sharp Belchings, Crudities, Burning, and Pain of the Stomach and
Sides, which are plucked upwards, and sometimes inflamed; the Belly is bound,
sleep little, and that with troublesome Dreams, Sadness, given to be
Thoughtful, Idle, etc. These are the general Symptoms, but the more particular
ones, which People afflicted find more or less, according as they are of
Constitution, etc. are ranged as follow, viz.

I. Crudity of the Stomach, so sower sometimes as to set the Teeth an Edge. II.
Pains in the Stomach, reaching even to the Back, and returning upon Eating,
III. Costiveness of Body, from an universal Melancholy Habit. IV. An
Inflammation of the Hypochonders, attended with Redness of the Cheeks, and
sudden Flushings in the Face. V. Urine sometimes thin and pale like Water, and
sometimes thick and troubled with now and then a Sediment of red Sand. VI. A
Motion of Wind in the left Hypochonder causing great Pain. VII. Anxiety, caused
by Wind distending the Hypochonders, thereby causing a straitness in those
Parts, which have Nerves from the sixth Conjugation. VIII. A Palpitation of the
Heart, either from the Malignity of the Vapors in the Part, or by Consent of
the Stomach. IX. A beating in the Left Hypochonder, caused either by the great
Pulsation of the Caeliacal Branch of the Arteries after Anger or violent
Motion, or by the Compression of the Arteries in the Mesentery, by the
Glandules being more than ordinarily extended. X. A Dryness in the Mouth,
Tongue and Palate, by reason of hot Vapors ascending through the Gullet and
rough Artery. XI. A Difficulty of Breathing, both by reason of the Affection of
the Nerves dedicated to the Muscles of the Breast, and of the Affusion of evil
Matter into the Spaces of the Muscles. XII. A Perturbation of the Brain from
Vapors resolved, which if they be obscure they darken the Spirits, and cause
Melancholy Dotage; if dry, an Epilepsy and Watchings; and if many, the Vertigo
and a Fear of Strangling, or Stupidity.
These are the Symptoms of Hypochondriack Melancholy, but all of them are
rarely to be seen in one Person, the most certain Symptoms that always attend,
are Grippings and Wind in the Bowels, a weak Stomach, and sometimes a very keen
one, Costiveness, Belchings, Palpitation of the Heart, Perturbations of the
Head, and a disturbed or uneasy Mind.

The Symptoms being thus premised, let us now inquire more particularly after
their Cause. The first Cause is a Vicious Acid in the Stomach, enlarging the
Appetite, but unfit for Digestion, hence ensues an Acid Crudity in the first
Passages, which depraves the Crasis of the Blood, prevents the due separation
of the Volatile Spirits; upon which the Lymphatick Juice becomes Acid, and the
Bileous Juice Inactive.

These are the Sources of all the preceding Symptoms, since Wind, Noise,
Griping in the Guts, and. Costiveness, are the natural Result of a Viscous Acid
in the first Passages; as also Flushings in the Face, arising from its
Effervessence with the Bile. The Convulsions of the Nervous Membranes in
several Parts of the Body, are the Effects of its Irritation; its Crudity
impairs the due Fermentation of the Blood, and causes a Palpitation of the
Heart, and difficulty in Breathing; it depraves the Nutritious Juice of the
Bowels, which settles into hard Swellings, and occasions a Degeneracy and
Austerity in the Spirits; hence Fear, Melancholy, irregular Thoughts, and
uncouth Emotions ensue.

The Procatartick or remote Causes that promote Crudities, are Acid Liquors, or
Salt Victuals, or such as are dried in the Smoke; both which partake of the
Acid Spirit of Salt or Soot; want of Motion to promote Digestion, and the
speedy Assimilation of Chyle; Nocturnal Study or Care; exhausting the Blood and
rendering the Lympha Acid, which at length brings on a Nervous Atrophy; this
Disease being an Enemy to the Nervous System.

So much for the Symptoms and Causes of the Hypochondriack Disease, which is
generally observed to happen to Scorbutic Bodies, and to People of the best
Sense and good Understanding, it being seldom seen that Fools and Blockheads
are troubled with that Distemper.

This Disease is truly difficult to Cure, by reason of the mighty Heap of
Symptoms that commonly attend Persons afflicted with it; it is seldom mortal,
but of very long continuance, sometimes lasting even the whole period of Life,
for which Reason it is called The Disgrace of Physicians.

If it be attended with continual Pain and Giddiness of the Head, it gives
fears of the Epilepsy, Apoplexy, or Blindness. If it be accompanied with a
moderate Flux of the Belly, (for it is good to be loose, bad to be costive)
Vomiting, or Haemorrhoids, it is good, but if those Fluxes continue long, it is
dangerous. Sometimes the Patient seems to be cured, and then in a few Months it
returns again: It is much easier cured if taken in the beginning, and happening
to People neither in a full, or declining Age; also Men are easier cured than
Women; the Fat and Fair, than the Lean and Swarthy.

The Cure of this Distemper consists primarily and peculiarly in opening all
Obstructions in the Stomach, Bowels and other Passages, by which the Digestions
may be perfected and good Chyle assimilated. Secondly in tempering the Evil
Quality of the Humors. Thirdly in evacuating the Morbifick Matter. Fourthly in
altering the Habit of the Body, and strengthening the weakened Parts.

To accomplish these Four Intentions, Authors prescribe more Medicines than
there are Symptoms, and which for any one to follow, would rather perplex than
profit. Some run altogether on Steel Courses, and prescribe them promiscuously
to all; others are much devoted to Testaceous Pouders, which they call
Sweetners; others again to Acids, and others in opposition to Alcalies. Some
are for Volatile Salts and Spirits, others for fixed Salts and Cardiacks; some
highly applaud Emeticks, others condemn them, and cry up Catharticks; others
are for Alteratives, others for Aperitives. And thus do they vary as their
Opinions or Inclinations lead them, without considering with that mature
Judgment they ought, or making just Observations; which is the reason so few
are cured, or so ordinarily relieved.

But as the whole Cure of this Distemper hinges upon the Four Points mentioned,
when those Points are maturely considered, and Medicines accordingly adapted,
it is not to be doubted but the end will be accomplished; and to speak truly, I
never found, where the Patient was steady in the Method prescribed him, but
that in the End a Cure was obtained.

To do this, I rely upon the Two Medicines following, viz. my Hypochondriacum
Digestivum, and Pulvis Corroborans. The first answers the Three first
Intentions of Cure, and the second the last: But as this Disease is most
commonly Chronick and lasting, they must be taken for some time together, or
else a Cure* cannot be expected, at least wise to be durable, it being the
Nature of it to return again, if the Cause be not totally removed, and the Tone
of the Parts fully recovered: Therefore the Patient is first to take my
Hypochondriacum Digestivum for so long time as that he finds no Remains of the
Disease, but is free in every Respect from each particular Symptom, and this he
may expect to find in about Five or Six Weeks time, if the Disease be not very
inveterate; and when the Symptoms are off, he is to take my Pulvis Corroborans
to strengthen the Tone of the Parts, the Crasis of the Blood being beforehand
brought to rights; and that he is to continue for about Three, Four or Five
Weeks, or longer if he finds any remaining Weakness, or other Indisposition to
give him fear of a return of his Illness.

My Hypochondriacum Digestivum is thus prepared.
TAKE Filings of Steel, and Salt Armoniack, of each Four Ounces; Powder the
latter, and let the former be clean from Dust, and put them into a Sublimatory,
and Sublime according to Art; when the Glass is cold, open it, and dissolve the
sublimed Matter in as small a Quantity of fair Water as will be sufficient to
do it; when it is dissolved, filter it, and precipitate the filtrated Liquor,
by dropping into it (gradatim and separately) Spirit of Salt Armoniack, and Oil
of Tartar per deliquium of each as much as you find sufficient; first a few
Drops of one and then of the other, and so on alternately, till nothing further
subsides; pour off the clear Liquor by Inclination, and dry the Precipitate
according to Art. To every Ounce of which, add an Ounce and half of the
Duplicate Secret; an Ounce of black Hellebore prepared; half an Ounce of
Epithymum; Agarick, Diagrydium, of each Six Drams; Lapis Lazuli prepared, Three
Drams; make all into fine Powder and mix them together very well, and keep it
always close stoped for Use. A Paper of this containing half a Dram is a Dose,

This Hypochondriacum Digestivum, is to be taken a Paper at a Time, containing
half a Dram every Night and Morning, in a Glass of White Wind and Water, which
will give one Stool, or perhaps two in a Day; but if that Evacuation should be
too much to hold it daily, for so long a time as mentioned, then he is to take
two thirds of a Paper at a time, or but half a Paper, or less, according as he
finds he can bear it.

When the Patient has done with that Medicine as directed, or has taken it for
five or six Weeks, then (although he should not find himself quite well) it will
be best for him, omitting that, to begin the Pulvis Corroborans, and take one
Paper of it at a time, every Night and Morning mixed in the Morning, in a Glass
of German Spaw Water, drinking the remainder of the Flask within the compass of
an Hour, or Hour and Half after it; and that at Night in a Glass of Red Wine
and Water. This Medicine has no Evacuating Operation, unless a little by Urine;
And is made as follows:

The Pulvis Corroborans.
TAKE of the best Salt Armoniack, and the finest Filings of Steel purified, of
each Two Ounces; grind them gently on a Marble with a Mullet till they are
fine, then put them into an earthen Still, and Sublime, first with a gentle
Fire, then with a stronger, increasing the Fire by degrees; when all is
Sublimed, break the S^ill, and keep the upper part of it that is white, to make
a new Sublimation with fresh Filings; keep also the Yellow part, which is the
Diaphoretick Flowers of Steel, then take out the Caput Mortuum in the bottom,
and extract the Salt with Water, which purify by Solution, Filtration and
Coagulation; powder the Coagulaled Salt, and and to every Ounce of it, the best
Oriental Pearl prepared, Powder of China Roots, of each half an Ounce; Red
Coral, toasted Silk, of each Three Drams; Galangal, Zedoary Cloves, Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, Xyloaloes, Ginger, Red Roses, of each a Dram and half; Mace, Spodium,
Indian Spikenard, Schaenanth, Storax-Calamita, Cardamoms, Myrtle-Berries, long
Pepper, of each a Dram; Marjoram, Costmary, Basil, of each Four Scruples;
Alkermes Berries, Two Drams; Powder all very fine, and keep it close stopped for
Use, The Dose is a Paper containing Two Scruples, in the Vehicle before
mentioned.

He may go abroad with these Medicines, and by all means should use Exercise,
during the whole time of his taking them, and none like that of the Horse, to
ride every Forenoon, about two Hours after rising, for an Hour or two, which
procures him an Appetite to his Dinner; and to ride again about two Hours more,
which facilitates Digestion, and besides that, will, by the shaking, stir up,
for natural Evacuations, those stagnating Juices which would otherwise subside.
But by riding I do not mean he must ride hard, either to tire or sweat, but ad
ruborem sed non sudorem, and so as to be as easy and lightsome when he gets off
his Horse, as when he got on. He may eat fresh Meat, and that Heartily, all
sorts of Herbs, Fruits, or the like, that are agreeable, and drink now and then
a Glass, Two or Three of good Red Wine, such as Florence, Viana, Portugal, or
French Wine; and for his constant Drink he must take Wine and Water, instead of
Malt Liquors, all which if he observes, and also follows his Medicines and
Riding daily, as directed, his Cure will certainly be effected, as he him self
will have reason to believe, by his daily and almost hourly mending, after once
the Humors begin to be moved off, which he will find in about a Week or Ten
Days after he has entered the Course. By this means I have cured many, and some
whose Cases were very inveterate, and as believed by those they had before
applied to for help, incurable. I could give Instances of several with their
Names, but the former being inconsistent with the designed Brevity of this
Treatise, and being prohibited the latter, I shall only insert one Case, and
conclude this Chapter.

A Gentleman highly Scorbutic, fell into a Melancholy with Pains in the
Hypochondria, which afflicting him for a long time, vitiated all the Juices of
his Body, and wholly subverted the Concoctions, insomuch, that he had most of
the worst Symptoms mentioned to attend that Distemper, as flushing Heats, Pains
in the Head, Wind, Belchings, Tremblings, Horrors, Frights, and the like, for
which he had Purged times without number, Bled, and taken Antiscorbuticks of
all kinds, with all the Testaceous Pouders, which are reckoned Sweetners; had
passed through long Courses of Steel, drank all sorts of Mineral Waters; had
suffered the Penance of Seatons, Issues, Blisters, and Cuppings to ease his
Head, which used very much to be disordered, till at length being quite tired
out by his Disease and Medicines, he resolved to desist, and as patiently as he
could, wait for his appointed departure, which he was certain to himself could
not be long, his Illness being such, as Nature, to his thinking, could not long
subsist under. Thus being in a manner, quite worn out, and lamenting his hard
Fortune to a Friend, that came to see him, who had been my Patient, he told him
what I had done for him and others in Distempers of the Head, and advised him
to consult me, which he did, and whom as soon as ever I had heard his
Complaints, I told he would certainly be well, if he would observe the Rules I
prescribed him, which he heartily promised the News of having his Health again
being such as would make him do, he said, any thing. I forthwith began with
him, and gave him the very Medicines I have prescribed, in the Order I have
before spoken of, with Directions for him to ride on Horseback twice every Day,
for Two Hours each time, which he did, and with that wonderful success, that by
his Medicines and Exercise, in less than Four Months time, he recovered from
all his Indispositions, and attained a Strong, Lively, and Brisk Habit o^ Body.

CHAP. II. Of Vapors or Hysteric Fits; their real Cause and Cure.
WHAT I have said in the Chapter before, of Hypochondriack Melancholy, gives
some Idea of the Distemper I am now about to speak of, though I am not of the
Opinion of Sylvius and Willis, who allege that the Difference between them is
so little, that they are taken to be one and the same. I say I am not of their
Opinion, because the same Medicines that Cure the one, have no effect on the
other, and that because they affect different Sexes from different Causes, though
I must allow, that there is an Analogy between them in some Symptoms, and from
some Causes, but yet so far from being general, that it is but in some few
Particulars; the Symptoms of Vapors or Hysteric Diseases, being incident to
the Female Sex chiefly, in the manner Men cannot have them, and are so numerous
that a Day will scarce be sufficient to reckon them up.

Democritus in an Epistle to Hippocrates, said, That the Womb was the Cause of
Six Hundred Miseries, and of innumerable Calamities, and among them reckons
Hysteric Fits or Vapors, whence it is plain, he concludes that they arise
from a distemperature of the Womb, concerning which, I shall by and by speak.

The Vapors or Hysteric Fits, together with the Hypochondriack Disease, are
the most frequent of all Chronick Distempers; the Vapors few Women are wholly
free from, more or less; and those Men that lead Sedentary Lives and Study
hard, etc. are commonly afflicted with Hypochondriack Melancholy.

The Vapors or Hysteric Fits, are not only frequent to Women, but are so
wonderfully various, that they resemble almost all the Diseases poor Mortals
are subject to; for whatever Parts they seat themselves in, they presently
produce such Symptoms as belong to those Parts when primarily affected with a
real Distemper: As for Instance, if the Vapors seize the Head, they produce
some Disorder or other there; or if the Spirits, some violent Commotions of
Mind are presently occasioned, and so of the rest.

This Distemper is called the Hysteric or Uterine Passion, because the Authors
that first wrote about it, thought that the Womb was principally affected in
it, by reason it commonly invaded Maids, married Women, and Widows both old and
young, which Opinion is not fully agreed to, though we cannot but say it is
fomented and sustained, by a Fault that is in the Womb, as well as the other
Viscera, which the curing it by Medicines adapted to the Womb demonstrates, yet
it principally proceeds from a Fault in the Blood and Spirits, injured by bad
Humors, from Cold, ill Food, Trash, and the like, which stagnating by the
Patient's Sedentary or Idle Life, depraves the Blood, and gives it a bad
Disposition, able to produce the Hysteric Passion; of which by treating we
mean not one, but a whole Army of Distempers, at least in outward show, it
being a Disease that produces Head-achs, Giddiness, Convulsive Motions
Palpitations of the Heart, Rumblings and Agitations of the Stomach and Guts,
Difficulty of Breathing Hickup, loss of Senses both External and Internal, by
which Physicians speak of them under diverse Heads though they be from one and the
same Cause.

This Distemper called Vapors or Hysteric Passion in Women, is not always
attended with the sam^ Number of Symptoms, nor are the Symptoms the same, or
equally violent in all, for in some the Suffocation and Difficulty of Breathing
are but slight, i^ others very severe; therefore in describing the Symptoms, it
is not to be understood that they are less the Vapors, because they have not
all of them, for some feel the Symptoms as aforesaid in the Head, and there is
Giodiness, Swimming, Pain, and the like. In others, the Vital parts are
affected, which occasions so great a Palpitation of the Heart, that the Patient
verily believes the Bystanders may hear the sound of the Heart thumping upon
the Ribs. Some it affects so, as to cause Coughing without intermission, but
they expectorate nothing. Sometimes the Vapoury Humors fall upon the Parts
between the Stomach and Bowels and occasion violent Pain, much like the Illiack
Passion, and cause the Women to Vomit a green matter like porraceous Bile.
Sometimes the Spirits are so seized, that the Patient is oppressed with great
Anguish of Mind, and wholly dispairs of Recovery with Dejections, and as it
were a certain Desperation. Sometimes this Disease falls upon the Kidneys, and
causes Pain like the Stone, or Stone Cholick. Sometimes it falls on the Bladder
(though seldom) and stops the Urine, as if there was a Stone there. Sometimes it
falls upon the Stomach, and causes continual Vomiting, and sometimes upon the
Bowels, and then a Looseness follows, but generally no Pain accompanies either
of these Symptoms, tho oftentimes in both, the green Humor aforementioned,
appears either by Vomit or Stool.

And as this Disease afflicts almost all the inward Parts, so sometimes it
seizes all the outward Parts and Musculous Flesh, occasioning Pain, and
sometimes a Tumor in the Jaws, Shoulders, Hands, Thighs and Legs, of which
kind, that Tumor which swells ^he Legs is more conspicuous than the rest; but
^hese Pains and Swellings, afflicting the outward Parts, chiefly seize those
Women that are in a manner quite destroyed by a long Series and Force of the
Vapors.

But amongst all the Torments of this Disease, there is none so common as a
Pain in the Back, which most certainly all Women feel, how little soever they
are afflicted with the Vapors. It is also common, that after the Pains are
gone off, there is such a stiffness of the Parts, or Numbness or Soreness, as
if beaten, so that the Patient cannot bear to have the Places touched; but this
Tenderness goes off by degrees. And this amongst the rest is worth observing,
That all Hysteric Women complain of a Dejection and Sinking of the Spirits,
who when they would show the place where the sinking of the Spirits is, point
to the Region of the Lungs.

Yet of all the Symptoms that attend this Disease, nothing is more common or
inseparable, and more shows the Patient to be troubled with Vapors, than that
their Urine is as clear as Rock-water, and comes away, when they make it, in a
plentiful quantity-especially when they have just before found themselves
faint, ill, or sickish. Moreover, Women much troubled with Vapors belch up ill
Fumes as often as they eat, though they only eat moderately, and as they have an
Appetite. Also they sometimes in their Fits laugh exceedingly, and some times
cry as much, without any real Cause for either.

The efficient Cause of this Disease, in my Opinion, proceeds from a Confusion
of the Spirits; the origin and antecedent Cause of which Confusion, is the weak
Constitution of the Spirits and Genus Nervosum, and that weak Constitution
injured as before said, is the Cause of the many Symptoms that are attending,
as we have in somewhat particular terms ennumerated.

As to the Prognostics, this Disease seldom kills the Patient, yet sometimes
it snatches them away when the Fit is intense and lasts very long, or else
draws on an Apoplexy or Syncope.

Of the several degrees of the Vapors or Hysteric Fits, That is the worst, in
which many Parts suffer Convulsions, and the Exercise of the Senses is
interrupted; but That is slighter, where the Mind is untouched, or the right
use of it not taken away, and but one or two Parts are convulsed, especially if
the Vital Functions remain entire. In ancient People it is hardly curable,
because in them the Habit is contracted; in young Women it sometimes ceases of
it self, as they grow in Years, or when they begin to have Chindren. Hysteric
Fits are dangerous to Women with Child, and in Childbed, to the first for fear
of miscarrying, and to the last by reason of their Weakness got in Labor.

The Cure of the Vapors is twofold, in the Fit, especially when it is violent
and of long duration, and out of the Fits, to prevent their coming again.
Authors to bring the Patient out of the Fit, advise hard rubbing in the lower
Parts, and Scarification in the Hips; they recommend likewise the pulling out
the Hairs, the twisting of the Fingers, the putting to the Nose Foeted things,
as Assafaetida, Galbanum, burnt Feathers or Leather, Brimstone lighted, the
Smoke of Tobacco, Spirit, or Salt of Hartshorn, Armoniack, sharp Snuff, of
white Hellebore, Euphobium, or the like, some of which have done, and may do
good, when the Fit is not very extreme; but in all Cases of Desperation, and
also where the Fit is not very violent, (because the sooner the Patient is
brought out of the Fit the better) I use my Apoplectick Species prescribed in
the 8th Chapter aforegoing blowing a very little of it up each Nostril, which
instantly brings the Patient to her self, that she is not so fatigued, nor her
Spirits so worn or spent, as they generally are if the Fit continues for a long
time; this and this alone I have used times without Number, with all the
success imaginable, and therefore can and do with the more freedom recommend
it, it being, I believe, the only thing to save Life, where there is danger, in
any sudden Fit of any kind, in Old or Young.

I was once called to a Lady, taken of a sudden with a Fit of the Vapors,
which she had been many Years subject to, though nothing near so violent as then;
several Surgeons were instantly called, as well as Neighbors and Friends, who
when they came, thought she was dying, some that she was dead, no Life or
Breath, to appearance, being left. The Surgeons bled her, used Oil of Amber,
Spirit of Hartshorn, and the like, but nothing moved her. I came after she was
blooded, and seeing her Case, and the Consternation all about her were in,
immediately blew up into each Nostril, with a Quill, a little o^ my said
Apoplectick Species; it was not the tenth part of a Minute after its Use, but
she began t^ snort, and a little while after to sneeze, which brough^ her to
herself forthwith, though she had been almost a^ Hour lifeless, to all
appearance, and reported about to be dead. After that, I was desired to give
he^ what I judged proper to prevent those Fits for the future, which I did, as
I shall presently relate, an^ she never had any since, it being now three Year
ago, tho she was before, many time in a Year, subjec^ to Fits of the Vapors
more or less.

Entirely to cure Vapors or Hysteric Fits, Authors direct long Courses of
many and various Med^cines, and advise outward as well as inward Appl^cations,
which I have observed very frequently to d^ more harm than good; but I take
these Authors to be wrong in their Fundamentals, I mean as to the Causes of the
Disease, for if it proceeds from what I have a little before given my Opinion
it does, a few Medicines rightly adapted will Cure; and that the Disease does
proceed from those Causes, is evident by the Success of the Medicine I give,
which indeed is but one, though compounded of several Ingredients, and that made
up into Pills, which I call, and rightly to, my Vapor Pills; for if a Dose or
two of them be but taken where there are any Symptoms of the Fit's approaching,
or where there is any Perturbation of the Spirits, they immediately dispel all
those fuliginous Vapors, and raise the faint, depressed Spirits, giving them
such a Turn, that the Patient is as brisk and well as if nothing at all had
afflicted her; and if they be taken continually, Three at Night, and Three
every Morning, for some time, Drinking two or three Spoonfuls of Wine, or any
other agreeable Liquor after them, they not only regulate and clear the
Spirits, but amend and purify the Blood and bring it to a due Crasis; though in
Constitutions much debilitated by the length of the Disease, I advise with
them, the German Spaw-Water, a Flask every Day, which by diluting and washing
off the Peccant Salts in the Blood, gives the Vapor Pills the better ^oom to
extend their Efficacy, that by them, and the other good Qualities of that famed
Mineral Water, ^he Patient amends every Day, getting Health and Strength apace;
for these Pills powerfully regulate ^he Spirits, and Strengthen them and the
Genus Ner^osum, keep up the Appetite, rectify the Blood, con^^rm its Tone, and
do all that is requisite to cure the Distemper; there not being, I think I may
be bold ^o say, a better Medicine, or any other Method to ^e advised to cure
that Disease so easily, expeditiously and certainly, they making the Mind easy,
the Head lightsome, the Spirits active, and in short, render the whole Body so
lively, tranquil, and free from all Inquietudes and Interruption, that the
Patient becomes a new Person to herself and all about her, so that they will
scarcely believe her to be the same.

The Vapor Pills I speak of, are These.
TAKE Winters Bark, Zedoary Roots, Galangal, and Cloves, of each an Ounce and
half; Cinnamon, and Gentian Roots, of each Six Drams; Horseradish Roots, Three
Ounces; Mustard Seed, Two Ounces; Calimint, Wormwood, Cammomile Flowers, of
each an Handful* bruise all very small, and digest them for a Week in (...)
Decoction of White Tartar, and White Wine, of each (...) Quart, in a Sand Heat,
the Digesting Glass being close luted; at the End of the Time, let it Cool, and
then open the Glass, and press out the Liquor strongly from the Ingredients in
a Press; and to the Liquor, first put into (...) clean digesting Glass, add of
the best Myrrh in Powder an Ounce; Gum Ammoniacum, half an Ounce; Galbanum an
Ounce; Assafaetida, half an Ounce; evaporat^ in a moderate Heat, to the
Consistency of a thin Extract; to which, add, when it is cold, Russia Castor i^
fine Powder, an Ounce; Camphir rubbed fine, with a fe^ Drops of Oil of Almonds,
half an Ounce; Agnus Castu^ Seeds in fine Powder, Three Drams; Salt of Amber,
ha^^ an Ounce; Flowers of Salt Armoniack martiated, and E^^ Veneris, of each an
Ounce and half; Volatile Salt of Hart^horn, half an Ounce; Oil of Amber, Three
Drams; mi^ all together very well in a Mortar, till they come to the
Consistency of a Mass for Pills, which will be upon beatin^ 'em for a little
while together, and is then ready for Vs^ Three Pills about the bigness of a
large white Pe^ each, are a Dose.

The happy Effects of those Vapor Pills, which neither Purge or disorder the
Body in the least, I found in a late Patient, who was so extremely overwhelmed
with the Vapors, that she was never well, either in Mind or Body, nor free
from them a Day together. Sometimes she would have flushing Heats in her Hands
and Face, at other times cold Sweats, at other times a trembling all over her,
with Weakness in her Limbs that she could scarce walk. Sometimes Pains in her
Head, that she could not rise from her Pillow all Day. Othertimes she would
fall into Cryings, Fears, Dreads, and ruminate on a Thousand dismal Things.
Sometimes she would call out for help, for that she was dying and could not
live a Minute, and would be in a Rage with those that told her there was no
danger Sometimes she would foollishly laugh at nothing all of a sudden, and
presently after Cry. Sometimes rave, scold, and be angry at every thing.
Sometimes she would be mute, and not speak a Word, nor Eat or Drink. In this
Condition, which was very unhappy to all about her as well as to her self, she
took advice of many, and was, as she hoped, sometimes better, but her going
through many Courses for a long time to so little Benefit, tired out her
Husband's Purse as well as her own Person, insomuch, that they resolved to
leave off and see what Nature would do, which alas! was ^oo feeble to struggle
through her difficulties; which they seeing, and, by means of a certain Lady
whom (...) had before cured, hearing of my Vapor Pills she ^ame, as she said,
to talk with me, despairing through ^er whole Discourse of any Help. I ordered
her ^o take my Vapor Pills, which she did with Re^uctancy, not believing they
would do her any good, and to drink the German Spaw-Water with them, which by
her Friends persuasions she consented to do, and in less than Three Weeks time,
contrary to her Faith, she grew so well that in her own Opinion she then
believed she should be cured. I advised her to proceed in the Course, which was
nothing more than to take Three of my Vapor Pills every Night and Morning, and
an Hour after the Morning Dose to drink to Flask of German Spaw-Water, taking
Two Hours time for the drinking it by moderate Draughts (which is much better
than to drink it too quick o^ too much at a Draught) which she did as I
directed, and used at the same time moderate Exercise of Walking, and Riding in
a Chaise, as I advited, for about Nine Weeks, in which time she was perfectly
recovered, and was, and is at the writing of this, as completely well as if she
had never been ill. And this these Vapor Pills do, and though they keep the Body
gently soluble, yet comfort and strengthen the Spirits and Vitals, being
certainly the greatest Alterative, Riviving, Refreshing Medicine in those Cases
that is known.

I could give diverse other Instances of their wonderful Effects, but having
exceeded the Compass (...) intended to confine my self to, and already ove^
swelled the magnitude of the Book, am obliged t^ come to a

FINIS
Advertisement.
ALL the Medicines prescribed in this Treatise, may be had of the Author's own
preparing at the Two Blue Posts, in Haydon-yard, in the Minories, London, where
only he has allowed them to be disposed of, at the following Prices; which are
much cheaper than any one else can righty prepare them, with the best
Ingredients, in small Quantities.

s. d. The Cephalic Purging Pills prescribed in Page 3 the Box. 3 6 The
Emetick Powder Page 4 Parcel 3 0 The Cephalic Elixir. Page 5 Bottle 3 6 The
Vertginious Spirit. Page 13 Bottle 3 6 The Volatile Essence Page 22 Bottle 3 0
The Apoplectick Species. Page 32 Paper 2 6 The Paralytick Elixir. Page 38
Bottle 3 6 The Nerve Fotus. Page 39 Bottle 2 6 The Epileptick Spirit. Page 44
Bottle 3 6 The Hypochondriacum Digestivum. Page 59 Parcel 7 6 The Pulvis
Corroborans. Page 60 Parcel 7 6 The Vapor Pills. Page 71 Box. 4 0


