SOME THOUGHTS CONCERNING The Unusual Qualities OF THE AIR.

CONTAINING Some Cautions necessary to prevent Malignant and Pestilential or
Contagious Distempers.

As also Proper Medicines to prevent the ill Effects of Malignancy and
Contagious Infection, either in Respect o^ Malignant Fevers, the Smallpox; or
Intermitting Fevers or Agues, especially where Endemical or Epidemical, as in
Kent and Essex.

By RICHARD BOVLTON, sometime of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN HOOK, at the Flower de Luce, over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. MDCCXXIV.

TO THE Illustrious Prince JOHN, Duke of Montagu.
May it please your Grace,
YOUR Noble Ancestors, have continued so Illustrious a Character to Posterity;
that it is a great Happiness to find the same, equally shining in your Grace: A
Character, so worthy of its Noble Origin, excelling both in Learning Virtue and
Loyalty, that I should be vain to endeavor to draw that, which lies out of the
Power of my slender Pen.

I shall therefore forbear to attempt, according to the usual Methods of
Dedications, what I am not able to do Justice to, and shall only humbly beg the
Favor to lay this Trifle at your Feet.

A Trifle, not in respect of the Subject, being of the highest concern and
worthy our Consideration, but only as it contains some brief Thoughts,
sufficient to guard us from Dangerous Effects: for my Intention here was not to
write a thorough or complete Tract, but to propose just and necessary Cautions,
against such Evils, which I chose to do in as few words as I could.

The Honor your Grace has been pleased to do the Faculty of Physic, in being
a Fellow of the College, encourages me to hope that any thing that may seem
Reasonable that way, may meet with your Graces favorable Acceptance and
Patronage.

If this Trifle shall seem so to your Grace, it will be the greatest
Satisfaction and Encouragement to

Your Graces Most Humble and Obedient Servant RICHARD BOULTON.

SOME THOUGHTS CONCERNING The Unusual Qualities OF THE AIR, etc.
SINCE all Creatures who have the Faculty of Respiration, and live upon the
Superficies of this Terrestrial Globe, and inhabit the several Climates of the
known World, are obliged to breathe the Common Air or Atmosphere they live in;
and since not only those, but Mankind, whose Lives are more particularly
valuable, as a Creature of the most Noble and first Rank, are subject to be
altered and variously affected, according to the different Qualities of that
Air; and to receive different Impressions, accordingly as that is impregnated,
and endowed with several various Extraneous Bodies, Vapors or Efflusions; and
since these are not only likely to affect human Bodies externally through the
Pores of the Skin, but internally, when sucked into the Lungs, into more tender
and rarified Vessels, containing humors more exquisitely rarified and
expanded; and consequently are liable to be altered and depraved according to
the various Dispositions of that Air we breathe, which may lay the foundations
of Disorders and Distempers, pernicious and destructive to human Bodies, as
those extraneous Bodies, Vapors, or Effluviums are more or less unwholesome and
of a different Nature; I say, since Human Bodies are thus disposed and liable
to be ill affected and disordered by the various Qualities of the Air we
breathe, it is not only necessary but requisite we should consider, the
different Qualities of that Air, and what Extraneous Bodies, Vapors, or
Effluviums it may be impregnated and endowed with; and what alterations or ill
Effects these may occasion and produce, either at the present, or for the
future; and how far they may be prejudicial and pernicious to Mankind.

To determine and enable us to judge of the different Qualities of the Air, and
what Extraneous Bodies or Vapors it may be Impregnated and Endowed with, we
are to consider, how many Ways it may be furnished with such Vapors or
Effluviums; which must be, either from foreign Globes, far distant from the
Earth we live in, and from the Superficies of our Atmosphere; from extraneous
Bodies, or Vapors emitted or rising from Bodies on the Superficies of our
Globe; or from Vapors and Effluviums transuding and ascending out of the
Bowels of the Earth.

As for those Globes which are vastly distant from the Earth we live in, and
far remote from the Superficies of our Atmosphere, these are either the Stars,
the Moon or the Sun.

The Stars are so many Thousand Miles distant from us, and separated by such a
spacious and boundless Ether or Medium, that we can but just perceive the
Glimmering rays of those Celestial Bodies, which are sufficient to convince us
that there are such Stupendous Effects of an Infinite Power; but they are so
small, that they can have but little Effects in altering the Qualities of the
Air we Breathe; much less are they able to inform us, of the Nature of those
distarit Globes; and consequently cannot afford us any knowledge what
Alterations such can produce; only we may conclude, that where the Causes are
small and scarce perceivable, the Effects must be inconsiderable; and therefore
can do little good, except as Luminaries, or produce not much ill; and
consequently cannot contribute much to pervert it or deprave the Disposition of
our Air or Atmosphere.

As for the Moon, though that is much nearer than any of the Stars, yet it is
also placed at a great distance from the Superficies of the Earth, and
separated by a vast extent of fine Ether, which interposes betwixt that Globe
and ours, and prevents it from any immediate Effects upon the Air we live in;
and though several Effects are attributed to it, because the Periods seem to
keep time with its different Positions, yet it is contrary to all known Laws
Statical or Hydrostatical, that it should have any Effect upon any Bodies
contained within our Atmosphere, as having no immediate contact with terrene
Bodies, but only upon that Ether, which equally encompasses and compresses the
Superficies of our Vortex, and the utmost Extent of the Globe we live and
breathe upon or in; for the Air or Atmosphere may be properly said to be a part
of our Globe though the most fluid and rarified Superficial covering of Earth
and Water, and though Lunaticks, or those Distempers which grow worse at
certain periods, seem to be equal in distance with the several Positions of the
Moon, yet it cannot be demonstrated, that those Effects are owing to it as a
Cause, since other periodical Distempers keep an equal distance betwixt their
Periods, which depend upon Causes contained within the Limits of our own
Bodies; and as for the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, that must proceed from
some other Cause, both Statical and Hydrostatical Rules excluding it any share
in these different Motions of that fluid Element; but not to enter upon
Disputes of that Nature, which are foreign to our present purpose, we shall
only observe, that the Beams of the Moon, which illuminate our Globe; are only
reflected Beams of the Sun transmitted into our Atmosphere, and not the proper
Emanations or Effluviums of that Globe; and for as much as the Beams of the Sun
reflected from other Substances within our Globe, do not transmit to us the
Nature of those Bodies they are reflected from, but are only variously modifyd
and refracted in the Superficies of those Bodies, which different refractions
variously affect our Sensory, or the Organ of Sights, and produce the Sensation
of different Colors or Refractions, and which only affect the Sense of Seeing,
as they are stronger or weaker: Consequently we cannot expect, that the Beams
of the Sun, reflected from the Superficies of the Moon, should convey to us the
Qualities of that Body or Globe, especially since they are likewise conveyed
through so fine a Strainer as the interposed Ether, and refracted and altered
also in passing through the great and lofty expanded part of our Atmosphere,
which is reckoned, or computed, to be Seven Miles perpendicular in height,
boying up a Pillar of Quicksilver in a Weather-Glass, such a considerable
height, till it amounts to an Aequilibrium, or equal Weight of a Pillar of Air,
of the same Diameter and thickness, pressing upon the Basis, or Bottom of that
Pipe the Mercury or Quicksilver is contained in.

As for the Sun, it is evident, that it acts upon all Bodies within our
Atmosphere by Virtue of its Heat, since in the Summer time, when it is near
enough, it rarifies, expands and digests the Superficial Juices of the Earth,
as well those in our Bodies, which when fermented, attenuated and rarified, are
pressed by the force of the incumbent Atmosphere into the Roots of Plants and
Trees, and rise higher, as further rarified, pressed and expanded in the
Vessels of each Plant, which being variously fermented and strained through
different Vessels along with Specific Juices, are assimilated and converted
into the proper Juices of those Plants.

The Sun Beams also affect other Bodies on the Superficies of the Earth, and by
their active Parts, put the Parts of other Substances in Motion, and causes
them to emit Vapors and Effluviums, which, according to their different
Natures variously alter and affect the Air we breathe, and render it more or
less wholesome and pernicious, Healthful or Destructive: But though the Sun
has such considerable Effects upon this Globe, when near us, yet when but a
little further off in the Winter, we see that it has little or no apparent
Effects upon the Climate we live in; and if so small a difference can
extinguish the obvious Effects of so bright a Body as the Sun, we can scarce
imagine, that the Moon or Stars which are much further off and Shine but
faintly, should have any considerable Effects, or indeed any at all, especially
since they cannot be perceived.

It appearing hence, in a great Measure, how the Air we breathe may be altered
by Foreign Globes far distant from our Earth, we are next to consider how the
Air we breathe in may be altered and depraved by Vapors and Effluviums
emitted, and arising from the Superficies of the Globe we inhabit, which
appears from the vast variety of different Substances which may be observed on
the Superficies of the Globe we live upon, which deprave the Natural Temper and
Disposition of the Air, and consequently variously affect the Mass of Humors
circulating through the minute and small Vessels contained in and dispersed
through the Substance of the Lungs, such as putrified Bodies, and the constant
Emanation of Vapors occasioned by standing Waters, and the unwholesome
Stenches which naturally flow from the products of Art, as well as Nature,
which more particularly affect those Persons employed in such Arts, and more
immediately exercised about them; thus we see the strange decay in those
Persons which work in Pot-houses, Chemical Elaboratories, and other
employments, where they are exposed to unwholesome Vapors and preternartural
Fumes. And these are further improved to an ill purpose, and grow more
pernicious and unwholesome, and deprave the wholesome Dispositon of the Air,
when more forceably put in Action by the united force and heat of the Sun Beams.

But the greatest and most considerable Alteration which the Air receives from
the Extraneous mixture of Vapors and Effluviums, seems to be from such as
transude and ascend out of the Bowels of the Earth, whether of a Mineral kind
or of any other Nature. And as such sort of Vapors and Effluviums are most
likely to produce great and extraordinary Alterations, so conesquently those
Alterations are probably most pernicious, and of the worst consequence, and
aptest to occasion the worst of Accidents in human Bodies.

From such kind of Vapors differvently agitated and put in Action by the
nearer approach, or greater distance of the Sun, seems to arise that great
variety of Climates, not only in the same Latitude, but several Parts of the
Terrestrial Globe; for accordingly as the Air is variously affected with such
Effluviums of different kinds, these Vapors being put in Action by the heat of
the Sun Beams produce different Effects, and render the Air in such Climates
more or less wholesome, pernicious and depraved: Thus Agues are more frequent
in Kent, and other Distempers more common and custommary in different Parts of
the World.

When by the Constant and Customary transmission of particular Vapors and
Effluviums, any Country is frequently or constantly subject to such Diseases;
these Distempers are said to be Endemical or proper to that particular Climate;
but when Contagious or Malignant Distempers happen to rage more than commonly
or accidentally in any Place, such Disorders are called Epidemical, or
spreading at some particular Times, arising from the accidental Discharge and
Ascension of particular Vapors out of the Bowels of the Earth at that Time.

The Temper of the Air in different Climates is also altered differently
according to the Quantity as well as Quality of such Vapors, and as the Air is
more plentifully or sparingly impregnated with such preternatural Vapors,
which also in the same Climates exert themselves more or less vigorously
according to the different Seasons of the Year. Thus in Summer time Contagious
or Malignant Distempers rage more vigorously and universally and are less
Epidemical in the Winter.

And as the Temper and Disposition of the Air varies according to different
Climates, the various quantities of Mineral Effluviums, and the different
Seasons of the Year; so we find a vast difference according to the Nature and
Qualities of such Mineral Vapors. Some Minerals afford very wholesome and
Salutiferous Steams, whilst others are dangerous and pernicious. Thus the Mines
in Cornwall make the Country wholesome and healthful, whilst others produce
Contagious and Pestilential Qualities, which render such Countries frequently
subject to such Distempers.

Those Mineral Effluviums or Vapors which produce Pestilential Diseases, are
of a most pernicious kind, and are attended with very violent and most fatal
Symptoms, and such are esteemed, by that most Worthy and profound Judge of the
Works of Nature, the Honorable Robert Boil, to be of an Arsenical kind,
producing Effects of the most Malignant and Poisonous Nature, being most
offensive and destructive to Human Bodies.

It appearing then from what we have said, that the Temper of the Air, and its
most Unusual Qualities, which are likewise most destructive and dangerous,
chiefly depend on the Effluviums or Vapors rising out of the Bowels of the
Earth, whenever we find the Temper and Disposition of any Climate to vary and
differ from what it commonly does in such Climates, we have good reason to
conclude, that the Air is Impregnated with some unusual Effluviums out of the
Bowels of this Terrestrial Globe, which being mixed with and dispersed through
the Air produce that uncommon Indisposition.

And since we are constantly obliged to breathe the Air we live in, and to
impregnate our Blood with such Heterogeneous and offensive Particles, which
perverting the Course of Nature may produce ill Effects in human Bodies, we
ought to be very careful to guard our selves against such Accidents as may be
Destructive, and so prejudicial to Mankind, and to make use of necessary
precautions to prevent such ill Accidents, as such Inconveniences may render
us liable to.

It cannot be out of our Memory what fatal Consequences have lately happened
Abroad, especially in the South Parts of France; and how many Thousands have
been destroyed by the fatal Effects of an ill disposed Temper of the Air, so
Mortal and Epidemical. And as other Parts of the World may be likely to suffer
by Accidents, and may be liable to the same approaching Dangers, by hidden
Vapors and Effluviums transmitted from the inward Parts of the Earth, and by
Mineral Effluviums of a Malignant kind; whenever we find any unusual Quality in
the Air, we have a great deal of Reason to be afraid of some unusual Accidents,
and to make use of all necessary precautions to prevent them. If such ill and
Malignant Qualities should be conveyed from the inward Parts of the Earth into
our Atmosphere, such cautionary Preparations would arm us the better against
their ill Effects; and though no such danger, as we might justly fear, should
happen, yet at least we should reap this advantage by our jealous surmises,
that we should free our Bodies of ill disposed Humors, and put our selves in a
better State and Condition of Health; so that our Labor would not be ill
bestowed and fruitless, nor our Pains ill rewarded; the just Cautions to arm
our selves against the greatest of Dangers, would at least secure us against
less Evils.

And that at the present, we have very probable Grounds and substantial Reasons
to fear some impending Evil, and future Danger, which may too suddenly happen
in our Climate, and consequently we ought to make use of proper Methods to
prevent such Events, will in a great measure appear, if we consider the Steps
arid Progress of Malignant or Pestilential Distempers in former Times, and also
the Intemperies of our Climate for some time past, and at the present time;
which may give us sufficient grounds to suspect the consequential Intemperature
of the Air for the future, or time to come.

As for the Steps and Progress of Malignant or Pestilential Distempers,
formerly it has been observed, that the Pestilence took its Course
successively through several Parts of Europe, beginning first in Asia, and then
running through Italy, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, England, etc. In Turkey it is
Endemical, and constantly appears every Year; but this in a great measure
depends on the excessive Heats of the Climate, and their way of living; their
Blood being too much phlegmated to support and supply a sufficient Diaphoresis
or Swear, in the Time of excessive Heat, and this is, in a great measure,
occasioned by their Abstinence, according to Mahomet's Laws, from Spiritous
Liquors, which might sufficiently attenuate the Serum of the Blood, and render
it apt for Transpiration, so that when the Mass of Humors begin to be
fermented with Hear, the phlegmatic Parts of the whole are too great in
Quantity, and too gross in Quality to be discharged according to the ordinary
Course of Nature.

But it appeared lately in France without any Mask or Excuse to hide the
Evident Cause of its Malignancy, it plainly appearing to proceed from
Contagious Parts of Matter dispersed through the Air, which, from what has
been said, appear to be supplied by Subterraneous Mineral Effluviums, or
Vapors, proceeding out of the Bowels of the Earth, Which God Almighty preserve
us from!

But it is too much to be feared, that some Heterogeneous Particles, or
Malignant Vapors and Effluviums have, and are, too much dispersed through our
Atmosphere, or the Air which we now breathe in our Climate; and this will
appear too likely, if we observe, that near the whole Twelve Months last past,
the Nitrous Parts of the Air have almost been totally overpowered, and hindered
from producing their Natural Effects as usual in this Climate: For we may
observe, that most of the last Summer was not only hot and dry, but that most
of the last Winter appeared more like Summer than Winter Weather, there being
little appearance of either Frost or Snow, to what is usual in this Climate;
and we at the present find, that the Heat of the Weather has some time
exceeded what it has for several Years last past, which if it should increase
proportionally, as the Sun approaches, it must render the hottest Season of the
Year excessively so; and consequently must produce exceeding Malignant
Distempers, if not Pestilential.

And that we may reasonably conclude, that such Intemperatures of the Air
proceed from Subterraneous Vapors, or Effluviums, which not only overpower
the Nitrous Parts of the Air, but are put and excited into a preternatural
Fermentation by the heat of the Sun; I say, we may reasonably deduce this
Conclusion, since the Sun would have its constant and certain effect at the
same Distance, and consequently, that the Differences must proceed from some
Heterogeneous Particles, which concur to produce such Alterations and
Differences in the Natural Disposition of the Air in one Climate.

And that the Air is too much Impregnated with some Heterogeneous Vapors, is
evident from the Maladies which have lately afflicted several Persons, as
particular Feverish Heats and Indispositions, attended with Pains in the Head
and dizziness, and other Symptoms much different from those which appear in
Phthisis or any usual Distempers.

If then, as we may well conclude, or, at least suspect, the Air we breathe, is
impregnated with Heterogeneous Particles, as it seems to appear, not only from
what we have mentioned, but the sudden and surprising Death of several Persons,
especially of lare, since we continually such in, and imbibe these
Heterogeneous Particles into our Blood in Respiration, it seems worth our while
to consider what Methods are proper to prevent their ill Effects, it either it
should happen, that the Air should be more plentifully impregnated with such
Particles, or by long breathing them into our Lungs, the Mass of Blood should
be more strongly impregnated with them, so as to enable them to produce their
ill Effects more vigorously.

In order to assign proper Methods to this purpose, it will be requisite to
consider, what Causes commonly concur to produce Malignant Pestilential
Distempers, front whence it will appear, what Methods may be proper and most
expedient to prevent such Maladies, and to secure Mankind from such Dangers as
may happen, without the overruling hand of Providence to divert such
pernicious Qualities which may be more plentifully emitted out of the Bowels of
the Earth, and dispersed through the infected Air we breathe in.

And, first, From what has been said, it appears sufficiently, that the
Antecedent Cause of Malignant or Pestilential Distempers depends on, and is
composed of extraneous malignant Mineral Vapors, or Exhalations rising out of
the Bowels of the Earth and Impregnating the Air we breathe with pernicious
Particles.

These Mineral Effluviums or Vapors, First and Primarily affect Human Bodies,
and being sucked into the Lungs in Breathing gradually impregnate the whole
Mass of Blood with their Poisonous Steams.

These Poisonous Particles of Mineral Vapors, at the first are so small in
quantity, that they are not able to produce any ill Effects, being lodged and
harbored amongst the more Phlegmatic and gross Parts of the Animal Humors;
but being gradually collected to a greater quantity they exert themselves more
powerfully, and the gross Parts of the Blood being attenuated and subtilised by
their corrosive Qualities, or at least some part of them, they are no longer
able to cloak and skreen them from showing their corrosive Qualities.

The Mass of Blood being thus gradually more strongly impregnated with these
depraved and Heterogeneous Particles, and some Parts of the Mass of Humors
attenuated by their corrosive Qualities, they begin to discover those
Qualities; run them into a more fluid form by their corrosive Faculty, and
separating them from the rest, the perfect Mixture of the Mass of Humors is by
this means broke, and made an imperfected Mixture, the grosser Parts being cast
off and separated from the thinner, and by this means rendered unapt and unfit
for Circulation; the grosser Parts occasion Obstructions in the small and
minutest Vessels, whilst the more thin and corrosive corrode and destroy the
continuity of the Vessels, whose joint Effects make such a sad Catastrophe in
human Bodies, and putting the whole fabric into disorder, produce those ill
Symptoms in Pestilential and Malignat Distempers; as Tumors, Ulcers,
Inflammations, Deliriums, Mortifications and Death: In the Glandulous Parts
they produce Buboes, in the fleshy Pares Carbuncles and Blotches, in the
Nervous Parts, especially the Membranes of the Brain, Inflammation, Delirium
and Phrensy, in the Glandulous Parts of the Brain, and other noble Parts,
violent Symptoms and sudden Death.

These Malignant and Pestilential Distempers being thus formed, and the Blood
strongly Impregnated with destructive Vapors as well as the Air, the Distemper
begins to be more contagious and spreading; the ill Effluviums heaped up in
human Bodies now exerting themselves powerfully, and breaking out of those
Repositories, unite with those contained in the Air, and more strongly affect
those Persons about them; and thus the Infection is spread and promoted
Secondarily, these Effluviums from human Bodies uniting with those contained in
the Air, and those already collected in the Mass of Blood.

But besides these Primary and Secundary Antecedent Causes to produce Malignant
and Pestilential Distempers, there are other accessory and Concurring Causes
requisite; for since all are not equally subject to them, but several continue
a long time amongst such Persons without prejudice, till at the last their
Constitutions are gradually depraved and more strongly affected with the
Venomous Exhalations.

This Accessory concurring Cause, must be a particular Disposition in the
Blood, to retain, and be affected by these Infectious Vapors or Effluviums of
the Earth, and human Bodies; otherwise all People would be equally subject to
be Infected at the same time. To discover this Disposition, we are to consider,
that whatever is contained in the Mass of Blood, as long as is thin enough to
circulate through the Vessels, there is no danger of Obstruction, and
consequently there can no, damage happen, except it be too thin, and corrosive,
and opening the Extremities, or otherwise corroding and destroying the
Continuity of the Vessels occasions an Extravasation; but even to produce that
Effect, the Humors must be very sharp before they can break the Vessels, as
long as they circulate freely, since they stay not long enough in any Part to
produce that Effect, and therefore we may well conclude that there must be
Viscocity also in the Blood, and that those viscous Parts being either too
thick to circulate, or separate from the rest, first cause an Obstruction and
detain these corrosive Humors, the perfect Mixture of the Blood being first
broke and destroyed by those Contagious Parts.

Indeed when the Vessels are too much crowded and extended with Humors, as in
Plethorick Bodies, Corrosive Particles crowded and impelled by the force of
Circulation into the small Pores of the Vessels, may too much extend them and
contribute to separate and divide the continuity of their Parts; but since
there is Naturally a Viscocity in the Blood and Serum, and this may be, and
frequently is too great; this united with those Corrosive Qualities, and
retaining them, will give them a greater opportunity of Corrosion. Thus a
Viscous Phlegm retaining a sharp Humor upon the Top of the Stomach or
Ventricle, where there is a plentiful Distribution of Nerves, causes a
corroding Pain at the Stomach, called Heart-burn; and in the Membranes, about
the Musculous Parts, occasions Rheumatick Pains, especially where they are most
Sensible and incapable of Extension; and the Membranes of the Joints corroded
with a sharp or Austere Viscous Matter produce those excessive Pains of the
Gout, where the Obstruction so much retains those sharp Humors that they
corrode the Vessels in pieces, and occasion such an extravasation of this
Viscous Matter as to produce and form Nodes.

From hence it plainly appearing that a predisposition in the Blood is an
accerssory concurring Cause, and that this predisposed Humor, is a Viscous
gross Humor, which retains and heaps up the Contagious Particles of the Air we
imbibe, and draw in with our Breath, it consequently follows, that the Conjunct
Cause, or Matter of the Disease is, Contagious Particles lodged first in a
Viscous Humor, which was an accessory Antecedent Cause, and disengaged or
separated from the sharp Humor, and causing Obstructions, becomes along with
that sharp Contagious Humor, a Conjunct Cause, and both together make up the
Material Cause, or the Morbifick Matter of the Disorder and Distemper, which
according to the Degrees, produces more Malignant Diseases, and when abounding
in an extraordinary! degree, even the Pestilence, which is so obnoxious and
fatal to Mankind.

And that a Viscous Matter, along with the Contagious Particles, is the
Conjunct Cause, and produces Malignant and Pestilential Distempers, is evident
from hence, since all People are not equally subject to such Distempers, and
some never have any at all, though they live in a Contagious Air, and amongst
Infected Persons; and that a Viscous predisposition of Blood is necessary as a
concurring Cause is manifest; for as long as the Humors are sufficiently
attenuated, though sharp corrosive Particles are imbibed into the Blood, and
mixed with it in Respiration, they are soon discharged and separated from it
again, by the common Emunctories and discharges of Nature, as by Sweat,
Transpiration, Urine or Stool, before they can have any time or power to alter
and corrupt the Blood by destroying its Texture and Mixture, for the constant
Agitation and Circulation of the Blood preserves its Mixture along time when
kept in perpetual Motion; but when the Blood is too thick it retains a greater
Quantity, hinders the Natural Discharge, and consequently tends to heap up
Infectious Particles.

Besides, when the Blood abounds with Viscous Parts, it produces a larger
Discharge or Separation of Phlegmatic Parts, when its Texture and Mixture is
imperfect, which occasion Obstructions, and concur to produce Malignant
Symptoms, when thrown Critically upon the minute Vessels or Glands of any Part.

When any such Critical Discharge is made, and a Malignant or Pestilential
Distemper is formed, and properly in esse or factu, that is, perfectly formed,
the Antecedent, conjunct and Accessory Causes along with the Symptoms produced,
make up the formal Cause, which is the Disease and its Symptoms.

But to complete this, there is one Cause accessory, which is the Procatartick
Cause, or that which puts the Antecedent Causes in Action; as any sudden
Passion of the Mind, and the ill use of Non-Naturals, or the force of
Imagination; but that which is chiefly so and External, is the approaching Heat
and Activity of the Sun Beams, which put those Contagious Effluviums, Vapors
or Exhalations, in Action more briskly, by increasing the Degrees of
Fermentation or Digestion, the Consequence of which we may justly fear and
dread; for if such Contagious Effluviums are in the Air, and should increase,
it may reasonably be feared, that Contagious Distempers may happen more or less
Malignant, if not Pestilential, according to the Degrees of the Primary
Antecedent Cause, Viz. Extraneous Mineral Exhalations, Vapors or Effluviums,
from which God Almighty, or Art, must preserve us, if they should by the course
of Natural Causes break forth.

From what has been said, it appears what just cause we have to dread the ill
Consequences of Contagious Vapors, which we may too reasonably suspect. It may
therefore be requisite to consider, what Methods are most proper to prevent and
avert the Event, and Consequences of such dreadful Causes; which may easily be
deduced from what has been said: For if Contagious Vapors are retained by a
Viscous Indisposition of Blood, and sharp Corrosive Humors or Vapors,
collected and run into a Fluor, destroy the Texture and Mixture of the Blood,
and by this Means produce the Symptoms of Malignant or Pestilential Distempers,
the proper Intentions to prevent such Accidents, must be to Correct and
Discharge that Viscous Matter which retains Contagious Vapors, as well as to
correct and prevent the ill Effects of those Infectious Effluviums; it being
impossible either to prevent Mineral Exhalations, which is the Primary
Antecedent Cause, or to hinder and obstruct the Sun's approach, which is the
Principal Procatartick Cause, though sometimes the Antecedent Cause, when
increased to a great Degree, and plentifully heaped up, may also be a
Procatartick Cause, and put it self in Action.

Since then the Principal Intentions to prevent Malignant or Pestilential
Distempers are to remove the Natural Indisposition, which retains Contagious
Vapors, and to correct those Vapors, or Malignant Particles which destroy the
Texture of the Blood, and produce such fatal Consequences, we are to consider
what is most reasonable to be done.

As for the Air, it is of such vast Extent, and the Superficies of the Earth so
large, that it will be hard to deal with so extensive a Subject Physically, but
in the Compass of a human Body we may be more likely to deal with them.

As for the Predisposition of the Blood which renders human Bodies most likely
to retain them, and to heap up Contagious Particles, since that is a Viscous
Humor, it is obvious to those who have taken Pains in Physic, what Intentions
are requisite to that purpose; as Bleeding and Purging, for Bleeding emptying
the Vessels makes room for Fluids to dilute and thin the rest, and Purging
discharges a grosser Humor than passes off by any other Natural way, which
Nature makes use of.

And to correct those Contagious Vapors which may already be heaped up in the
Blood, or may hereafter be contracted, since they wou^d pass off, if nothing
was in the Way to obst^uct them, without destroying the Texture of the Blood,
since thin Humors flow best off by Diaphoresis, or through the Pores of the
Skin, when the gross Humors are removed by Bleeding and Purgeing Alexipharmick
Diaphoreticks, seem most proper for that purpose, which may correct those
Malignant Vapors and discharge them, and consequently preserve the Texture and
due Mixture of the Blood, and prevent those Malignant and fatal Consequences.

As for particular forms for this purpose, I need not direct Physicians, they
being able to prescribe for themselves; but every Body not being Physicians, or
able, or willing to employ them, as too expensive, I shall recommend some
Medicines convenient for that purpose, to the use of those who think it worth
their while to preserve their Health, and guard themselves from future ill
Consequences.

And, as I said before, it may not be amiss to pursue such measures, for they
will at least have this advantage, that if Pestilential Distempers happen not;
they will still guard themselves from the Dangers of Malignant Distempers,
which will be worth their while, and reward their Care of their Health, and
preseve a good Constitution.

Indeed for the sake of those who cannot afford to employ a Physician I should
have laid down forms for their use, that they might apply themselves to
Apothecaries, but some of them are too apt to adulterate Medicines, and leave
out any Ingredients that are dear, though most useful and necessary; besides in
the several Books I have already writ, I have been so free that way, that
several, though they have made use of them to their Advantage, yet they have
not had the Civility to acknowledge the freedom, in a way customary to those
who have been educated in Physic, though it has been the whole business and
study of my Life, since I left School Education.

If therefore any one shall think it worth their while to take care of their
Health, and guard themselves from future ill Consequences, after Bleeding to
attenuate the Humors, to discharge the Viscous Humor, though I hate any thing
that looks like common Quackery, notwithstanding the Art of Physic was built
upon it, I shall recommend particular Medicines for that purpose already
prepared, with Directions for their Use. Yet if any shall apply themselves to
me for Advise, I shall not scruple to prescribe, let them make use of who they
please. But to proceed from this accidental Digression.

The properest Purge which I should recommend upon this occasion, is Dr.
Sagittary's Elixir, a Medicine of Excellent Use, and discharging obnoxious
Humors with a great deal of Safety. This ought to be taken once or twice a
Week, working gently, and by making a gradual discharge without too much force
upon Nature, and therefore most agreeable to human Bodies; I have no Interest
in recommending this Excellent Medicine, but only the good of Mankind.

Those Days which are free from Purging, they may take an Anti-malignant and
Antipestilential Tincture, which will correct those Contagious Vapors, and
expel them out of the Blood, gently through the Pores of the Skin, without the
trouble or force of immoderate Sweat, or any sensible sweating at all, taking a
Spoonful every Morning, and at Night going to Bed, in a Glass of Wine and
Water, or Wine only, or in Beer, if any shall like it rather.

It also preserves the due Mixture and Crasis of the Mass of Blood and Humors,
preserving human Bodies from Contagious Infection, whether from those more
Malignant or Pestilential Effluviums, or Vapors dispersed through the Air,
from the Superficial or Subterraneous Parts of the Earth, or from the Bodies of
Infected Persons.

It also preserves human Bodies in such a perfect state of Health, tha^ it
prevents and guards them from the ill Effects of such less Indispositions and
Intemperatures as occasion and render Men's Bodies liable to Agu^^ or
Intermitting Fevers, as in Ke^^ or Essex; where it will be of singular and
universal Use, if frequentl^ made use of in those Climates.

It will likewise, if frequently mad^ use of, contribute to prevent the
spreading of that Contagious and Infectious Distemper the Smallpox, or at
least render the B^ood of so wholesome a Disposition, by cleansing it of its
Impurities, that if it does not totally prevent them, yet it will render them
less virulent, or much milder and less dangerous, and prevent the unnecessary
hazard and danger of Inoculation, a new contrived Practice which only
forestalls future by present Sickness, and hastens on that Inconveniency which
would be effected or happen at a greater distance of Time, or perhaps not at
all.

And that the Smallpox depends on a particular Disposition of the Air, which
destroys the due mixture of the Mass of Blood, and makes an Alteration in its
Texture is very evident, since we see, that this Disease is often times
Epidemical, and rages more universally at one time than another.

And that the Disposition of the Air, in this Case, destroys the Texture of the
Blood, appears from the Symptoms of it, for we see, that the grosser Particles
of the Blood, in that Disease, are not only separated from the rest, but that
they are critically cast off in the Glands of the Skin; which evidently
appears, since as the Air is impregnated with particular Vapors, milder, or
more sharp and biteing, the Pox are of a benign kind, or Corrosive, and
occasion Pits, or Exulcerations which leave disfiguring Marks behind them.

But in this Distemper there is not only a depraved Indisposition in the Air,
but likewise a Predisposition in the Mass of Humors is requisite which from
the Symptoms appears to be Viscous, and to depend perhaps on the faults of
Digestion, and Crudities thus congested in their Infancy, but this we have not
time or room to consider thoroughly.

I shall only add, that to prevent this Distemper the Purgeing Elixir may be
used once a Week, and the Tincture beforementioned those Days that are free
from Purgeing, and for some time after, which are also frequently to be
repeated; the Quantity to be proportioned according to the Person's Age,
Directions for which will be given along with that Tincture.

Of the Differences of Contagious Vapors.

Since in the foregoing Sheets we have taken Notice, that Malignant and
Contagious Distempers depend on, and are occasioned by pernicious Vapors and
Exhalations rising out of the Bowels or the Superficial Parts of the Earth,
impregnating the Air we breathe, and acting upon Bodies preindisposed, and
furnished with Vicious depraved Humors; we shall briefly add something of the
differences of those Contagious Vapors and Exhalations which produce these
different Effects; the Effects varying, as we before took notice, according to
the variety of the Causes.

And first Watery Exhalations render the Air thick and moist, and obnoxious to
Athmatick Persons, and those that have moist Lungs; these with Nitrous acid
Effluviums occasion Agues, The Famous Mr. Boil Observing that a particular
Acid mixed with a Volatile, produces a Cold Effervency; In the Smallpox, the
Mixture of the Blood is Broke by Vitriolick Vapors or Effluviums, which
appears from the Curdling Effects, which produce Tumors in the Skin, and also
from the Nauseous Smell attending that Disease. Malignant Fevers depend on a
higher degree of corrosive Mineral Salts, producing a higher degree of
Crudities, and much more than Nature can digest; throw off or discharge. In
Pestilential Distempers the Effluviums are of a more Malignant kind, and rather
of an Arsenical Nature, producing Symptoms of a proportionable Degree of
Malignancy and more pernicious.

How these Malignant Effects may be prevented, we have already observed, and
where this Tincture may be had, I shall annex by way of Adverment.

FINIS.
N. B. THis Cordial, Anti-Malignant Tincture, will be Sold at Mr. Osborns, at
the Golden-Lyon, at St. Margarets-Hill, Southwark; Mr. Scaggs's an Instrument
Makers at Wapping-New-Stairs, Wapping; Mr. Dysons, at die Woolpack in
Burchin-Lane, near the Royal Exchange; Mr. Tredwells, a Toy-Shop, at the Corner
of St. Martins-Le-Grand, Newgate-Street; Mr. Hooks, Bookseller, opposite to
St. Dunstan's-Church, near Temple-Barr; Mr. Hargraves, at St. Anns
Coffee-House, over against the Church; Mr. Oakey, Grocer, at the
Golden-Sugar-L^^f, in Old Bonstreet, near Piccadilly; Mr. Ewens, a ^oy-Shop, at
the Seven Stars, near York Buildings in the Strand.

BOOKS Writ and Published by the Author.
A Treatise of the Reason of Muscular Motion, or the Efficient Causes of the
contraction o^ a Muscle.

A Treatise of the Reason of the Heat of the Blood, and of the Use of the Lungs.

An Epitomy of Mr. Boyles Philosophical Works, in Four Volumes. Octavo.

An Epitomy of Mr. Boyles Theological Works, in Three Volumes, with his Life
prefixed.

A System of Rational and Practical Surgery.

A Treatise of the Gout, King's Evil, Lues Venerea, with an Essay of the Reason
of Intermitting Fevers, and the Effects of the Cortex Peru.

A Complete History of Witchcraft, etc. in Two Volumes. Octavo.

A Vindication of the same against Reflections of Dr. Hutchinsons, now Bishop
of Down an Connor. To which is added, an Essay on the Nature of Material and
Immaterial Substances.

An Essay on the Plague printed at Dublin.


