A TREATISE OF THE EXTRAORDINARY VIRTUES AND EFFECTS OF ASSES MILK.

BOOKS printed for J. WHISTON and B. WHITE, in Fleet Street.
In One large VOLUME, OCTAVO, (Price Six Shillings,) Illustrated with Eight
fine Copper Plates,
I. A COMPENDIUM of ANATOMY. In which all the Parts of the Human Body are
succinctly and clearly described, and their Uses explained,

By LAURENCE HEISTER, M. D. Professor of Physic and Surgery in the University
of Helmstadt, and Fellow of the Royal Societies of London and Paris.

Translated from the last Edition of the original Latin; greatly augmented and
improved by the Author.

To which are added, Notes by Mr. Henault, and the Editor.

II. HEALTH Preserved: In Two Treatises.

1. On the Diseases of Artificers, which by their particular Callings they are
most liable to; with the Method of avoiding them, and their Cure. By BERN.
RAMAZINI, M. D. Chief Professor of Physic at Padua. 2. On those Distempers
which arise from particular Climates, Situations and Methods of Life; with
Directions for the Choice of a healthy Air, Soil and Water. By FREDERICK
HOFFMAN, M. D. Physician to the present King of Prussia. Translated and
enlarged, with an Appendix, by R. JAMES, M. D. Author of the Medicinal
Dictionary. In a large Volume 12mo. Price 2s 6d bound.
III. The 2d Edition corrected, illustrated with four large Copper Plates Price
1s 6d sewed,

A TREATISE of the URINARY PASSAGES, etc. Containing their Description, Power,
and Uses; together with the principal Distempers that affect them; in
particular, the Stone of the Kidneys and Bladder. By WILLIAM RUTTY, M. D.
Fellow of the College of Physicians, and of the Royal Society, and Reader of
Anatomy at Surgeon's-Hall.

IV. New and Extraordinary Observations concerning the Prediction and various
Crises by the PULSE, independent of the critical Signs delivered by the
Ancients, made by the long Experience of several eminent Physicians, and
illustrated with many ^^w C^ses and Remarks. To which are added, Some Hints on
(...) ^atu^^ the ancient Observance, and modern Neglect of (...) By ^^MES
NIHELL, M. D. The 2d Edit. Pr. 2s sewed.

(...) ^us's History of Stones, with an English Version, (...) Philosophical
Notes, including the Modern (...) etc. described by that Author, and many other
(...) ^y JOHN HILL, M. D. Price 2s 6d sewed.

A TREATISE OF THE EXTRAORDINARY VIRTUES AND EFFECTS OF ASSES MILK, In the CURE
of various DISEASES, Particularly the GOUT, SCURVY, and NERVOUS DISORDERS; And
of its peculiar nourishing and restorative Qualities in all Consumptive
Disorders, and even the Decays of Old Age.

Illustrated with several remarkable CASES.

Translated from the LATIN of the celebrated FREDERICK HOFFMAN, M. D. Principal
Physician to his present Majesty the King of Prussia, and Member of the Royal
Societies of London and Berlin.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN WHISTON and BENJAMIN WHITE, in Fleet Street. MDCCLIV.

(Price One Shilling.)

PREFACE.
THE great reputation which Dr. Hoffman has deservedly acquired by his superior
abilities and long experience in his profession, has made his writings
universally known and esteemed by the learned.

This treatise being intended for general use, he has wrote with more
plainness, and with as few terms of science as possible, to render it generally
useful, as the subject he treats of is proper for every one to be acquainted
with, whose state of health has required the use of this common and almost
universal remedy.

WE thought it would not be amiss to prefix the opinions of those eminent
physicians, Dr. Moffett, Mr. Lemery, and Dr. Arbuthnot, on the same subject,
which we have therefore here adjoined, all which confirm and strengthen the
sentiments of Dr. Hoffman in this treatise.

DR. MOFFETT in his treatise of foods, says, "Asses milk is an especial cure
for that sort of consumption, wherein the flesh decays through ulceration of
the lungs and breathing parts; it is both meat and medicine, cleansing and
nourishing alike, not so thin as to hinder expectoration, nor so thick as to
cause condensation of the matter putrified, but being of a middle temper and
consistence, and consequently most proper for that disease. A middle age Ass's
milk is the best. Having got such a one, shut her from her foal four or five
hours before you use her milk, let her be well curried, lest her skin, growing
foul, ill vapors be increased inwardly, for want of perspiration. Feed her
with grinded malt-straw dried, mingled with a little sweet fennel-seed, annis,
or carraway-seeds, which she will eat with great pleasure, and digest into a
sweet and wholesome blood. An hour after that milk her as near the patient as
you can, that it may be drank before the air has altered it; for if it be once
cold it is not wholesome. This may be done twice a day, morning and evening,
upon an empty stomach, neither eating or drinking after it for two hours: You
may sweeten it with sugar candy, sugar of roses, or fine honey, and it will be
more effectual. In winter let her be fed with the sweetest meadow hay."

MR. LEMERY in his treatise on foods, says, "Asses milk, as to its consistence
and virtues, is much like that of a woman; it is much used as a remedy against
the phthisick and other disorders of the lungs, and being like woman's milk, is
of a qualifying nature, is beneficial in the cure of pimples, the defluxions of
the eyes, and to ease the pains of the gout."

DR. ARBUTHNOT in his treatise on aliments, page 85. observes, that "woman's
milk is the sweetest as to the nutritious quality, the next to it is that of
ASSES."

THE translator hopes he has rendered the author's sense very clear, and
wishing it may prove of general good, recommends it to the perusal of the
public.

November 10, 1753.
A TREATISE OF THE Extraordinay Virtues and Effects of ASSES MILK.
THOSE who have had a long and careful experience in the practice of physic,
have a better opportunity than the rest of mankind of observing that the
plainest sorts of remedies, those which are most readily prepared, and as it
were at hand in every family, are highly preferable to all kinds of compounds,
and artificial mixtures of drugs whatsoever; not only in regard to the safety
in using them, but likewise in their real virtue and efficacy; whether they be
intended to thoroughly subdue, or put a timely stop to all the various kinds of
diseases.

IF we diligently revise the best writings of physicians in the earliest ages,
we shall find that they met with greater success, and wrought more cures with
the most simple and easy medicines, such as are quite agreeable to nature, such
as only require a regulation in diet, and have a greater share of nourishment
than of physic in them, than the chemists of later times can effect with their
inestimable secrets, and subtle compositions, produced by the force of fire.
For all these, unless administered with the nicest care and discretion, instead
of doing service, are sure to do much mischief; and therefore must be esteemed
very dangerous, and far less eligible than those family remedies that may be
used without any hazard at all.

UNDOUBTEDLY the refined art of chemistry, which brings to light the various
mixtures and properties of natural substances, deserves a very great and
peculiar degree of admiration; and the experiment is very surprising of the
chemists, who are able to relieve the sufferings of their patients with a few
drops only, or a very small pill: yet when the larger or more plentiful
preparations of what are called Galenical medicines are rejected, when no
regard is shown to the safe assistance of regulated diets, so much recommended
by the ancients, and medicines altogether chemical, are almost universally used
against all diseases; the effect is, that the practice of physic is become far
more dangerous in our days, than it was formerly, and gets discredit by more
frequent instances of the loss of patients. For my own part, I was always
guided by the following rule; that the only way to gain a happy and successful
method in the healing art, is continually to unite theory with practice, the
experience of the ancients with that of the moderns, and Galenical and domestic
remedies with chemical. For I have discovered by a long improved experience,
that remedies which have blended in them the powers of both nourishment and
physic, and are therefore pleasant and refreshing to the frame of our bodies,
are not only the safest, but the most efficacious in the cure and prevention of
diseases. And it is undeniable that the use and properest method of
administering these, is more exactly to be learnt from the remains of the
ancients authors, than from the works of the moderns, or even of such of the
moderns as have plainly a fondness and partiality for the ancients.

ONE of the most eminent and distinguished instances of what I thus assert is
Asses milk: which, indeed, was strenuously recommended by the ancient
physicians, and esteemed of sovereign benefit in rooting out the obstinate
remains of the most grievous distempers; yet most of our later physicians, in
other respects men of high repute, are very ignorant of its most excellent
qualities, and therefore were either so cautious, as seldom to introduce into
their practice this desirable promoter of health, or actually were afraid to
use it at all. In the following treatise therefore I intend, by fair and just
arguments, founded on an extensive experience, to set forth all the admirable
virtues of Asses milk, which have so long been absolutely forgotten and unknown.

BUT before we come immediately to the subject, it is not improper previously
to show in general, that all milk is a sort of food that has a singular
medicinal virtue belonging to it, without considering its remarkable nourishing
quality; which very weighty reasons should recommend its being medicinally
used. That milk has this nutritive quality, must I think be readily allowed by
all, as it appears constantly to every man, by his own experience, to be
particularly constituted and adapted to the support of our bodies. The unborn
child, while yet enclosed in the womb, grows and is nourished by milk, which is
prepared for it in the structure of the secundines. When it is born, it
acquires still additional firmness from a supply of milk; is gradually wrought
up to its perfect form; and all its inward parts gain so much more strength in
proportion as they are able to alter and digest whatever food they take in, and
reduce them to the milky juice called chyle. Lastly, every man, so long as he
remains alive, receives his whole nourishment and vigor from chyle, which is
extracted from the food digested and dissolved, and is in truth no other than
milk. It is milk that supplies the principles and materials, not of the blood
alone, but of all the fluids that cherish and sustain life.

SINCE then milk is so manifestly proved to be the principal of all the kinds
of aliment; so it may be deservedly reckoned the chief of all remedies. Which,
though it may not seem clear and evident to others, may be proved to
demonstration with very little difficulty. To begin then with experience, the
best instructor in all things, and what is superior to all the most refined
speculations.

No man, that has cultivated ever so slight an acquaintance with the medicinal
art, can be ignorant that the milk of almost all animals has a very powerful
and mavelous efficacy in tempering, subduing, and diminishing the force of
the strongest poisons, whether they come from the kingdom of minerals, animals,
or plants, especially those of a corrosive kind, that are most remarkable for
fatal execution. And so great is this efficacy, that any person, who has taken
poison, by a seasonable use of milk in a proper method and quantity, will be
sure to escape immediate death, and recover perfect health. On which account it
may be reasonably questioned, whether there be any more ready and prevalent
antidote to be found in the whole works of nature. And the most ancient and
early writers in medicine both knew and described the certain virtue of milk
against poisons. Diosscorides, the most ancient writer concerning the Materia
Medica, says, that milk, if fresh and new, is serviceable against corrosions
and inflammations occasioned by deadly poisons, such as cantharides,
pityocampa, salamandra, or bupreste, orpiment, dorycnium, aconite, or
ephemeron. And Pliny repeats almost the very same account.

IF we enquire into the treatment of diseases themselves, it will appear that
milk was frequently and successfully employed against them, from numberless
testimonies and examples to be found in many late authors, in common with those
ancient physicians Hippocrates, Galen, Celsus, and the Arabian writers. This
will be more largely illustrated when we proceed to the subject of asses milk.
At present let it suffice to produce what we read in Martian, "That heretofore
milk was esteemed the sacred anchor and foundation of all remedies: so that
there was scarce any distemper in which milk was not made use of." The same is
attested by Jo. Jac. Wepfer, an eminent author, and noble ornament of the
faculty among the Dutch. "There is surely some divine quality belonging to
milk. Formerly I could not have believed it, had I not had convincing
experience of it. Mine own eyes have seen men entirely renewed by it. For by a
discreet use of it, multitudes have acquired a sounder constitution, more hale
complexion, and greater strength of body."

BUT though the milk that is generally used in the medicinal way, is that of
the common domestic sorts of animals, as cows, sheep, and goats; yet asses
milk is by far the most efficacious, and its virtues in physic exceed those of
every other species so much, that no sort of remedy is to be discovered so
safe, and so powerful in its effects. For this, taken at seasonable times, in
due quantities, and with a proper regimen, gives eminent relief to such as are
afflicted with phthisics, hectics, consumption and slow consuming fevers,
chronical coughs, and a scorbutic atrophy, hypochondriac and hysteric
disorders, cramps, ulcers in the bowels, and diseases that proceed from a
saline acrid erosion. This consideration induced me to fix upon this sort of
milk, above all others, for the subject of my observations, in order to set
forth its powers and properties, to demonstrate its usefulness, and confirm it
by testimonies and examples.

IN the first place, we must assign the reason why Asses milk is to be
preferred in medicine, before that of other creatures. Which may be done in a
more convincing and satisfactory manner, if we previously lay down some certain
stated propositions, concerning the composition of milk, and those ingredients
which are the foundation of all its operations. It is universally known that
milk consists of three different substances, each of which has a different
quality and powers peculiar to itself. The first is the fluid part, commonly
called serum, or whey. The next is the oily fat part, which exhibits itself in
cream on the surface, and is to be wrought into butter. The third is of a
coarser nature, earthy and mucilaginous in its texture, and of this cheese is
formed. The serum, or watery portion, exceeds the others in quantity, so that in
different milks, there will be found eight or ten parts of this fluid, to one
only of solid. The butter, or oily fat substance is the lightest, and the least
in quantity, and inflammable in its nature. And lastly the curd is of a more
fixed and heavy temper, is very readily hardened by acids, and subsides to the
bottom in the substance of cheese.

THE efficacy of every sort of milk in curing and subduing any disease, is
derived from this threefold nature of the ingredients that constitute the
substance of milk. For that milk which is thin and liquid, and contains a
larger proportion of serum, is preferable for its faculty of moistening,
diluting, cleansing and relaxing. Again, that which is heavier, and has much of
the gross substance of curd, is valuable for its excellence in hardening,
confirming and consolidating the broken vessels.

BUT that which produces a great share of cream, and likewise a considerable
quantity of the curd-like substance, is eminent for its softening, smoothening,
and nourishing quality. If we examine the different species of milks that are
in common and daily use; the human is the sweetest of all, of a very soft and
rich temperature, and is the best accommodated for the nutriment of the human
body. That of cows is fatter, has more of the earthy and less of the watery
substance, and is therefore less fitted for cleansing the vessels, but best
formed for softening, tempering and nourishing. Sheeps milk is the most gross,
and very full of the earthy mucilaginous curd; whence it has little of a
cleansing power, but is extremely useful for closing up such blood vessels, or
lymphaticks, as are injured and corroded by acrid humors. Goats milk has very
little serum, and is of a pretty thick and astringent consistence, produces
very little butter, yet is more cleansing and diluting than cows milk.

THIS different proportion in the ingredients of milk, and the difference of
beneficial effects arising therefrom, is not so much to be ascribed to the food
of the animals, (of which more largely hereafter,) as to the different texture
and conformation of their bodies. For though we were to feed the various
milch-creatures with the same sort of food, for the same length of time, and in
the same manner in all respects, yet would they not give milk of one and the
same nature, but each of its own and peculiar kind. It is therefore a very
evident truth, that the matter and quality of the food conduces but little
toward the formation of milk, but that it is altogether brought to perfection
by the p^culiar nature of the animal, which consist in a distinct composition
and texture of the fluids, (namely, the temperature of the blood and other
juices,) and a particular make, structure, and constitution of the solids,
especially of the glands belonging to the udder, which are composed of
numberless fine vessels.

WHEN we examine more minutely into the medicinal virtue and disposition of
Asses milk, it will appear to be fraught with an abundance of peculiar
excellencies which render it so exceedingly wholesome. In the first place, it
is thinner than all other milks, and abounds with watery and serous
ingredients. This is what Aristotle and Galen have both observed, who call it
(...), composed of the minutest particles. Since then it is known that many
diseases are caused by a grossness and tenacity of the juices, which, as they
pass slowly through the finer vessels, of which the principal emunctories and
strainers of the glands consist, are apt to stop in those narrow passages, to
fill them up, and occasion obstructions, it is very obvious and natural to
conclude, that the use of Asses milk, which abounds with serous and fluid
particles, must be extremely proper to open the obstructed vessels, to
attenuate the gross and viscid juices, and set them in an easy and free motion.
Again, when we know that multitudes of distempers proceed from an acrid, salt,
and corrosive state of the fluids, we cannot but be assured that the thin serum
of Asses-milk will not fail of diluting, softening, and subduing them: although
it must be allowed at the same time, that the sweet oily substance contributes
much toward this effect, which embraces and involves the pointed particles of
salt, and by this means the crude, ill-digested juices, being property
corrected, are, by the plentiful assistance of serum, conveyed in their due
course through the vessels appointed for secretion.

IT is another extraordinary excellence of Asses milk, that it contains but a
small proportion of the grosser curdling substance. Out of eight ounces of
Asses milk which I set over hot coals in a broad vessel, after all the serum
was evaporated, I could scarce gather so much as six drachms of a whitish sweet
matter. I then took twelve ounces of the same milk, and set it by to curdle in
a close vessel, filled about half way. In three days time a very white and thin
curd settled at the bottom, which when separated from the whey by straining
through filtrating paper, and afterward dried, scarce amounted to two drachms;
all the rest of its solid parts having in part passed with the whey through the
strainer, and partly adhered to the sides of the vessels, or lost themselves in
the operation. On the contrary, the same weight of cows milk, treated in the
same manner, thickened into a grosser and heavier curd, which when cleared from
the whey, spread out in a broad plate, and dried in the sun, weighed ten
drachms. From these experiments it is evident, that the quantity of the gross
curdling substance is very small in Asses milk, when compared with other sorts.
For this reason it easily diffuses itself into the minutest extremities of the
blood vessels, thoroughly dilutes the vital juices, liquifies the sluggish
humors, and when it has thus dissolved them conveys them off. A third
circumstance that more strongly evinces the salubrious quality of Asses milk,
is, that the share of cheese-like substance which it contains is extremely soft
and tender, and never makes a gross or firm curd. To make this evident, I
warmed some Asses milk, and sprinkled it with vinegar, expecting to see it
contract a thick consistence; but nothing appeared of that sort, except a few
light thin flakes floating here and there on the serum: when, on the contrary,
cow's milk, the instant it was mixed with an acid, condensed into lumps of a
considerable hardness, and fell to the bottom. Now in all cures which are
sought by milk, nothing can be so hurtful and dangerous as to have it curdle in
the stomach, to prevent which accident ought to be the physicians principle
care and concern. For the mischiefs occasioned by a coagulation of milk in the
stomach are very pernicious, and have been observed and cautioned against by
the best authors. It is past dispute therefore that that milk is the most
wholesome and properest for medicinal uses, which has least tendency to curdle,
which is the case with Asses milk in the most remarkable degree.

A fourth, and the most valuable excellence in Asses milk, is its exquisite
sweetness, in which it exceeds all other species of milk, except the human: for
you may extract from it by much the greatest quantity of delicate tasted sugar,
or rather a thick substance resembling manna. To try the experiment, I boiled
twelve ounces of Asses milk, in the month of July, over a gentle fire, and
immediately it produced a thick concretion very sweet, weighing one ounce. Upon
this I poured it into a glass with a pint of rain water, which when frequently
shaken almost dissolved the mass, leaving only a small sediment. The liquor was
then poured through filtrating paper, and set to evaporate, and yielded half an
ounce of an honey-like substance, extremely sweet, and white. As Asses milk
therefore contains so plentiful a proportion of sweet salts, we cannot doubt
but it has for that reason a very singular medicinal quality which cannot be
expected in other kinds of milk. For this honey-like salt greatly softens,
checks and moderates the acrimony of humors, whether acid or bilious, and by
gently irritating the fibers of the bowels, urges them to their office and
operation. Hippocrates very justly observes, that Asses milk disposes to
purging more than any other. And in another place advises, as a remedy for the
Fluor Albus, first to occasion a gentle purging by drinking Asses milk, and
then to change it for cows milk.

FROM these enlarged observations which we have made on the excellencies of
Asses milk, it must be evident to all that judge sensibly, that it has an
admirable efficacy toward curing many distempers. It may now be proper to
enumerate those distempers in regular order, and explain the usefulness of this
milk in each particular. The first and most remarkable instance we shall give,
by proving that no surer or more successful remedy can be invented or
recommended against consumptions. The use of milk in such diseases had long
been practiced, till the physical schools of Cnidos and Cos exploded it: at
length Hippocrates, who came from the latter, vindicated and established its
credit, and was universally followed in it by all the physicians of the next
age. Galen says a great deal in praise of milk in consumptive cases; and speaks
of a place, called Stabia, very famous for its good air, pasture for cattle,
and their wholesome milk, which was filled frequently with crowds of consumptive
people that came thither for relief. And Aretaeus ascribes so extraordinary
virtues to milk in this grievous distemper, that he does not scruple to affirm,
that if consumptive folks would drink great quantities of milk they would need
no other remedy.

YET although milk of all kinds be a wholesome medicine in consumptive and
decaying constitutions, yet Asses milk excells the others in a greater degree,
because it fully answers every requisite that can conduce to the cure of
consumptions. If we strictly enquire into the cause and origin of a consumption
of the lungs, it will be found to proceed from a stoppage and obstruction of
the vessels, of which the lungs are almost entirely composed. Whence
Hippocrates very properly and ingeniously describes the rise of a consumption
in these words; "when the lungs have collected a quantity of blood, or salt
phlegm, and cannot discharge them, but they settle and fix there, they occasion
little pustules to rise; which suppurate at first; and through the whole
distemper there continues a sharp dry cough, chilliness, a fever, a pain in the
breast and back, and sometimes a a strong wheesing both in lying down and
sitting up, and then the patient begins to spit up much corrupted matter." --
It was usual with the ancients to vary their prescriptions of milk for
consumptions, and sometimes order Asses milk before, and sometimes after the
use of other milk, as different occasions required. Hippocrates advises purging
with Asses milk boiled (or Mares milk strained, which much resembles Asses
milk) and drank every morning to the quantity of about a quart; after which he
recommends cows milk, or goats.

PROSPER ALPINUS greatly recommends the use of woman's milk at first, then
Asses, and lastly goats, in a consumption and ulceration of the lungs. For my
part, I am convinced both from reason and experience, that Asses milk alone is
sufficient for the cure of this terrible disease. For nothing can be so
properly adapted as this is, by its abundance of sweet detersive salts, to
cleanse away and disperse the matter that obstructs the vessels and pipes of
the lungs. Besides, it greatly restores decayed strength, cools the heat of the
intestines, fills out the wasted limbs, and preserves a free and open
perspiration. Yet I do not deny, but when the obstruction of the vessels in the
lungs is cured, cows milk or goats, by reason of their plenty of gross, earthy
substance, may be proper to fill up and consolidate the cavities made by the
corrosive ulcers.

IF I may be allowed to produce my own experience, I could recount many
instances of consumptive people, who were afflicted with an obstinate cough, a
fever, a great discharge of viscid matter from the lungs, and an amazing waste
of the whole body; and who, after an ineffectual trial of other remedies, by my
directions took to a long continued course of Asses milk, or cows milk, (either
with or without some sort of tea,) and perfectly recovered. But omitting
others, I shall only relate one very late case, which is now fresh in my
memory: A man, about thirty years old, of a very debauched life, and given to
all kinds of intemperance, especially drinking of spirituous liquors, first
fell into a spitting of blood, which being cured, though after a long
continuance, he contracted a fever, which at first had the appearance of a
defluxion, but at length consumed his strength, and afflicted him night and
day. He continually spit up a great discharge of purulent and viscid matter,
his strength failed, and his flesh wasted so speedily, that he could not walk
about, and was given over by every body. Yet, after he had laid three months in
this sad condition, by God's blessing he recovered, unexpectedly, at the return
of the spring, on drinking goats milk warm every morning, after I had
administered gentle, opening, saline-abstersive and nitrous powders, to remove
his obstructions, and hectic heat.

YET we must take notice, that though this be such a sovereign remedy for
consumptions, and when given in a judicious manner, scarce ever fails of
success, yet it will not cure every sort of consumption; but must be applied in
the beginning of the distemper, and is most likely to take effect, before the
ulcers be grown callous, or the corroded cavity be too deep and large, or the
fever become continued and without intermission. Celsus justly advises, "If it
be a real consumption, you ought to attack it as early as possible; for when
this distemper is of long date, it is not easily conquered. But in the
beginning, as in all lasting and obstinate fevers, the use of milk is proper."
And Alpinus very discreetly says, that a regular course of milk will cure
consumptions in their beginning, before the ulcers be grown large and callous.

As a spitting of blood, difficulty of breathing, wasting of the flesh, and a
small fever, all generally inseparable companions of a consumption of the
lungs, are occasioned by the same cause, namely, an obstruction of the vessels
of the lungs, and pustules that arise from thence, which in the height of the
distemper grow to a scirrhous and cancerous ulceration, there is no more
powerful help against all these symptoms, than Asses milk, and it has always
been recommended by the most ancient and able physicians. There is a remarkable
passage in Trallian, which says, "If the whole body receives no benefit from
food, but begins apparently to waste away, and the breast does not discharge
much matter, they ought to live on milk only, and that of Asses excells all
others, because it purges to a proper degree." The same author again commends
Asses milk for a difficulty of breathing: "Such as are afflicted with a
difficulty of breathing, I have often known relieved by Asses milk, when given
properly, for it clears and removes whatever is fixed in the vessels of the
lungs." And in another place, speaking of spitting blood, he fays, "All that
spit blood find relief from milk. For there is no medicine or food of any kind
so suited to their case as milk: and those that took to the use of that alone
at first, and persevered in it for a long time, have all recovered their
health. I knew a man that by living on milk for a whole year, and entirely
abstaining from wine, was cured of a spitting of blood and matter, and escaped
falling into a consumption."

A consumption with a slow feverish heat, is most times caused by a stoppage or
obstruction in the smaller vessels, thence proceeds a stagnation of the
humors, either in the lungs or bowels, and glandulous parts of the belly. Now
Asses milk serves to moisten and remove these obstructions; it likewise cools
and checks the violence of the feverish heat. Whence it is evident, that a right
use of Asses milk is not only extremely serviceable, but the very best of all
remedies in a slow fever. Hippocrates agrees with us in this, and advises those
that have a consumption and small fever to drink milk. And Riverius relates a
remarkable case of a young lady of Montpellier, aged 25, who had been long
confined to her bed with a cough that harrassed her night and day, perpetual
watching, a pain in her stomach, a slow fever, costiveness, and a general decay
of the whole body, who was perfectly recovered by drinking Asses milk for one
month, after being prepared for it by a laxative cooling julep.

To this let me add a most singular case that came within my observation a few
years ago. A gentlewoman had for many years been subject to much sickness, but
now for half a year together was afflicted with a slow fever, a loathing of
food, languidness of the limbs, a dry cough, watchings, a great pain about the
Os Sacrum, heat of urine, profuse sweats by night, and so entire a waste and
decay in flesh and strength, that she was unable to stir from her bed. In vain
had she been plied with decoctions, anti-hectic powders, stomachicks,
anti-hysterics, resolvents, and a thousand other things; she lay past all
hopes, and in expectation of certain death. At length, in the beginning of the
spring, by my directions, she took to Asses milk, taking between whiles a
little opening manna, mixed with some cooling nitrous powders, and now and then
some nourishing broths prepared with laxative roots, and with such happy
success, that in three days only, every thing appeared wonderfully amended; and
though the cure was not entirely completed in many weeks, she was at last
perfectly restored to her health and vigor.

I likewise judge Asses milk to be very efficacious against an Empyema, which
is often caused by a pleuresy improperly treated, especially in bodies of a
spongy habit, and shows itself by a constant and copious spitting of matter. To
confirm which opinion I shall relate a remarkable case as told by T.
Valleriola: A woman, after recovery from a pleuresy, began to discharge, by
spitting, great quantities of purulent matter, which reduced her to a
miserable, thin, emaciated, and lifeless condition. The author tried to relieve
her breast of that load of filth by detersive drinks, linctus's, broths, and
such sort of things, but without success: at length, as her fever was not very
high, nor any obstruction appeared to be in the Hypochondria, or the bowels, he
prescribed Asses milk fresh milked, and sweetened with a little sugar, which
having drank for six weeks, she recovered her health and a good constitution,
and died twelve years after in childbed. I likewise remember, many years
since, when I practiced physic at Minden, a nobleman, thirty years of age, of a
full and sanguine habit of body, who, after a pleuresy injudiciously treated,
fell into so very great a spitting both of purulent and chylous matter, which
lasted more than a month; and that he sometimes spit more than a pint a day,
and was thereby surprizingly weakened and emaciated. I ordered him to drink
Asses milk, with powders of crab-shells and bole armonic, balsam of sulphur of
almonds, sperma ceti, and dragons blood mixed; when he had done this for two
months, by the assistance of providence he was happily cured, to the admiration
of all that knew him.

BUT yet, it is not only in these diseases which affect the lungs and other
intestines with a cough, fever, waste and consumption, that Asses milk has this
admirable and divine efficacy, but it is also wonderfully serviceable for
soothing, abating, and lulling the fierceness of pains in the nervous parts of
the body, chiefly those that fix themselves in the joints. These diseases, such
as the gout in the hands, feet, and hips, are caused by a sharp, thin serum,
issuing out of those glands which were discovered by Clopton Havers, nay
through the coats of the glands, and falling on the articulo-nerveo-tendinous
ligaments, which corrodes them and occasions most acute pains, cramps, and
contractions of the limbs. This, in time, affects the whole system of the
nerves, and brings on a fever, watching, anxiety, languidness, want of
appetite, and universal restlessness, if the fit be very violent. In these
rheumatic and gouty cases, the whole mass of humors is infected with foul,
salt, tartarous, and sharp particles; which is perhaps owing to some antecedent
cause, a fullness of blood, some suppression of a critical discharge from the
blood, irregular living, or excess in eating; and yet some modern practitioners
are apt to confound these remote causes with the proximate, the salt foulness
of the humors, and prove themselves quite ignorant of the nature of this
distemper, as well as of the method of applying remedies. For it is evident from
experience, that all such remedies as sweeten the juices, correct the sharp
salts, and as it were sheath-up their points, and at the same, time gently
promote each different kind of excretion, go a great way toward relieving the
violence of the distemper, soften and mitigate the sharp pains, and in a great
measure cure the disease itself, unless it be hereditary, or of a very long
date.

Now milk, and particularly that of Asses, is by far the best and most
excellent of this sort of remedies, excepting the diluting decoctions that are
prepared from roots. Nor is its excellence any late discovery of the moderns,
but the earliest writers in physic, and all their followers, highly recommended
and approve it. Hippocrates advises, in a sciatica, first a purge, and then a
course of Asses milk. And in the same treatise, he adds, it is proper in the
gout first to soften the bowels with a glyster or suppository, and after a
purge to drink warm whey or Asses milk. Pliny tells us many have been relieved
from pains in the joints by drinking milk. And Celsus says, many people, by a
long course of Asses milk, have been so thoroughly cleared of this distemper,
as to be free from it ever after. Among the moderns, Gabriel Fonseca,
Hollerius, Ballonius, Baglivi, Sydenham, Sachs, Griselius, Pechlinus, Dolaeus,
Waldschmidt, and many more, all agree, from numberless experiments and
observations, in allowing milk, and especially Asses milk, to be the principal
comfort and relief of gouty and rheumatic persons.

AND I can from my own knowledge assert, that after using gentle laxatives made
of manna, solutive syrup of roses, and some absorbents mixed, I have found the
drinking of goats milk, (where Asses could not be had) for many days together,
without meat or drink of any other sort, has given great benefit; the pains
have grown milder, and of shorter continuance, and all the other symptoms have
ceased. I have known many gouty old men, who after drinking Asses milk with
manna for the three first days, and then continuing it alone for a fortnight,
have found their pains greatly abated: but when they laid aside this remedy,
their torture was most intense and obstinate, and confined them to their beds
for some months. Yet this must all along be observed, that in these distempers
the good effects of milk is more speedy and certain where the patient is young,
the disease not inveterate, the gout not fixed to a particular part, nor
transmitted by inheritance.

As Asses milk proves so very useful in relieving the pains that seize the
outward parts of the Body, so it is likewise no less serviceable against those
that affect the inward nervous parts, the stomach and intestines, as is the
case in convulsive cholics. This very beneficial effect of it is to be
accounted for in the following manner: The Asses milk, being diluting, corrects
and overpowers the acrimony of the bilious juices, softens and relaxes the
contracted fibers with its serous and slippery particles, and with its sweet
ingredients renders the bowels laxative; then that corrosive matter which
occasions all the pain, is readily conveyed off by stool, and all is easy and
quiet. The truth of this Ballonius asserts, and although Hippocrates forbids
the use of milk where there are bilious purgings, yet, if there be no
remarkable fever to corrupt the milk, I think it should be given. For if it may
be thrown into the bowels by a glyster, without any hurtful effect, why not
also into the stomach?

WHEN cramps and convulsions seize the nervous parts, which is the common
symptom in hypochondriac and hysteric fits, I have always observed milk,
especially that of Asses, do great good; provided there be no costiveness, nor
obstruction in the bowels, and the first passages be not clogged with sharp and
viscid phlegm. Hence Sydenham highly approves the use of milk in what he calls
the hysteric cholic. Many women, says he, for a long while troubled with
hysteric disorders, especially that which I call hysteric cholic, have been
quite cured by only living on milk for some time." Bened. Sylvaticus bestows
the highest praises on Asses milk in hypochondriac complaints, which he directs
to be sweetened with sugar, and made a moderate purge by a small mixture of
powdered senna, and drank for forty days together. And although Hippocrates
forbids milk where the hypochondria are distended, that is, when the stomach is
expanded with wind, or the belly swollen and overcharged with blood, yet I have
often learned from indisputable experience, that the hypochondria are not
always thus oppressed, but that the stomach and adjoining intestines are often
tortured with contractions caused by the sharpness of the humors, and blood
that stagnates in the finer vessels, and that this disorder is successfully
removed by milk.

FOR the same reason this judicious author zealously recommends Asses milk, in
madness and hypochondriac melancholy, which are occasioned by spasms, that
force too great a quantity of blood into the head, so that it cannot circulate
equally and freely through the vessels of the membranes that enclose the brain:
and if it be drank every morning to the quantity of four or five ounces, for
the space of a month, or longer, it corrects the acrid humors, eases the
contractions of the fibers, cools and relaxes the bowels, and by gradually
removing the cause, subdues that terrible disorder. But in order for more
certain success, it is proper to make an addition to the purging quality of the
milk, by mixing a little manna; the happy effects of which I have very often
experienced.

SINCE therefore it is so evident that Asses milk is beneficial to the nerves,
and heals their several forementioned disorders by means of its softening and
lubricating quality, we cannot doubt but it may be properly administered in
other complaints, where the nervous parts are likewise afflicted and disordered
with violent motions, as in epilepsies and convulsive fits. This is affirmed by
that eminent author Sylvaticus, in many places; and I can attest the same with
confidence. For I could produce very many examples of it, but one in particular
of a youth of noble birth, about fourteen years of age, and of admirable parts
and understanding. Having been struck by some sudden fright, he was instantly
seized with strong convulsions in his limbs, chiefly his legs and arms: and
after much anxiety and uneasiness of spirits, was oppressed with entire
swoonings, so that the fit came sometimes every other day, sometimes every day,
about the evening, and pursuing him for the space of two months, reduced him to
a very weak condition. Many physicians were consulted, who gave him various
medicines, but without any effect: at last he was ordered to drink every
morning about three ounces of Asses milk, now and then with a little manna, and
to be put in a warm bath every other day, taking between whiles some
anti-epileptic powders: in a month's time the disorder disappeared, and the
patient, by the divine blessing, recovered his health and strength.

LET us consider those grievous disorders that attend the scurvy, such as a
wasting of the flesh, fierce pains and contractions of the limbs, external
ulcers and erosions. All which are derived from a total distemperature of the
juices, a suppression of those very useful evacuations of sweat and excrement;
from a a defect in the secretion of the bilious humors in the spleen; from a
salt sulphurous foulness in the humors; and likewise from their too thick
consistence, which retards their natural progress, and obstructs the finer
vessels. Now nothing can be so proper to open these closed passages, to remove
obstructions, to correct the acrimony of the humors and to dissolve their
viscidity, as diluting, moistening and cooling remedies, such as the whey of
goats milk, or, what is still preferable to all, Asses milk.

THE strongest testimony I can produce in favor of this eminent good quality
in milk, is that of the best author that ever wrote upon the scurvy, Eugalenus,
who says, "I have seen many people recover out of the scurvy from the use of
milk and milk-diets, with a stronger and better constitution than those that
have lived under the rules and prescriptions of physicians." And he mentions
several that have been cured of scorbutic fevers by milk, though contrary to
the prescription of Hippocrates, in his aphorisms. And I myself could produce a
multitude of examples within my own experience of people afflicted with a
wandering scorbutic gout, (a national distemper in Westphalia) whom I
absolutely cured, when I practiced physic at Minda, with no other medicine than
Asses, or other sorts of milk, if it were not needless to tire the reader with
so many illustrations of a thing that is so clear and evident.

WHEN scorbutic people and old men, who are naturally subject to a salt and
foul corruption of the humors, and likewise such as are infected with a
venereal taint, are afflicted with dangerous ulcers that seem to resemble
cancers; even in these terrible symptoms a very speedy and sure relief may be
had from Asses milk, and the whey of it. Which, as it is evident from all the
abovementioned arguments, is likewise confirmed by the authorities of many
authors both ancient and modern. Dioscorides recommends milk, mixed with honey,
or salt, in all sorts of ulcerations in general, as well inward as outward, for
violent itching in the skin, pimples, and foul humors of the body. Galen
advises the use of Asses milk for ulcers in the uterus, the reins, the bladder,
and pudenda. To these we may add the assertion of Sylvaticus, that Asses milk
drank for thirty or forty days together, not only entirely cured a cancerous
swelling in the neck of the uterus, but also a venereal ulcer, attended with a
consumption and slow fever. Again, the same author commends the same remedy for
the cure of that herculean distemper, the elephantiasis, in these words; "Asses
milk drank every morning to the quantity of a quart, with a little sugar, and
cream of tartar, to render it purgative, is a very excellent remedy for the
elephantiasis." And Ambrose Parey, in his book of surgery, says, he has known
by experience the admirable efficacy of Asses milk, in cancerous ulcers, both
taken inwardly, and applied outwardly in fomentations.

AND while we are enumerating the many noble virtues of Asses milk, we must not
omit its peculiar excellence not only as a remedy to the distempers of old men,
but as a sort of food of great efficacy in restoring their decayed strength.
With regard to its medicinal excellence in relieving old age, we have elsewhere
shown at large, that in an advanced age, the blood and all the juices contract
a great degree of foulness and corruption, from obstructions in the excretory
glands and vessels, whence in time proceeds variety of distempers, the most
remarkable of which are indigestion, languidness in the limbs, consumption of
the solids, a low fever, and pruritus. And all these are to be relieved by a
proper use of milk. And on this account it has always been held in great esteem
both by the ancients and moderns; for it is very efficacious in rendering the
humors fluid when they are too thick, in diluting those that are salt and
acrid, in relaxing the too rigid and tense fibers, and in restoring the
excretions, when disturbed, to their proper order, as it not only cleanses the
foul juices, but likewise breeds a proper supply of good ones. It will be
sufficient for the present purpose to produce the authority of Trallian, who
strongly recommends Asses milk to old people who are under a consumptive
wasting; and the reason he gives for it is, because they have but a small share
of strength, and are neither able to separate nourishment from common food, nor
to distribute it through the constitution; wherefore the milk of women is first
to be preferred, and next to it that of Asses.

IF we enquire into the nourishing and analeptic property of Asses milk, by
which it retards the decays of old age, and restores the strength of those who
have been reduced by distempers, no body can hesitate to give the preference to
this kind of milk above any others.

BUT it may not perhaps be disagreeable, or improper, to produce the authority
of authors of great credit, who have treated of this subject. I shall begin
with the recommendation that Helmont gives of it; who, although in other parts of
his writings he condemns the use of milk, yet in Libr. de Digest. Aliment.
ascribes a particularly refreshing invigorating and nourishing property to that
of Asses, supposing that the Ass, as a long-lived animal, is furnished with
milk preferable to any others. Eryphon, as Herodotus relates, relied altogether
on Asses milk for restoring old and emaciated people. I myself also knew an
officer of the army, who was restored to his former health and ease by Asses
milk, though he was almost entirely wasted away with the venereal distemper and
excruciating pains that had afflicted him for several years. Heurnius also
relates, that Asses milk prevents old age and wrinkles; for which reason, no
doubt, it was that Poppaea, the wife of Nero, always ordered a hundred Asses to
be kept, that she might bathe every day in their milk, to preserve her skin
white, soft, and smooth.

HAVING now explained the property of Asses milk, and its excellence in several
disorders, I shall proceed to the proper method of giving it, and then show
what is necessary to be observed in order to expect success from it. But it
will first be proper to say somewhat of the animal itself. A milch Ass ought to
be quite free from any disorder, not very old, but of a middle age, neither too
fat nor too lean, and may be esteemed the better if she bring her foal in the
month of May. She ought not to be fed in a house, but kept in meadows which
produce plenty of medicinal herbs; she should drink river water, which, as it
is lighter and more diluting than spring water, passes off quicker by the
proper discharges, and mixing more thoroughly with the humors, cleanses them
more effectually. Helmont has an ingenious remark on this subject: he advises
that the Ass should be combed or curried every morning as horses are, for that
it may easily be known from the milk, whether she has been dressed that morning
or not. Without doubt there may be some reason for this, because the use of the
currycomb increases perspiration, and cleanses the humors, by passing off a
great many saline particles that way.

IT ought to be considered too what the Ass is fed with, because the nature and
properties of the milk of animals is altered by their diet, so as to be more or
less wholesome, or even adapted to some particular disorders. For as it is a
common practice to make a purging or alterative medicine given to the nurse,
communicate its properperties to her milk and take effect on the child, so no
doubt the same will hold good in regard to the animals whose milk we use. Galen
proves this by the instance of goats, who are fed with scammony or spurge,
whose milk is purging. Dioscorides and Hippocrates are of the same opinion, and
in the Acta Haffniensia it is asserted, that wormwood eaten in large quantities
makes the milk bitter. From hence it is that Coelius Aurelianus commends milk
in the coeliac passion, or flux, which is taken from goats that feed on
willows, vine leaves, oaks, or sallows, plaintain, and plants of the same
nature; giving this reason for it, "because the astringent quality of the herbs
communicates itself to the milk." But there is a remarkable difference between
the milk which is produced in spring from green pasture, and that in winter
from dry food. Varro, who was very well acquainted with what belong to country
affairs, was of this opinion, and says, "that milk from barley and stubble, and
all kinds of hard and dry food is nourishing; but that is more cleansing which
comes from green pasture." And Dioscorides thinks that milk in spring is
thinner, and because it comes from green pasture, more laxative and softening.

FROM whence it plainly appears, that milk of all sorts, but more especially
Asses, is not only most serviceable in the spring, but that its virtues may, by
a regulation of food, be so prepared, as to be particularly effective against
any one distemper. Wherefore I should advise that a milch Ass be fed with such
herbs as in themselves are known proper for the disease you would relieve. In a
consumption, and diseases of the lungs and breast, let her be supplied with
veronica, ground ivy, the blind or dead nettle, coltsfoot, scurvy grass; or,
if you want to restore the vigor of the solids, with sanicula, tansey,
nummularia, consolida-major, flowers of St. John's-wort, alchimilla, polygonum,
and the like; or let the creature be drove to places where these plants abound.
In pains and spasms, both inward and external, it may be useful to mix in her
food yarrow, chamomile flowers, acacia, mead-wort, tilia, melilot, spurge,
mallows, marsh mallows, and others of this nature. In slow and hectic fevers,
(besides those we named as good for the lungs) we may add plantane, prunella,
and scurvy grass mixed with germander. If the hypochondria are obstructed, and
cause a scorbutic foulness in the juices, choose out some herbs of the opening
or laxative kind; such are fumitory, the lesser centaury, absinthium,
scurvy grass, trefoil, water-cress, nasturtium, and the lesser house-leek. In
the same manner may milk be rendered medicinal, and fit for almost any
complaints, by administering such herbs and flowers as the physician shall
esteem most proper and effectual.

As to the method of using it, these following rules may be observed.

1. IN cases of necessity, Asses milk may be drank at all times; but it is by
far the most serviceable in the spring and summer, when all the herbs are full
of juices, and greatly enrich the milk. 2. The milk should be milked into a
pail set over hot water, and immediately put into a vessel that has a narrow
mouth, and shuts close, and so drank directly while it is warm; for milk, like
all other liquors, has a subtle spirit, of a strengthening and invigorating
quality, which by no means ought to be allowed to fly off with its warmth.
Hence Galen orders that milk be drank instantly, and the animal brought to the
patient's bedside; for that its nature, like that of the semen, is at once
altered by the open air. 3. The morning is the best time of day to drink, as it
will operate the easier in an empty stomach; and therefore no other food ought
to be taken in four or five hours after it. Yet, if circumstances require a
frequent repetition of it, if may be drank in the afternoon; but it should be
about four hours after dinner has been digested, and in but half the quantity
that is drank in the morning, 4. It Is impossible to prescribe in general any
fixed quantity that should be used, because of the difference of ages,
constitutions, and distempers; but thus far may be said, that you ought never
to exceed the quantity of three common pints. 5. The time of continuing it must
be directed by the degree and strength of the distemper: if that be very
obstinate, it were well to continue drinking it for three months, or longer;
especially if a favorable prospect appears of success, and the violence of the
symptoms abate very discernably.

YET a prudent and experienced physician will so order, regulate, and methodise
the use of this medicine, as almost to insure success, and avoid any hurtful
consequences. I shall therefore conclude with a few cautions that should be
observed very accurately.

1. BEFORE a course of milk is begun, the state and condition of the stomach
must be carefully inquired into: Whether it will bear milk, and have a
sufficient degree of strength to concoct, digest, and then discharge it. For if
that be weak and infirm, if it be troubled with wind and phlegm, or be loaded
with a crowd of acid humors, milk must not be taken; because, until these
things are remedied, that will curdle and stagnate, and corrupt, and increase
the flatulence and uneasiness. It will be proper therefore to cleanse and
relieve the stomach first, either downwards, by a gentle dose of manna, or,
where the case will allow, by a vomit with a grain or two of emetic tartar. 2.
Great care must be had that the milk be not turned to curd. And therefore where
the food is apt to grow acid in the stomach, as is the case with old and
hypochondriac people, it is advisable to give absorbent, earthy, and alcaline
medicines, mixed with the milk, adding likewise some stomachic carminative
essence, or volatile oily salt. 3. When the patient has drank milk for six or
eight days, a gentle dose of manna should be given, to purge the bowels, and
carry off whatever foulness the stomach may have contracted, that the farther
efficacy of the milk be not retarded. 4. It is best to drink it at first
sparingly, three or four ounces, and then to increase the draught gradually,
that the stomach be not too suddenly oppressed, and conceive a dislike and
loathing to the remedy. 5. A proper regulation of diet must be observed during
the course of milk. The lightness of food must be chiefly consulted; avoiding
not only meats hard of digestion, but also those that are reckoned to afford
little nourishment, and likewise all flatulent victuals, summer fruits, and
acids of all kinds; abstaining from all malt liquors, and wines, except a small
quantity of the soundest Spanish wines. Nor should any bread be used that is
lumpish and fermented, but what is made of the cleanest and finest wheat flour.

IN the last place let me add some instances, wherein the use of milk may be
judged improper. In headaches arising from crudities in the stomach, in very
acute fevers, and when the bowels are overcharged with gross blood, milk is
very pernicious: being no less improper when the Stomach is cold and filled
with acids, than when in a heat and ferment, as it is in fevers, and when the
bilious humors abound, because in both cases it quickly turns to a foul and
offensive putrid state. Milk is also very prejudicial to those who, either
through neglect of bleeding, or a total suppression of the discharge of the
piles, or the menses, are afflicted with a too great and unnatural share of
blood, and consequently with a foulness of the humors. Which agrees entirely
with the observation of Hippocrates, That the more you nourish distempered
bodies, the more you injure them. For unless the excess of blood be reduced by
moderate bleeding, and the faulty digestion amended by medicines that correct
the whole mass of fluids, all sorts of milk must be avoided, as extremely
hurtful and dangerous.

FINIS.
Thi^ Day is Published, Price 5s. bound, In ONE VOLUME, OCTAVO, The SECOND
EDITION, beautifully printed, of HIPPOCRATES upon AIR. WATER, and SITUATION;
upon Epidemical Diseases; and upon Prognostics, in Acute Cases especially.

To which is added, The Life of Hippocrates from Scranus, and Thucydides's
Account of the Plague of Athens. The Whole translated, methodised, and
illustrated with useful and explanatory Notes.

By FRANCIS CLIFTON, M. D.

Fellow of the College of Physicians, and of the Royal Society.

Printed for J. Whiston and B. White, at Mr. Boyle's Head in Fleet Street.


