AN ANATOMICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE HUMAN GRAVID UTERUS, AND ITS CONTENTS.

AN ANATOMICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE HUMAN GRAVID UTERUS, AND ITS CONTENTS.

BY THE LATE WILLIAM HUNTER, M. D. PHYSICIAN EXTRAORDINARY TO THE QUEEN,
PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY IN THE ROYAL ACADEMY, AND FELLOW OF THE ROYAL AND
ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETIES, etc. etc.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. JOHNSON, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD; AND G. NICOL,
PALL MALL. 1794.

TO GEORGE FORDYCE, M. D. etc. DAVID PITCAIRN, M. D. etc. AND CHARLES COMB, M.
D. etc.
GENTLEMEN,
As Trustees appointed by the late Dr. Hunter, to have the care of his valuable
Museum, there is an evident propriety in dedicating this posthumous Treatise to
you. He has given you the most unequivocal proof of his good opinion; and there
are none to whom, I am persuaded, he would have been more disposed to have
dedicated this little work, had he been alive.

It happens, by a lucky concurrence of circumstances, that while I am doing
what I believe would have been very agreeable to the Author himself, to whom I
owe every sentiment of gratitude and respect, I follow at the same time my own
opinion and feelings. You have shown me many marks of your friendship; and
there are none for whose character I entertain a higher esteem.

I forbear to add any thing more. Your seize and professional reputation
need not to be told; and I am unwilling to incur the risk of offending your
delicacy, and forfeiting some part of that favorable opinion with which you
have always appeared to honor me, by attempting to offer what might perhaps be
considered as adulation. I remain,

GENTLEMEN, with very sincere regard, your faithful, and most obedient servant,
M. BAILLIE.
Windmill Street, Oct. 3. 1794.
ADVERTISEMENT.
AN accurate Anatomical Description of the Human Gravid Uterus and its
Contents, has not hitherto been published in this, nor I believe in any other
country. It was therefore a desideratum in anatomy; and no person surely was so
capable of supplying this want as the late Dr. Hunter. He had more
opportunities of examining this subject than any other anatomist; it had
engaged very early his attention, and he had pursued every inquiry relating to
it with uncommon ardour. The result of his labor has been, that he has
improved very much the knowledge of this part of anatomy, more especially by
discovering the decidua reflexa, and by explaining the true nature of the
decidua, as formed by the uterus, which before his time was altogether
misunderstood. About twenty years ago, he published a large volume of plates to
illustrate the Anatomy of the Gravid Uterus and its Contents, which for
accuracy of representation, and excellence of engraving, have never been
surpassed in any anatomical work. The first artists were employed, who, while
they contributed to the improvement of a most interesting part of science, were
ambitious at the same time of adding to their own reputation.

No regular description of the anatomy of the Gravid Uterus accompanied these
plates, but the plates themselves were merely explained. Dr. Hunter had
intended, however, to make up this deficiency, so as to render the whole work
complete. He has made a promise to this purpose in the preface to his large
volume of Engravings; and has left behind him a Manuscript containing a
Description of the Anatomy of the Gravid Uterus and its Contents, which he had
not quite finished. What appeared to me to be wanting, I have attempted with
much diffidence to add, but this amounts only to a few pages.

It may very naturally be asked, why has this publication been so long delayed?
To this question I am unable to give a satisfactory answer; but I will explain
the real cause of the delay. When this Manuscript came into ray hands after Dr.
Hunter's death, I had studied anatomy for so short a time, and indeed was so
young, as not to be capable of judging whether the Manuscript was in a state
fit for publication or not. After some time it was laid by, and not taken up
till lately. It then struck me, upon perusal, as not only proper to be
published, but as likely to do honor to the reputation of Dr. Hunter, although
already so great.

The Manuscript is probably not the copy which would have been put into the
hands of the printer, had the Author himself been alive; but it is written with
so much perspicuity, that he would have had very little to have corrected. I
have thought it my duty to make no alteration, except when there was a very
obvious reason for it; and this has happened only in a very few instances.

THE EDITOR.

CONTENTS.
OF the Size of the Uterus PAGE 1 -- Figure of the Uterus PAGE 3 -- Situation
of the Uterus PAGE 7 -- Ligaments, Tubes, and Ovaria, of the Pregnant Uterus
PAGE 12 -- Thickness of the Uterus PAGE 15 -- Blood Vessels of the Uterus PAGE
16 -- Lymphatics PAGE 19 -- Nerves PAGE 21 -- Muscular Fibers of the Uterus
PAGE 25 -- Mouth of the Uterus PAGE 29 Of the Contents of the Pregnant Uterus
PAGE 31 -- Placenta PAGE 36 Of the Membranes PAGE 50 -- Amnion ibid. -- Chorion
PAGE 52 -- Decidua PAGE 54 -- Allantois and Urachus PAGE 58 -- Liquor Amnii
PAGE 60 Of the Child PAGE 62 -- Size and form of the Child PAGE 68 Of the
Uterus and its Contents in the earlier Months of Pregnancy PAGE 71 -- Amnion
PAGE 75 -- Vesicula Alba PAGE 76 -- Chorion PAGE 77 -- Decidua PAGE 79 --
Placenta PAGE 84 -- Navel String PAGE 85 -- Foetus PAGE 86
AN ANATOMICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE HUMAN GRAVID UTERUS, etc.
SIZE OF THE UTERUS.
THE pregnant uterus undergoes such gradual changes, from the time of
conception to the hour of delivery, that in giving the anatomy of this part it
will be necessary to fix upon some one time in the wide period of nine months.
The latter part of that period appears to be the fittest for our purpose, on
many accounts, but especially because the fruit of the womb is then come to its
full perfection, bears examination better, and all the minute organization is
become more the object of sense and experiment. We shall therefore be supposed
to be speaking of the uterus as it is in the ninth month, except the contrary
be particularly expressed.

The common size of the pregnant uterus may be understood by casting the eye
over the first, second, fourth, eleventh, and thirteenth plates. This refers to
the large volume of engravings, illustrating the Anatomy of the Gravid Uterus,
which was published by the author about twenty years ago; and a similar
reference is made in some other parts of this Treatise.
To be more particular upon the size of the uterus would answer no useful
purpose. And that the difference in a number of instances will be very
considerable, may be readily imagined, when we reflect that the uterus very
commonly contains a child and placenta, at least twice as large in one case as
it does in another, and frequently at the least six or eight times more water:
besides the variety of size from there being one child only, or twins, etc.

The size of the uterus appears to depend upon the quantity of the liquor amnii
principally; for though women who have twins, or a very large child, are
commonly observed to be very big, yet the greatest number of those who are
really very much swelled out, are so only from a vast quantity of water. In
such cases there is frequently but one child, and that very often a small one.

FIGURE OF THE UTERUS.
The general figure of the uterus is oviform; the fundus answering to the
largest extremity of the egg, and the cervix and os uteri to the small end: but
the fundus is larger and more flat, or less pointed, in proportion to the lower
extremity of the uterus, than one end of an egg is to the other; and the whole
uterus seems more or less compressed, so as to be broader from right to left,
than it is from the fore part backwards. Besides these more constant
deviations, the figure of the uterus differs from the regular oviform, from a
variety of accidental causes, as it adapts itself to the neighboring parts, to
the attitude of the body, and to the position of the contained child. In order
to conceive these varieties more easily, we must remember that in most cases
the uterus is not so completely filled as to be upon the full stretch. Were it
out of the body, and filled artificially, it would easily contain more than it
actually does. Thus the uterus, like a bladder of water not quite full, is
plastic, and moulds itself into various shapes from accidental circumstances.

As the surrounding parts resist the pressure or weight of the uterus
unequally, according to their different natures, the uterus swells out in some
places, while in others it is pressed inwards. Thence it is, that the brim of
the bony pelvis has commonly the effect of a belt girding that part of the
uterus, and the projections of the spine, and of the psoae and iliac vessels,
mould the outside of the uterus into corresponding cavities.

That the different attitudes of the mother's body should produce alterations
in the figure of the uterus, needs not now a particular explanation or proof.
The weight of the uterus itself, and of the adjacent viscera, being differently
directed, must produce some change in the form of the uterus corresponding to
every change of posture, especially as the parts against which the uterus will
rest its weight, in the different postures of the body, are of such different
natures.

The same plastic state of the uterus makes it adapt its figure to the
circumstances of the child within, and vary as those change. We not only in
dead bodies see the parts of the child making a variety of different
projections on the outside of the uterus; but in the living body, all the same
variety is frequently manifest to the touch, in examining the outside of the
abdomen. The round projecting ball made by the child's head or buttocks, is
commonly very perceptible, and in many instances smaller projecting parts are
so distinctly felt through the containing parts of the abdomen, as to leave no
room to doubt of their being knees or elbows. The most extraordinary instance
which has come to my knowledge, of the uterus shaping itself to its contents,
was a case of twins which Dr. Mackenzie showed to me, and which, with many
other curious and useful observations, which an indefatigable diligence in his
profession had furnished him with, it is to be feared are already in some
measure lost to the public. In this case, the twins with their involucra and
waters, did not make one compacted oval body as usual, but the uterus had
stretched into two distinct bags for containing the respective twins; so that
upon the outside of the uterus there was a notch dividing it into two
apartments, as deep and distinct, in proportion, as the base of the heart
represented on cards.

In several cases I have observed the uterus to stretch unequally in the
corresponding opposite parts; so that one half, either right or left, has been
considerably larger than the other. And in two cases I found the anterior part
of the uterus much more swelled out than the posterior, so that the distance
from the insertion of one Fallopian tube to the other, measured much less upon
the back part than upon the fore part of the uterus; and in some cases the
reverse has been as evident.

The human uterus, in the unimpregnated state, commonly has one triangular
cavity. In many instances it is found subdivided, at its upper part, into two
lateral cavities, so as to resemble the two horns of the uterus in a quadruped.
Several specimens of such uteri are preserved in my collection. That
peculiarity will perhaps explain the unequal extension of the two sides, right
and left, in some instances of pregnancy; and may likewise explain this very
singular case of twins which Dr. Mackenzie met with: we need only to suppose
that the uterus had originally been subdivided into two horns, and that each
ovarium had furnished a foetus, which was deposited in the respective side or
horn of the uterus, as in the quadruped.

Upon the whole, we may say that an egg is no more like the form of the human
uterus, than a cylinder like the beautifully varied figure of the trunk of the
human body. It must be observed likewise, that the cavity does not always
correspond with the outward figure of the gravid uterus. In one instance which
I met with in a dead body, and still preserve, and in another, which I was very
sensible of in a living woman, a part or band of the inner stratum of the flesh
of the uterus had not stretched in the same degree with the rest, but made a
considerable partition internally; a circumstance which might have increased
the difficulty, as well as the danger of rudely turning the child, or taking
away the placenta with the hand.

SITUATION OF THE UTERUS.
The small or lower end of the uterus is placed in the cavity of the pelvis.
This generally contains the greater part of the child's head, and fills up the
cavity of the pelvis so completely, as to press the vesica urinaria against the
symphysis pubis, and the rectum against the hollow of the sacrum. The os uteri
is directed against the coccyx, or the lower part of the sacrum. The body and
fundus of the uterus, which for the most part contains all the rest of the
child and the placenta, is so placed in the anterior part of the abdomen, from
the brim of the pelvis upwards to the epigastric region, as to be under and
before all the other bowels in immediate contact with the parietes abdominis,
occupying the whole space from one hip bone to the other, and a proportionable
space from these bones upwards as far as the epigastric region. The common
situation of the uterus will be perfectly understood by looking at plate first,
second, third, and fourth.

When the uterus rises up from the cavity of the pelvis into the hypogastric
and umbilical regions of the abdomen by its increasing bulk, it is no wonder
that it should instantly mount up before the small intestines. Their attachment
to the loins by the mesentery, would seem to render this necessary; but there
is another cause which co-operates toward this effect, and which almost as
certainly prevents the epiploon from falling down before the uterus, though
that membrane is naturally so loose, that we might conceive it to be spread out
indifferently either before or behind the body of the uterus. Yet in fact this
fatty membrane is commonly found pushed up by the uterus, and crowded all round
the fundus uteri, with the small intestines in the epigastric and adjacent
parts of the hypochondriac regions. The cause of all this would appear to be
the specific lightness of those parts in comparison of that of the uterus. The
intestines contain some air, and the epiploon a good deal of oil, which gives
them lightness, and buoys them up above the uterus.

Whoever has any tolerable notion of the shape of the abdomen, and situation of
the cavity of the pelvis, must understand that the axis of the uterus is very
far from the perpendicular line, its lower end being turned backwards, and its
upper end in proportion turned forwards. This obliquity changes with the
attitude of body, and from many other causes. When erect, the weight of the
uterus presses the fore part of the abdomen into a greater rotundity, and then
the axis of the uterus approaches nearest to the transverse or horizontal line;
and in a recumbent posture, the contrary happens from a similar cause.

In the case of a first pregnancy, the uterus stretches itself higher up in the
epigastric region, and its axis comes nearer to the longitudinal or vertical
direction, because the parietes of the abdomen do not easily give way, and do
not swell forwards in any great degree; but in a woman who has had many
children there is a more loose and pendulous abdomen, and thence the uterus
does not shoot upwards, but rather forwards, and takes more of the transverse
situation. This oblique direction of the uterus approaching to the transverse,
is more remarkable in very short women; because in them the chest is so near
the pelvis that the uterus is stopped in its ascent, and forced to shoot
forwards. The same thing happens, and for a like reason, when the pelvis is
very narrow. For in this case the uterus must be higher, as no part of it can
be lodged in the cavity of the pelvis. In a very short and crooked woman, with
a very narrow pelvis, upon whom I saw the Caesarian section performed, from a
concurrence of the abovementioned causes, the fundus uteri was turned not only
forwards, but even a little downwards. As she lay upon the table, the navel and
upogastrium could not be seen; the navel being situated on what might have been
called the posterior and inferior part of the abdominal tumor. And to expose
that part of the abdomen to the surgeon, it was necessary with two assisting
hands to lift up the fundus uteri, or the most prominent part of the abdomen;
without which the hypogastric region would have been inaccessible. Indeed, it
was an appearance which, without having seen it, I should never have conceived.

The obliquity of the uterus toward the right or left side is not commonly,
indeed cannot be, very considerable. When it is of such a size as to possess
the whole, or nearly the whole space between the hip bones, and its lower
extremity is fixed down to the pelvis, how is it possible that it should be
turned very considerably to one side? A small degree of lateral obliquity is
very common; and it is natural to suppose that in a reclined posture, the
middle projection of the lumbar vertebrae will throw a little more than one
half of the uterus into the lateral cavity between the spine and one hip bone.
In fact, we know that in all the last months of utero-gestation the abdomen is
often more full on one side than on the other. Women say in such a case, that
the child lies on one side; and they judge rightly. Where the child lies, the
bulk must both be more considerable and more permanent; but where there is only
uterus, placenta, and water, the swelling will be softer, and project less.

When the child lies more in one side than in the other, I have frequently
observed that the limb of that side is weaker, more benumbed, and more liable
to cramps and oedematous swellings. That an awkward position of the child will
occasion spasms in the limb, experience testifies with the clearest evidence.
Many women feel that the one depends upon the other; and from particular
motions of the child, can certainly prognosticate ease or pain till it shall
alter its situation again.

As far as I have been able to observe, the mere obliquity of the uterus never
occasions so difficult a labor, as to require any artful management to bring
the os uteri into a proper situation. In such cases, as in many others, art can
do little good, and patience will never fail.

Whoever understands the figure and situation of the uterus in the last months
of gestation, will see that in that period a case of pregnancy may commonly be
distinguished from other swellings of the abdomen, by outward examination
alone. The flatulent softness, and, when struck, the peculiar sound of the
bowels round the uterus, the circumscribed tumor which the uterus forms, and
the unequal resistance which it makes when you press upon the child, or upon
the waters, are commonly, all taken together, so characteristic, as hardly to
leave an experienced and attentive examiner in doubt.

OF THE LIGAMENTS, TUBES, AND OVARIA, OF THE PREGNANT UTERUS.
It is a common observation, that the ligaments and tubes of the pregnant
uterus are attached lower upon the side of the uterus than they were before
pregnancy. If the reason of this has not been so generally known, it is
nevertheless evident. The peritonaeal coat of the uterus makes the broad
ligament on each side, much in the same manner as the analogous membrane of the
intestinal tube makes the mesentery. When a woman is not pregnant this ligament
is of considerable breadth, the spermatic vessels pass between its two laminae,
the round ligament runs downwards, and outward, on its anterior surface, and
the tube runs in loose serpentine turns upon its upper edge.

But in proportion as the circumference of the uterus grows larger, the broad
ligaments grow narrower, their posterior lamella covering the posterior
surface, and their anterior lamella covering the anterior surface of the uterus
itself. As a proof of what has been said, we observe that the round ligaments
do not now run down on the fore part of the broad ligaments, but upon the fore
part of the body of the uterus itself; a proof, I say, that the peritonaeum,
which covers the uterus at this part, is the very membrane which before
pregnancy made the anterior lamella of the broad ligament. Farther, in
proportion as the fundus uteri rises upwards, and increases in size, the upper
part of the broad ligament is so stretched that it clings close to the side of
the uterus, so that in reality the broad ligament disappears, no more of it
remaining than its very root; viz. its upper and outer corner, where the group
of spermatic vessels pass over the iliacs immediately to the side of the
uterus. In this state, though the small end of the tube opens into the same
part of the uterus, as before impregnation, yet the tube has a very different
direction; instead of running outward in the horizontal direction, it runs
downwards, clinging to the side of the uterus. And behind the fimbriae lies the
ovarium, for the same reason, clinging close to the side of the uterus. The
fimbriae and ovarium are commonly placed upon the iliac vessels, or fleshy brim
of the pelvis, behind the group of spermatic vessels.

The round ligaments run almost perpendicularly downwards from the fundus uteri
to their passage through the muscles; they are considerably enlarged in
thickness, and are so vascular, that when injected, they seem to be little more
than a bundle of arteries and veins. Their arteries are all convoluted. Both
their arteries and veins are branches principally of the spermatics, and both
evidently anastomose with their respective external vessels in the groin, or
upper part of the labia. Even in this enlarged state of the round ligaments, it
is very difficult to say how they terminate in the groin; they appear to be
insensibly lost.

The tubes are more fleshy, vascular, and soft in their substance, and are less
convoluted than in the unimpregnated state. The fimbriae and internal rugae are
larger and much more beautiful, especially when their vessels are well injected.

The ovaria seem to have undergone no remarkable change, except that one which
contains the corpus luteum; which for the most part can be distinguished by a
rounded fullness, and frequently a considerable prominence, sensible both to
the sight and touch, upon the middle of which there is a small pointed cavity
or indentation like a cicatrix. Upon slitting the ovarium at this part, the
corpus luteum appears a round body, of a very distinct nature from the rest of
the ovarium. Sometimes it is oblong or oval, but more generally round. Its
center is white, with some degree of transparency; the rest of its substance
has a yellowish cast, is very vascular, tender, and friable, like glandular
flesh. Its larger vessels cling round its circumference, and thence send their
smaller branches inwards through their substance. A few of these larger vessels
are situated at the cicatrix or indentation on the outer surface of the
ovarium; and are there so little covered, as to give that part the appearance
of being bloody when seen at a little distance. When there is only one child,
there is only one corpus luteum; and two in case of twins. I have had
opportunities of examining the ovaria with care in several cases of twins, and
always found two corpora lutea. In some of these cases there were two distinct
corpora lutea in one ovarium; in others, there was a distinct corpus luteum in
each ovarium. In a variety of different cases, I have found that the sex of the
foetus has no relation to the corpus luteum being in the right or left ovarium.

OF THE THICKNESS OF THE UTERUS.
Those who say that the uterus grows thicker in the same proportion that its
bulk is increased, have probably been deceived by examining the uterus of a
woman who died some hours or days after delivery. In that contracted state the
uterus is often found even two inches thick; but in all those which I have
examined, in the natural distended state, though there was some difference, the
thickness of the uterus was but a little more considerable than before
impregnation. When not injected, its more common thickness is from one to
two-thirds of an inch; when its vessels, and particularly its veins, are pretty
well filled with wax, its thickness is thereby considerably increased, more
especially where the placenta is fixed, on account of the number and size of
the vessels at that part. For this reason only, perhaps, the uterus is thickest
at that part, and for this reason too it is commonly thicker toward the fundus
than near the cervix. In respect of thickness, I have observed a good deal of
variety, and such inequalities in the same uterus, that even where the placenta
did not adhere, the uterus has been almost twice as thick at one part as at
another. I have always observed in opening the uterus, that its thickness is
more considerable than one could have imagined it to be by feeling it
externally, where there is a fluctuation of the water. Its substance is so
soft, that the fluctuation then felt is like that of water in a thin bladder.

OF THE BLOOD VESSELS OF THE UTERUS.
There is no circumstance in which the gravid uterus differs more from the
unimpregnated, than in the size and termination of its vessels. The arteries,
both spermatic and hypogastric, are very much enlarged. The hypogastric is
commonly considerably larger than the spermatic, and we very often find them of
unequal sizes in the different sides. They form a large trunk of communication
all along the side of the uterus; and from this the branches are sent across
the body of the uterus, both before and behind. The cervix uteri has branches
only from the hypogastrics, and the fundus only from the spermatics; or in
other words, the hypogastric artery gives a number of branches to the cervix,
besides sending up the great anastomosing branch, and the spermatic artery
supplies the tube and fundus uteri before it gives down the anastomosing branch
on the lateral parts of the uterus. All through the substance of the uterus
there are infinite numbers of anastomosing arteries, large and small, so that
the whole arterial system makes a general network, and the arteries are
convoluted, or serpentine, in their course. Hardly any of the larger arteries
are seen for any length of way upon the outside of the uterus. As they branch
from the sides, where they first approach the uterus, they disappear by
plunging deeper and deeper into its substance.

The arterial branches which are most enlarged, are those which run toward the
placenta, so that wherever the placenta adheres, that part appears evidently to
receive by much the greatest quantity of blood; and the greatest number both of
the large and small arteries at that part pass through the placenta, and are
necessarily always torn through upon its separation.

The veins of the uterus would appear to be still more enlarged in proportion
than the arteries. The spermatic and hypogastric veins in general follow the
course of the arteries, and like them, anastomose on the side of the uterus.
From thence they ramify through the substance of the uterus, running deeper and
deeper as they go on, and without following precisely the course of the
arterial branches. They form a plexus of the largest and most frequent
communications which we know of among the vessels of the human body. And this
they have in common with the arteries that their larger branches go to, or
rather come from, that part of the uterus to which the placenta adheres; so
that when the veinous system of the uterus is well injected, it is evident that
that part is the chief source of the returning blood. Here too, both the large
and small veins are continued from the placenta to the uterus, and are always
necessarily broken upon the separation of these two parts. The veins are
without valves, and are therefore easily injected. In injecting them, we
observe that at first they become turgid, and project on the outer surface of
the uterus; but in proportion as we throw a greater quantity of wax into these
vessels, they grow more flat and obscure; because the uterus itself becomes
more filled and tense, which has the effect of compressing the veins that run
in its substance. As I know no reason for calling the veins of the uterus
sinuses, and as that expression has probably occasioned much confusion among
the writers upon this subject, I have industriously avoided it.

OF THE LYMPHATICS.
Mr. Cruikshank is the first who observed at this school of anatomy the
lymphatics in the gravid uterus; he also injected them with mercury, and traced
them with great success in several subjects. They are more numerous, and many
of them larger than could have been imagined; from which it is manifest, that a
copious absorption is carried on in the uterus toward the mother. The
lymphatics pervade its substance universally; its peritonaeal coat appears,
like that of a calf's spleen, to be interwoven with a crowded plexus of these
vessels; and where they get to the sides of the uterus, when filled with
mercury, some of them are even larger than a goose-quill. Some are remarkably
varicose, or enlarged at particular places. They pass from the sides of the
uterus, many with the spermatic vessels, but the greater number and the larger
with the hypogastrics. Of these last, some pass into glands on the side of the
vagina; others meet with no glands till they have reached the side of the
pelvis, where they run into the glands of the iliac plexus, or shoot backwards
into the glands of the sacral plexus; from both of which they pass into the
lumbar plexus, where they are lost among the absorbents of the lower
extremities, and the external parts of generation.

Besides the lymphatic vessels of the uterus, there are others, as we hinted
above, belonging to the ovaria and Fallopian tubes, which follow the course of
the spermatic arteries and veins. They anastomose with the lymphatics of the
uterus, and terminate in glands which are placed upon the sides of the lumbar
vertebrae, near the origin of these blood vessels. Here they become mixed with
the lymphatics of the lumbar plexus, and enter along with them into the lower
end of the thoracic duct. The spermatic lymphatics enlarge during pregnancy in
the same manner as the blood vessels; and for this reason they are then both
most readily seen and injected.

The reason why the blood vessels, lymphatics, and nerves of the ovaria and the
Fallopian tubes, have their origin in the loins, is the same with that of the
origin of similar vessels and nerves in the male. The ovaria and Fallopian
tubes are not placed in the cavity of the pelvis in the early foetal state, but
upon the psoae muscles, some little way under the kidneys. It is natural,
therefore, that their vessels and nerves should arise near the vessels and
nerves of these organs.

OF THE NERVES.
I cannot take upon me to say what change happens to the system of uterine
nerves from utero-gestation but I suspect them to be enlarged in some
proportion as the vessels are. Upon this occasion we profess only to give the
anatomy of the gravid uterus; yet since the descriptions of the nerves of the
uterus which I have read, seem to me unsatisfactory, I shall so far go beyond
my subject as to describe the hypogastric nerves, such as they appeared to me
in a female subject carefully dissected for that purpose. All the uterine
nerves come from the intercostals, and pass in the form of plexuses with the
blood vessels, as in the other abdominal viscera; so that there is a spermatic
and hypogastric plexus of each side attending the vessels of the same name.
They are principally the branches of two large cords of the intercostals, which
run down before and on each side of the aorta in the abdomen, much in the same
manner as the trunks of the intercostals run down upon the sides of, and
behind, that artery. On the left side this large cord comes down from the
semilunar ganglion, partly as a continuation of the anterior cord of the
intercostal from that part where it is forming the semilunar ganglion, and
partly as a plexus of nervous filaments coming down more forwards from the
ganglion itself. This cord passes down before the beginning of the renal
artery, all along the side of the aorta. In its way it receives branches from
the intercostal, and gives off branches, so that it has the appearance of a
plexus, though the principal cord can always be distinguished.

It gives off the renal plexus, which is situated upon the side of the
uppermost vertebra lumborum, and passes to the sinuosity of the kidney, behind
the renal vein; but both before, and behind, and above, and below, the renal
artery.

Opposite to the third vertebra lumborum, the cord gives off two pretty large
branches, and some small filaments of nerves, which run down with and before
the spermatic artery. This spermatic plexus may be distinctly traced, with the
artery, into the ovarium and adjacent parts, at the upper part of the broad
ligament.

Immediately below the origin of the spermatic plexus, opposite to the same
third vertebra lumborum, two large branches come from the trunk of the
intercostal nerve, in the common direction of these communicating branches;
viz. forwards, downwards, and inwards, which join the great cord, and make it
larger from this conjunction downwards.

On the right side the cord comes down from the semilunar ganglion, close to
the root of the superior mesenteric plexus and artery, giving a few branches
only to the renal plexus, and runs down on the right of the aorta, as the other
on the left.

And on the right side the renal plexus, which comes chiefly from the semilunar
ganglion, as it passes toward the kidney, behind the vena cava and renal vein,
the renal plexus, I say, sends down the spermatic plexus behind the beginning
of the renal, which soon joins and passes with the spermatic vessels of this
side.

The two cords, right and left, may be said to constitute a lumbar plexus all
along the aorta, which makes the basis of the plexuses which accompany the
branches of that artery; or they may be considered as the anterior cords of the
intercostals in the abdomen.

At the upper part of the fourth vertebra lumborum, the right cord gives down a
considerable branch with the iliac artery, which branching, forms a kind of
sheath-like plexus upon the artery in its way to the groin.

At the bifurcation of the aorta, the right and left cord unite upon the fore
part of the aorta, and make a plexus from that part directly downwards as far
as the lower part of the fifth vertebra lumborum, and then finally divide into
what we may call the right and left hypogastric nerve.

On the right side a pretty large branch comes from the trunk of the
intercostal, on the side of the fourth vertebra lumborum, which passing
downwards, and inwards behind the right iliac artery, joins the plexus of the
two united cords before the last vertebra lumborum.

The hypogastric nerve passes round the side of the pelvis, between the
peritonaeum and the hypogastric vessels, and upon the inside of the ureter. At
the middle of the side of the pelvis, where the hypogastric vessels divide, the
nerve splits into a double range of branches; viz. posterior and anterior.

The posterior range goes to the side of the rectum, some branches passing to
the back part, and others to the fore part, of the gut; and the first and
uppermost of those branches are manifestly reflected upwards upon the gut,
directing their course toward the colon.

The anterior range of branches is the largest, arid may be considered as the
continuation of the trunk of the hypogastric nerve, in the form of a plexus.
Where the hypogastric vessels are passing to the side of the uterus and vagina,
this nerve, situated behind them, spreads out in branches like the portio dura
of the seventh pair, or like the sticks of a fan, with many communications
which are sent to the whole side of the uterus and vagina. The uppermost
branches pass upwards, in the duplicature of the broad ligament, toward the
fundus uteri. The branches, as they go to lower parts of the organ, pass less
obliquely, then horizontally, and the lowest of all run downwards on the side
of the vagina. The greatest crowd or number of these branches go to the os
tincae, and the adjacent parts of the uterus and vagina.

OF THE MUSCULAR FIBERS OF THE UTERUS.
The substance of the uterus is rendered remarkably soft and loose in its
texture by pregnancy; so that when an incision is made into it, the wound can
easily be made to open wide; or if a narrow piece of the uterus be cut quite
out through and through, it is so loose and ductile, that it can be readily
drawn out to at least double its natural thickness. This laxity appears to
depend on two causes, viz. the great quantity of large vessels in its
composition, and the loose connection between the fasciculi of its fibers. It
would seem probable that utero-gestation enlarges the cellular connecting
membrane, as well as the vessels of the uterus.

When we speak of the muscular fibers, it is difficult to treat the subject
with precision. We neither know their external appearance, nor their internal
composition. They only manifest themselves to our senses, when numbers of them
are collected into bundles, and make what we commonly call muscular fasciculi.
In living bodies they manifest themselves by motion in the part, which we
suppose is produced by a contraction or accurtation of the fibers themselves;
but that change in the nature of a muscular fiber, which is the cause of its
contraction, is not known. This contraction in some parts is voluntary, in
others is involuntary, and in some it is both. In some parts it is quick, and
in others very slow. The motion which is actually observed in the uterus of
living women, is involuntary and slow. It is commonly believed to be muscular
motion, and the fibers peculiar to the substance of the uterus are believed to
be muscles. In the quadruped, the cat particularly, and the rabbit, the
muscular action, of the peristaltic motion of the uterus, is as evidently seen
as that of the intestines, when the animal is opened immediately after death.
In many parts, particularly of the internal surface of the uterus, these fibers
have the same striking fasciculated appearance which we observe in common
muscles; yet they are of a paler color, and appear to me to be of a harder
texture. When we know more of the nature of muscular fibers, we shall perhaps
be able to account for this variety. I have taken considerable pains to trace
the arrangement of the uterine fasciculi, but except upon its inner surface, I
have observed nothing but irregularity and confusion. On the inner surface
itself, I have observed some variety, and always where the placenta adheres, a
good deal of irregularity.

In a woman who died seven days after delivery, I gave up the uterus to this
pursuit, and examined the fibers very carefully. I stretched it gradually in
warm water, then inverted it, to have a full view of its inner surface. The
remains of the decidua had been melted down, and passed off with the lochia, so
that the fasciculated stratum of muscular fibers appeared to be bare, and to
make the internal surface of the uterus. In a great number of places, but
particularly where the placenta had been fixed, the fasciculi left oval spaces
between them for the passage of arteries and veins, somewhat like those
separations in the tendinous fibers of the abdomen and loins, where vessels
pass out to the cellular membrane and integuments. The cervix uteri, where the
penniform rugae are situated, had not such regular nor so large fasciculi as
the rest of the uterus. In the body of the uterus the fibers were very
regularly circular. The fundus was made up of two concentric circular plains of
fibers, at the very center of which was the orifice of the Fallopian tube. The
better to conceive this arrangement of the internal muscular fibers, we may
suppose each corner of the fundus uteri, where the tube is inserted, to be
stretched or drawn out, so as to make two horns, or a bifid fundus, as in the
quadruped; then if we understand the inner fibers to be circular in every part
of the uterus, we understand clearly how they will be circular in the human
uterus upon its body, and likewise circular and concentric at each corner of
the fundus.

When this internal stratum was removed, the fasciculated appearance and
regular direction of the fibers was less and less apparent, in proportion as I
dissected outward; which seemed in a great measure to be owing to the infinite
number of the branches and communications of the large veins.

The outer stratum in general was firmer and less vascular; that is, had fewer
large vessels, and therefore was more dense than the middle and inner stratum.
But the lateral parts of the uterus, where both the spermatic and hypogastric
vessels first come to it, and anastomose upon its outside, are excepted in this
general observation.

I afterward had the most favorable occasion that could be desired, for
examining the fibers upon the inside of the uterus. It was the uterus of a
woman who died at the end of the ninth month, without being in labor, and
without having any flooding or discharge of waters. When I had examined and
taken out all the contents, I attended particularly to the internal surface of
the uterus. I found it every where covered with a thin stratum of the decidua,
through which the muscular fibers appeared, but with some degree of obscurity.
Upon rubbing off this tender membrane with a cloth, it gave me pleasure to see
how exactly the above description agreed with the appearances. And it is my
opinion, that whenever a fair opportunity for examination presents itself, it
will be found more accurate to say, that there are two than that there is one
musculus orbicularis in fundo uteri. Ruysch's figure will be found to be a
tolerable representation of either, and the orifice of the Fallopian tube will
appear in the center of each.

OF THE MOUTH OF THE UTERUS.
The mouth of the uterus differs considerably in the different times of
utero-gestation. For the greatest part of the nine months, that is, till the
cervix uteri be fully distended, there is a projection of both the anterior and
posterior lip of the os tincae; and in some women this continues till the very
time of labor. But in most women, when they are at their full time, or very
near it, the os uteri is flat, and makes only a small rugous hole, often not
readily discoverable by the touch on the lower or posterior part of the rounded
lower end of the uterus. The border of this orifice, and the internal surface
of the uterus, for an inch or more all around, is full of little irregular
cavities. These contain a tough gluten, which shoots across, and plugs up the
inner part of the orifice. This gluten is commonly squeezed out from all the
lacunae, by the dilatation of the os uteri in the beginning and progress of the
labor; and so losing its hold, it falls out. In the dead body, when the part
is kept some days in water, the gluten swells out more and more from all these
cavities, and then separates entirely. Then the innumerable lacunae which
contained it being empty, are very visible. And if the gluten has been thus
carefully taken away, and be floated in water, its external surface is seen
beautifully ornamented with all the processes which were drawn out of the
innumerable lacunae.

OF THE CONTENTS OF THE PREGNANT UTERUS.
The contents of the pregnant uterus are the secundines, liquor amnii, and the
foetus. The secundines make the lining of the uterus, and the immediate
covering of the child; they form the chain of connection and communication
between the bodies of the mother and child, and carry on that wonderful
influence upon which the life and health of the child depend. There is an
obvious division of them, into the navel string, the placenta, and the
membranes.

A peculiarity in the secundines with regard to their substance is likewise
very obvious. They are all more or less gelatinous and transparent; and there
is no manifest fibrous texture in any part of their substance. Their texture is
adapted to the temporary purpose which they serve.

Another peculiarity in the secundines is, that there is not any appearance of
fat in them, let the mother or child be ever so adipose, at any period of
utero-gestation, neither in the sound or natural, nor in the morbid state of
parts. What, upon a careless examination, appears to be fat upon the inner
surface of the placenta in many cases, is an accumulation of a substance
somewhat like a tough jelly, with an opaque and yellowish cast; and what often
appears like slender ramifications of fat upon the outer surface, in reality is
not fat, but ossifications in that part of the decidua.

The navel string is a cord made of three large vessels twisted together, which
at one end is fixed to the child's navel, and at the other to the placenta. It
passes, through the liquor amnii, from the child to the rest of the secundines.
It is sometimes little more than a foot in length, and sometimes even more than
four feet long. Its more common length is about two feet. When very long, it is
generally entangled round the child's neck. I have known it turned four times
and an half round the neck. I can hardly say that I ever saw an instance of a
natural labor being in any degree retarded or rendered difficult by the
shortness of the navel string, or by its being twisted in coils round the
child's neck. The probable reason for the latter is, that in such cases there
is a proportionable redundancy of length in the string, which we may suppose
had lain in convolutions at the depending part, and that the child's head
gavitating to the same place, had thereby insinuated itself into the center of
the coils, and so given them an opportunity of slipping over it, and of being
caught, in labor at least, upon the neck. Where a child is turned indeed by
the hand of an operator, the navel string will often be so entangled as to
occasion real difficulties. The thickness of the navel string is likewise
various, not only from the vessels being full of blood, or empty, but from the
different size of the vessels themselves, and more especially from the
different quantity of the gelatinous substance which connects them. In some it
is only of the size of a small finger, in others it is thicker than a large
thumb.

The three vessels of the navel string are two arteries and a vein. I have seen
several cases where there was only one artery, and it was always in proportion
larger. I never saw two veins: in cases of a single umbilical artery, I had
supposed that the two hypogastrics of the foetus had united at the navel to
form one trunk; but in one foetus of this kind which we dissected, the
hypogastric artery of one side was not reflected to the navel, but produced
only such branches as remain pervious in the adult. The umbilical vessels give
off no visible branches till they come to the placenta. There the two arteries
anastomose, commonly by a cross canal, nearly of the size of one of the
arteries.

There is a great variety in the twisting of the vessels of the navel string.
Sometimes they are uniformly and closely twisted, like a rope, in their whole
course; and sometimes they run almost quite straight and parallel, especially
in that part of the string which is toward the placenta; for near the foetus
it is almost always more or less twisted. In some navel strings there is great
irregularity from solitary turnings of particular vessels, commonly called
knots, as we see in twisting a cord where some of the constituent threads are
longer, and therefore looser than others. The end of the navel string which is
next the placenta is always less twisted, and more uniform than the end which
is toward the foetus.

Whatever be the cause, in most which I have attended to, the twisting of the
navel string has been in the same direction, viz. such as would be produced in
turning the child round upon the navel as a center, by pushing its head toward
the right side and its feet to the left. In two-and-thirty preparations now
before me four only are twisted the contrary way; and of the twenty-eight which
are twisted in the common way, three have the contrary twist, for some inches,
at the extremity which was toward the foetus. The coat or covering of the
navel string, which has a smooth or polished surface, is composed of the united
membranes amnion and chorion, and is almost inseparably joined with the parts
which it incloses. The ligament which goes from the bladder of the foetus to
its navel, between the umbilical arteries, commonly called the urachus, or its
remains, grows more slender as it passes along. In the navel string it is
hardly perceptible, except near the foetus. It is like a fine thread, a little
more white and opaque than the rest. When you have found it near the foetus, by
taking a little pains you may trace it sensibly almost the whole length of the
string. Mr. Cruikshank first observed this to me. Besides the vessels, the
remains of the urachus, and coat of the navel string, I have observed nothing
in its composition but a fine cellular substance loaded with a transparent ropy
fluid, which gives the part both firmness and bulk. By touching the cut surface
of the fresh navel string, and removing the finger slowly, we see the fluid so
tenacious and ductile, as to be drawn out into fine threads some inches in
length. If the navel string be kept some days, its fluid loses entirely that
glutinous quality, and transudes like water; for which reason the string
becomes then supple, and loses greatly of its bulk. In this state, if a small
blow-pipe be pushed into the interstices of the vessels, and proper ligatures
be made, the whole intersticial substance may be rendered emphysematous and
white, like a piece of inflated fresh lungs. In this condition it may be dried,
and then cut up to show more distinctly the cellular substance. The great
variety that is observed in the thickness or size of the navel string in
different parts and in different cases, depends principally on the quantity of
the cellular substance, and not on the bulk of the child.

The winding course of the vessels in the navel string we may presume, prevents
their being much affected by any stretching force, and the firmness of the
intersticial substance protects them against dangerous compression. These
accidents might otherwise perhaps have occasioned frequent mischief, especially
where there is a large child, and a small quantity of the liquor amnii. In such
a case the navel string passing under the arm or ham, or in the groin, might
have been compressed so as at least to have prevented the return of the veinous
blood. The same thing might have easily happened in those cases where there is
actually a knot formed upon the navel string, while the child is in the womb;
and that such a case sometimes happens I can hardly doubt. If I have not been
deceived, I have twice seen it.

OF THE PLACENTA.
The placenta and the membranes together, make one complete unimperforated bag,
which lines the uterus, and contains the child. The placenta is thick, fleshy,
and exceedingly vascular; the membranes are thin, pellucid, and for the most
part have scarcely any apparent red blood vessels.

The figure of the placenta is commonly round and flat, about an inch in
thickness, and a span in breadth. It becomes gradually thinner all around at
its edge, so as to render the change from the placenta to membranes more
imperceptible. The above mentioned thickness of the placenta is meant of the
common flaccid state in which we usually see it; but when its cellular part is
well filled with wax, or any fluid, the placenta is at least two inches thick.
Though its figure is generally round, it is often oblong or triangular, or of
an irregular shape; and sometimes it has a small lobe or two, separated and
entirely distinct from the rest. I have seen it oblong and narrow in the
middle, like the cipher 8, or like the common placentae of twins united by an
isthmus. When the placenta is very long and narrow, and the navel string is
inserted near one end, it is apt to remain in the uterus a considerable time
after the birth of the child, and to occasion flooding and faintness before it
comes away.

The outer surface which adheres to the womb, and is therefore naturally
unequal, is rough, tender in its substance, commonly covered with blood, lightly
subdivided into smaller constituent lobes, and, to a common observer, seems to
have no apparent blood vessels, at least none of any considerable size.

Its internal surface, naturally more or less concave, is glossy, hard or
compact in its texture, and beautifully marked with the ramifications of the
umbilical vessels. The navel string, which produces these branching vessels, is
inserted sometimes into the very center, but more commonly a little nearer the
edge, and often into the very edge of the placenta. In at least four different
cases, I have seen the navel string terminate on the inside of the membranes,
at the distance of five or six inches from the placenta. In all these cases the
umbilical vessels parted from one another even to considerable distances in
their course upon the membranes, and came to the edge and inner surface of the
placenta at different places, even at the opposite parts. The termination or
insertion of the navel string, wherever it happens to be, makes the center of
ramification for the large vessels on the internal surface of the placenta.

Commonly there is only one center; but in those cases where a navel string
attaches itself to the membranes, there are just so many centres of
ramification as there are trunks of large arteries or veins coming separately
to the edge of the placenta. The internal surface of the placenta is covered
with the membranes amnion and chorion, and the external with the decidua; of
which hereafter.

The following peculiarity I have often observed in the placenta. Upon its
inner surface, at more or less distance from the extreme border, there is a
projecting brim, of the whitish color of pleuritic blood, which gives a hollow
dish-like appearance to the inside of the placenta. The membranes go off from
this brim, and the circumference of the placenta is remarkably thick, forming a
unequal surface (part of the outer surface of the placenta) instead of a thin
edge.

In considering such a placenta, it would be natural to suppose that there had
been a cell or recess in the uterus corresponding to the outward convexity of
the placenta. I will not pretend to explain this peculiarity, because it never
occurred in any instance where I saw the placenta still adhering to the uterus.
Perhaps it will be found to happen, when the ovum attaches itself near one of
the Fallopian tubes, in those women who have the uterus divided at its fundus
into a right and left sinuosity, corresponding to the horns of that organ in a
quadruped. I have observed that such placentae part from the uterus after
labor with more difficulty, requiring a good deal of patience and cautious
assistance; and frequently after all, the chorion and decidua are found to be
torn from the placenta all around, and left, or a portion of them at least,
adhering to the uterus.

The human placenta, as well as that of quadrupeds, is a composition of two
parts intimately blended, viz. an umbilical or infantile, and an uterine
portion. One is a continuation of the umbilical vessels of the foetus; the
other is an efflorescence of the internal part of the uterus.

The umbilical portion of the placenta is of a simple nature, consisting of a
regular ramification of the arteries and veins of the navel string into smaller
and smaller branches, without any lateral anastomosis, so that when unravelled
by gentle putrefaction, motion, and washing, this part takes on the appearance
of a tree whose branches divide to almost infinite minuteness, not only toward
its outer surface, but every where through its substance.

The two umbilical arteries anastomose freely by a canal of communication just
where they are going to branch out upon the placenta, sp that by injecting one
of them, the other is readily filled also. Every branch of an artery is
attended with a branch of a vein; these cling to one another, and frequently,
in the substance of the placenta, entwine round one another as in the navel
string.

Much has been said, or supposed, about a communication between these vessels
and those of the uterus; but from all the experiments I have made upon the
human subject (and upon quadrupeds likewise), it plainly appears that the
umbilical arteries terminate in the umbilical veins, and not in the vessels of
the uterus; and that the blood passes from the arteries into the veins, as in
other parts, and so back to the child again. If the placenta be whole in all
its substance, which is seldom the case, and its blood vessels be pretty well
emptied of their blood, any subtle injection thrown into an artery will fill
the arterial system through the whole substance of the part to an amazing
degree of minuteness, and return so freely by the veins as to fill them very
generally and equally. In the same manner the whole umbilical systems may be
filled by injecting the vein, the fluid returning from the veins into the
arteries. In both these experiments the injected fluid is confined to the
umbilical vascular system, none escaping at the external surface of the
placenta, neither by large nor small orifices, whether of veins or arteries.

After common labors the placenta is generally more or less torn, and its
vessels contain a quantity of coagulated blood; on both of which accounts it is
unfit for a successful injection. I have generally taken care, by a previous
management, to procure a favorable subject, and would recommend the same
method to those who have the opportunity, viz. when the navel string is tied
and cut, not only allow the end of the string to bleed from the placenta, but
milk it continually till the placenta comes down into the vagina; and in taking
that away, be slow, cautious, and gentle, leaving it principally to the gradual
pressure from the mother, and very gentle pulling by the navel string. Thus it
will neither be bruised nor torn; and it will be almost empty of blood.
Instantly put it into a basin of warm water, with the inner surface upwards.
What blood remains in the vessels will still be fluid enough to be pressed from
those on the surface of the placenta into, and then along the vessels of the
string. Then turn up the external surface, wash and press it very gently, and
clear it of all coagula, either upon its surface, or in the venal orifices; and
the whole will be almost without blood.

When a placenta is finely injected, and then steeped, and frequently washed in
clean water, it is evident that the umbilical injected vessels do not reach
even the outer surface of the placenta, but are only seen through a membrane
(decidua) which covers all that surface. It is rough or ragged, like the inner
surface of the uterus, to which it adheres, and by its whiteness becomes very
distinct from the vascular injected part of the placenta, over which it is
spread. It becomes still more distinguishable when the part is put into
spirits, which render it more opaque and whiter.

This membrane is an efflorescence or production of the inner membrane of the
uterus, and is analogous to the uterine fungi of quadrupeds. It receives no
vessels demonstrable by the finest injections from those of the navel string,
yet it is full of both large and small arteries and veins. These are all
branches of the uterine vessels, and are readily filled by injecting the
arteries and veins of the uterus; and they all break through in separating the
placenta from the uterus, leaving corresponding orifices on the two parted
surfaces.

This decidua, or uterine portion of the placenta, is not a simple thin
membrane expanded over the surface of the part; it produces a thousand
irregular processes which pervade the substance of the placenta, as deep as the
chorion or inner surface; and are every where so blended and entangled with the
ramifications of the umbilical system, that no anatomist will perhaps be able
to discover the nature of their union. While these two parts are combined, the
placenta makes a pretty firm mass; no part of it is loose or floating. But when
they are carefully separated, the umbilical system is evidently nothing but
loose floating ramifications of the umbilical vessels, like that vascular
portion of the chorion which makes part of the placentula in a calf; and the
uterine part is seen shooting out into innumerable floating processes and
rugae, with the most irregular and most minutely subdivided cavities between
them that can be conceived. This part answers to the uterine fungus in the
quadruped.

In a placenta of nine months, I have never been able to separate the two
constituent parts otherwise than by some degree of putrefaction, and gentle
rubbing and washing; but this operation always destroys the uterine portion,
which is more tender, and melts down by putrefaction sooner than the other. In
the placenta of an earlier age, the union of the two constituent portions is
less intimate, and they may both be preserved very entire, like the vascular
chorion and fungus in the quadruped. I did this operation in a conception of
four months, and still preserve the uterine part attached to the inside of the
uterus. I wished to give a figure of it, but the processes were so irregular
and so changeable, while floating in water, that the painter could not express
them; and when taken out of water, they collapsed into a smooth membranous
appearance.

These two portions of the placenta are so interwoven with one another as to
leave innumerable small vacuities, with free communications, through the whole
substance. If this cellular structure be inflated or injected, the placenta,
like the corpora cavernosa penis, acquires a very considerable increase of
thickness, and subsides again when the fluid escapes. This cellular receptacle
in the placenta, cannot be completely filled after it has been parted from the
uterus, because then the fluid, which we may by any contrivance throw in, will
be discharged at innumerable orifices on the outer surface of the placenta; but
while it remains attached to the uterus, all the cells may be easily and
completely filled by injecting any fluid into the arteries or veins of the
uterus. These vessels, and these only, have a demonstrable communication with
the spongy cells of the placenta, which receive the maternal blood from the
arteries of the uterus, and give it back into the veins of that part. Both
these vessels pass in the decidua, and the larger branches of both, with little
or no ramification, terminate abruptly in the cells.

The arteries are all much convoluted and serpentine; the larger, when
injected, are almost of the size of crow-quills. The veins have frequent
anastomoses, pass in a very slanting direction, and generally appear flattened;
some of them are at least as big as a goose-quill, and many of them are very
small.

All around at the very edge of the placenta, there are a great number of these
veins; and many of them run a little way, in the direction of tangents to the
circle, in the very angle between the membranes and the placenta. When they
have been filled by injection, while the placenta and membranes adhere to the
uterus, and in that state are seen from the inside through the amnion and
chorion, many of them appear evidently to collect their smaller branches from
the adjacent parts of the decidua and of the uterus, and throw their trunks
into the placenta; as if there were a disposition for bringing venal blood into
the spongy cavities of the placenta, from the decidua and inside of the uterus
all round the placenta.

In separating the placenta from the uterus, which is commonly practicable with
the least imaginable force, all these vessels are necessarily torn through; and
then each broken vessel has an open mouth upon the inner surface of the uterus,
and a corresponding orifice on the outer surface of the placenta.

Notwithstanding the disputes still subsisting among anatomists, whether any
blood vessels pass between the uterus and placenta, and though the texture of
these vessels be so exceedingly tender that they break with the least force,
they are as demonstrable in a proper subject as any vessels in the body, not
only by injections, but in a fresh subject, without any artificial preparation.
And any anatomist who has once seen and understood them, can readily discover
them upon the surface of any fresh placenta; the veins, indeed, he will find
have an indistinct appearance from their tenderness, and frequent anastomoses,
so as to look a good deal like irregular interstitial void spaces: the
arteries, which generally make a snake-like convolution or two on the surface
of the placenta, and give off no anastomosing branches, are more distinct. The
best time for seeing them is as soon as the placenta comes away in a common
labor. Let its surface be instantly washed with clean water, that all the
loose blood may be removed. This renders the ground (the decidua) lighter
colored, and for that reason makes the vessels, which will still contain some
dark blood, more conspicuous.

If a blow-pipe be thrust into the substance of the placenta any where, the air
which is blown into the cellular part opens and rushes out readily by the open
mouths both of the arteries and the veins.

While the placenta remains adhering to the uterus, any injection made by the
uterine arteries fills not only these vessels, but also the cellular part of
the placenta; and if we continue the operation, the injection returns from
these cells into the veins of the uterus, and fills them likewise. The same
thing happens, but in an inverted order, when we begin by injecting the veins
of the uterus.

Thence it is, that in injecting the gravid uterus, if we fill one system of
uterine vessels fully, we can hardly afterward get the injection to run any
length of way in the other system. Therefore when we wish to have both systems
pretty well injected, we must fill the first only moderately, and then the
other. And when the arteries and veins of the uterus have been filled in this
manner with wax of different colors, we observe, in examining the placenta,
that the wax which was thrown into the first system (the arteries for example)
is driven toward the inside of the placenta by the wax which was last thrown
in by the other system, and which for that reason lodges itself principally in
those cells of the placenta which are next to its outer surface.

While the placenta and membranes adhere to the uterus, make a slit into the
coat of the navel string; there introduce a blunt probe, and force it into the
cells of the adjacent part of the placenta; then withdrawing the probe,
insinuate an injecting-pipe, and tie it firmly with a broad thread round the
navel string. You will then find that you can by that pipe fill the whole
placenta uniformly in its cellular part, and likewise all the veinous system of
the uterus and decidua, as readily and fully as if you had fixed the pipe in
the spermatic or hypogastric vein; so ready a passage is there reciprocally
between the cells of the placenta and the uterine vessels. It is as much
reciprocal, and more largely open, than between the corpus spongiosum and the
veins of the penis.

From all these experiments and observations, which have been often repeated
and diligently attended to, with no other desire than to discover truth, it
seems incontestible that the human placenta, like that of the quadruped, is
composed of two distinct parts, though blended together, viz. an umbilical,
which may be considered as a part of the foetus, and an uterine, which belongs
to the mother; that each of those parts has its peculiar system of arteries and
veins, and its peculiar circulation, receiving blood by its arteries, and
returning it by its veins; that the circulation through these two parts of the
placenta differs in the following manner; in the umbilical portion the arteries
terminate in the veins by a continuity of canal, whereas in the uterine portion
there are intermediate cells into which the arteries terminate, and from which
the veins begin.

Though the placenta be completely filled with any injection thrown into the
uterine vessels, none of the wax finds its way into any of the umbilical
vessels; and in the same manner fluids injected into the umbilical vessels
never can be pushed into the uterine, except by rupture or transudation.

The first time, in the year 1743, that I injected the vein of the navel
string, while the placenta adhered to the uterus, in separating these two
parts, it was evident that the injection had no where passed farther than the
placenta, except at one place, where a small convoluted vessel (no doubt an
artery) was traced, distinctly filled with wax, some little way in the
substance of the uterus; but upon examination, it was evident that there was
extravasation in that part of the placenta. And by many trials I know that
water, or any fluid fit for transudation, thrown into the umbilical arteries or
veins, readily gets into the cellular cavities of the placenta, and thence into
the vessels, especially the veins of the uterus.

OF THE MEMBRANES.
The membranes of the human secundines in the latter period of utero-gestation
may be reckoned three, viz. amnion, chorion, and decidua.

AMNION.
This membrane is uniformly thin, transparent, and without any visible fibers
or vessels, yet its texture is firm, so as to resist laceration much more than
the other membranes. It lines all the inside of both placenta and membranes*
and therefore forms the(...) might suppose the amnion and cuticle to be
continued into one another.

By its internal surface, which is smooth and glossy, it is every where in
contact with the liquor amnii, or child. Its outer surface adheres to the
chorion by means of an intermediate, transparent, gelatinous substance, of
which there is sometimes a pretty thick stratum. This connecting medium between
the amnion and chorion appears to be neither fibrous nor vascular, and is so
tender, that the least force or rough handling separates these two membranes,
even in the most recent state of the secundines; and if kept till putrefaction
is begun, it is scarcely possible to prevent their separation. On the navel
string the amnion adheres intimately to the subjacent parts without the
intervention of such a jelly, except just near the placenta. There, for an inch
or two, the amnion comes off from the navel string as easily as from the
placenta or chorion. Whatever be the structure of the gelatinous medium, whose
constituent parts are invisible by reason of their transparency, it will
frequently peel off in broad laminae, either from the outer surface of the
amnion, or inside of the chorion, as if these membranes were double, or had a
very tender transparent membrane between them.

The vesicula umbilicalis, of which we shall treat hereafter, is often almost
invisible in the secundines of a full grown child; but when seen, it lies on
the outside of the amnion, adhering firmly to that membrane either at the
inside of the placenta, or on the membranes at no great distance from it.
Commonly it has the same appearance as in a conception of two or three months,
viz. of a very small, round, but thin white body.

CHORION.
By this membrane is here meant that which lies on the outside of, and next to
the amnion. It is transparent like the amnion, but much more thin and tender.
It is so extended as to make a complete bag, which incloses that membrane and
all its contents; and is every where connected with that immediate involucrum
of the child and water, by the gelatinous medium above described, except upon
the navel string: there the amnion and chorion are intimately and inseparably
connected as one membrane, of which the inner lamella is a production of the
chorion.

Where it is expanded over the concave surface of the placenta, it acquires
considerable thickness and strength, and is so intimately connected with the
superficial branches of the umbilical vessels, that it seems to give them a
coat; or they seem to run in a duplicature of its substance, till they emerge
in smaller branches to disperse themselves through the different lobes of the
placenta.

At the membranous portion of the secundines, the chorion adheres so firmly to
the more external membrane or decidua, that it is often difficult to separate
them in recent secundines. Gentle putrefaction makes them part readily: and in
separating these two membranes, especially near the edge of the placenta, we
may always observe a number of white slender threads, which emerge from the
substance of the chorion, and ramify into smaller filaments upon the interior
lamella of the decidua, which originally was the decidua reflexa. These are the
remains of those shaggy vessels which shoot out from the chorion in a young
conception, and give the appearance of the ovum being altogether surrounded by
the placenta at that time. With a magnifying glass they appear to be
transparent ramifying vessels, which run in corresponding furrows upon the
internal surface of the decidua, and a good deal resemble lymphatics.

DECIDUA.
This is a membrane of a very peculiar nature, the knowledge of which throws
great light upon the contents of the pregnant uterus, and upon the connection
between the mother and child. It is the outer membrane of the secundines, and
yet it may be said to be the internal membrane of the uterus. It is much
thicker, and more opaque than the other membranes, yet still is of a more
tender texture; in so much that it has scarcely a more firm consistence than a
curd of milk, or coagulum of blood. It is full of small arteries and veins,
often seen containing red blood, which ramify from its outer surface inwards
through its substance: the principal arteries run in winding convolutions, like
the coilings of a snake. It is very thin, and commonly has no perceptible blood
vessels at that part which is situated near the cervix uteri; it grows thicker
and more vascular toward the placenta, at the very edge of which it acquires a
considerable thickness, and splitting into two strata, is continued over both
surfaces of the placenta, but especially its inner smooth surface, blending
itself there inseparably with the umbilical portion of the placenta. The layer
of the decidua which lies between the chorion and the placenta is in one case
much thicker than in another. It sometimes forms a smooth, tender, opaque
membrane; but is more frequently reticulated, especially toward the edge of
the placenta, looking somewhat like lace. Occasionally there are portions of it
a good deal thicker than the rest, and which shining through the transparent
chorion, bear some resemblance to pieces of fat. This layer is generally
thicker than that which adheres to the rough external lobulated surface of the
placenta. It communicates with that other by means of the processes of the
decidua, which pass between the lobules of the placenta, and along the external
surface of the umbilical vessels. These processes may be evidently seen to join
it, and it is probable that they contribute principally to its formation. THE
EDITOR.
In what sense this membrane covers the outside, or constitutes the uterine
portion of the placenta, has been already explained.

The internal surface of the decidua, and its union with the chorion, was
explained above in treating of that membrane. Its external surface, except what
was opposite or near to the os uteri, is more or less unequal and ragged, and
full of the broken ends of small arteries and veins, which come into it from
the uterus. Where it is pretty thick, it is often divisible into two or more
laminae. Its outer stratum or lamella is perforated at each Fallopian tube, and
at the os uteri.

This membrane is an efflorescence of the internal coat of the uterus itself;
and is therefore shed, as often as a woman bears a child, or suffers a
miscarriage. It is of considerable thickness, and one stratum of it is always
left upon the uterus after delivery, most of which dissolves and comes away
with the lochia. Frequently a thicker stratum separates from the uterus in one
part, and a thinner in another; and sometimes, especially when the discharge of
the secundines is hurried in a labor, the whole membranous part, both of the
decidua and chorion, remain behind attached to the uterus. In separating the
membranes from the uterus, we observe that the adhesion of the decidua to the
chorion, and likewise its adhesion to the muscular fibers of the uterus, is
rather stronger than the adhesion between its external and internal stratum,
which we may presume is the reason that in labor it so commonly leaves a
stratum upon the inside of the uterus.

In order to see the genuine appearance of the decidua after a labor, the
secundines should be instantly well washed in warm water, to remove the loose
coagulated blood, and then put into cold water, that the blood which remains in
the vessels may congeal; and when the decidua happens to be well marked with
blood vessels, a piece of the membranes may be spread upon white paper, and
held near a strong fire till the blood changes to a blackish color, and dries.
This prevents the transudation of the red blood, which would presently render
the vascular structure of the decidua indistinct, or invisible.

The number and size of the vessels which pass from the uterus to the placenta,
and which are necessarily broken through upon a separation of these two parts,
sufficiently account for the bleeding which has always been known to happen
upon such an occasion: and we cannot longer wonder that considerable, and even
fatal bleedings have happened, from a separation merely of a part of the
membranes.

Though the decidua be allowed to be the outer membrane of the secundines, yet
as it is really the internal lamella of the uterus* we may still retain the old
language, and say, that the outer membrane of the ovum (that is of the contents
of the uterus) is chorion, and that the chorion is in contact with, and adheres
to the uterus.

Those anatomists who describe the human chorion as a transparent smooth
membrane, without any blood vessels, are surely so far in the right; but when
they apply that description to the outer membrane of the secundines, they
betray a total ignorance of their subject. They can never have once looked with
attention upon the fresh human secundines.

OF THE ALLANTOIS AND URACHUS.
It was very natural for such anatomists as were conversant with the secundines
of quadrupeds only, to suppose that there was a human allantois, or reservoir,
for the urine of the foetus, among the secundines, with an urachus, or conduit,
leading to it from the bladder: and they would more readily adopt this opinion
when they observed in the human body, and especially in children, a ligamentous
substance passing from the bladder to the navel, which is commonly enough
called the remains of the urachus. But that men who have had opportunities of
inquiring into the fact, should, in spite of the evidence of their senses, be
ready to believe that man must have, because the quadruped has an allantois,
appears to be founding too much upon loose reasoning. In reality, the argument
drawn from the brute creation, appears to have more force toward disproving,
than toward establishing the human allantois. It might be stated thus:
quadrupeds, great and small, have an allantois; in all of them the membrane
itself is distinctly visible, the urachus is easily seen, any fluid thrown into
the bladder passes without difficulty along the navel string, and fills the
allantois; the two collections of fluid, viz. liquor amnii, and urine are seen
and distinguished at first sight. From these facts we might presume a priori
that there were similar appearances in the human subject, and these as much
more striking in a human foetus, than they are in a kitten, as that is larger
than this. But in fact none of those appearances are seen in the human subject,
and therefore we must conclude that the similar parts do not exist.

Among all the dissections which I have made of the gravid uterus, and of
conceptions which have been thrown off in an entire state (except in very young
conceptions, when the vesicula umbilicalis is turgid), I have never seen any
thing like two distinct bags of water; nor any membrane between the chorion and
amnion; nor any passage leading from the bladder along the navel string to the
rest of the secundines. These observations give me a conviction that there is
no human allantois. What there is in the very early part of pregnancy beside
the blood vessels above described, is not now the question. Neither have I ever
seen in the human subject, any thing like omphalo-mesenteric vessels, or any
membrane analogous to that in a dog or cat, through which these vessels are
distributed.

OF THE LIQUOR AMNII.
The liquor amnii is the fluid which lies immediately round the body of the
child and navel string, taking its name from the membranous bag which incloseth
it. The quantity of this fluid is very different in different cases. In one
dissection at the full time, I found little more than half a pint. In many
labors I have been convinced from the appearance upon the linen that it did
not amount to so much. And it is notorious to practitioners in midwifery, that
frequently several quarts at least, are discharged at the birth of a child. I
should guess that there may be commonly, upon an average, about two pints or
more.

It is quite fluid, that is, without any sensible degree of tenacity, or
ropiness, pretty transparent; although sometimes a little foul or muddy, and
has a little of the yellowish cast in color. In labors it is frequently very
thick, and of a foul green color; in which case the secundines are always
stained with the same foulness. This I believe is always owing to a mixture of
the child's meconium. When the liquor amnii is all bloody in labor, we may be
pretty sure that the child is dead. This color is owing to the transudation of
red blood.

It does not coagulate with heat like the serum of blood, but grows more opaque
and muddy, as if there were a very small part of such a fluid in its
composition. Occasionally the quantity of coagulable matter in the liquor
amnii, is nearly as great as in the water of ascites; which is most readily
shown by applying to it some of the common acids, such as the nitrous or
muriatic.

To the taste it is always very sensibly saltish: and a considerable quantity
of common salt may be obtained by evaporating a large quantity of the liquor.

OF THE CHILD.
The foetus in utero is naturally contracted into an oval form, adapted to the
figure and circumstances of its habitation. The vertex of the head makes one
end of the oval, and the nates the other. One side or edge of the oval, is
formed by the occiput, the back part of the neck, and the incurvated trunk; the
other is made by the forehead and the mass of contracted and conglomerated
limbs. The chin is close to the breast, the trunk is bended forwards, the knees
are close to the fore parts of the hypochondria, the legs drawn to the back
parts of the thighs, the feet, or lower part of the legs decussating each
other; and the upper extremities contracted into the vacant space betwixt the
forehead and knees. The most common situation of the extremities is not to be
determined, as they are found to be a little different in different
dissections; and in the living body they vary almost every moment: thence the
hands are seen indiscriminately on the head or face, or across one another, or
round the knees, or legs; and the legs are sometimes extended, and the feet are
placed by the face; or one is in that position, and the other contracted, and
the foot downwards.

The navel string, in passing from the child to the placenta, is often
variously entangled with the extremities, and frequently winds once or oftener
round the neck.

When there is a considerable quantity of liquor amnii, the child takes the
advantage of room, and the composition of its parts is not so close or
globular. In proportion as there is less room, its figure is more compacted and
molded to the shape of the cavity of the uterus. In two different cases which
I examined, there was so little fluid surrounding the child, though the waters
had not been discharged, that the uterus had pressed and molded all parts of
the child into a very ugly form, as if it had been made of dough; and in such
cases the hands, and more particularly the feet, are liable to be compressed
and twisted into deformity, on account of their being projecting, or pliant
parts.

When a child is newly born, and left unconfined, however it may fling its
limbs in starts, yet for the most part, when quiet, it gathers itself up into
the oval form, as it lay in the womb. Were it not for art, this natural habit
would be preserved; and man would take rest like the quadruped, with all his
limbs folded up.

From want of room in the uterus, and some accidental awkward situation of the
parts, children are sometimes born with such apparent deformity in their hands
or feet, that nurses, and people of a higher rank in other respects, but upon a
perfect equality with them in natural knowledge, are frightened, and believe it
to be a monstrous, or incurable deformity.

With regard to the mother, the most common situation of the child by far is,
with its head downwards, and its nates at the upper part of the uterus. Once
perhaps, in twenty or thirty cases, it is the contrary, and presents, as they
term it in midwifery, with its posteriors. All the observations that I have
been able to make in dissections, and in the practice of midwifery, would
persuade me that the child's head is naturally downwards through all the later
months of utero-gestation: and that neither reason nor instinct teaches it, at
a particular time, any trick of a tumbler or rope-dancer.

Whether the child's head be downwards or upwards, the back parts of the child
are commonly turned more or less toward one side of the mother, and its fore
parts in proportion toward the other; so that more of the child lies in one
side of the mother than in the other; and this is sometimes the right side, and
sometimes the left. In the dissections of gravid uteri which have fallen to my
lot, it has so happened, that whenever the placenta adhered not to the middle,
but to one side of the uterus, the child's limbs were toward the placenta, and
its body and back in the opposite side of the womb.

The reason of the situation of the child with respect to the mother, seems to
arise from several circumstances. The internal surface of the amnion is smooth
and slippery; and in proportion to the growing body of the child, the space is
gradually diminished. This diminution of space renders the oval figure of the
child more compact, and together with the oblong figure of the uterus,
determines the long axis of the oval to become vertical. The uterus being
broader from side to side, than from the fore part to the back part, and the
child in its oval figure being more narrow from side to side, than from the
fore part to the back part, the shape of the uterus again will fix the
situation of the child, so that its fore parts shall be rather to one side of
the mother. So I have always found in the dead body, and so I believe it
generally is when the mother is alive.

In the particular case of a very small child, in proportion to the quantity of
the liquor amnii, I should suppose that it is, or may be otherwise. In such a
case, there will be so much space for the child, that even where the larger
diameter of the child coincides with the smaller diameter of the uterus, there
will still be no want of sufficient room; and therefore the child will alter
its situation as the posture of the mother, or its own motions may direct. An
ingenious friend of mine objected to this doctrine, that probably the posture
of the dead subject might be the occasion of the child being commonly found,
upon dissection, with its back toward one side of the mother. But, however the
child might be supposed to be situated in those cases where there is a great
quantity of liquor amnii, that its back is commonly turned to one side of the
mother, is confirmed by the following observations. First, in most cases small
projecting parts, like knees or elbows, may be felt through the parietes of the
abdomen in any posture of the mother; which could hardly be, if the child's
back lay directly forwards. In the last place, I have observed in several, but
especially in two cases of dissections, that the child was so compacted for
want of room, and so embraced by the uterus, though the waters had not been
discharged, that it could not possibly have varied its situation; and in all
these cases the back of the child was turned toward the side of the mother.

The reason why the child's head is commonly downwards, may be supposed to be
this: the child is specifically heavier than the liquor amnii, and therefore in
the various attitudes of the mother, is always in contact with, and supported
upon the depending part of the uterus. This, in the more common attitudes, is
the cervix uteri. The child's head, and upper part of the trunk, contain more
matter in proportion to their surface, than the lower part of the body. Thence
the head will more generally fall down to the lower part of the uterus. And for
the same reason, were a child to be dropped into deep water, in various postures
and directions, its head would always first reach the bottom. But the motion of
the head itself, either alone, or in cooperation with the attitude of the
mother, may sometimes turn the head toward the fundus uteri.

In the last two or three months of gestation, the child is commonly so much
straitened for room, and so compactly adapted to the oblong figure of the
uterus, that it cannot change its general position either by its own efforts,
or even by accidents happening to the mother. At this period it is frequently
evident, that some awkward straitened position of the child being produced by
its own motion, and pressing or stretching the uterus unequally, gives the
mother much uneasiness for a time. And then, upon the child's stirring in some
remarkable way, it gets to be more at its ease, and the mother feels instant
relief from the pain, the stretching, or whatever the complaint was. This will
happen to the same woman again and again.

OF THE SIZE AND FORM OF THE CHILD.
The size and weight of a child's body at birth, I believe, is generally
over-rated in this country; in so much that we are often told, even by those
who ought to know, of children weighing from fifteen to twenty pounds. So far
is this from being true, that I never knew an instance of a child which weighed
twelve pounds, and the greatest number are little above half that weight. Dr.
Macaulay was at pains in our hospital to ascertain the ordinary bulk of new
born children, by first weighing a great number indiscriminately as they were
born; and then by giving an order to our matron to weigh occasionally all such
as were of a remarkable size in either extreme. Of several thousands born in
the British Hospital, at their full time, while the Doctor's order was attended
to, the smallest weighed above four pounds, the largest eleven pounds two
ounces, and by far the greater number weighed from five to eight pounds,
avoirdupois.

The shape and proportion of the parts of a child's body are very different
from those of an adult. Without descending to minutiae, it must be observed
that the head is very small in proportion to the trunk; and the lower part of
the body when compared with the upper. Thus the upper part of the trunk of the
body is small with regard to the head, the lower part of the trunk is small in
proportion to the upper part, and the lower extremities are small in proportion
when compared with the arms.

Some children are so clean, that when born they hardly require being washed:
but for the most part their skin, particularly on the head and back, is covered
with a crust of a white greasy mucus, which will not wash off with plain water.
Sometimes this mucus is as fluid as honey, and in great quantity, but more
commonly it clings to the skin like a thin besmearing plaster.

It has been thought by some people, a deposition or settling upon the child
from the liquor amnii. But I should rather presume that it is a collection of
the cutaneous discharges of the foetus itself; for the following reasons. It is
more greasy or unctuous, and of a more opaque and white color, than might be
expected in any settlement from the liquor amnii. Besides, we never see any
similar deposition on any part of the inner surface of the amnion, or upon the
navel string. In the last place, we see that this mucus collects in the groins,
armpits, hams, etc. in such children as lie so compacted and folded up. that
these parts of their skin are not exposed to receive any settling from the
liquor amnii.

After this account of such things relating to the body of the child as are
external, an examination of its internal peculiarities would naturally follow.
The most important of these are, what we may suppose absolutely necessary to
the life of the child while it draws its nourishment from the mother, and
cannot enjoy respiration, viz. the communication between the pulmonary artery
and the aorta; the continuation of the internal iliac arteries to the navel,
where they form the arteries of the navel string and placenta; the continuation
of the vein of the navel string from the navel to the liver, where it meets
with, and is continued into the left branch of the vena portarum hepatica; the
canal of communication between that anastomosis and the trunk of the left vena
cava hepatica; the foramen ovale with its valve, in the partition between the
two auricles of the heart; and the compact state of the lungs, which have not
as yet received air. Besides which, there are many things in the child
different from what they are in the adult, though of less importance, and less
connected with that way of life which is peculiar to the child before its birth.

But as opportunities of dissecting subjects which are proper for these
inquiries have been frequent, anatomists have left little to be added to their
observations upon this branch. Wherefore we shall now pass it over, that our
time and expense may be employed about such things only, as require subjects
and occasions which few anatomists can procure.

OF THE UTERUS AND ITS CONTENTS IN THE EARLIER MONTHS OF PREGNANCY.
The most early case of pregnancy which I have had an opportunity of examining
in the dead body, was of three complete months. With regard to the uterus
itself, and its exterior appendages, I cannot go farther back into pregnancy;
but with regard to its contents, I can go as far as the sixth week, having
examined with great attention innumerable fresh miscarriages which happened
between that time and the end of the third month. And when I have compared and
connected all these observations, and joined them to what I have seen in the
dissection of several cases in the fourth and fifth months, which have fallen
to my lot, it must be allowed that I have had very favorable opportunities of
knowing the state of the pregnant uterus even in the earlier times of gestation.

In the third and fourth months the substance of the uterus is become more soft
than before conception, and all its vessels being proportionably enlarged, it
appears to be much more vascular. We may therefore reasonably believe, even if
we knew nothing from dissections of quadrupeds, that the uterus changes its
nature in that respect from the time of conception, and receives a greater
quantity of blood. Its thickness is only a little increased in its natural
state, but considerably when the veins and arteries are artificially distended
with any fluid.

At this time the conception is lodged entirely in the fundus uteri, or in that
part which in the unimpregnated state has a smooth internal surface; no portion
of the conception stretching then down into the cervix uteri, or that part of
the uterus which is narrow and rugous within.

The cervix uteri remains contracted and hard in its substance, and contains a
tough and firm jelly, which cements and fills up its cavity so completely, that
upon attempting to push a probe through it, the probe will as readily force its
way through the hard substance of the uterus itself, as through the cementing
jelly. When the uterus is kept a considerable time in water, six or eight days
perhaps, this cementing jelly swells, grows in proportion softer, and at last
comes away, or falls off in one mass. Then the internal surface of the cervix
exhibits a most beautiful appearance; being variegated with projecting rugae,
and innumerable intermediate narrow, but deep cavities, which lodged so many
processes of the jelly. In separating the jelly, when by previous maceration it
had been fit for such an operation, I have seen these processes drawn out of
the little cavities as distinctly as we can see a hand drawn out of a glove:
and when the jelly is carefully separated and floated in clear water, it
preserves its figure, and exhibits a most elegant appearance, produced by the
processes that shoot out from its surface all around.

The os uteri, or the very extremity of the uterus, is in some women narrow or
pointed, with a very small orifice, that will just admit the point of a very
small finger; and in some it is large, soft or spongy to the touch, granulated
upon its surface, and the orifice so wide as to admit the end of the finger
full half an inch up with great ease. There the passage becomes narrow, and is
closed with the gelatinous cement. The os uteri, all around its passage, is
crowded with small cavities, containing the same sort of jelly, which by
maceration swells, pushes out from the cavities, and comes away, leaving the
cells void. This, no doubt, is part of the jelly which naturally comes away in
labor. Some women have much more of it than others; and in comparing different
dissections, I have observed more of the jelly within the cervix uteri, and
more likewise in the cells round the os uteri, in one subject than another.

The uterus at the time of three or four months, is by no means so tightly
filled but that it would easily contain more. It is like a bladder therefore,
so filled with water, that it would easily contain a third part more. Thence it
is soft and swagging, and easily changing its shape, accommodates itself to the
neighboring parts.

The situation of the uterus, which at first is in the cavity of the pelvis,
but afterward gradually rises up into the cavity of the abdomen, and the
changes which its ligaments undergo, may be easily conceived by any person
acquainted with the state of those parts before conception, and who has
considered what, in a former part of this work, was said upon the same things
in the ninth month of pregnancy.

The peculiarities of the ovarium are very different at the different periods
of utero-gestation. In the earlier months the corpus luteum is considerably
larger and more vascular; and within it there is a considerable and evident
cavity, containing a fluid. When the uterine vessels have been injected, I have
observed that the wax very easily extravasates into that cavity. On the outside
of the ovarium there is a little pit, which looks like a hole, leading into the
cavity of the ovarium. But in the cases which I have seen, no bristles would
pass; it appeared to be an obliterated duct, or passage grown together.

The contents of the uterus, and the membrane which I have called decidua, are
very different in the first months of pregnancy from what they are in the end
of it. I shall take them in their order.

AMNION.
In the second and third months, the amnion is much the same sort of membrane
as in the later months of utero-gestation; only it is much more delicate and
transparent, and its gelatinous union with the chorion still more tender.

In the very early state of an ovum, the amnion forms a bag, which is a good
deal smaller than the chorion, and therefore is not in contact with it. In the
course of some weeks, however, it comes nearly into contact with the chorion,
and through the greater part of pregnancy the two membranes are pretty closely
applied to each other. These changes show that at the very first the chorion
has a quicker growth than the amnion, unless it be supposed that the amnion
begins to be formed some little time after the chorion; that soon the amnion
acquires a quicker progress of growth than the chorion, and that at length they
keep exact pace in their growth with each other.

VESICULA ALBA
The little bag situated on the outside of the amnion, which I shall
distinguish by this name, is commonly more apparent at this age than in the
later months, from the white opaque color of the fluid which it contains being
more distinguishable upon the very transparent membranes. It is a small oval
bladder, transparent, and containing a very small portion of a cream-like
fluid, which may be easily pressed into any one part of the bag: the bag will
there be made turgid, and by continuing the pressure it will burst, and the
fluid be scattered. From this bag a small duct is continued to the navel
string, which evidently grows smaller as it runs on. It sometimes evidently
contains the same sort of white fluid as the bag itself, which may be pressed
forward and backward with the point of a needle. When the duct comes to the
navel string, it is as small as the finest hair, and with magnifying glasses
may be seen running the whole length of the string. In its whole course, both
among the membranes, and on the string, it adheres closely to the amnion it is
however frequently invisible. The distance of the vesicula from the navel
string is various, being sometimes half an inch, and sometimes twice or three
times as much.

CHORION.
In the early months of utero-gestation, this membrane is very different in
several respects from what it is in the last months.

First, the membrane itself is considerably stronger than the amnion, so that
in the progress of the nine months, the proportional strength of the amnion is
increasing, while that of the chorion is diminishing; for the amnion is the
strongest membrane in the last months.

Secondly, in the first months the chorion is uniformly or equally strong in
all its parts; whereas in the last months, that portion of the chorion which
lines the placenta, is many times thicker and stronger than the portion which
makes the membranous part of the secundines. Here ends the Manuscript of Dr.
Hunter, except that what is afterward said about the navel string is also of
his writing. The Editor has taken the liberty of transposing this from the
place where it was, to another which appeared to him more proper for it.


Thirdly, when the chorion with its contents, and all the shaggy vessels
hanging from its external surface (which has been commonly called the ovum) is
separated from the enclosing decidua, there is no apparent difference, in a
very early conception, between the outer surface of one part and another. The
whole is at this period equally covered with shaggy vessels, but very soon that
part of the surface of the chorion, which is not to contribute to form the
future placenta, becomes smooth. This change begins commonly at a point, and
gradually spreads to the edge of what afterward becomes the placenta, till the
shaggy vessels are removed, and that part of the chorion then appears a smooth
transparent membrane. Occasionally a few straggling roots of the shaggy vessels
are left still remaining. There would seem to be some variety as to the exact
time of this change, for we find one ovum considerably larger than another
before any of the shaggy vessels have at all disappeared; but they are
generally gone at the end of a few weeks.

By what process these shaggy vessels disappear, it would be extremely
difficult to conjecture, unless by absorption; and if this be the case, then
absorbent vessels must exist in the structure of the secundines, a circumstance
which has not yet been demonstrated, and which, from the nature of the parts,
can hardly admit of this decisive mode of evidence.

DECIDUA.
In ova of a few weeks growth, the membrana decidua is more distinct for
examination, than in the more advanced periods of pregnancy, and is different
in several circumstances. It is a very soft, tender, pulpy membrane, which
lines the whole cavity of the fundus uteri, reaching to the beginning of the
cervix, and passing a little way within the origin of the Fallopian tubes, at
which places it is perforated by small openings. In a case of very early
conception, probably not more than two weeks, which was examined by Mr. Hunter,
the decidua was found, upon opening the uterus, to be as fine at the beginning
of the cervix as the retina, but without any hole in it there. This, perhaps,
always takes place in a very early conception, where the ovum remains
undisturbed in the uterus; but where it passes off in a miscarriage, the
decidua at the cervix is perforated. In more advanced pregnancy, that part of
the decidua which lines the inner surface of the uterus, and which will in the
progress of the description be distinguished by the name of the decidua vera,
seems to lose itself at the beginning of the cervix, and has evidently there an
opening. The decidua which covers the external surface of the chorion becomes
gradually thinner as pregnancy advances, but has no opening in it at the cervix
uteri, or any where else.
It is very irregular in its thickness, some parts being thicker than a crown
piece, and others of extreme thinness; but this is subject to a good deal of
variety in different persons. In the more advanced periods of utero-gestation
there is not so much variety in the thickness of the different parts of the
decidua, but it is then a thinner and much more uniform membrane.

The inner surface of the decidua, which comes immediately into view when the
ca^ity of the uterus is laid open, is at an early period of pregnancy smooth;
but the outer surface of the decidua, which is in immediate contact with the
uterus, has shooting from it a prodigious number of little processes or
flocculi, giving it a very irregular appearance. In the more advanced stages of
pregnancy, there is little apparent difference to the eye between the outer and
the inner surface of the decidua, these flocculi being hardly observable. The
adhesion too of the decidua to the uterus, at an early period of pregnancy, is
not so strong as when pregnancy has made a further progress.

Besides that portion of the decidua lining the cavity of the fundus uteri,
which Dr. Hunter used to call, by way of distincttion, the decidua vera,
another portion forms an external covering to that part of the chorion, which
is not in contact with the inner surface of the placenta. This was discovered
by Dr. Hunter, who called it the decidua reflexa. It is a membrane of
considerable thickness, and is sometimes of a yellower color than the decidua
vera. If it did not lead to some risk of producing an erroneous opinion with
regard to the formation of the dicidua, I think it would be better to call the
decidua vera by the name of the decidua uteri, and the decidua reflexa by the
name of the decidua chorii. This would render it more easy to acquire a clear
idea of the whole membrane.
The ovum lies between a part of the decidua vera and the decidua reflexa, both
of which unite into one membrane at the edge of the placenta; or the decidua
vera divides itself at the edge of the placenta into two laminae, one of which
passes between the placenta and the inner surface of the uterus, and the other
forms the decidua reflexa, which covers the outer surface of the chorion. The
decidua enveloping the ovum, does not however merely cover the shaggy vessels
of the chorion at their outward floating extremities, but also the whole of
their external surface, as deep as the chorion. The chorion itself commonly
appears transparent, and not covered by any layer of decidua immediately
applied to it. It sometimes, however, although I believe very rarely, appears
to be distinctly covered with a thin layer of decidua, and therefore in those
cases where it seems to be wanting, it may not improbably be supposed to be so
very thin as to escape observation. What is now said, however, is to be
considered as merely conjectural.

Where the decidua reflexa is beginning to pass over the chorion, there is, at
an early period of pregnancy, an angle formed between it and the decidua, which
lines the uterus; and here the decidua is often extremely thin, and perforated
with small openings, so as to look like a piece of lace. In proportion as
pregnancy advances, the decidua reflexa becomes gradually thinner and thinner,
so that at the fourth month, it forms an extremely fine layer covering the
chorion. It comes at the same time more and more closely in contact with the
decidua, which lines that part of the uterus to which the placenta is not
fixed, till at length they adhere together. One might naturally be led to
suppose, that this part of the decidua, after its junction with the decidua
reflexa, should become a thicker membrane than it was originally. This however
is so far from being the case, that it is really thinner. The decidua reflexa,
being very thin before it is joined to it, can produce little additional
thickness, and the decidua which lines the uterus is gradually made thinner in
the progress of pregnancy by distension, and perhaps too by some degree of
absorption.

The decidua resembles a good deal in its appearance, as well as in its mode of
formation, the lamina of coagulable lymph which is formed by inflamed surfaces.
Both membranes are of a yellowish white color; both are tender, pulpy, and
vascular. The lamina of coagulable lymph is formed by an inflamed membrane; the
uterus before the decidua is formed becomes much more vascular, so as to change
into a state somewhat analogous to inflammation. The points of comparison,
however, between those two membranes reach no farther. The lamina of coagulable
lymph is gradually changed into the membrane of adhesion, which resembles
exactly the common cellular membrane of the body; but the decidua continues
throughout a peculiar membrane.

How the decidua envelopes the ovum has never yet been observed, and therefore
can only be a subject of conjecture. The most probable supposition is, that the
ovum passes from the ovarium into the cavity of the uterus, while the
coagulable lymph is pouring out by the arteries of the uterus, which is
afterward changed into decidua. One can hardly imagine that the ovum should
make its way into the middle of a membrane, which is already formed, and though
tender, yet capable of some degree of resistance. In two examinations, however,
which I have known to have been made with care, at a very early period of
pregnancy, where the decidua was already formed, no ovum could be discovered.
But this circumstance I consider as invalidating very little the probability of
the supposition which has just been made, because it is natural to think, that
at a very early stage of pregnancy the ovum is so small, as to be detected with
great difficulty.

Although it be extremely probable, that the decidua begins to be formed at the
time that the ovum passes into the cavity of the uterus, yet it is not
absolutely necessary for the formation of the decidua that the ovum should
reach that cavity. When an ovum grows in the ovarium or the Fallopian tube, the
decidua is both formed in the uterus, and the uterus is considerably enlarged,
so as to undergo, to a certain degree, changes exactly similar to those which
take place in natural pregnancy.

PLACENTA.
In a very young ovum there is no appearance whatever of the placenta. The
whole outer surface of the chorion is covered with shaggy vessels, and that
part which will afterward contribute to form the placenta is not more covered
than the rest. In the course of a few weeks, more than one half of the surface
of the chorion becomes smooth, and the remainder continues to be covered, as
before, with shaggy vessels. These vessels are covered at their floating
extremities with the decidua, and even their whole external surface is covered
with it as deep as the chorion itself. Here then are the two parts which
constitute the placenta; the foetal, formed by an extension of the vessels of
the chorion, which are derived from the umbilical vessels; and the maternal,
formed by the decidua. All the shaggy vessels hanging from the outer surface of
the chorion, are probably not blood vessels. It is natural to think that some
lymphatics may be interspersed; but these have not hitherto been demonstrated.
These are for some time separable from each other, but they gradually become
so intimately connected, that all disunion is impossible, and at the same time
the placenta becomes gradually firmer in its texture. At what exact time this
intimate connection becomes complete, it is very difficult to ascertain,
because it is very difficult to find an opportunity of examining miscarriages
at a near gradation of age with respect to each other.

Some favorable circumstances too, or a greater dexterity, may make the
maternal and infantile portions of the placenta separate from each other, at
the same age, more easily in one case than another, which will render this
point still more difficult of determination. Dr. Hunter has mentioned, that he
has separated the two parts from each other in a placenta of four months; but a
placenta even considerably before this period, has very much the same
appearance of structure to the eye that it has afterward. It would seem that
in the early months, even although the placenta has acquired the common
appearance of structure, the maternal and infantile portions are not so very
intimately connected together, as in the more advanced periods of pregnancy.

NAVEL STRING.
Till some such time as the sixth or seventh week, there is nothing to claim
the appellation of navel string. The belly of the foetus, at its most
projecting point, is close to the amnion and other involucra; and there the
vessels of communication pass. From this time the navel is gradually drawn out
or formed. About the seventh week (the age of the most common abortions, viz.
such as are generally excluded in the eleventh or twelfth week) the navel
string is usually about an inch long, and straight, that is, without any
twisting, either of the whole cord, or of the vessels round one another. It is
likewise very thick in proportion to the vessels, which run straight like
slender threads in the transparent gelatinous substance of the string. In very
fresh subjects they contain red blood; in others (and in all after being kept
some time), they appear like opaque white threads. Besides the umbilical
vessels, the fine white thread which comes from the white vesicula upon the
outside of the amnion, is often visible along the whole length of the navel
string. At this age it is very common to see some convolutions of the
intestines lodged in the beginning of the cord. About the tenth week the navel
string is become proportionably more slender, and so much longer, that commonly
it makes loose turns, instead of running straight from the foetus to the
placenta; and it is often much twisted like a rope.

FOETUS.
At what exact time the foetus of an ovum becomes visible, it is extremely
difficult to determine, because it is almost always impossible to ascertain the
date of the impregnation. I should believe, however, that the foetus is visible
before the end of the fourth week, because we find that it has made
considerable progress in its growth; at the usual time of ova dying in
miscarriages, which is about the seventh week. Since this was written, Dr.
Comb has shown me a preparation where there is the appearance of a foetus,
although extremely small, and where, from peculiar circumstances, the
conception has been ascertained to be twenty-two days old.


The foetus at this period consists of two oval masses, viz. the head and the
trunk, of which the former is commonly smaller and rounder than the latter.
Occasionally the head is, at this period, even larger than the body. The head
is bent forwards upon the breast; and although there is a narrowness; yet there
is no distinct appearance of the neck. The eyes form the most conspicuous
feature, appearing each of them like a very small dark circle, which surrounds
a white central point. They are placed at a great distance from each other, and
low down in the head. The mouth is, at this period, generally very wide, with
the tongue very obvious at the lower part of it, and the two lips are hardly
begun to be formed. The nose is obscurely marked, and still more so are the
external ears, which appear, upon attentive examination, like two small circles
gently hollowed, near the angles of the mouth.

The body commonly forms a larger and a longer oval than the head, with the
lower part of the spine curved round toward the belly, so as to resemble
somewhat the tail of a quadruped when thrown between the hind legs. The upper
extremities sprout out from each side of the chest, and are directed obliquely
toward the chin; the lower extremities sprout out in the same manner from the
lower part of the trunk, and are considerably smaller at this period than the
upper. These proportions of the head to the trunk, and of the upper to the
lower extremities, change very much in the further growth of the foetus within
the uterus; the head becoming relatively much smaller, and the lower
extremities becoming larger. After birth, however, a further change takes
place, for there is a great difference between the proportion of these parts to
each other in a child at birth, and in an adult.

THE END.

