A Commendatory SERMON PREACHED November the 4th, 1709. BEING THE BIRTHDAY OF
King William, Of Glorious Memory.

By Daniel de Foe.

LONDON: Printed by J. Dutton; near Fleet Street.

A Commendatory SERMON Preached November the 4th, 1709.
1 Chap. 2 Book of Samuel, 24. Ye Daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who
clothed you in Scarlet, with other Delights; who put on ornaments of Gold upon
your Apparel.
NOW, Gentlemen, you will pardon me a Digression, when I shall remind you that
this is the 4th Day of November, the initial Day of Euroupe's Liberty, the
great Dawning of this Age's Glory; the Day that God has hallowed or set apart
to be praised in, for that unvalued Blessing of King William's Life. On this
Day it began. The Thankfulness of honest Men for the inestimable Gift, shall
never fail to be revived this Day, while they have Hearts to own it, or Britain
has honest Men left to know the Hand that saved them, or to remember whose
glorius Instrument he was, to assault Tyranny, and the most triumphant Enemies
of God's Church, and his People's Liberty.

May this Day be Sacred to his Memory, and it will be so, while there are any
such thing as honest Men in this Part of the World -- The Reflection upon the
least temporal Mercy ye enjoy, ay and some spiritual ones too, must bring back
your Memory to this Day, and by this Day to the Person by whose Name it is
called I know it is hard, as a Reverend Prelate of this Church once took notice,
for English Men to remember Twenty long Years behind them, especially so
despised a thing as a Benefector But an English Man cannot look round him a Day
in his Life, but he is as necessarily brought to a Remembrance of King William.
I had almost said, as he is ^of a Governing Providence in the World. Nor is ^
any thing profane to join them; For by Him, as Instrument, has Providence
brought to pass for us all the Wonders of the last Age -- An Age big with
mighty Events, swelled with the glorious Revolutions of Kingdoms, and the
mighty Downfall of Hell's monstrous Schemes, laid deep, and politickly derected
at the Interest and Kingdom of Christ Jesus in the World.

William was the Thunderbolt that split all the mighty Work, that blow up the
Foundation of the Devil's Kingdom in Europe; that shook the vast Fabric, and
left it so weak, that even a Woman is thought on, Can an English Man go to Bed,
or rise up, without blessing the very Name of King William? His Perils have
been our Safety, his Labors our Ease, his Cares our Comfort, his continued
Harassing and Fatigue, our continued Calm and Tranquillity.

When you sit down to eat why have you not Soldiers quartered in your Houses to
command your Servants and insult your Tables? It Is because King William
subjected the Military to the Civil Authority, and made the Sword of Justice
triumph over the Sword of War, When you lie down at Night why do you not bolt
and bar your Chamber, to defend the Chastity of your Wives and Daughters from
the ungoverned Lust of raging Mercenaries? It Is because King William restored
the Sovereignty and Dominion of the Laws, and made the Red-Coat World Servants
to those that paid them. When you receive your Rents, why are not arbitary
Defalcations made upon your Tennants, arbitary Imposts laid upon your Commerce,
and oppressive Taxes levied upon your Estates, to support the Tyranny that
demands them, and your Bondage made strong at your Expense? It Is because King
William reestablished the essential Security of your Properties, and put you
into that happy Condition which few Nations enjoy, of calling your Souls your
own. How came you by a Parliament to ballence between the Governed and the
Governing, but upon King William's exalting Liberty upon the ruin of the
Oppression? How came you to have Power to abuse your Deliverer, but by the very
Deliverance he wrought for you? He gave you that Liberty you afterward took to
insult him, and supported you in those very Privileges you ungratefully
bullied him with. You could not with all your brutish skill provoke him to be a
Tyrant, He abhorred Oppression, and scorned to practice it, and he that had
Fire enough to assault all your Oppressors, and a Hand strong enough to wrestle
with an established and confirmed Tyrant, had yet Meekness enough to let you
oppress him, because he would not oppress you, and saw you ungrateful enough to
oppose not your Benefactor only, but your own Felicity for his sake.

Yet to the last he fought for you against foreign Tyranny, and kept his Foot
upon the Neck of your secret Usurpers; He trod upon them. And those than
courted him at Home to resent your Ingratitude, received his constant Frown;
This was the Man that lived for you, and yet died by you, and hearken to it
with Regret, and reproach your selves with it whilst you live, He died
murdered by your Unkindness.

Heaven, that honored him here, and received him from hence, has shown some
dreadful Instances of his Abhorrence of the Manner he was treated here, and has
resented the particular Insults done to his Name, as if done to himself; And I
wish I could not say, Heaven seems to punish us Nationally for our National
Usage of this Prince, who was his eminent Instrument to us for Good.

How are we, notwithstanding our Victories, yet embarrass'd in that cruel and
bloody War, which we reproached him for not ending sooner? We have not yet
arrived to that Partition-Treaty, that we threw in his Face, And if greater
Conditions have been seemingly offered us, they have been but seemingly so,
without any Security for their being made effectual. We have had Reason now to
see our Reproaches of King William unjust, who we redicul'd for not beating the
French, while he has rather hardened himself this Year, than submitted, after
he has been five Times overthrown.

Let us look back to King William's Part in this War, and imagine Lewis XIV. in
the state he was in when that War began. Not all the Princes and States of
Europe united, would have begun a War against him. His Armies numerous in Men,
and all those Men veterans in War, and flushed with Conquest; his Treasures in
a Kind infinite, his Generals experienced and enterprizing; himself 20 years
younger and vigorous. I tell ye none of ye all would have ventured to begin the
War, nor would you have been in your Wits, if you had. It was a Work only fit
for a William, a King that could conquer by being overthrown, that could
struggle with Impossibilities, and could penetrate into the remotest Events.

Let any Man look into the Temper of our Nation at this time, and they will
find we are not now fit for a Disaster, as we were then; we have fought the
French, and beaten them, thank God for it; for Woe to us if we had lost the
Day! How would our Credit have been run down, our Bank being pushed at, our
General insulted, our Ministry abused, as if really Men were now in God's stead.

And that the Duke of Marlborough could not only fight for Victory, but command
it, But King William saw Victory even in the want of Success; He lost the
Battles, and won the Day, and in this I am not too forward, if I say, he fought
as never Man fought and conquered* He fought with a fierce victorious Enemy
abroad, with cruel and intolerable Deficiences at Home, and yet he fought! Any
body but King William would have yielded to insuperable Difficulties, but he
fought on, and reduced the King of France at last, to seek Peace, acknowledge
him King, and affront the Refugee that he fought to restore.

Thus he broke the first Power of the invincible French Empire; He broke their
old Veterans, and exhausted their immense Treasures; He took the haughty Lewis
by the Throat in the flower of his Strength, and set his Foot against him, when
he was another kind of Ltwis than he is now. And though I would not lessen the
Glory of the present Conquerors in the Field, yet as a Mine under a great Rock,
though it cannot entirely blow it away, yet shakes it, and dislocates it, so as
to make it easier for Workmen to remove; So King William shook the Foundations
of French Power in such a manner, as has made it much easier for others to
crush it entirely, than it would otherwise have been.

At last Heaven, provoked at your Treatment of this Prince, removed him from
us, and were it not a Debt due to his Memory, I should bury in silence the
barbarous Abuses of him after his Decease; but particularly the Article of the
Horse. The King was thrown by his Horse, or rather his Horse fell with him, by
which his Majesty received some hurt in his Collar-Bone, which as it was
thought hastened his Death, tho, it is evident he did not die of that Hurt.

Now let them not only blush, but tremble at the Event, who have insulted his
Memory, by cannonizing in their Cups the Horse that threw down the King,
drinking a Health to the Beast, less so by far than the Bruits that drink it,
and rejoicing in the Disaster. Let such no more talk of Calves Head Clubs and
Feasts of Triumph, though vile enough too, insulting the Dead; but nothing can
match the Infamy of this Practice, odious both to God and Man. How odious it is
to Man, I think I need not insist upon; no honest Man can think of it without
Horror; But how odious to God it is, you shall all be judge.

Now, Gentlemen, pray remark it, to the Honor of Divine Vengeance, and to the
extraordinary Conviction of all that can open their Eyes to the Methods of the
Almighty, in his examplar Dealings with impious Men; That of the scandalous
Wretches, who have thus insulted the Memory of King William in this Nation, by
drinking the Horse's Health that hurt him. I can give you Account of at least
Eleven, that have had their Brains dashed out, or their Necks broke, by falls
from their Horses; Besides some that have been very much hurt, but have had
Time spared to them for Repentance, And if ye think it for your Instruction, I
may hereafter give you their several Histories. Pray mark the Retaliation, I
say it again, All by falls from their Horses.

Can we have have a greater Testimomy of the abhord Wickedness of the Thing?
Has Heaven, in any Age, given a greater Witness to the Honor or Memory of any
Man in the World? You may read plainly, how dear his Name is to the Divine
Power, who concerns his Justice so remarkably to retaliate the Injuries done
it. That the Party, who espouse these People, may read their Crime in their
Punishment. Let the Remnant take heed,

Now Joy and Pleasant Hearts be your Portion, who commemorate this Day, that
Drink a Temporate Glass to the Prosperity of all that love King William: that
bless his Memory, and hand on a grateful Sense of his Actions to the Ages to
come. And may all that envy and repine at his Glory, or at the great Things we
enjoy from his Conduct, be disragarded and disappointed, till they repent, or
do worse.

FINIS.

