A TREATISE OF Incurable Diseases: CONTAINING I. An ESSAY on the Proper Means
to reduce the Number of INCURABLES. II. An ATTEMPT to settle a just Notion of
INCURABLE in Physic. III. A SPECIMEN of a Rational Method to discover the
Cures of reputed INCURABLE DISEASES.


By P. SHAW, M. D.

Neque igitur dubitabo inter Desiderata reponere Opus aliquod de Curationibus
morborum qui habentur pro Insanabilibus; ut evocentur and excitentur Medici
aliique egregii, and magnanimi, qui huic operi quantum largitur natura rerum
incumbant; quando hoc ipsum, Istos morbos pronunciare Insanabiles, neglectum
and incuriam veluti lege sanciat, and ignorantiam ab infamia eximat. Bac. de
Aug. Scient. L. IV. C. II. p. 310. LONDON: Printed for J. Roberts, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1723. (Price One Shilling.)

F Hoffman fecit

TO THOMAS GUY, Esquire;
SIR,
THOUGH the Subject of this Treatise, considered as a Desideratum in the
Healing-Art, should chance to have had no great Share in your Studies, yet have
you a Right to a Work of this kind, superior to any such Claim.

I will not say, had your benificent Disposition never appeared in favor of
the wretched Incurable, that I should never have entertained any Thoughts on
this Subject: But this I am obliged, in Justice, to acknowledge, that whilst I
was committing them to Paper, your excellent Design was so strongly before me,
that I found it absolutely impossible to write regardless of it. Upon which
Account, it is but Just that I make you a Tender of what was thus written.

I cannot indeed persuade my self, however mean the Performance may appear,
that it will prove an unacceptable Present; since it attempts a farther Relief
of those deplorable Persons, for whom you have already expressed so tender a
Regard.

And if by due Management, any of these shall happily find a Cure, where it
might be least expected, in an Hospital set apart for Incurables, it will not,
I presume, redound more to the Consolation of the Patient, than to the Honor
and Delight of him who not only generously founded, but liberally endowed it.

I am, With the highest Esteem, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, PETER SHAW


A TREATISE OF Incurable Diseases, etc.
I. Of the proper Means to reduce the Number of Incurables.
ALTHOUGH several cogent Reasons, to demonstrate the Feasibility of the present
Design, may be drawn from the Nature of Distempers, and the known Effects of
Medicines; the common Occurrences of daily Practice, and the great Probability
there is of bringing many unknown Remedies to Light; yet were it not for what
so grave and approved an Author, as the great Lord-Chancellor Bacon, has
recorded about incurable Diseases, it would perhaps seem daring and
presumptuous to maintain the Possibility of lessening their Number, after so
many Ages appear to have been unsuccessfully spent in attempting it.

FOR, the Cure of Incurables does not only involve a Paradox in the Expression,
but in an Age so productive of new Discoveries, and so fertile in Improvements
as the present, it generally passes for a desperate Problem; and is apt to be
ranked in the same Class with the Quadrature of the Circle, the Perpetual
Motion, and the Philosopher's Stone.

BUT the most celebrated and judicious Author abovementioned, is clear and
express, that Physicians When they enquire into Diseases, find so many which
they assert to be Incurable, either from their first Appearance, or after they
have continued some Time, that the Proscriptions of L. Scylla, and the
Triumv^rate were ^^^ing in Comparison of the Proscriptions of Physicians, by
which, with the most unjust Sentence imaginable, they deliver Men over to
Death* many of whom, notwithstanding, escape with less Diffic^^^y than and
those formerly under the Roman Proseriptions. A Treatise therefore is wanting
upon the Cures of repared incurable Diseases, to the ^^nd that both Physicians
and others of Eminence and Resolution may be encouraged and excited to pursue
this Matter as far as the Nature of it will permit; since to denounce Dis^^es
Incurable* is to establish Neg^^gence and Carelessness, as it were by a Law, at
the same time that it ^^^eens Ignorance from Rep^oach.
"In inquisitione illorum de Morbis, inveniunt Morbos complures quos
Insanabiles decernunt, alios jam inde a principio Morborum, alios post talem
quampiam periodum. Ita ut L. Scyllae and Trium-virorum Proscriptiones, res
nihili fuerint prae Medicorum Proscriptionibus, per quas tot homines
iniquissimis edictis morti dedunt; quorum tamen plurimi minore cum difficultate
evadunt, quam illi olim inter Proscriptiones Romanas. Neque igitur dubitabo
(continues this great Author) inter Desiderata reponere Opus aliquod de
Curationibus Morborum, qui habentur pro Insanabilibus; ut evocentur and
excitentur Medici aliique egregii and magnanimi; qui huic operi, quantum
largitur Natura rerum, incumbant; quando hoc ipsum, istos Morbos pronunciare
Insanabiles, neglectum and incuriam veluti lege sanciat, and ignorantiam ab
infamia eximat." de Aug. Scient. L. IV. Cap. II. p. 310.

AFTER such a Declaration from so great a Man, it will not, I hope, appear
either assuming or ridiculous to attempt a Discovery of the Cures of such
desperate or inveterate Diseases as may chance unjustly to pass for Incurable.
Such a Design, at least, ought not to be thought assuming, if it be entered
upon according to his Lordship's Direction, "To the end that the more able
Physicians, and Persons of Eminence and Resolution, may be encouraged and
excited to a thorough pursuit of this Matter;" which is the main View in
publishing this Treatise.

And if an Indulgence be granted to any thing that may seem to carry an Air of
Presumption or Assurance in such an Undertaking, I am persuaded there are few
will think an attempt of this Nature, Ridiculous or Impracticable, after so
very grave and discerning an Author has laid it down for just and reasonable.

Some there are, however, who will be apt to say, granting many Diseases were
an hundred Years ago, unwarrantably called Incurable; and allowing the
Physicians of that time to have, in this Respect, been no less unjust than
rigid and severe; yet after so many great Improvements, and useful Discoveries
made in Medicine of late, it is impossible the Censures of the present
Physicians should be equally unjust, or equally severe with those at the time
when this great Author wrote. Others will go still farther and cry, can it be
imagined, when by a grand Increase of Learning, a through Reformation in
Philosophy, a prodigious Number of useful Experiments, and happy Discoveries in
Mechanics, Anatomy, Chyrurgery, Chemistry, Pharmacy, and Botany, a noble
Addition to the Materia Medica, and the Introduction of a Mechanical System of
Physic; can it be imagined will some say, when by these large Acquisitions the
Art of Healing seems raised to its Achme, its Pinnacle of Perfection, that the
Censures of Physicians are not extremely just and utterly Irreversible; and the
Number of Incurables already shrunk and contracted within the narrowest Bounds
human Means can reduce them?

Indeed, it may very well appear Surprising, if with these accumulated
Advantages the Art of Healing be not vastly improved, and the Number of reputed
incurable Diseases lessened; and yet alas! the thing it self will speak and
tell us, that Incurables were never more common, and that they are so far from
diminishing, that they rather seem to grow upon us daily, insomuch, that it is
become necessary to provide for the meaner Sort of them by a new and an
extraordinary Kind of Bounty.

Besides, as 'twere folly to endeavor to palliate the Matter, the common
Practice of every Place will, at this Day, afford a sufficient Proof both of
the great Number of Incurables, and the rash Censures of Physicians. For not to
mention that we daily see Persons who were given over by some Physicians,
recovered by others, what Numbers after having been declared Incurable by very
eminent Men, and such as were well versed in physical Practice, have not found
a Cure by Accident, the Kindness of Nature, the Observation of a Regimen, the
Use of slight Medicines, a Course of Physic, or by venturing upon some
desperate Means? Instances of all these are every where so Numerous, that it is
in vain to go about to conceal the Thing, or its pernicious Consequences: Most
Persons are now appriz'd, that Incurable in Physic has had a like Effect with
Occult Quality in Philosophy, a Term which managed with Address, amused the
Multitude, and kept up a Veneration for an Appearance of Learning, but at the
same time proved a very great Obstacle to farther improvement in useful
Knowledge.

It Is well known also, that every Age has had its particular Kind of Practice,
which was always adequate to the Discoveries of the Time, and regulated by the
prevailing Philosophy of the Place; so that this Practice in the Infancy of the
Art, must necessarily have been proportioned to an infant Knowledge of Diseases
and Remedies. It Is less to be wondered at therefore if the puny Physicians of
the earliest Ages shifted the obstinate Cases from one to another, and were
pleased to denounce all the Diseases incurable which baffled their slender
Skill. This Procedure, however we laugh at in them, but are our selves perhaps
no less Ridiculous; for we also turn off our desperate Patients, when our
Remedies fail us, and term that an incurable Disease which obstinately resists
the fashionable Practice of our Age and Country.

But is a Distemper therefore really Incurable, because I, a second, or a third
Person cannot cure it? Or can this Term with any Propriety, be applied to a
Case which has only eluded the prevailing or current Practice of our Time,
without giving any evident Tokens, that it is absolutely, and in every respect
Incurable? If this be sufficient to denominate a Disease incurable, then
numberless Diseases, which have been cured, were incurable.

Doubtless this Term ought to be used with great caution, because when
misapplied, it not only abuses the Patient, but disgraces the Profession, and
brings a Scandal on its Professors, at the same time that it prevents an
Improvement of the Art of Healing. But we of this Age ought more than those of
any precedent one, to demur in the Use of the Word, when the Case is not very
plain and evident; we who are well acquainted with the Structure of the human
Body, and several grand Remedies which were unknown to former Ages; we who are
Masters of all the Experience of the Ancients, and have seen their Weakness and
Errors, as well as our own, in calling some Diseases incurable; we who cannot
but own Posterity may improve in their Knowledge of these Things, and be able
to cure Diseases reputed by us Incurable, as we have happily cured some that
were so reputed by Antiquity. Are not we also sensible that Physicians
generally go in the same beaten Track, and that though they differ in Forms, yet
usually agree to exhibit the same Medicines in like Cases? Thus all now
prescribe Mercury in the Venereal Lues, and Cortex in Intermittents; and if
these happen to fail, the modish Practice of our days is supposed to be
exhausted, and without farther trouble, the Case is adjudg'd Incurable. But as
this Sentence is frequently reversed either by Nature, Accident, or Art, it is,
by no means, of it self sufficient to denominate a Person properly Incurable,
that his Case has been unsuccessfully prescribed to by a few Physicians.

How it comes to pass that Incurables are so numerous at this time, and that
whilst other Arts and Sciences appear in a flourishing Condition, and even
Medicine it self is greatly improved in its Theory, yet the Art of Healing, the
practical Part, the most valuable Branch of Physic, and ultimate End which all
the other Branches are destined to promote and center in, should not be equally
advanced, is a Speculation that would carry us beyond the Bounds of the present
Design. And as it is of far greater Consequence to know how to remedy this
Defect in the Art of Healing, and thereby diminish, if possible, the Number of
Incurables, than to account for the slow Progress of the physical Practice; I
shall here confine my self to the former Consideration, and endeavor to show
what is the most proper Method of proceeding in order to discover the Cures of
such Distempers as obstinately resist the present Form of Practice, at the same
Time that they give no other Signs of their being absolutely and properly
Incurable.

The Method that I would offer at in this case, is founded on a proper Use of
our natural Faculties. If we will but open our Eyes, allow a freedom of
Reasoning, and not be slow in reducing its Dictates to Action, there are good
grounds to hope that the Number of reputed Incurables will soon be lessened, or
at least their increase be prevented; and a more accurate distinction of
Diseases for the future be introduced.

As by a reputed incurable Disease, I always mean such an one as proves too
strong for ordinary Treatment, without affording any farther reason to persuade
us, that the Cure of the same Case is utterly impossible to be effected
hereafter, to attempt the Cure of a reputed incurable Disease, is in no wise
Wild or Romantic. But the Way to discover such a Cure, is not to stop short
where the common Medicines fail, lazily term the Case Incurable, and then sit
down contented, and applaud our selves for having got to the extent of our
Tether: On the contrary, if we would in carnest endeavor to benefit Mankind,
by improving the Art of Healing, from an accurate Observation of the Phenomenon
of Diseases, we should proceed to deduce their immediate Causes, and find out
what kind of Remedies are wanting to remove them; and then by the proper
Experiments obtain these Desiderata, or at least in defect of them, contrive to
raise the known Remedies to their utmost Power, in order to see whether they
will not then reach the more stubborn Cases.

It is such a Kind of Geometrical Method, which appears to me the most proper
to be observed in this Pursuit; that way of Reasoning from Data to Quaesita,
which has done Wonders in Philosophy, Astronomy, and Mechanics. But it happens
most unfortunately, that instead of encouraging and pursuing this noble Method
in Physic, we seem almost entirely to discountenance and contemn it; instead of
endeavoring by this means to cultivate the most momentous Art on Earth, we are
too often amusing our selves with what is Trifling, when set in Competition
with it; and instead of endeavoring to lessen the Number of Incurables, or
ease their Tortures, we are either wrapped up in the Clouds, and contemplating
the Stars, or grovelling on the Ground in quest of Pebbles. Not that I would
Reflect on any part of Knowledge, though ever so little useful; but surely
those who have attached themselves to Physic, and make Profession of its
Practice, are inexcusable, if this has no share in their Studies. Some
excursions out of this Province are perhaps allowable, but we should not
methinks always content ourselves with searching after Things which are utterly
foreign to Physic. The Theory of Physic, indeed, no one can deny to be useful,
so far as it brings Advantage to the Practice; but who does not see that it is
Preposterous to spend Time in computing the absolute force of the Muscles, the
weight of the Air upon the Lungs, the just Momentum of the FLuids, and a
thousand other Things; whilst there remain so many inquiries of infinitely
greater Importance to be made, and which might even discover the cure of such
Diseases as we now miscall Incurable?

Is it not shocking to see what Pains and Application are bestowed in promoting
other Arts and Sciences, whilst Physic alone is abandoned, and seems to be
almost the only Art that is not cultivated among us? Thus in Astronomy, a
glorious Science indeed, and though not unworthy of the Esteem it meets with, is
yet infinitely less conducive to the Well-being of Mankind than the Practice of
Physic; what immense Labor and Assiduity are employed? With what diligent
attendance and watching is a new Star added to the Catalogue, or another
Satellite to the train of a Planet? What Drudgery is not gladly undergone, to
determine the Magnitudes, Distances, Periods of Revolution, Gravities and
Densities of the remote planetary and cometary World? But if any professed
Physicians, leaving their own Art to the improvement of others, shall give
themselves up to the cultivation of this, they may please to consider that such
procedure will afford little Consolation to a Man under the raging torture of
the Gout or Stone, or to those doomed to languish under the hard Sentence of
Incurable. What will it avail such as these, to be told the exact Minute of an
Eclipse, or other Results of numerous Observations, and laborious Calculations?
And yet these Things which concern us so little are highly prized, at the
Expense of Medicine; and the Knowledge of them obtained with the most vigorous
Resolution and assiduous Application. How we can answer the not taking equal
Pains to discover new Remedies, improve the old ones, and advance the Art of
Healing, when the Lives of Mankind are immediately concerned in it, I am at a
loss to know. But to return.

The Method I would recommend to find the Cures of reputed incurable Diseases,
will be best understood by the Specimen annexed; where I aim to proceed entirely
upon rational Grounds. I must therefore take leave to observe, that the free
use of our Reason is the best Guide we can make choice of to lead us to this
Discovery. By the use of Reason I would be understood to mean the exercise of
that Faculty upon Subjects relating to Diseases, in order to find a desirable
and promising Method of Cure for an inveterate Case, when the current Practice
has proved unsuccessful; that is, such a Method as shall, before it be tried,
appear likely to succeed, when considered by a rational Physician, and is more
eligible to the Patient, than the Distemper it is intended to rid him of, or at
least to palliate. Such a Method of Cure as this, is, in my Opinion,
unexceptionable, in reputed incurable Cases; and ought without scruple to be
put in Practice by a reputed incurable Patient; because such a Patient can have
no hopes of a Recovery, but either from mere Chance or Empiricism, or else from
the trial of such a rational Means as is here proposed: But any rational Person
will surely rather rely on Reason, than Chance for a Cure. Moreover, true
reasoning from the requisite Data, brings us to absolute certainty; and is
always preferable to Belief, Tradition, casual Experience, or any other
Assistance relied on in physical Practice: a general and rational Physician
therefore, who is never unprovided of Data to Reason from, cannot do better
than thus to apply this Faculty. And if the result of this Application be the
discovery of a desirable and promising Method of Cure, he cannot do better, in
the way of his Profession, than to recommend it.

This method of Procedure will be readily acquiesc'd in by those who are
unacquainted with the general fate of Physic. Such Persons are ant to imagine,
that this is the common foot upon which all rational Physicians proceed in
their daily Practice, and that no other tolerable Method can be established.
But these Persons are not aware how extremely cautious and sparing Physicians
have formerly been in the use of their Reason. That Body of Men have all along
had so tender a Regard to their Fellow Creatures, that they thought their
utmost care was necessary in the Application of Remedies; and therefore rarely
ventured to trust so dangerous a Thing as Reason in the use of 'em. And so
Experience, safe Experience, came to be wisely substituted in its stead: this
was the Oracle, this alone was extolled, and Reason, fallacious Reason was
decry'd and contemned, as having little to do in the Practice of Physic. Hence
they proceeded to settle Rules, and establish Forms from Experience, choosing
always to use the Remedies which had been used before, and to prescribe over
again what they had already experienced. To swerve from the established Method,
or prevailing Practice of the Age, was commonly thought bold and dangerous; and
to try a new Remedy, though it might promise ever so fair, was looked upon as
hazardous and presumptuous. The practice of Physic being thus curbed in, and
restrained, has advanced by very slow Paces; and all this for want of a sound
Philosophy, and a larger stock of Data. For certainly there can be no other
Pretense, why this best of Faculties should be thrown aside as useless, or
disadvantagious in Physic, rather than in Philosophy, or any of the Arts and
Sciences. But now as the case is otherwise, as our Data are more numerous, and
the way of reasoning from them is improved; as our present System of Philosophy
is solid and extensive, and the Subject of Physic, the animal Structure, is
vastly better defined and understood; 'twould be highly absurd to pretend, that
this grand Talent ought not to be applied to discover the cures of, at least,
the reputed incurable Diseases among us. For in these Cases, our present stock
of Experience is confessedly of no Service, and new random Trials might be
justly deemed rash and Presumptuous: An attempt therefore to form a method of
Cure, by arguing from the nature of the Disease, to the discovery of more
powerful Remedies, is here the only rational and promising means we have left.

It will surely be granted, that the present practice of Physic is
improveable, if it be considered, that the several Branches of which this Art
is composed, are daily improving; whilst new discoveries are made in Anatomy,
and Surgery grows more complete; whilst Chemistry and Pharmacy furnish us
with new Preparations, and Mechanics is more successfully applied to the
animal Structure; it cannot be doubted but some use may be made of these Things
to the advantage of Physic, and the cure of reputed incurable Diseases. There
is no room to question, that many powerful Remedies lie now absconded, or
enveloped in their first Principles, if it be considered, that the whole Set we
are at this time acquainted with, were once in the same state of Darkness and
Confusion. Let us but reflect, that Agues were reputed incurable till the
Cortex was found, and its Uses known, as well as the Lues Venerea till Mercury,
and the Woods were applied; and consider by what means not only these, but
numberless other useful Medicines were obtained; and then there will be very
great Encouragement to expect, that if diligent search were made, and the
proper Experiments instituted, many grand Remedies might be disclosed, and such
as would be of force sufficient to cure some Diseases which now lie under the
unjust Sentence of Incurable.

Nor is this the only reason we have to hope for such a Redress in the Art of
Healing, and a considerable Reduction of the present Incurables: great
Assistance may in this case be likewise obtained from a due management of the
Remedies we are already possessed of. For there are so many Requisites
necessary to advance these to their highest Power, that it may very well be
questioned, if the utmost force they are capable of affording, was ever exerted
on the cause of any Disease.

Chemistry has improved the Efficacy of many Medicaments, and shown them to
have such Virtues, as were utterly unknown before that Art became general: And
Fire is an Element from which other as great Matters may be justly expected.
Besides this, an inverted Order, a well proportioned Dose, a proper preparation
of the Body and Medicine, a right Choice, a select Combination, with many other
Things of the like kind, have an immense Power to increase the Virtues of
Remedies. Here then is an almost inexhaustible fountain of useful Varieties put
into our Hands, which we can manage as we please; and if they were properly
employed, it is not to be said what Effects they might produce in obstinate or
reputed incurable Cases. That this may the better be apprehended, let it be
considered by way of Illustration, that when the Cortex has proved ineffectual
for the cure of an Ague, being given before the Body was rightly disposed, it
will succeed when exhibited after due Preparation; that Opiates mixed with
Purgatives will take effect, which administered single might fail; that Solids
will purge when Fluids will not; that lenient Purgatives will open the Body
where strong Catharticks would loose their force; that some Medicines succeed
when given in small quantities, at long Intervals, which administered otherwise
would have a contrary effect; and in short, that all possible Combinations,
Doses, Preparations, etc. have never yet been tried, nor perhaps ever can be
exhausted.

From all which it appears, that the cures of some reputed incurable Diseases
may be justly expected, either from a discovery of new powerful Remedies, or a
more apposite use of the old ones. Our Method therefore ought to have regard to
both these Desiderata.

In order to acquire new Remedies, let us suppose the true and immediate Cause
of a stubborn disorder to be found, which in all bodily Diseases, is commonly
material; our Method of proceeding directs us to obtain this material Cause,
wherever it can be come at, and to make the proper Experiments upon that very
Matter out of the Body, which being included in it was the Parent of the
Disorder. An Example or two will make all plain. The cretacecus Matter, or
chalky Stones, which are often thrown out in a Fit of the Gout, appear to have
been the immediate cause of that Fit. A proper quantity of these therefore
being obtained, and the Nature of them discovered from the Symptoms of the
Distemper, etc. we are hence directed to try any Preparation that we know has a
power to act upon, and dissolve Matter of the like kind. But in case such a
Dissolvent be unknown to us, then are we to contrive some Compositions, after
the same manner as if we were prescribing to an inveterate case of a Patient
afflicted with the Distemper, and try their Virtues upon these Stones, till at
length we arrive at a Preparation that proves a real Dissolvent, at the same
time that it may be safely administered, some convenient way, in such a quantity
as to be able to effect the like dissolution of that cretaceous Matter, whilst
it is circulating in the Fluids of the Body. Such a Composition, it is
reasonable to expect, would prove a grand Remedy, and perhaps a Specific, that
is, such a Medicine as will effect a Cure without causing any sensible
Evacuation. Understand the like Experiments to be made upon the Stones, which
are apt to lodge in the Bladder or Kidneys, till a proper Dissolvent be found,
which, if it cannot safely effect the desired dissolution in the Body, may at
least be so managed, as to prevent the future Generation of a Stone. Again,
supposing the case of an Hydrophobia occasioned by the Bite of a mad Dog, where
we know the Fluids are contaminated by an actual Poison, which being contagious
by a Communication of any of those Fluids, a way may very easily be contrived
to obtain a quantity of the infected Saliva, or any other of the animal Juices,
in order to make the proper Experiments upon it, till an Antidote for the Venom
were by that means discovered. This Antidote might thus be known to be found.
Supposing two equal Portions of the contaminated Fluid to be procured, and the
presumed Antidote to be mixed in one of them, let both be communicated by
Injection, or otherwise to two sound Dogs; and if that wherein the presumed
Antidote was contained, proves harmless, and the other noxious, and the same
Consequence attends the same Experiment in two or three Repetitions; it would
be reasonably to expect that the Cure of this cruel Disease was discovered, and
the Medicine might therefore be tried occasionally upon Hydrophobous Patients,
or rather administered soon after the Bite was received.

How far this Method of proceeding may be put in Practice, I will not presume
to determine; but it is very probable that it may be advantageously pursued at
least in all those Distempers which yield a grosser kind of Matter for their
Cause, or else depend upon, a visible alteration in the Consistence, Texture,
etc. of the Fluids. This is certainly a most desirable and rational way of
procuring Specificks or grand Remedies, since the Lives of Mankind are not
hereby in the least endangered; and it otherwise remains, that we wait for
their Discovery till mere chance shall place them before us, open our Eyes, and
force us by repeated Importunities and Solicitations, at once to acknowledge
their Virtues, and our own Indolence. If the whole tribe of reputed incurable
Diseases, gave such fair Opportunities as these for the discovery of their
respective Specificks (and that most of them do not, I would have no one be too
positive) we might soon see their number shrink, upon allowing a proper
Patronage and Encouragement to this kind of Experiments.

And here I cannot but take notice, how apt we are to plume our selves upon
living in an Age when experimental Philosophy flourishes. Experiments, its
true, are daily made, but I would fain know to what grand Purposes they serve?
Several indeed there are, whose design is highly Commendable; but are there any
now on foot, or that can possibly be contrived, of greater Moment, than the
sort above mentioned; any more Beneficial to Mankind, or Ornamental to a
Nation; any so well deserving the Encouragement of the Wealthy, and the
Countenance of the Learned? But instead of such useful Essays as these, we
generally meet with Attempts so mean and low, so trivial and contemptible, in
comparison of them, that one would be tempted to think they came from the
ignorant Vulgar, and the Herd of Mankind, rather than from the polite and
philosophical Part of the Species. It Is a melancholy Reflection, that those
Persons from whose open Profession, surprising Discoveries might be justly
expected, should generally amuse us with the Minutiae of Things, put us off
with the Tith of Mint and Cummin, and leave us to seek the weightier Matters,
the advancement of Physic, and the Reduction of Incurables from another Quarter.

But what an Improvement of the Art of Healing may we not expect, what
Alleviation of the Miseries of the Incurable may we not hope for, when a
spacious Building is now purposely crecting for their Reception and Use? This
seems not only a particular Instance of compassionate Bounty, but a Desire
expressed for the improvement of Physic, and the universal Benefit of Mankind
in an illustrious President of a solid and diffusive Good. Physicians then, we
may reasonably presume, will not now be so far wanting to themselves, to their
Art, and to human Nature, as to neglect this or the like favorable
Opportunities, of raising the Reputation of their Profession, by discovering
the Cures for the unjustly supposed Incurable, and lessening the Torments of
the miserable Objects, to whom such Goodness is shown.

No longer let us, through Ease and Indolence, give occasion to Empiricks to
triumph over us, and boast themselves Masters of Specificks for the Diseases
which we inconsiderately pronounce Incurable: No longer let us suffer the
People to be deluded with the specious Arcana of ignorant Men; Arcana the dear
and desperate purchase of hazardous Experiments, and random trials on the human
Kind: No longer let us leave to Chance, and the slow workings of Nature, the
Discovery and Production of those useful Remedies which we are furnished with
Faculties to search for and obtain. Who does not rather repose his Confidence
in Reason, and the due exercise of his own Abilities, than trust to Accident
the management of any Affair? And shall we in the Art of Healing alone, put off
our inquiries till Chance shall deign to present us with the means of Recovery,
when Health is within our own reach? We seem to want no Preparative in this
case, but a Resolution to step beyond the slow-paced Practice in vogue, and to
be guided by our Reason in the choice of Experiments. We are every way fitted
to go immediately upon so useful an Undertaking: We have seen the Effects of a
tolerable number of Trials made upon human Blood, and other animal Fluids;
which when improved and enlarged, may serve to very useful Purposes: We are
furnished with a large stock of Data, and know how to increase it at
Discretion: The Causes of Diseases are generally known, and Materials for
Experiments are every where at hand; so that if the Work were heartily set
about, there is no fear of Success. A Set of Axioms also might be laid down to
encourage and direct the Undertaking, and serve as Rules in the Prosecution of
it. Such as the following for Example.

1. Mathematical Certainty ought not to be expected in Physic.

2. A Chronic Disease allows many Opportunities for the Discovery and Use of
Remedies.

3. The success or failure of a single Experiment, is not sufficient to
establish or abolish the use of a Remedy.

4. If any undesirable Method of Cure shall, upon repeated trials, either prove
entirely unsuccessful, or suffer more to die than recover, it ought not to be
acquiesc'd in, before, at least, other more desirable and promising Methods
shall have been tried.

5. It Is better to try any desirable and promising Method of Cure, than run the
hazard of languishing out a Life in Pain and Misery.

6. If any Disease can be transmuted into another, attended with less Danger,
and less Pain, every such Transmutation is a Degree of Cure.

7. A Remedy that acts immediately upon the Seat of a Disease, is more likely
to effect a Cure, than one that acts only Consequentially upon it.

8. No more causes of a Disease need be inquired after, than will fairly and
naturally account for its Phenomenon.

9. In every inveterate and dangerous Disease, the most powerful Remedies ought
to be immediately applied.

10. No Remedy can rationally be directed before it be known what Life is,
together with its Cause, State and Effects; and what a Disease is, together
with its Cause, State and Effects.

These may suffice for a Specimen of what Rules might be given to forward the
discovery of the Cures of reputed incurable Diseases.

But let this business proceed as it may, and that the Success will be
proportionable to the Application, cannot be denied; we certainly have it
already in our Power, by the Use of known Remedies to make several, whether
real or reputed Incurables, pass their Lives with more ease and satisfaction
than they would enjoy without, them: Nay, by well adapted Regimen and Remedies,
it is possible not only to palliate, but to change a stubborn Distemper, so that
it may justly pass for a degree of Cure, or really become a partial one. But
when a Case is peremptorily adjudg'd absolutely Incurable, the Patient is
usually dispirited, and with difficulty brought to follow those Rules which
would produce this Effect. For which reason the Sentence of Incurable, be the
Case what it will, should never be passed with Rigor.

There is another thing still behind, and I am glad to find it insisted upon
by, no less a Person than that Ornament to our Nation, the great Lord Bacon,
whom I have already had occasion to mention; not only because I know it is
necessary for the Author of any Doctrine which carries the Air of Novelty, to
produce his Voucher; but because the Thing it self seems somewhat contrary to
the general Practice of Physicians, and the Sense of some People. It Is
concerning the proper Means to render Death easy, or less irksom, when its
approach can no longer be put off or delayed by the Use of Remedies: Concerning
which, our great Author expresses himself in this manner. "I am clearly of
Opinion. That it is the Duty of a Physician to mitigate the Pain and Torture of
a Disease, as well as to restore Heath, and this not only when such a Mitigation
tends to a Recovery, as it is the removal of a dangerous Symptom, but also when
there being no farther Hopes of a Recovery, it can only serve to make the
Passage out of Life more calm and easy. For that Complacency in Death, which
Augustus. so much desired. ^s no small Happiness. -- But it is a point of
Conscience with the Physicians or our Days, to sit by the Sick after they have
given them over; when in my Opinion, if they would do an Office of Humanity in
their own Profession, they ought to be gaining Skill in their Art, whilst they
endeavored to make the dying Person depart with more Ease and Tranquillity".
"Etiam plane censeo ad officum Medici pertinere, non tantum ut sanitatem
restituat, verum etiam ut dolores and cruciatus Morborum mitiget: Neque id
ipsum solummodo, cum illa mitigatio Doloris, veluti Symptomatis periculosi, ad
convalescentiam faciat and conducat, imo vero cum abjecta prorsus omni
sanitatis spe, Excessum tantum praebeat e vita magis lenem and placidum.
Siquidem non parva est felicitatis pars, (quam sibi tantopere precari solebat
Augustus Caesar) illa Euthanasia. -- At nostris temporibus Medicis quasi
Religio est, aegrotis postquam deplorati sint assidere, ubi si officio suo,
atque adeo humanitati ipsi de^sse nolint, and artem ediscere, and diligentiam
praestare deberent, qua animam agentes, facilius and mitius e vita demigrent.
Hanc autem partem, inquisitionem de Euthanasia exteriori -- inter Desiderata
reponimus." de Aug. Scient. L. IV. C. 2. p. 311. And accordingly his Lordship
sets down as a Desideratum, A Method to cause a Composure in dying, and does
not appear to disapprove even of that course which Epicurus took to obtain this
end, which was by intoxicating himself.

-- Hinc Stygias ebrius hausit Aquas. But though the Physicians of our Time are
acquainted with better ways than this, to cause such a Composure, yet I don't
know how it happens that few are careful to put them in Practice; unless it be
for fear of bringing Death the sooner upon the Patient, instead of rendering the
passage out of Life more easy. For I believe there are not many who apprehend
such a Procedure to be unnatural, and who would choose to feel that Pain and
Torture which some weak Minds may fancy Nature intended they should; and so be
willing to dye by the regular workings of Providence, rather than be thrown out
of the ordinary way by human Art. It Is therefore methinks a proper enquiry, by
what means this composure in Death may be obtained, and whether it could not be
effected by a Remedy which should rather promote than prevent a Recovery. And
since there may be frequent occasions for such an Assistant; since it would be
inhuman to deny it, when requested; and since the Art in it self is doubtless
very desirable, and highly beneficial, it is pity that any opportunity of
improving it should be neglected.

An Attempt to settle a just Notion of Incurable in Physic.
NO proper meaning being generally conveyed by the word Incurable, it is
necessary to appropriate one to so important a Term.

That the bad tendency of a Distemper, from its first Existence to its latest
continuance in the Body, cannot in the least be prevented; or that, after a
stated Period, the cure of a case can by human Means, be advanced no farther,
is what this Term in propriety of Speech should constantly signify.

But, a loose and abusive Sense of the Word has so universally obtained, and is
so apt on several occasions to be run into, that 'twill be difficult to make it
always carry this more restrained and correct Signification. Nor is it an easy
matter in some Cases, to obtain such a distinct and positive Idea as ought to
be raised by this Sound, when we talk of Diseases in a Philosophical manner;
which perhaps is one reason why so many Distempers commonly pass under this
Denomination; and that when a certain form of Remedies has for a determined
space of Time, been used without the desired Effect, the case is merely upon
this account pronounced Incurable. But it is apparent that there may happen a
wide difference between a real and such a reputed incurable Distemper; since to
constitute the former, it is necessary that it will utterly elude the force of
what the most perfect Physicians can rationally prescribe for its Cure; when to
make the latter, it is enough that it has eluded the Prescriptions of one or two
Practitioners. To confirm a Disease really Incurable, the utmost powers of
Remedies must prove ineffectual: To cause it to pass for Incurable, that it has
baffled the fashionable Practice will suffice. Some Reason drawn from the
Nature of the Thing, is requisite to show a Case to be absolutely Incurable; to
denominate a Patient so, a groundless Conjecture will serve.

It Is likewise evident, that reputed Incurable may chance, at the same time, to
prove real incurable Diseases; so that to introduce a more accurate
Distinction, and to show the true difference betwixt them, is of great
Importance.

It Is not necessary however, in an Essay which rather proposes what ought to be
done, before we make so free with a Term, upon whose use the Lives and Health
of Mankind depend, than undertakes to do it; it is not necessary, I say, in such
an Essay as this, to descend so far as to inquire what Life and Health are,
what their Causes and Effects, wherein they consist, by what various Means, and
how far they may be impaired or diminished before Death necessarily ensues; all
which it would be absolutely requisite to know in the respective Distempers, if
we were willing to see whether any, and which of the Catalogue of Diseases are
in their own Nature absolutely, and in every Stage properly Incurable; or if we
would fix the Point in other Cases, to which when Diseases arrive, they will
never admit of farther Alleviation. These Things are here supposed to be in
great measure known already, although they highly deserve the most exact and
careful Inquiry.

But not to let this weighty Matter pass entirely unregarded, it should be
observed, that if a Distemper be absolutely Incurable, the reason why it is so,
must arise either from the Nature of the Disorder, or the natural Imperfection
of Medicine; and consequently where the Properties and immediate Cause of a
Disease are well known, and yet from them no Reason can be deduced to manifest
the case Incurable; that it passes for such, ought to be attributed to the
natural Imperfection of the Art of Healing. But the Art of Healing cannot be
said to be naturally Imperfect, till its utmost extent be known, that is, till
the animal Economy, and the immediate Causes of its Disorders are thoroughly
understood, and the utmost Powers of the known Remedies have been fully
obtained; if not also, till all the discoverable ones have after the best
Manner been experienced. Now if all these Advantages have not been acquired in
our Days, as no considerate Person will say they have, it follows, that no
Distemper can properly by us be called Incurable, but where some evident Cause
of its being so, appears from the Nature of the Thing it self. For unless this
Cause be manifest, to pretend a Disease is not to be alleviated in any of its
Stages, or that a Cure can be carried no farther, when we don't know why, is a
bold Guess; and to pronounce the Case Incurable, even after we have done our
utmost, will mean no more than that the Remedies hitherto used in it, have
failed of the defir'd Effect. But would not such a Censure be equally
Ridiculous, as to say, ten or an hundred unsuccessful Experiments have been
made to transmute Metals, and therefore their Transmutation is undiscoverable?
Here then is a Foundation for a just Distinction between real and reputed
incurable Diseases.

Thus we see in Surgery, those Wounds are properly adjudg'd Mortal or
Incurable, which happen in such Parts of the Body whose Union was of absolute
necessity to the continuance of Life; as for Example, a transverse Section of
the Larynx, which entirely stops Respiration; a disunion of the Cerebellum,
which prevents the Influx of the Fluid there secreted into the Heart; etc.
These and the like Cases are justly deemed Incurable, from the very Instant
when the Wounds were first inflicted; because here the vital Functions are
evidently destroyed, without any opportunity being allowed for the Use of
Remedies. This is the most determined and genuine Sense of the Word, and
therefore the Use of it in other Cases ought to be judged of, by its Approach
to, or Recess from this original Meaning. And accordingly where the Fatality of
Wounds is less sudden, and less certain, as in Obstructions of the animal
Faculties, suppose by a transverse Section of the Oesophagus, the Term
Incurable cannot with equal Certainty be applied at the Instant the Wound was
received, because there may be other Ways contrived of conveying Nutriment to
the Body, besides by the Mouth; and in the mean Time, Opportunities may be
afforded, of applying the proper Remedies. But if the Body could be supplied
with Nutriment only by the Mouth, and there were no Opportunities allowed for
the Use of Means for Recovery, then such a Case might, with equal Certainty, be
pronounced Incurable, or mortal, as one of the former Kind; though the
Prediction would not be so soon fulfilled. In all such Cases as these, it is
evident when and why the Term incurable is applicable, which is always governed
by the Nature of the Thing, and the Opportunities there are for the Use of
Remedies, or else by the natural Imperfection of the Art of Surgery: Whereas
on the contrary, in several Diseases, both Acute and Chronic, this Term is
applied, where no such Reasons appear. Thus when certain equivocal Symptoms
come on in acute Distempers, without having any Regard to the immediate or
material Cause of the Disorders of the animal Economy; they consist in without
so much as any positive Idea in our Minds, obtained from reflecting on the
Nature of the Distemper; and without considering the State of the Art of
Healing, we at present make no Scruple to adjudge them mortal, or Incurable,
though neither the vital, natural, or animal Faculties are wanting. Thus for
Instance, we proceed in the Plague, malignant Fever, Goal-Distemper, and the
confluent Species of the Smallpox, etc. when perhaps if the Matter were
carefully examined into, such Diseases ought never to be called Incurable, till
they arrive at the very Point of Death. But if there be any Reason to suspend
this final Judgment in acute Cases, is there not vastly more to be cautious,
how we pass such a Censure in chronic Diseases, where no Opportunities are
wanting to make the necessary Inquiries to find out the Cause, and to apply the
proper Remedies? And what reason can possibly be assigned, that the respective
Specificks for the Gout and Stone, shall never be discovered; or that no means
can be contrived to alleviate the Pain of those Diseases, farther than is
effected by the present Practice? Who can pretend, that an Antidote for the
Bite of a mad Dog is undiscoverable, when he considers we are Masters of the
Specific for that of the Viper? But to call these, and several other Diseases
Incurable, is the Way to make them so, as being apt to put a Stop to farther
Inquiries into the Nature of them, and retard the Discovery of any Thing that
has a Relation to their Cure. At least then, let no one pretend to call any
Case Incurable, till he is well acquainted with the Subject of Diseases; till
he knows their true and immediate Cause, and the utmost Virtues of the several
Remedies we are at present possessed of.

An animated human Body, we are certain, is a pure mechanical Structure, wholly
composed of Solids and Fluids; and consequently the immediate Cause of every
bodily Disease, can be only Matter and Motion.

The utmost Virtues of Remedies cannot be known, till the Remedies have been
most artificially prepared and combined, most seasonably and properly applied,
exhibited in the most just Quantity, at the most proper Intervals, and lastly,
continued in exact Proportion to the Demand of the Distemper. All which
Requisites, there is little Reason to believe, have been hitherto strictly
observed in their Exhibition. And besides the Improvement which may be made in
the present Set of Remedies, it is not to be doubted, as was before observed,
that many others, of equal Virtue, may be discovered by proper Application;
upon all which Accounts, it were greatly to be wished, that Physicians would
never apply the Term Incurable to any Cases, but such alone where that Matter
and Motion are wanting, which Life, even in its lowest and weakest State
requires, or when all means, by which they used to be supplied, are entirely
cut off. For if a Distemper be curable only in Part, it is improperly called
incurable, till that partial Cure, can by human Means, be carried no farther.

We daily observe so many unexpected and surprising Turns in the Disorders of a
human Body; Nature here acts by so many secret Springs, and makes so many
unforeseen Sallies and Excursions, as if she took Delight to mock our Toil,
baffle our best concerted Measures, and reverse our best formed Judgments, that
it is presumptuous, where the Case is not manifest, to pretend to fix and
determine the Point she shall just come up to, and not exceed; to say, hitherto
shall thou come, and no farther; here the Disease is Incurable, and here the
Art of Healing fails. No one less than an absolute Master of this Art, will
surely ever go so far. If indeed we could always obtain from an exact
observation of the Properties of Diseases, their true and immediate Causes, and
had a previous Knowledge of the utmost Effects, the best adapted Regimen and
Remedies would have upon them, then we might presume to determine what Cases
either were, or were not incurable, by the present known Remedies; and no one,
without this Qualification, can pass a valid Judgment. Let us then endeavor to
increase our Knowledge of Distempers and Remedies, by all possible Means, and
not venture to pronounce the Sentence of incurable upon Diseases, at least till
we have acquired such a Definition of them, as will bring us acquainted with
their real Causes; and till we are Masters of the best Way of managing and
improving the Remedies we enjoy.

To discover whether a reputed incurable be also a real incurable Distemper, I
apprehend the best Course to be taken, is first to set down the several
Properties of every Case distinctly; next, to draw as many Consequences from
these Properties, as may give Light into the Nature of the Case, and assist in
discovering its immediate Cause: And when this is obtained, we are naturally
directed to search for the Remedy; so that at length, by this Method of
Proceeding, we shall see how far our present Stock of Remedies will reach,
after they have been duly improved; and what we are farther directed to seek
for, to advance the Art of Healing to a greater Perfection. To usher in this
Method, I will here set down a few short Examples, by way of Specimen, of what
may be expected from it, upon a proper application. The Cases I shall choose to
instance in, are reputed Incurable, either from their first appearance, to
their ultimate Stage, or after a set Time; the Sequel will show whether they
really deserve the Appellation of incurable, or ought to be rescued, and set
free from the tyrannical Imposition of a misemploy'd Term.

A Specimen of a rational Method, to discover the Cures of reputed Incurable
Diseases.
Of MADNESS.
1. THERE are two Species of this Distemper, viz. Melancholia and Mania.

2. The Properties of the Melancholia are; to proceed from some Disorder in the
Mind.

3. To be preceded by Anxiety, Want of Sleep, intense Thought, frequent Anger,
or any violent Passion; profuse Venery, Pain in the Head, Suppression of the
natural Evacuations, burning and lasting Fevers, violent Exercise long
continued, hot and dry Weather.

4. To manifest it self by Fear and Sadness, and the Color of the Skin, which
grows pale, yellow, brown, livid; by Spots of the same Color, a slow Pulse,
hard Respiration, Secretion and Excretion lessened, Loss of Appetite, Loss of
Flesh, Love of Solitude, lasting Passions, Fixedness on some Thought, a
Pressure, Coarctation or Repletion about the Viscera or Hypochondria.

5. When it is of long continuance, it causes the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Mania,
Convulsions, etc.

6. It Is sometimes naturally cured by a cuticular Eruption, large Vatices,
great Swelling and consequent Flux of the Haemorrhoids, and an Excretion black
Bile by the Mouth or Anus.

7. The Properties of the Mania are generally the same, but differ in a few
Particulars; for Instance,

8. Boldness and Anger here attend instead of Fear and Sadness in the former.

9. Immense muscular Strength.

10. Very great Watchfulness.

11. A surprising Endurance of Cold and Hunger.

12. Most dreadful and outrageous Ideas.

13. All Secretions in a manner stopped.

14. Anatomy shows in both Species, that the Brain and its Meninges are dry,
hard and crisp; its Cortex yellow, and that its Vessels abound in Varices, and
are distended with a black viscid Gore.

15. The Mania, after an obstinate resistance of the common Practice, has been
cured by spontaneous Varices or Haemorrhoids, by a Dropsy, Dysentery, a tertian
or quartan Ague, and large Haemorrhages.

16. Does it not follow, that the immediate Cause of both Species is an
Evaporation of the more subtle Parts of the Fluids? 1. 2. 3. 7. 10. 13. 14.

17. That the Mania differs from the Hypochondria only in degree, 4. 5. 6. 14.
15. Since they both have the same Causes, and exhibit the same Appearance upon
Dissection?

18. That this Disease unjustly passes for incurable 6. 15. even although a Year
or two may have been unsuccessfully spent in attempting its Cure?

19. And lastly, that the Specific wanting in both Species, is such a Remedy,
as will prevent this Evaporation 16. which remains to be discovered by proper
Experiments.

20. In the mean time, perhaps no known Remedy will more forcibly contract the
Pores, and prevent this Evaporation, than the Cold Bath, when used so as to
exert its proper force.

21. Now the Cold Bath can only act upon the Body by its Gravity or Pressure,
the Insinuation of the Parts whereof it is composed, and its Coldness; but its
Gravity or Pressure will be proportionably increased by a deeper Immersion, and
this will consequently render the Insinuation of the Water proportionably
greater. Its Coldness also may be immensely increased by the addition of Sal
Ammoniac, etc. Here therefore is a Remedy of an unlimited Force, which seems to
be exceedingly well adapted to the Cure of this Disease: And accordingly, it is
found in Fact to answer, the best of any known Remedy in this Distemper, though
made use of under very great Disadvantages.

Of the Rabies Canina, or Hydrophobia, consequent upon the Bite of a mad-Dog.
THE Properties of this Disease are as follow.

1. It Is spontaneous in many Animals, especially in Dogs, Foxes, and Wolves,
which communicate it not only to one another, but to Men, by Contagion.

2. The slightest Bite of an Animal thus infected is often fatal, as it is also
to touch their Saliva with the Tongue, or to handle such Instruments much, as
have been used about them.

3. The Contagion in a human Body, manifests itself at various Intervals in
various Subjects; in some it will lurk for several Years.

4. The Place where the Bite happened first becomes painful, the Pain spreads
to the adjacent Parts, a Weariness and Heaviness is felt in the Flesh, the
Sleep is broken, discomposed, frightful, and attended with Convulsions. The
Patient is uneasy when awake, he sighs, is sad, and seeks Solitude. These
Symptoms gradually increase, and a Difficulty of Respiration comes on, which is
now frequently interrupted with Sighs; an unusual Dread and Terror upon
beholding any Liquid, loss of Appetite; to taste any Liquor causes very great
Anxiety, Tremors and Convulsions; vomiting of a viscid bilious or green Matter,
Heat, Fever, Watching, Priapismus, strange disorderly Ideas. The Tongue is dry,
and extended out of the Mouth, there is a Hoarseness and very great Drought;
the Patient at length now becomes outrageous upon attempting to drink; he
endeavors to bite whoever he meets with; he foams at the Mouth, and gnashes
with his Teeth; a cold Sweat comes on; he grows most outragiously mad, and,
with the utmost Difficulty of Respiration, dies convulsive.

5. From Dissection it appears, That the Organs of Deglutition are inflamed,
that a viscid bilious matter is lodged in the Stomach, that the Gall-Bladeer is
full of black Bile, that the Pericardium is dry, that the Lungs are greatly
overcharged with Blood, that the Arteries are full of a very liquid Blood, but
the Veins empty. It Is remarkable, that this Blood will scarce coagulate, when
extravasated and exposed to the Air. All the Muscles, Viscera, Brain, and
Spinal Marrow appear too dry.

6. Is not therefore the immediate Cause of this Disease a subtle Poison in
the Fluids, whose Specific Antidote is unknown to us?

7. And till this Antidote can be found, is it not clear, that all manner of
Evacuations, especially Phlebotomy or rather Arteriotomy, are to be used in
every Stage of the Disease; and all other Measures to be pursued, which tend to
introduce new Fluids, in the Room of the contaminated Set; or at least to
discharge so much of the Virus, as to lessen its pernicious Consequences?

8. The Effects of this Virus in the Body, being so very dreadful and fatal,
may justify the Use even of severe and hazardous Means to prevent 'em, so that
at least Phlebotomy ad Animi Deliquium usque may be occasionally repeated; not
only upon that Account, but also by reason of the very great Inflammation that
attends it. And because Fear is known to have been serviceable in this Case;
may it not be very proper to contrive some extraordinary Ways to raise this
Passion to a very great Degree, if not before Immersion in the cold Bath, at
least by means thereof, being used in almost its utmost force?

Of the Palsy.
1. THERE are three Species of this Disease. 1. Where Motion alone is wanting.
2. Where Sensation alone is wanting. 3. Where both Motion and Sensation are
wanting.

2. It Is often preceded by the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, or Convulsions, a Retention
of the natural Evacuations, a Translation of the Matter of an acute or chronic
Disease; Wounds, Contusions, Luxations, Compressions, Erosions, etc. intense
Cold or Heat, too free an Use of hot Water, Exhalations of poisonous Minerals
admitted into the Body.

3. The paralytic Parts grow cold, soft, flaccid and waste gradually.

4. It Is often critically cured, or by the Force of Nature, either by a
spontaneous and lasting Diarrhaea, a Fever, an insensible Dissipation of the
morbific Cause, or lastly, by a convulsive Motion of the Part.

5. From hence it follows, that the immediate Cause of the Palsy is a Want of
the Influx of the Blood, or nervous Fluid, or both, into the Part, 1, 2, 3.

6. That the Parts lose their natural Elasticity. 2, 3.

7. That when both the nervous and arterial Fluid is wanting to the Part, and
the Canals are deprived of their natural Elasticity, the Case is most
inveterate.

8. That its Cause may be either external or internal. 2.

9. That the Want of the nervous and arterial Fluid, is either owing to a Fault
in their respective Canals, or to the Fluids themselves. 2.

10. That it may be cured either by a Specific or an Evacuant, 4. and
consequently is not justly reputed incurable.

11. That the Cure depends upon removing the Obstruction to the Influx of the
Fluids, and deriving them in their natural State, into their respective Canals.

12. That the Cure must be adapted to the Cause.

13. Supposing then, both Canals and Fluids to be affected; the Canals to have
become cold and flaccid, and the Fluids gross and tenacious; it is plain, that a
powerful Dissolvent, which at the same time that it liquifies and purifies the
Blood, promotes a free Circulation in the disordered Parts, and restores the
Elasticity to the Canals, will prove a Specific in this Case: And why the
Cortex Peruvianus, when raised to its utmost or proportionable Power, may not
prove this Specific, perhaps nothing but the proper Experiments will show.

14. The very great Effects of a due Use of the Cortex, not only in
intermitting Fevers, but in many other Disorders, both of the Solids and
Fluids, are too well known to stand in need of a particular Enumeration; and
this Medicament is now so universally allowed to be safe as well as
efficacious, when properly applied, that I know of no Objection that can lie
against the Use of it in the Palsy. Those who think it not of Force sufficient
in such an obstinate Distemper as this, when, after some Months have to no
Purpose been spent upon it, it is reputed Incurable, will please to consider its
surprising Effects on the Solids and Fluids in a rebellious Quartan Ague, in
what very large Doses it is capable of being exhibited, and how much a prudent
Mixture of Sal Absinth: etc. will add to its Virtue; especially if so grand a
Remedy as the cold Bath, when duly improved, may be called in to its
Assistance, as in the Distemper we are speaking of, it frequently may.

Of the Lues Venerea.
1. WHEN this Disease is hereditary, or become universal, it appears under
various Forms, but may be distinguished by these Properties.

It generally begins with an Itching, Heat, and Inflammation in some Part of
the Body. Whitish Pustules appear, which drying, scale off, and leave a Cavity;
or else break, grow deep, afford a yellow Mucus, or corrosive Sanies, and form
Ulcers incurable by common Medicines. These afterward increase in Number both
externally and internally. The inguinal Glands swell, collect Matter, break of
themselves, and discharge. Shankers, Verrucae, Porri, Mariscae, Condylomata,
Caruncles, Strangury, Erosion of the Urethra, and Parts adjacent. Stiffness in
the Joints, and Pain of the Limbs. Erosion of the Cartilages. The Bones grow
carious, and rise in stubborn Apostems, corrupting the adjacent Parts. The
Viscera mortify, and the Flesh corrupts.

2. This Distemper is found to be communicated by Lactation, Sweat, Saliva, and
Exhalation.

3. From hence, it is Cause is a corrosive Taint admitted into the Body, which
gradually assimilates the Fluids to it self, corrupts the Solids, and becomes
contagious by a Communication of the Fluids.

4. The Specific wanting here is therefore such an one as will destroy the
force of this Corrosive, or put a stop to the Contagion in the animal Fluids;
which there is an opportunity of discovering by the proper Experiments.

5. In the mean time, if we expect this specific Virtue from any known
Medicament, it is necessary it should be used as a Specific, that is, by
suffering it to be detained in the Body as long as possible, to let it have
it is utmost Effects upon the Solids and Fluids: And who can say that Mercury,
thus properly managed, will not have such a specific Virtue?

This is a matter of no small moment, and certainly deserves to be well
examined; for if this reasoning will hold good, it follows, that much Pain and
Fatigue, very great Danger and Loathsomness, the necessary attendants of a
Salivation, are often undergone to no purpose, or else to a bad one; whilst
such a hazardous Method frequently failing to Cure the Disease, occasions it
afterward to pass for Incurable. In which Case, this specific Use of Mercury,
may bid very fair for a Cure.

There is but one Objection, that I know of, can be made against this way of
turning Mercury into a Specific, for the Cure of the Lues Venerea, viz. That
the Venereal Taint or Virus, being plentifully evacuated by Salivation, as
appears from the quantity and stench of the Saliva, a contrary way of
proceeding will have a contrary Effect, and consequently detain and lock up the
Virus in the Body.

That some Portion of the Venereal Taint is evacuated with the Saliva in a
Salivation, cannot be denied, any more than that some is likewise evacuated
with the Urine, and other Excretions, since in both Cases the Virus will
evidently manifest it self by propagating the Contagion. 2. But that it is more
plentifully evacuated by the Salivary Glands in the former Case, than it would
be by the Renal in the latter, were proper Diuretics exhibited, may be justly
questioned, if the stench of the Saliva be no proof of it. But it is well known
that the Saliva evacuated in the Salivation of a Person who is entirely free
from any Venereal Taint, is equally fetid with that of a Venereal Patient.

Again, successive Salivations have been oftentimes regularly raised, and
prudently carried on, so as to cause a very plentiful Excretion of fetid
Saliva; but notwithstanding this, the Lues has been left uncured: from whence
it should appear that the Cure does not depend upon an evacuation of ferid
Saliva. Nor will this perhaps admit of a doubt, if it be remembered that many,
on the contrary, have been cured of the Lues, by Mercury, who could never be
brought to Salivate at all; and that others, whom upon account of some Disease
of the Breast, or the like, it has not been thought prudent to venture under so
dangerous a Flux by the Mouth, have happily recovered by this specific Use of
the same.

And agreeable to this Doctrine is that Practice of the best Physicians, who
even after the most profuse Flux by the Mouth, either exhibit proper Doses of
Mercury, during the space of several weeks after the Salivation is dropped,
without any Design to bring it on again; or else put the Patient into a Course
of specific Diet-Drink; as well knowing that unless somewhat of this kind be
done, the Patient is not secure, but runs the hazard of a relapse.

It Is evident that Mercury exhibited so as to Purge or Salivate, cannot exert
its full Force upon the Body; because by those very Excretions it is soon
thrown out, as appears, in that it may be revived from the Excrements and
reinstated in Possession of its former Properties: If therefore we would obtain
the utmost Effects of this grand Medicament, ought it not by a prudent
management to be detained, in a large quantity, as long as possible in the
Body? This Method alone, methinks, can determine whether Mercury will prove a
true Specific for the Lues Venerea.

Moreover, such an Use of Mercury is not only directed by the nature of the
Disease, but by the similar Effects of other Remedies. The Lues Venerea is a
very stubborn and obstinate Distemper, and where it once seises, is with great
difficulty removed; it seems strongly to adhere to the body, or rather it
entangles it self so as to become one with it, as appears particularly by its
lasting Effects after a partial Cure; (for Mercury as it is generally exhibited,
only palliates, but seldom eradicates this Disease, as is well known to the
more curious observers:) ought not then the Remedy also to be entangled and
united with the Body, in order to exert its full Force, and be upon equal Terms
with its Adversary? Thus we see every Day when the Cortex, exhibited in an
Intermittent, is evacuated by Stool, it is of no Effect toward curing the
Disease, though administered in a very large Quantity; but stop this Evacuation,
let the Medicine remain in the Body, circulate with the Fluids, and exert it is
full Force, it becomes a very different and vastly more powerful Remedy than
before, and justly deserves to be called a Specific.

Of the Gout.
1. THE chief Properties of the Gout are, to return generally in the Spring and
Autumn. 2. Seldom to affect any but Men of a gross and corpulent Habit. 3. To
succeed high Living, hard Study, violent Exercise, the free Use of Acids, and
taking Cold on the Feet.

2. A Fit is usually preceeded by Crudity, or rawness felt in the Stomach,
heaviness, Costiveness, a stoppage of Sweat in the Feet, and by Varices.

3. When regular, it seizes the internal Parts of the Foot, its Periosteum,
Nerves, Membranes, Ligaments, and Tendons about the Joints: And when irregular,
that is, when it moves about or disperses it self, it always falls on the like
membranous and nervous Parts.

4. A Fit comes on with a tensive, burning, gnawing Pain, which increases
gradually to it is height, then decreases, as the Part grows moist, red, and
tumid.

5. The Pain goes off in a Diaphoresis, leaving an Itching behind it.

6. It scales the Part, or bursting the Vessels, throws off a solid cretaceous
Matter.

7. It Is more violent, as the Swelling is less, and vice versa.

8. The more severe the Fit, the greater the Interval of its return, and vice
versa.

9. Does it not follow that the immediate Cause of the Gout, both in its knotty
and smooth Species, is a cretaceous Matter lodged in some nervous and
membranous Part? For a Fit never ceases 'till this Matter is thrown off in the
former Species, and to suppose a like Expulsion in the latter, though made in a
less sensible manner, fairly and naturally accounts for the other Phenomenon,
which are the same in both. It should follow therefore, that these two Cases
differ only as the Cause happens to be more or less perspirable, 3.4.5.6.

10. Does not the Cause of this Disease lurk in the Body in the Absence of a
Fit? 1.7.8. If the Gout be ever properly hereditary, this is still more evident.

11. It appears that this Cause is deposited upon various Parts by the Fluids;
2. For the Solids never exchange Places; and consequently the Fluids alone, in
the Absence of a Fit, are the Seat or Vehicle of this Cause.

12. This Cause upon many Occasions 1. is apt to stagnate, or be deposited in
the smallest Canals, and such as are most remote from the Brain and Heart,
where the Circulation is languid, and the Parts are naturally pressed,
contracted and less yielding, 3.

13. This Matter is corrosive 4.6.

14. As the Vessels are more stiff and rigid, 12. and the Matter more corrosive
and tenacious, 11.13. the Disease will be more severe.

15. Both the Solids and Fluids being concerned in the Fit, the Cure ought at
that Time to regard them both: But in the Absence of a Fit, the Cure need only
regard the Alteration of the Fluids 11.

16. The Cure then in the Absence of a Fit, is to be effected, either by a
proper Dissolvent of a cretaceous Matter in the Fluids, or by proper Evacuation.

17. Till the Specific can be found for this Case, perhaps Evacuations might be
contrived, to carry off the Semina of the Disease, during that large Interval
(1.) which is usually interposed between two Fits; and by that Means a new Set
of Fluids be procured, and a proper Regimen and Remedies used to prevent the
future Generation of this Cause. For if the Cause of the Disease, in the
Absence of the Fit, exits in the Fluids, 11. and be equally dispersed in them,
as there appears Reason, from the supposed present State of Health, to believe;
it is certain, that an Evacuation of Blood, at a large Orifice, would lessen the
Quantity of this Cause in the Body: and could not Phlebotomy be so managed, as
to detract as much of it as would otherwise be thrown out by the ensuing Fit;
and if so, would not this prevent a Fit as effectually as the having undergone
one? In the absence of the Fit, the Body is sound, and the Effects of moderate
Phlebotomy on a sound Body, we know are to lessen the Quantity of the Blood,
and rarify the remaining Part; to take off from the Resistance of the Fluids,
allow a more free Contraction of the Canals, and a Recovery of their
Elasticity; to dissolve Coagulations, to open Obstructions, and promote a free
Circulation; and lastly, to forward both Secretions and Excretions, and to
allow of a Renovation of the Fluids or Mass of Blood. Now there are none of
these Effects, taken separately or conjointly, but seem of themselves to have a
direct Tendency to forward the Cure, provided the first Digestion can be well
secured, and Crudities in the others prevented; which greatly depending upon a
prudent Choice of the Subject, and a proper Management during the Use of the
Remedy, no greater Objections will perhaps lie against this Method, where a
Person is willing to pursue it, than are to be produced against other approved
and established Forms of Procedure in other Diseases.

Phlebotomy, after the manner proposed, has never that I know of, been tried by
Way of Prevention or Cure of the Gout, though in the Rheumatism, an
acknowledged similar Case, it frequently has with very good Success; and is one
of the best known Methods of Cure, for that Distemper. And the same Operation,
when performed in the common Manner, or used as an Assistant in the Cure of the
Gout, has sometimes been found of Service. But as this Case has seldom been
prescribed to by Physicians of Judgment, it being always looked upon as
Incurable, or such a Disease as was rendered worse by the Use of Physic, it has
fallen almost entirely to the Management of Empiricks, from whose Practice I
will not, in a Case of so great Nicety, venture to draw a Conclusion.

As these few Examples are proposed by Way of Specimen, it must be observed,
that it did not suit with the Nature of the Design, to enumerate all the
Properties and Phonomena of every Disease, under its respective Title, though
there may perhaps be commonly enough from whence to deduce their immediate Cause,
and a suitable Method of Cure. Nor are all the possible Advantages taken of
what Properties are set down, upon account of the designed Brevity of this
Discourse. It ought not therefore to be attributed to neglect, that under
Madness, no Notice was taken, of what Service a prudent Exhibition of the
Cortex, Sal, Absinth. etc. might be, during the Use of the particular Remedy,
there recommended; nor any Mention made of the proper Ways of endeavoring to
reduce the Mind to its natural State: Nor again how advantageous, deep
Incisions, frequent Scarifications, strong Attractives, actual Cauteries,
powerful Digestives, sharp Corrosives, proper Lotions, etc. in the Bite of a
mad-Dog: How useful strong stimulating Remedies in the Palsy; or what better
Methods than the common, there are of treating the inveterate or confirmed Lues
Venerea: Nor lastly, of what Service a Course of Relaxatives, Perspiratives,
Sudorificks, Corroboratives, Stomachicks, or a Salivation in the Gout; or the
most proper Method of treating that Disease during the Fit, though the
Properties mentioned will lead to it.

Much less could it be expected, that the Diet, Regimen, and Medicines
requisite, or useful in each Process, should be there insisted on, which would
be to have swelled a Volume upon each Distemper.

Thus then have I done what I at first props'd; which was only to offer at some
probable Means to improve the Physical Practice with Regard to inveterate
Cases, or such as are undeservedly styled Incurable; in hopes, at the same
Time, to wipe off some Part of that Reproach, which has fallen on the Art of
Healing, through a Remissness to cultivate so necessary and beneficial a Part
of it. I am sensible how little I have contributed to so great a Work, yet if
this imperfect Sketch may happen to give Occasion to a due Prosecution of the
Design, I shall not repent that I ventured to communicate so slender a
Performance to the Public.

FINIS.

