bust of Homer OPOS



THE ILIAD OF HOMER.

Translated by Mr. POPE.

Te sequor, O Graiae gentis Decus! inque tuis nunc
Fixa pedum pono pressis vestigia signis:
Non ita certandi cupidus, quam propter Amorem,
Quod Te imitari aveo --
LUCRET. LONDON: Printed by W. BOWYER, for BERNARD LINTOTT between the
Temple-Gates, 1715.

PREFACE.
HOMER is universally allowed to have had the greatest Invention of any Writer
whatever. The Praise of Judgment Virgil has justly contested with him, and
others may have their Pretensions as to particular Excellencies; but his
Invention remains yet unrivaled. Nor is it a Wonder if he has ever been
acknowledged the greatest of Poets, who most excelled in That which is the very
Foundation of Poetry. It is the Invention that in different degrees
distinguishes all great Genius's: The utmost Stretch of human Study, Learning,
and Industry, which masters every thing besides, can never attain to this. It
furnishes Art with all her Materials, and without it Judgment itself can at
best but steal wisely: For Art is only like a prudent Steward that lives on
managing the Riches of Nature. Whatever Praises may be given to Works of
Judgment, there is not even a single Beauty in them but is owing to the
Invention: As in the most regular Gardens, however Art may carry the greatest
Appearance, there is not a Plant or Flower but is the Gift of Nature. The first
can only reduce the Beauties of the latter into a more obvious Figure, which
the common Eye may better take in, and is therefore more entertained with. And
perhaps the reason why most Critics are inclined to prefer a judicious and
methodical Genius to a great and fruitful one, is, because they find it easier
for themselves to pursue their Observations through an uniform and bounded Walk
of Art, than to comprehend the vast and various Extent of Nature.

Our Author's Work is a wild Paradise, where if we cannot see all the Beauties
so distinctly as in an ordered Garden, it is only because the Number of them is
infinitely greater. It Is like a copious Nursery which contains the Seeds and
first Productions of every kind, out of which those who followed him have but
selected some particular Plants, each according to his Fancy, to cultivate and
beautify. If some things are too luxuriant, it is owing to the Richness of the
Soil; and if others are not arrived to Perfection or Maturity, it is only
because they are overrun and oppressed by those of a stronger Nature.

It is to the Strength of this amazing Invention we are to attribute that
unequaled Fire and Rapture, which is so forcible in Homer, that no Man of a
true Poetical Spirit is Master of himself while he reads him. What he writes is
of the most animated Nature imaginable; every thing moves, every thing lives,
and is put in Action. If a Council be called, or a Battle fought, you are not
coldly informed of what was said or done as from a third Person; the Reader is
hurried out of himself by the Force of the Poet's Imagination, and turns in one
place to a Hearer, in another to a Spectator. The Course of his Verses
resembles that of the Army he describes, (...) They pour along like a Fire that
sweeps the whole Earth before it. It Is however remarkable that his Fancy, which
is every where vigorous, is not discovered immediately at the beginning of his
Poem in its fullest Splendour: It grows in the Progress both upon himself and
others, and becomes on Fire like a Chariot-Wheel, by its own Rapidity. Exact
Disposition, just Thought, correct Elocution, polished Numbers, may have been
found in a thousand; but this Poetical Fire, this Vivida vis animi, in a very
few. Even in Works where all those are imperfect or neglected, this can
overpower Criticism, and make us admire even while we dis-approve. Nay, where
this appears, though attended with Absurdities, it brightens all the Rubbish
about it, 'till we see nothing but its own Splendour. This Fire is discerned in
Virgil, but discerned as through a Glass, reflected, and more shining than
warm, but every where equal and constant: In Lucan and Statius, it bursts out
in sudden, short, and interrupted Flashes: In Milton, it glows like a Furnace
kept up to an uncommon Fierceness by the Force of Art: In Shakespeare, it
strikes before we are aware, like an accidental Fire from Heaven: But in Homer,
and in him only, it burns every where clearly, and every where irresistibly.

I shall here endeavor to show, how this vast Invention exerts itself in a
manner superior to that of any Poet, through all the main constituent Parts of
his Work, as it is the great and peculiar Characteristick which distinguishes
him from all other Authors.

This strong and ruling Faculty was like a powerful Planet, which in the
Violence of its Course, drew all things within its Vortex. It seemed not enough
to have taken in the whole Circle of Arts, and the whole Compass of Nature; all
the inward Passions and Affections of Mankind to supply this Characters, and
all the outward Forms and Images of Things for his Descriptions; but wanting
yet an ampler Sphere to expatiate in, he opened a new and boundless Walk for
his Imagination, and created a World for himself in the Invention of Fable.
That which Aristotle calls the Soul of Poetry, was first breathed into it by
Homer. I shall begin with considering him in this Part, as it is naturally the
first, and I speak of it both as it means the Design of a Poem, and as it is
taken for Fiction.

Fable may be divided into the Probable, the Allegorical, and the Marvelous.
The Probable Fable is the Recital of such Actions as though they did not happen,
yet might, in the common course of Nature: Or of such as though they did, become
Fables by the additional Episodes and manner of telling them. Of this sort is
the main Story of an Epic Poem, the Return of Ulysses, the Settlement of the
Trojans in Italy, or the like. That of the Iliad is the Anger of Achilles, the
most short and single Subject that ever was chosen by any Poet. Yet this he has
supplied with a vaster Variety of Incidents and Events, and crowded with a
greater Number of Councils, Speeches, Battles, and Episodes of all kinds, than
are to be found even in those Poems whose Schemes are of the utmost Latitude
and Irregularity. The Action is hurried on with the most vehement Spirit, and
its whole Duration employs not so much as fifty Days. Virgil, for want of so
warm a Genius, aided himself by taking in a more extensive Subject, as well as
a greater Length of Time, and contracting the Design of both Homer's Poems into
one, which is yet but a fourth part as large as his. The other Epic Poets have
used the same Practice, but generally carried it so far as to superinduce a
Multiplicity of Fables, destroy the Unity of Action, and lose their Readers in
an unreasonable Length of Time. Nor is it only in the main Design that they
have been unable to add to his Invention, but they have followed him in every
Episode and Part of Story. If he has given a regular Catalogue of an Army, they
all draw up their Forces in the same Order. If he has funeral Games for
Patroclus, Virgil has the same for Anchises, and Statius (rather than omit
them) destroys the Unity of his Action for those of Archemorus. If Ulysses
visit the Shades, the Aeneas of Virgil and Scipio of Silius are sent after him.
If he be detained from his Return by the Allurements of Calypso, so is Aeneas
by Dido, and Rinaldo by Armida. If Achilles be absent from the Army on the
Score of a Quarrel through half the Poem, Rinaldo must absent himself just as
long, on the like account. If he gives his Hero a Suit of celestial Armor,
Virgil and Tasso make the same Present to theirs. Virgil has not only observed
this close Imitation of Homer, but where he had not led the way, supplied the
Want from other Greek Authors. Thus the Story of Sinon and the Taking of Troy
was copied (says Macrobius) almost word for word from Pisander, as the Loves of
Dido and Aeneas are taken from those of Medaea and Jason in Apollonius, and
several others in the same manner.

To proceed to the Allegorical Fable: If we reflect upon those innumerable
Knowledges, those Secrets of Nature and Physical Philosophy which Homer is
generally supposed to have wrapped up in his Allegories, what a new and ample
Scene of Wonder may this Consideration afford us? How fertile will that
Imagination appear, which was able to cloth all the Properties of Elements,
the Qualifications of the Mind, the Virtues and Vices, in Forms and Persons;
and to introduce them into Actions agreeable to the Nature of the Things they
shadowed? This is a Field in which no succeeding Poets could dispute with
Homer; and whatever Commendations have been allowed them on this Head, are by
no means for their Invention in having enlarged his Circle, but for their
Judgment in having contracted it. For when the Mode of Learning changed in
following Ages, and Science was delivered in a plainer manner, it then became
as reasonable in the more modern Poets to lay it aside, as it was in Homer to
make use of it. And perhaps it was no unhappy Circumstance for Virgil, that
there was not in his Time that Demand upon him of so great an Invention, as
might be capable of furnishing all those Allegorical Parts of a Poem.

The Marvelous Fable includes whatever is supernatural, and especially the
Machines of the Gods. If Homer was not the first who introduced the Deities (as
Herodotus imagines) into the Religion of Greece, he seems the first who brought
them into a System of Machinery for Poetry, and such an one as makes its
greatest Importance and Dignity. For we find those Authors who have been
offended at the literal Notion of the Gods, constantly laying their Accusation
against Homer as the undoubted Inventor of them. But whatever cause there might
be to blame his Machines in a Philosophical or Religious View, they are so
perfect in the Poetic, that Mankind have been ever since contented to follow
them: None have been able to enlarge the Sphere of Poetry beyond the Limits he
has set: Every Attempt of this Nature has proved unsuccessful; and after all
the various Changes of Times and Religions, his Gods continue to this Day the
Gods of Poetry.

We come now to the Characters of his Persons, and here we shall find no Author
has ever drawn so many with so visible and surprising a Variety, or given us
such lively and affecting Impressions of them. Every one has something so
singularly his own, that no Painter could have distinguished them more by their
Features, than the Poet has by their Manners. Nothing can be more exact than
the Distinctions he has observed in the different degrees of Virtues and Vices.
The single Quality of Courage is wonderfully diversified in the several
Characters of the Iliad. That of Achilles is furious and intractable; that of
Diomede forward, yet listening to Advice and subject to Command: We see in Ajax
an heavy and selfconsidering Valor, in Hector an active and vigilant one: The
Courage of Agamemnon is inspirited by Love of Empire and Ambition, that of
Menelaus mixed with Softness and Tenderness for his People: We find in
Idomeneus a plain direct Soldier, in Sarpedon a gallant and generous one. Nor
is this judicious and astonishing Diversity to be found only in the principal
Quality which constitutes the Main of each Character, but even in the
Under-parts of it, to which he takes care to give a Tincture of that principal
one. For Example, the main Characters of Ulysses and Nestor consist in Wisdom,
and they are distinct in this; the Wisdom of one is artificial and various, of
the other natural, open, and regular. But they have, besides, Characters of
Courage; and this Quality also takes a different Turn in each from the
difference of his Prudence: For one in the War depends still upon Caution, the
other upon Experience. It would be endless to produce Instances of these Kinds.
The Characters of Virgil are far from striking us in this open manner; they lie
in a great degree hidden and undistinguished, and where they are marked most
evidently, affect us not in proportion to those of Homer. His Characters of
Valor are much alike; even that of Turnus seems no way peculiar but as it is
in a superior degree; and we see nothing that differences the Courage of
Mnestheus from that of Sergesthus, Cloanthus, or the rest. In like manner it
may be remarked of Statius's Heroes, that an Air of Impetuosity runs through them
all; the same horrid and savage Courage appears in his Capaneus, Tydeus,
Hippomedon, etc. They have a Parity of Character which makes them seem Brothers
of one Family. I believe when the Reader is led into this Track of Reflection,
if he will pursue it through the Epic and Tragic Writers, he will be convinced
how infinitely superior in this Point the Invention of Homer was to that of all
others.

The Speeches are to be considered as they slow from the Characters, being
perfect or defective as they agree or disagree with the Manners of those who
utter them. As there is more variety of Characters in the Iliad, so there is of
Speeches, than in any other Poem. Every thing in it has Manners (as Aristotle
expresses it) that is, every thing is acted or spoken. It is hardly credible in
a Work of such length, how small a Number of Lines are employed in Narration.
In Virgil the Dramatic Part is less in proportion to the Narrative; and the
Speeches often consist of general Reflections or Thoughts, which might be
equally just in any Person's Mouth upon the same Occasion. As many of his
Persons have no apparent Characters, so many of his Speeches escape being
applied and judged by the Rule of Propriety. We oftener think of the Author
himself when we read Virgil, than when we are engaged in Homer: All which are
the Effects of a colder Invention, that interests us less in the Action
described: Homer makes us Hearers, and Virgil leaves us Readers.

If in the next place we take a View of the Sentiments, the same presiding
Faculty is eminent in the Sublimity and Spirit of his Thoughts. Longinus has
given his Opinion, that it was in this Part Homer principally excelled. What
were alone sufficient to prove the Grandeur and Excellence of his Sentiments in
general, is that they have so remarkable a Parity with those of the Scripture:
Duport, in his Gnomologia Homerica, has collected innumerable Instances of this
sort. And it is with Justice an excellent modern Writer allows, that if Virgil
has not so many Thoughts that are low and vulgar, he has not so many that are
sublime and noble; and that the Roman Author seldom rises into very astonishing
Sentiments where he is not fired by the Iliad.

If we observe his Descriptions, Images, and Similes, we shall find the
Invention still predominant. To what else can we ascribe that vast
Comprehension of Images of every sort, where we see each Circumstance and
Individual of Nature summoned together by the Extent and Fecundity of his
Imagination; to which all things, in their various Views, presented themselves
in an Instant, and had their Impressions taken off to Perfection at a Heat?
Nay, he not only gives us the full Prospects of Things, but several unexpected
Peculiarities and Side-Views, unobserved by any Painter but Homer. Nothing is
so surprising as the Descriptions of his Battles, which take up no less than
half the Iliad, and are supplied with so vast a Variety of Incidents, that no
one bears a Likeness to another; such different Kinds of Deaths, that no two
Heroes are wounded in the same manner; and such a Profusion of noble Ideas,
that every Battle rises above the last in Greatness, Horror, and Confusion. It
is certain there is not near that Number of Images and Descriptions in any Epic
Poet; though every one has assisted himself with a great Quantity out of him: And
it is evident of Virgil especially, that he has scarce any Comparisons which
are not drawn from his Master.

If we descend from hence to the Expression, we see the bright Imagination of
Homer shining out in the most enlivened Forms of it. We acknowledge him the
Father of Poetical Diction, the first who taught that Language of the Gods to
Men. His Expression is like the coloring of some great Masters, which
discovers itself to be laid on boldly, and executed with Rapidity. It is indeed
the strongest and most glowing imaginable, and touched with the greatest
Spirit. Aristotle had reason to say, He was the only Poet who had found out
Living Words; there are in him more daring Figures and Metaphors than in any
good Author whatever. An Arrow is impatient to be on the Wing, a Weapon thirsts
to drink the Blood of an Enemy, and the like. Yet his Expression is never too
big for the Sense, but justly great in proportion to it: It Is the Sentiment
that swells and fills out the Diction, which rises with it, and forms itself
about it. For in the same degree that a Thought is warmer, an Expression will
be brighter; and as That is more strong, This will become more perspicuous:
Like Glass in the Furnace which grows to a greater Magnitude, and refines to a
greater Clearness, only as the Breath within is more powerful, and the Heat
more intense.

To throw his Language more out of Prose, Homer seems to have affected the
Compound-Epithets. This was a sort of Composition peculiarly proper to Poetry,
not only as it heightened the Diction, but as it assisted and filled the
Numbers with greater Sound and Pomp, and likewise conduced in some measure to
thicken the Images. On this last Consideration I cannot but attribute these to
the Fruitfulness of his Invention, since (as he has managed them) they are a
sort of supernumerary Pictures of the Persons or Things they are joined to. We
see the Motion of Hector's Plumes in the Epithet (...), the Landscape of Mount
Neritus in that of (...), and so of others; which particular Images could not
have been insisted upon so long as to express them in a Description (though but
of a single Line) without diverting the Reader too much from the principal
Action or Figure. As a Metaphor is a short Simile, one of these Epithets is a
short Description.

Lastly, if we consider his Versification, we shall be sensible what a Share of
Praise is due to his Invention in that also. He was not satisfied with his
Language as he found it settled in any one Part of Greece, but searched through
its differing Dialects with this particular View, to beautify and perfect his
Numbers: He considered these as they had a greater Mixture of Vowels or
Consonants, and accordingly employed them as the Verse required either a
greater Smoothness or Strength. What he most affected was the Ionic, which has
a peculiar Sweetness from its never using Contractions, and from its Custom of
resolving the Diphthongs into two Syllables; so as to make the Words open
themselves with a more spreading and sonorous Fluency. With this he mingled the
Attic Contractions, the broader Doric, and the feebler Aeolic, which often
rejects its Aspirate, or takes off its Accent; and completed this Variety by
altering some Letters with the License of Poetry. Thus his Measures, instead of
being Fetters to his Sense, were always in readiness to run along with the
Warmth of his Rapture; and even to give a farther Representation of his
Notions, in the Correspondence of their Sounds to what they signified. Out of
all these he has derived that Harmony, which makes us confess he had not only
the richest Head, but the finest Ear in the World. This is so great a Truth,
that whoever will but consult the Tune of his Verses even without understanding
them (with the same sort of Diligence as we daily see practiced in the Case of
Italian Opera's) will find more Sweetness, Variety, and Majesty of Sound, than
in any other Language or Poetry. The Beauty of his Numbers is allowed by the
Critics to be copied but faintly by Virgil himself, though they are so just to
ascribe it to the Nature of the Latin Tongue. Indeed the Greek has some
Advantages both from the natural Sound of its Words, and the Turn and Cadence
of its Verse, which agree with the Genius of no other Language. Virgil was very
sensible of this, and used the utmost Diligence in working up a more
intractable Language to whatsoever Graces it was capable of, and in particular
never failed to bring the Sound of his Line to a beautiful Agreement with its
Sense. If the Grecian Poet has not been so frequently celebrated on this
Account as the Roman, the only reason is, that fewer Critics have understood
one Language than the other. Dionysius of Halicarnassus has pointed out many of
our Author's Beauties in this kind, in his Treatise of the Composition of
Words, and others will be taken notice of in the Course of the Notes. It
suffices at present to observe of his Numbers, that they flow with so much
ease, as to make one imagine Homer had no other care than to transcribe as fast
as the Muses dictated; and at the same time with so much Force and inspiriting
Vigor, that they awaken and raise us like the Sound of a Trumpet. They roll
along as a plentiful River, always in motion, and always full; while we are
born away by a Tide of Verse, the most rapid, and yet the most smooth
imaginable.

Thus on whatever side we contemplate Homer, what principally strikes us is his
Invention. It is that which forms the Character of each Part of his Work; and
accordingly we find it to have made his Fable more extensive and copious than
any other, his Manners more lively and strongly marked, his Speeches more
affecting and transported, his Sentiments more warm and sublime, his Images and
Descriptions more full and animated, his Expression more raised and daring, and
his Numbers more rapid and various. I hope in what has been said of Virgil with
regard to any of these Heads, I have no way derogated from his Character.
Nothing is more absurd or endless, than the common Method of comparing eminent
Writers by an Opposition of particular Passages in them, and forming a Judgment
from thence of their Merit upon the whole. We ought to have a certain Knowledge
of the principal Character and distinguishing Excellence of each: It is in that
we are to consider him, and in proportion to his Degree in that we are to
admire him. No Author or Man ever excelled all the World in more than one
Faculty, and as Homer has done this in Invention, Virgil has in Judgment. Not
that we are to think Homer wanted Judgment, because Virgil had it in a more
eminent degree; or that Virgil wanted Invention, because Homer possessed a larger
share of it: Each of these great Authors had more of both than perhaps any Man
besides, and are only said to have less in Comparison with one another. Homer
was the greater Genius, Virgil the better Artist. In one we most admire the
Man, in the other the Work. Homer hurries and transports us with a commanding
Impetuosity, Virgil leads us with an attractive Majesty: Homer scatters with a
generous Profusion, Virgil bestows with a careful Magnificence: Homer, like the
Nile, pours out his Riches with a sudden Overflow; Virgil like a River in its
Banks, with a gentle and constant Stream. When we behold their Battles,
methinks the two Poets resemble the Heroes they celebrate: Homer, boundless and
irresistible as Achilles, bears all before him, and shines more and more as the
Tumult increases; Virgil, calmly daring like Aeneas, appears undisturbed in the
midst of the Action, disposes all about him, and conquers with Tranquillity:
And when we look upon their Machines, Homer seems like his own Jupiter in his
Terrors, shaking Olympus, scattering the Lightnings, and firing the Heavens;
Virgil, like the same Power in his Benevolence, counselling with the Gods,
laying Plans for Empires, and regularly ordering his whole Creation.

But after all, it is with great Parts as with great Virtues, they naturally
border on some Imperfection; and it is often hard to distinguish exactly where
the Virtue ends, or the Fault begins. As Prudence may sometimes sink to
Suspicion, so may a great Judgment decline to Coldness; and as Magnanimity may
run up to Profusion or Extravagance, so may a great Invention to Redundancy or
Wildness. If we look upon Homer in this View, we shall perceive the chief
Objections against him to proceed from so noble a Cause as the Excess of this
Faculty.

Among these we may reckon some of his Mavelous Fictions, upon which so much
Criticism has been spent as surpassing all the Bounds of Probability. Perhaps
it may be with great and superior Souls as with gigantick Bodies, which
exerting themselves with unusual Strength, exceed what is commonly thought the
due Proportion of Parts, to become Miracles in the whole; and like the old
Heroes of that Make, commit something near Extravagance amidst a Series of
glorious and inimitable Performances. Thus Homer has his speaking Horses, and
Virgil his Myrtles distilling Blood, without so much as contriving the easy
Intervention of a Deity to save the Probability.

It is owing to the same vast Invention that his Similes have been thought too
exuberant and full of Circumstances. The Force of this Faculty is seen in
nothing more, than its Inability to confine itself to that single Circumstance
upon which the Comparison is grounded: It runs out into Embellishments of
additional Images, which however are so managed as not to overpower the main
one. His Similes are like Pictures, where the principal Figure has not only its
proportion given agreeable to the Original, but is also set off with occasional
Ornaments and Prospects. The same will account for his manner of heaping a
Number of Comparisons together in one Breath, when his Fancy suggested to him
at once so many various and correspondent Images. The Reader will easily extend
this Observation to more Objections of the same kind.

If there are others which seem rather to charge him with a Defect or
Narrowness of Genius, than an Excess of it; those seeming Defects will be found
upon Examination to proceed wholly from the Nature of the Times he lived in.
Such are his grosser Representations of the Gods, and the vicious and imperfect
Manners of his Heroes, which will be treated of in the following See the
Articles of Theology and Morality, in the third Part of the Essay.
Essay: But I must here speak a word of the latter, as it is a Point generally
carried into Extremes both by the Censurers and Defenders of Homer. It must be
a strange Partiality to Antiquity to think with Madam Dacier, "that Preface to
her Homer.
those Times and Manners are so much the more excellent, as they are more
contrary to ours" Who can be so prejudiced in their Favor as to magnify the
Felicity of those Ages, when a Spirit of Revenge and Cruelty reigned through the
World, when no Mercy was shown but for the sake of Lucre, when the greatest
Princes were put to the Sword, and their Wives and Daughters made Slaves and
Concubines? On the other side I would not be so delicate as those modern
Critics, who are shocked at the servile Offices and mean Employments in which
we sometimes see the Heroes of Homer engaged. There is a Pleasure in taking a
view of that Simplicity in Opposition to the Luxury of succeeding Ages; in
beholding Monarchs without their Guards, Princes tending their Flocks, and
Princesses drawing Water from the Springs. When we read Homer, we ought to
reflect that we are reading the most ancient Author in the Heathen World; and
those who consider him in this Light, will double their Pleasure in the Perusal
of him. Let them think they are growing acquainted with Nations and People that
are now no more; that they are stepping almost three thousand Years backward
into the remotest Antiquity, and entertaining themselves with a clear and
surprising Vision of Things no where else to be found, and the only authentic
Picture of that ancient World. By this means alone their greatest Obstacles
will vanish; and what usually creates their Dislike, will become a Satisfaction.

This Consideration may farther serve to answer for the constant Use of the
same Epithets to his Gods and Heroes, such as the far-darting Phoebus, the
blue-ey'd Pallas, the swift-footed Achilles, etc. which some have censured as
impertinent and tediously repeated. Those of the Gods depended upon the Powers
and Offices then believed to belong to them, and had contracted a Weight and
Veneration from the Rites and solemn Devotions in which they were used: They
were a sort of Attributes that it was a Matter of Religion to salute them with
on all Occasions, and an Irreverence to omit. As for the Epithets of great Men,
Mons. Boileau is of Opinion; that they were in the Nature of Surnames, and
repeated as such; for the Greeks having no Names derived from their Fathers,
were obliged when they mentioned any one to add some other Distinction; either
naming his Parents expressly, or his Place of Birth, Profession, or the like:
As Alexander Son of Philip, Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Diogenes the Cynic,
etc. Homer therefore complying with the Custom of his Country, used such
distinctive Additions as better agreed with Poetry. And indeed we have
something parallel to these in modern Times, such as the Names of Harold
Harefoot, Edmund Ironside, Edward Long-shanks, Edward the black Prince, etc. If
yet this be thought to account better for the Propriety than for the
Repetition, I shall add a farther Conjecture. Hesiod dividing the World into
its Ages, has placed a fourth Age between the Brazen and the Iron one, of
Heroes distinct from other Men, a divine Race, who fought at Thebes and Troy,
are called Demigods, and live by the Care of Jupiter in the Islands of the
Blessed Hesiod, lib. 1.. 155, etc.
. Now among the divine Honors which were paid them, they might have this also
in common with the Gods, not to be mentioned without the Solemnity of an
Epithet, and such as might be acceptable to them by its celebrating their
Families, Actions, or Qualities.

What other Cavils have been raised against Homer are such as hardly deserve a
Reply, but will yet be taken notice of as they occur in the Course of the Work.
Many have been occasioned by an injudicious Endeavor to exalt Virgil; which is
much the same, as if one should think to praise the Superstructure by
undermining the Foundation: One would imagine by the whole Course of their
Parallels, that these Critics never so much as heard of Homer's having written
first; a Consideration which whoever compares these two Poets ought to have
always in his Eye. Some accuse him for the same things which they overlook or
praise in the other; as when they prefer the Fable and Moral of the Aeneis to
those of the Iliad, for the same Reasons which might set the Odysses above the
Aeneis: as that the Hero is a wiser Man; and the Action of the one more
beneficial to his Country than that of the other: Or else they blame him for
not doing what he never designed; as because Achilles is not as good and
perfect a Prince as Aeneas, when the very Moral of his Poem required a contrary
Character. It is thus that Rapin judges in his Comparison of Homer and Virgil.
Others select those particular Passages of Homer which are not so labored as
some that Virgil drew out of them: This is the whole Management of Scaliger in
his Poetices. Others quarrel with what they take for low and mean Expressions,
sometimes through a false Delicacy and Refinement, oftener from an Ignorance of
the Graces of the Original; and then triumph in the Aukwardness of their own
Translations. This is the Conduct of Perault in his Parallels. Lastly, there
are others, who pretending to a fairer Proceeding, distinguish between the
personal Merit of Homer, and that of his Work; but when they come to assign the
Causes of the great Reputation of the Iliad, they found it upon the Ignorance
of his Times, and the Prejudice of those that followed. And in pursuance of
this Principle, they make those Accidents (such as the Contention of the
Cities, etc.) to be the Causes of his Fame, which were in Reality the
Consequences of his Merit. The same might as well be said of Virgil, or any
great Author, whose general Character will infallibly raise many casual
Additions to their Reputation. This is the Method of Mons. de la Motte; who yet
confesses upon the whole, that in whatever Age Homer had lived he must have
been the greatest Poet of his Nation, and that he may be said in this Sense to
be the Master even of those who surpassed him.

In all these Objections we see nothing that contradicts his Title to the
Honor of the chief Invention; and as long as this (which is indeed the
Characteristic of Poetry itself) remains unequaled by his Followers, he still
continues superior to them. A cooler Judgment may commit fewer Faults, and be
more approved in the Eves of One Sort of Critics: but that Warmth of Fancy
will carry the loudest and most universal Applauses which holds the Heart of a
Reader under the strongest Enchantment. Homer not only appears the Inventor of
Poetry, but excells all the Inventors of other Arts in this, that he has
swallowed up the Honor of those who succeeded him. What he has done admitted
no Increase, it only lest room for Contraction or Regulation. He showed all the
Stretch of Fancy at once; and if he has failed in some of his Flights, it was
but because he attempted every thing. A Work of this kind seems like a mighty
Tree which rises from the most vigorous Seed, is improved with Industry,
flourishes, and produces the finest Fruit; Nature and Art have conspired to
raise it; Pleasure and Profit joined to make it valuable: and they who find the
justest Faults, have only said, that a few Branches (which run luxuriant through
a Richness of Nature) might be lopped into Form to give it a more regular
Appearance.

Having now spoken of the Beauties and Defects of the Original, it remains to
treat of the Translation, with the same View to the chief Characteristic. As
far as that is seen in the main Parts of the Poem, such as the Fable, Manners,
and Sentiments, no Translator can prejudice it but by wilful Omissions or
Contractions. As it also breaks out in every particular Image, Description, and
Simile; whoever lessens or too much softens those, takes off from this chief
Character. It is the first grand Duty of an Interpreter to give his Author
entire and unmaim'd; and for the rest, the Diction and Versification only are
his proper Province; since these must be his own, but the others he is to take
as he finds them.

It should then be considered what Methods may afford some Equivalent in our
Language for the Graces of these in the Greek. It is certain no literal
Translation can be just to an excellent Original in a superior Language: but it
is a great Mistake to imagine (as many have done) that a rash Paraphrase can
make amends for this general Defect; which is no less in danger to lose the
Spirit of an Ancient, by deviating into the modern Manners of Expression. If
there be sometimes a Darkness, there is often a Light in Antiquity, which
nothing better preserves than a Version almost literal. I know no Liberties one
ought to take, but those which are necessary for transfusing the Spirit of the
Original, and supporting the Poetical Style of the Translation: and I will
venture to say, there have not been more Men misled in former times by a
servile dull Adherence to the Letter, than have been deluded in ours by a
chimerical insolent Hope of raising and improving their Author. It is not to be
doubted that the Fire of the Poem is what a Translator should principally
regard, as it is most likely to expire in his managing: However it is his
safest way to be content with preserving this to his utmost in the Whole,
without endeavoring to be more than he finds his Author is, in any particular
Place. It Is a great Secret in Writing to know when to be plain, and when
poetical and figurative; and it is what Homer will teach us if we will but
follow modestly in his Footsteps. Where his Diction is bold and lofty, let us
raise ours as high as we can; but where his is plain and humble, we ought not
to be deterred from imitating him by the fear of incurring the Censure of a
mere English Critic. Nothing that belongs to Homer seems to have been more
commonly mistaken than the just Pitch of his Style: Some of his Translators
having swelled into Fustian in a proud Confidence of the Sublime; others sunk
into Flatness in a cold and timorous Notion of Simplicity. Methinks I see these
different Followers of Homer, some sweating and straining after him by violent
Leaps and Bounds, (the certain Signs of false Mettle) others slowly and
servilely creeping in his Train, while the Poet himself is all the time
proceeding with an unaffected and equal Majesty before them. However of the two
Extremes one could sooner pardon Frenzy than Frigidity: No Author is to be
envied for such Commendations as he may gain by that Character of Style, which
his Friends must agree together to call Simplicity, and the rest of the World
will call Dullness. There is a graceful and dignified Simplicity, as well as a
bald and sordid one, which differ as much from each other as the Air of a plain
Man from that of a Sloven: It Is one thing to be tricked up, and another not to
be dressed at all. Simplicity is the Mean between Ostentation and Rusticity.

This pure and noble Simplicity is no where in such Perfection as in the
Scripture and our Author. One may affirm with all respect to the inspired
Writings, that the Divine Spirit made use of no other Words but what were
intelligible and common to Men at that Time, and in that Part of the World; and
as Homer is the Author nearest to those, his Style must of course bear a
greater Resemblance to the sacred Books than that of any other Writer. This
Consideration (together with what has been observed of the Parity of some of
his Thoughts) may methinks induce a Translator on the one hand to give into
several of those general Phrases and Manners of Expression, which have attained
a Veneration even in our Language from their use in the Old Testament; as on
the other, to avoid those which have been appropriated to the Divinity, and in
a manner consigned to Mystery and Religion.

For a farther Preservation of this Air of Simplicity, a particular Care should
be taken to express with all Plainness those Moral Sentences and Proverbial
Speeches which are so numerous in this Poet. They have something Venerable, and
as I may say Oracular, in that unadorned Gravity and Shortness with which they
are delivered: a Grace which would be utterly lost by endeavoring to give them
what we call a more ingenious (that is a more modern) Turn in the Paraphrase.

Perhaps the Mixture of some Graecisms and old Words after the manner of
Milton, if done without too much Affectation, might not have an ill Effect in a
Version of this particular Work, which most of any other seems to require a
venerable Antique Cast. But certainly the use of modern Terms of War and
Government, such as Platoon, Campaign, Junto, or the like (which some of his
Translators have fallen into) cannot be allowable; those only excepted, without
which it is impossible to treat the Subjects in any living Language.

There are two Peculiarities in Homer's Diction that are a sort of Marks or
Moles, by which every common Eye distinguishes him at first sight: Those who
are not his greatest Admirers look upon them as Defects, and those who are seem
pleased with them as Beauties. I speak of his Compound-Epithets and of his
Repetitions. Many of the former cannot be done literally into English without
destroying the Purity of our Language. I believe such should be retained as
slide easily of themselves into an English-Compound, without Violence to the
Ear or to the received Rules of Composition; as well as those which have
received a Sanction from the Authority of our best Poets, and are become
familiar through their use of them; such as the Cloud-compelling Jove, etc. As
for the rest, whenever any can be as fully and significantly expressed in a
single word as in a compounded one, the Course to be taken is obvious. Some
that cannot be so turned as to preserve their full Image by one or two Words,
may have Justice done them by Circumlocution; as the Epithet (...) to a
Mountain would appear little or ridiculous translated literally Leaf-shaking,
but affords a majestic Idea in the Periphrasis: The lofty Mountains shakes his
waving Woods. Others that admit of differing Significations, may receive an
Advantage by a judicious Variation according to the Occasions on which they are
introduced. For Example, the Epithet of Apollo, (...), or far-shooting, is
capable of two Explications; one literal in respect of the Darts and Bow, the
Ensigns of that God; the other allegorical with regard to the Rays of the Sun:
Therefore in such Places where Apollo is represented as a God in Person, I
would use the former Interpretation, and where the Effects of the Sun are
described, I would make choice of the latter. Upon the whole, it will be
necessary to avoid that perpetual Repetition of the same Epithets which we find
in Homer, and which, though it might be accommodated (as has been already shown)
to the Ear of those Times, is by no means so to ours: But one may wait for
Opportunities of placing them, where they derive an additional Beauty from the
Occasions on which they are employed; and in doing this properly, a Translator
may at once show his Fancy and his Judgment.

As for Homer's Repetitions; we may divide them into three sorts; of whole
Narrations and Speeches, of single Sentences, and of one Verse or Hemistich. I
hope it is not impossible to have such a Regard to these, as neither to lose so
known a Mark of the Author on the one hand, nor to offend the Reader too much
on the other. The Repetition is not ungraceful in those Speeches where the
Dignity of the Speaker renders it a sort of Insolence to alter his Words; as in
the Messages from Gods to Men, or from higher Powers to Inferiors in Concerns
of State, or where the Ceremonial of Religion seems to require it, in the
solemn Forms of Prayers, Oaths, or the like. In other Cases, I believe the best
Rule is to be guided by the Nearness, or Distance, at which the Repetitions are
placed in the Original: When they follow too close one may vary the Expression,
but it is a Question whether a professed Translator be authorized to omit any:
If they be tedious, the Author is to answer for it.

It only remains to speak of the Versification. Homer (as has been said) is
perpetually applying the Sound to the Sense, and varying it on every new
Subject. This is indeed one of the most exquisite Beauties of Poetry, and
attainable by very few: I know only of Homer eminent for it in the Greek, and
Virgil in Latin. I am sensible it is what may sometimes happen by Chance, when
a Writer is warm, and fully possessed of his Image: however it may be reasonably
believed they designed this, in whose Verse it so manifestly appears in a
superior degree to all others. Few Readers have the Ear to be Judges of it, but
those who have will see I have endeavored at this Beauty.

Upon the whole, I must confess my self utterly incapable of doing Justice to
Homer. I attempt him in no other Hope but that which one may entertain without
much Vanity, of giving a more tolerable Copy of him than any entire Translation
in Verse has yet done. We have only those of Chapman, Hobbes, and Ogilby.
Chapman has taken the Advantage of an immeasurable Length of Verse,
notwithstanding which there is scarce any Paraphrase more loose and rambling
than his. He has frequent Interpolations of four or six Lines, and I remember
one in the thirteenth Book of the Odysses, ver. 312. where he has spun twenty
Verses out of two. He is often mistaken in so bold a manner, that one might
think he deviated on purpose, if he did not in other Places of his Notes insist
so much upon Verbal Trifles. He appears to have had a strong Affectation of
extracting new Meanings out of his Author, insomuch as to promise in his
Rhyming Preface, a Poem of the Mysteries he had revealed in Homer; and perhaps
he endeavored to strain the obvious Sense to this End. His Expression is
involved in Fustian, a Fault for which he was remarkable in his Original
Writings, as in the Tragedy of Bussyd' Amboise, etc. In a word, the Nature of
the Man may account for his whole Performance; for he appears from his Preface
and Remarks to have been of an arrogant Turn, and an Enthusiast in Poetry. His
own Boast of having finished half the Iliad in less than fifteen Weeks, shows
with what Negligence his Version was performed. But that which is to be allowed
him, and which very much contributed to cover his Defects, is a daring fiery
Spirit that animates his Translation, which is something like what one might
imagine Homer himself would have writ before he arrived to Years of Discretion.
Hobbes has given us a correct Explanation of the Sense in general, but for
Particulars and Circumstances he continually lopps them, and often omits the
most beautiful. As for its being esteemed a close Translation, I doubt not many
have been led into that Error by the Shortness of it, which proceeds not from
his following the Original Line by Line, but from the Contractions
abovementioned. He sometimes omits whole Similes and Sentences, and is now and
then guilty of Mistakes which no Writer of his Learning could have fallen into,
but through Carelessness. His Poetry, as well as Ogilby's, is too mean for
Criticism.

It is a great Loss to the Poetical World that Mr. Dryden did not live to
translate the Iliad. He has left us only the first Book and a small Part of the
sixth; in which if he has in some Places not truly interpreted the Sense, or
preserved the Antiquities, it ought to be excused on account of the Haste he
was obliged to write in. He seems to have had too much Regard to Chapman, whose
Words he sometimes copies, and has unhappily followed him in Passages where he
wanders from the Original. However had he translated the whole Work, I would no
more have attempted Homer after him than Virgil, his Version of whom
(notwithstanding some human Errors) is the most noble and spirited Translation
I know in any Language. But the Fate of great Genius's is like that of great
Ministers, though they are confessedly the first in the Commonwealth of Letters,
they must be envied and calumniated only for being at the Head of it.

That which in my Opinion ought to be the Endeavor of any one who translates
Homer, is above all things to keep alive that Spirit and Fire which makes his
chief Character. In particular Places, where the Sense can bear any Doubt, to
follow the strongest and most Poetical, as most agreeing with that Character.
To copy him in all the Variations of his Style, and the different Modulations
of his Numbers. To preserve in the more active or descriptive Parts, a Warmth
and Elevation; in the more sedate or narrative, a Plainness and Solemnity; in
the Speeches a Fullness and Perspicuity; in the Sentences a Shortness and
Gravity. Not to neglect even the little Figures and Turns on the Words, nor
sometimes the very Cast of the Periods. Neither to omit or confound any Rites
or Customs of Antiquity. Perhaps too he ought to include the whole in a shorter
Compass, than has hitherto been done by any Translator who has tolerably
preserved either the Sense or Poetry. What I would farther recommend to him, is
to study his Author rather from his own Text than from any Commentaries, how
learned soever, or whatever Figure they make in the Estimation of the World. To
consider him attentively in Comparison with Virgil above all the Ancients, and
with Milton above all the Moderns. Next these the Archbishop of Cambray's
Telemachus may give him the truest Idea of the Spirit and Turn of our Author,
and Bossu's admirable Treatise of the Epic Poem the justest Notion of his
Design and Conduct. But after all, with whatever Judgment and Study a Man may
proceed, or with whatever Happiness he may perform such a Work; he must hope to
please but a few, those only who have at once a Taste of Poetry, and competent
Learning. For to satisfy such as want either, is not in the Nature of this
Undertaking; since a mere Modern Wit can like nothing that is not Modern, and a
Pedant nothing that is not Greek.

What I have done is submitted to the Public, from whose Opinions I am
prepared to learn; though I fear no Judges so little as our best Poets, who are
most sensible of the Weight of this Task. As for the worst, whatever they shall
please to say, they may give me some Concern as they are unhappy Men, but none
as they are malignant Writers. I was guided in this Translation by Judgments
very different from theirs, and by Persons for whom they can have no Kindness,
if an old Observation be true, that the strongest Antipathy in the World is
that of Fools to Men of Wit. Mr. Addison was the first whose Advice determined
me to undertake this Task, who was pleased to write to me upon that Occasion in
such Terms as I cannot repeat without Vanity. I was obliged to Sir Richard
Steel for a very early Recommendation of my Undertaking to the Public. Dr.
Swift promoted my Interest with that Warmth with which he always serves his
Friend. The Humanity and Frankness of Sir Samuel Garth are what I never knew
wanting on any Occasion. I must also acknowledge with infinite Pleasure the
many friendly Offices as well as sincere Criticisms of Mr. Congreve, who had
led me the way in translating some Parts of Homer, as I wish for the sake of
the World he had prevented me in the rest. I must add the Names of Mr. Row and
Dr. Parnell, though I shall take a farther Opportunity of doing Justice to the
last, whose Goodnature (to give it a great Panegyric) is no less extensive
than his Learning. The Favor of these Gentlemen is not entirely undeserved by
one who bears them so true an Affection. But what can I say of the Honor so
many of the Great have done me, while the First Names of the Age appear as my
Subscribers, and the most distinguished Patrons and Ornaments of Learning as my
chief Encouragers. Among these it is a particular Pleasure to me to find, that
my highest Obligations are to such who have done most Honor to the Name of
Poet: That his Grace the Duke of Buckingham was not displeased I should
undertake the Author to whom he has given (in his excellent Essay) the finest
Praise he ever yet received. Read Homer once, and you can read no more;
For all things else appear so mean and poor,
Verse will seem Prose: yet often on him look,
And you will hardly need another Book.
That the Earl of Halifax was one of the first to favor me, of whom it is hard
to say whether the Advancement of the Polite Arts is more owing to his
Generosity or his Example. That such a Genius as my Lord Bolingbroke, not more
distinguished in the great Scenes of Business than in all the useful and
entertaining Parts of Learning, has not refused to be the Critic of these
Sheets, and the Patron of their Writer. And that so excellent an Imitator of
Homer as the noble Author of the Tragedy of Heroic Love, has continued his
Partiality to me from my writing Pastorals to my attempting the Iliad. I cannot
deny my self the Pride of confessing, that I have had the Advantage not only of
their Advice for the Conduct in general, but their Correction of several
Particulars of this Translation.

I could say a great deal of the Pleasure of being distinguished by the Earl of
Carnarvon, but it is almost absurd to particularize any one generous Action in
a Person whose whole Life is a continued Series of them. The Right Honorable
Mr. Stanhope, the present Secretary of State, will pardon my Desire of having
it known that he was pleased to promote this Affair. The particular Zeal of Mr.
Harcourt (the Son of the late Lord Chancellor) gave me a Proof how much I am
honored in a Share of his Friendship. I must attribute to the same Motive that
of several others of my Friends, to whom all Acknowledgments are rendered
unnecessary by the Privileges of a familiar Correspondence: And I am satisfied
I can no way better oblige Men of their Turn, than by my Silence.

In short, I have found more Patrons than ever Homer wanted. He would have
thought himself happy to have met the same Favor at Athens, that has been
shown me by its learned Rival, the University of Oxford. If my Author had the
Wits of After-Ages for his Defenders, his Translator has had the Beauties of
the present for his Advocates; a Pleasure too great to be changed for any Fame
in Reversion. And I can hardly envy him those pompous Honors he received after
Death, when I reflect on the Enjoyment of so many agreeable Obligations, and
easy Friendships which make the Satisfaction of Life. This Distinction is the
more to be acknowledged, as it is shown to one whose Pen has never gratified
the Prejudices of particular Parties, or the Vanities of particular Men.
Whatever the Success may prove, I shall never repent of an Undertaking in which
I have experienced the Candor and Friendship of so many Persons of Merit; and
in which I hope to pass some of those Years of Youth that are generally lost in
a Circle of Follies, after a manner neither wholly unuseful to others, nor
disagreeable to my self.

OPOC AACTPIC

OPOC NOIX

KOYENE KPONOS IAIAS ODYSSEIA OPOS YTHOS ISTOPIA PO^^SIS KOOIDIA TPAGYDIA
PH^^SIS AP^T N GISTIS SOPHIA

Ex (...) antiquo in Palatio (...)

Homaerium Smyrnaeum



OPOC CYPNAION

OPOC AASTPIANON



maps of Greece and Phrygia GRAECIA HOMERICA
PHRYGIA cum Oris Maritimus


AN ESSAY ON THE LIFE, WRITINGS and LEARNING, OF HOMER.
THERE is something in the Mind of Man, which goes beyond bare Curiosity, and
even carries us on to a Shadow of Friendship with those great Genius's whom we
have known to excel in former Ages. Nor will it appear less to any one, who
considers how much it partakes of the Nature of Friendship; how it compounds
itself of an Admiration raised by what we meet with concerning them; a Tendency
to be farther acquainted with them, by gathering every Circumstance of their
Lives; a kind of Complacency in their Company, when we retire to enjoy what
they have left; an Union with them in those Sentiments they approve; and an
Endeavor to defend them, when we think they are injuriously attacked, or even
sometimes with too partial an Affection.

There is also in Mankind a Spirit of Envy or Opposition, which makes them
uneasy to see others of the same Species seated far above them in a sort of
Perfection. And this, at least so far as we speak of the Fame of Writers, has
not always been known to dye with a Man entirely, but to pursue his Remains
with idle Traditions, and weak Conjectures; so that his Name, which is not to
be forgotten, shall be preserved only to be stained and blotted. The
Controversy, which was carried on between the Author and his Enemies, while he
yet was living, shall still be kept on foot; not entirely upon his own account,
but on theirs who live after him; some being fond to praise extravagantly, and
others as rashly eager to contradict his Admirers. This Proceeding, on both
sides, gives us an Image of the first Descriptions of War, such as the Iliad
affords; where a Hero disputes the Field with an Army 'til it is his time to
dye, and then the Battle, which we expected to fall of course, is renewed about
the Body; his Friends contending that they may embalm and honor it, his
Enemies that they may cast it to the Dogs and Vultures.

There are yet others of a low kind of Taste, who, without any Malignity to the
Character of a great Author, lessen the Dignity of their Subject by insisting
too meanly upon little Particularities. They imagine it the Part of an
Historian to omit nothing they meet concerning him whom they write upon; and
gather every thing wherein he is named, without any distinction, to the
Prejudice or Neglect of the more noble Parts of his Character: Like those
trifling Painters, or Sculptors, who bestow infinite Pains and Patience upon
the most insignificant Parts of a Figure, 'till they sink the Grandeur of the
Whole, by finishing every thing with the neatest Want of Judgment.

Besides these, there is a fourth sort of Men, who pretend to divest themselves
of impetuous Emotions on both sides, and to get above that imperfect Idea of
their Subject, which little Writers fall into; who propose to themselves a calm
Search after Truth, and a rational Adherence to Probability in their historical
Collections: Who neither wish to be led into the Fables of Poetry, nor are
willing to support the Falsehoods of a malignant Criticism; but, endeavoring
to steer in a middle way, have obtained a Character of failing least in the
Choice of Materials for History, even from the darkest Ages.

Being therefore to write something concerning a Life, which there is little
Prospect of our knowing, after it has been the fruitless Enquiry of so many
Ages, and which has however been thus differently treated by Historians, I
shall endeavor to speak of it, not as a Certainty, but as the Tradition,
Opinion, or Collection of Authors, who have been supposed to write of Homer in
these four preceding Methods, to which we shall also add some farther
Conjectures of our own. After his Life has been thus rather spoken of than
discovered, I shall consider him historically as an Author, with regard to
those Works which he has left behind him: In doing which, we may trace the
degrees of Esteem they have obtained in different Periods of Time, and regulate
our present Opinion of them, by a View of that Age in which they were written.

I. Stories of Homer, which are the Effects of extravagant Admiration.
I. If we take a View of Homer in those fabulous Traditions which the
Admiration of the ancient Heathens has occasioned, we find them running to
Superstition, and multiplied and independent on one another, in the different
Accounts which are given with respect to Egypt and Greece, the two native
Countries of Fable.

We have one in Eustathius in Od. 12.
Eustathius most strangely framed, which Alexander Paphius has reported
concerning Homer's Birth and Infancy. That "He was born in Egypt of Dmasagoras
and Aethra, and brought up by a Daughter of Orus, the Priest of Isis, who was
herself a Prophetess, and from whose Breasts Drops of Honey would frequently
distill into the Mouth of the Infant. In the Nightime the first Sounds he
uttered were the Notes of nine several Birds: In the Morning he was found
playing with nine Doves in the Bed: The Sybil, who attended him, used to be
seized with a poetical Fury, and utter Verses, in which she commanded
Dmasagoras to build a Temple to the Muses: This he performed in Obedience to
her Inspiration, and related all these things to the Child when he was grown
up; who, in Memory of the Doves which played with him during his Infancy, has
in his Works preferred this Bird to the Honor of bringing Ambrosia to Jupiter."

One would think a Story of this Nature, so fit for Age to talk of, and Infancy
to hear, were incapable of being handed down to us. But we find the Tradition
again taken up to be heightened in one part, and carried forward in another.
Heliod. Aethiop. l. 3.
Heliodorus, who had heard of this Claim which Egypt put in for Homer,
endeavors to strengthen it by naming Thebes for the particular place of his
Birth. He allows too, that a Priest was his reputed Father, but that his real
Father, according to the Opinion of Egypt, was Mercury: He says, "That when
the Priest was celebrating the Rites of his Country, and therefore slept with
his Wife in the Temple, the God had knowledge of her, and begot Homer: That he
was born with Tufts of Hair on his (...), Femur.
Thigh, as a Sign of unlawful Generation, from whence he was called Homer by the
Nations through which he wandered: That he himself was the occasion why this
Story of his divine Extraction is unknown; because he neither told his Name,
Race, nor Country, being ashamed of his Exile, to which his reputed Father
drove him from among the consecrated Youths, on account of that Mark which
their Priests esteemed a Testimony of an incestuous Birth."

These are the extravagant Stories by which Men, who have not been able to
express how much they admire him, transcend the Bounds of Probability to say
something extraordinary. The Mind, that becomes dazzled with the Sight of his
Performances, loses the common Idea of a Man in the fansy'd Splendour of
Perfection: It sees nothing less than a God worthy to be his Father, nothing
less than a Prophetess deserving to be his Nurse, and, growing unwilling that
he should be spoken of in a Language beneath its Imaginations, delivers Fables
in the place of History.

But whatever has thus been offered to support the Claim of Egypt, they who
plead for Greece are not to be accused for coming short of it. Their Fancy
rose with a Refinement above what we are supposed to have of their Masters, and
frequently the Veil of Fiction is wrought fine enough to be seen through, so
that it hardly hides the Meaning it is made to cover, from the first Glance of
the Imagination. For a Proof of this, we may mention that Poetical Genealogy
which is delivered for Homer's, in the (...)
Greek Treatise of the Contention between him and Hesiod, and but little varied
by the Relation of it in Suidas.

"The Poet Linus (say they) was born of Apollo and Thoose, the Daughter of
Neptune. Pierus of Linus: Oeagrus of King Pierus and the Nymph Methone: Orpheus
of Oeagrus and the Muse Calliope. From Orpheus came Othrys: from him
Harmonides: from him Philoterpus: from him Euphemus: from him Epiphrades, who
begot Menalops, the Father of Dius: Dius had Hesiod the Poet and Perses by
Pucamede, the Daughter of Apollo. Then Perses had Maeon, on whose Daughter
Crytheis, the River Meles begot Homer."

Here we behold a wonderful Genealogy contrived industriously to raise our Idea
to the highest, where Gods, Goddesses, Muses, Kings, and Poets link in a
descent; nay, where Poets are made to depend, as it were, in Clusters upon the
same Stalk beneath one another. If we consider too that Harmonides is derived
from Harmony, Philoterpus from love of Delight, Euphemus from beautiful
Diction, Epiphrades from Intelligence, and Pucamede from Prudence; it may not
be improbable, but the Inventors meant, by a Fiction of this Nature, to turn
such Qualifications into Persons as were agreeable to his Character, for whom
the Line was drawn: So that every thing, Divine or Great, will thus come
together by the extravagant Indulgence of Fancy, while it turns itself
sometimes to Admiration, and sometimes to Allegory.

After this fabulous Tree of his Pedigree, we may regularly view him in one
Passage concerning his Birth, which, though it differs in a Circumstance from
what has been here delivered, yet carries on the same Air, and regards the same
Traditions. There is a short Life of Homer attributed to Plutarch, wherein a
third part of Aristotle on Poetry, which is now lost, is quoted for an account
of his uncommon Birth, in this manner. "At the time when Neleus, the Son of
Codrus, led the Colony which was sent into Ionia, there was in the Island of Io
a young Girl, compressed by a Genius, who delighted to associate with the
Muses, and share in their Consorts. She, finding herself with Child, and being
touched with the Shame of what had happened to her, removed from thence to a
Place called Aegina. There she was taken in an Excursion made by Robbers, and
being brought to Smyrna, which was then under the Lydians, they gave her to
Maeon the King, who married her upon account of her Beauty. But while she
walked on the Bank of the River Meles, she brought forth Homer and expired. The
Infant was taken by Maeon, and bred up as his Son, 'till the Death of that
Prince." And from this Point of the Story the Poet is let down into his
traditional Poverty. Here we see, though he be taken out of the Lineage of Meles
where we met him before, he has still as wonderful a Rise invented for him; he
is still to spring from a Demigod, one who was of a Poetical Disposition, from
whom he might inherit a Soul turned to Poetry, and receive an Assistance of
heavenly Inspiration.

In his Life the most general Tradition concerning him is his Blindness, yet
there are some who will not allow even this to have happened after the manner
in which it falls upon other Men: Chance and Sickness are excluded; nothing
less than Gods and Heroes must be visibly concerned about him. Thus we find
among the different Accounts which Hermias in Phaed. Plat. Leo Allat. de Patr.
Hom. C. ^^
Hermias has collected concerning his Blindness, that when Homer resolved to
write of Achilles, he had an exceeding Desire to fill his Mind with a just Idea
of so glorious a Hero: Wherefore, having paid all due Honors at his Tomb, he
entreats that he may obtain a sight of him. The Hero grants his Poet's
Petition, and rises in a glorious Suit of Armor, which cast so unsufferable a
Splendour, that Homer lost his Eyes, while he gazed for the Enlargement of his
Notions.

If this be any thing more than a mere Fable, one would be apt to imagine it
insinuated his contracting a Blindness by too intense an Application while he
wrote his Iliad. But it is a very pompous way of letting us into the Knowledge
of so short a Truth: It looks as if Men imagined the Lives of Poets should be
Poetically written; that to speak plainly of them, were to speak contemptibly;
or that we debase them, when they are placed in less glorious Company than
those exalted Spirits which they themselves have been fond to celebrate. We may
however in some measure be reconciled to this last idle Fable, for having
occasioned so beautiful an Episode in the Ambra of Politian. That which does
not inform us in a History, may please us in its proper Sphere of Poetry.

II. Stories of Homer proceeding from Envy.
II. Such Stories as these have been the Effects of a superstitious Fondness,
and of our Astonishment at what we consider in a View of Perfection. But
neither have all Men the same Taste, nor do they equally submit to the
Superiority of others, nor bear that human Nature, which they know to be
imperfect, should be praised in an Extreme without opposition. From some
Principles of this kind have arisen a second sort of Stories, which glance at
Homer with malignant Suppositions, and endeavor to throw a diminishing Air
over his Life, as a kind of Answer to those who sought to aggrandize him
injudiciously.

Under this Head we may reckon those ungrounded Conjectures with which his
Adversaries asperse the very Design and Prosecution of his Travels, when they
insinuate, that they were one continued Search after Authors who had written
before him, and particularly upon the same Subject, in order to destroy them,
or to rob them of their Inventions.

Thus we read in Diod. Sic. l. 4.
Diodorus Siculus, "That there was one Daphne, the Daughter of Tiresias, who
from her Inspirations obtained the Title of a Sybil. She had a very
extraordinary Genius, and being made Priestess at Delphos, wrote Oracles with
wonderful Elegance, which Homer sought for, and adorned his Poems with several
of her Verses." But she is placed so far in the fabulous Age of the World, that
nothing can be averred of her: And as for the Verses now ascribed to the
Sybils, they are more modern than to be able to confirm the Story; which, as it
is universally assented to, discovers that whatever there is in them in common
with Homer, the Compilers have rather taken from him; perhaps to strengthen the
Authority of their Work by the Protection of this Tradition.

The next Insinuation we hear is from Suidas, that Palamedes, who fought at
Troy, was famous for Poetry, and wrote concerning that War in the Dorick Letter
which he invented, probably much against Agamemnon and Ulysses, his mortal
Enemies. Upon this Account some have fancied his Works were suppressed by
Agamemnon's Posterity, or that their entire Destruction was contrived and
effected by Homer when he undertook the same Subject. But surely the Works of
so considerable a Man, when they had been able to bear up so long a time as
that which passed between the Siege of Troy, and the flourishing of Homer, must
have been too much dispersed, for one of so mean a Condition as he is
represented, to have destroyed in every place, though he had been never so much
assisted by the vigilant Temper of Envy. And we may say too, that what might
have been capable of raising this Principle in him, must be capable of being in
some measure esteemed, and of having at least one Line of it preserved to us.

After him, in the order of time, we meet with a whole Set of Names, to whom
the Maligners of Homer would have him obliged, without being able to prove
their Assertion. Suidas mentions Corinnus Iliensis, the Secretary of Palamedes,
who writ a Poem upon the same Subject, but no one is produced as having seen
it. Tzetzes Chil. 5. Hist. 29.
Tzetzes mentions (and from Johannes Melala only) Sisyphus the Coan, Secretary
of Teucer, but it is not so much as known if he writ Verse or Prose. Besides
these, are Dictys the Cretan, Secretary to Idomeneus, and Dares the Phrygian an
Attendant of Hector, who have spurious Treatises passing under their Names.
From each of these is Homer said to have borrowed his whole Argument; so
inconsistent are these Stories with one another.

The next Names we find, are Demodocus, whom Homer might have met at Corcyra,
and Phemius, whom he might have met at Ithaca: the one (as Plutarch on Music.
Plutarch says) having according to Tradition written the War at Troy, the
other the Return of the Grecian Captains. But these are only two Names of
Friends, which he is pleased to honor with Eternity in his Poem, or two
different Pictures of himself, as Author of the Iliad and Odysses, or entirely
the Children of his Imagination, without any particular Allusion. So that his
Usage here, puts me in mind of his own Vulcan in the Iliad 18.
Iliad: The God had cast two Statues which he endued with the Power of Motion;
and it is said presently after, that he is scarce able to go unless they
support him.

It is reported by some, says Ptol. Ephesians. Excerpt. apud Photium. l. 5.
Ptolomaeus Ephestio, "That there was before Homer, a Woman of Memphis, called
Phantasia, who writ of the Wars of Troy, and the Wanderings of Ulysses. Now
Homer arriving at Memphis where she had laid up her Works, and getting
acquainted with Phanitas, whose Business it was to copy the sacred Writings, he
obtained a sight of these, and followed entirely the Scheme she had drawn." But
this is a wild Story, which speaks of an Egyptian Woman with a Greek Name, and
who never was heard of but upon this account. It appears indeed from his
Knowledge of the Egyptian Learning, that he was initiated into their
Mysteries, and for ought we know by one Phanitas. But if we consider what the
Name of the Woman signifies, it seems only as if from being used in a
figurative Expression, it had been mistaken afterward for a proper Name. And
then the Meaning will be, that having gathered as much Information concerning
the Grecian and Trojan Story, as he could be furnished with from the Accounts
of Egypt, which were generally mixed with Fancy and Fable, he wrought out his
Plans of the Iliad and the Odysses.

We pass all these Stories, together with the little Iliad of Siagrus,
mentioned by Aelian, l. 14. c. 21.
Aelian. But one cannot leave this Subject without reflecting on the
depreciating Humor, and odd Industry of Man, which shows itself in raising
such a Number of Insinuations that clash with each other, and in spiriting up
such a Crowd of unwarranted Names to support them. Nor can we but admire at the
contradictory Nature of this Proceeding, that Names of Works, which either
never were in Being, or never worthy to live, should be produced, only to
persuade us that the most lasting and beautiful Poem of the Ancients was taken
out of them. A Beggar might be content to patch up a Garment with such Shreds
as the World throws away, but it is never to be imagined an Emperor would make
his Robes of them.

After Homer had spent a considerable time in Travel, we find him toward his
Age introduced to such an Action as tends to his Disparagement. It is not
enough to accuse him for spoiling the dead, they raise a living Author by whom
he must be baffled in that Qualification on which his Fame is founded.

There is in Hesiod Op. and dicrum, l. 2. v. 272, etc.
Hesiod an Account of an ancient Poetical Contention at the Funeral of
Amphidamas, in which, he says, he obtained the Prize, but does not mention from
whom he carried it. There is also among the Hom. Hymn. 2. ad Venerem.
Hymns ascribed to Homer, a Prayer to Venus, for Success in a Poetical Dispute,
but it neither mentions where, nor against whom. But though they have neglected
to name their Antagonists, others have since taken care to fill up the Stories
by putting them together. The making two such considerable Names in Poetry
engage, carries an amusing Pomp in it, like making two Heroes of the first Rank
enter the Lists of Combat. And if Homer and Hesiod had their Parties among the
Grammarians, here was an excellent Opportunity for Hesiod's Favorers to make a
Sacrifice of Homer. Hence might a bare Conjecture spread into a Tradition, then
the Tradition give occasion to an Epigram, which is yet extant, and again the
Epigram (for want of knowing the Time it was writ in) be alleged as a Proof of
that Conjecture from whence it sprung. After this, a (...)
whole Treatise was written upon it, which appears not very ancient, because it
mentions Adrian: The Story agrees in the main with the short Account we find in
Plut. Banquet of the seven wise Men.
Plutarch, "That (...)
Ganictor, the Son of Amphidamas, King of Euboea, being used to celebrate his
Father's funeral Games, invited from all Parts Men famous for Strength and
Wisdom. Among these Homer and Hesiod arrived at Chalcis. The King Panidas
presided over the Contest, which being finished, he decreed the Tripos to
Hesiod, with this Elogy in the Sentence, That the Poet of Peace and Husbandry
better deserved to be crowned, than he who stirs us up to War and Contention.
Whereupon Hesiod dedicated the Prize to the Muses, with this Inscription, "(...)
"(...)"
Which are two Lines taken from that Place in Hesiod where he mentions no
Antagonist, and altered, that the two Names might be brought in, as is evident
by comparing them with these, (...)
(...)


To answer this Story, we take notice that Hesiod is generally placed after
Homer. Graevius, his own Commentator, sets him a hundred Years lower; and
whether he were so or no, yet Plut. Symp. l. 5.. 2.
Plutarch has slightly passed the whole Account as a Fable. Nay, we may draw an
Argument against it from Hesiod himself: He had a Love of Fame which caused him
to engage at the Funeral Games, and which went so far as to make him record his
Conquest in his own Works; Had he defeated Homer, the same Principle would have
made him mention a Name that could have secured his own to Immortality. A Poet
who records his Glory, would not omit the noblest Circumstance, and Homer, like
a Captive Prince, had certainly graced the Triumph of his Adversary.

Toward the latter end of his Life, there is another Story invented, which
makes him conclude it in a manner altogether beneath the Greatness of a Genius.
We find in the Life said to be written by Plutarch, a Tradition, "That he was
warned by an Oracle to beware of the young Men's Riddle. This remained long
obscure to him, 'til he arrived at the Island Io. There as he sat to behold the
Fishermen, they proposed to him a Riddle in Verse, which he being unable to
answer, died for Grief." This Story refutes itself by carrying Superstition at
one end, and Folly at the other. It seems conceived with an Air of Derision to
lay a great Man in the Dust after a foolish Manner. The same sort of Hand might
have framed that Tale of Aristotle's drowning himself because he could not
account for the Euripus: The Design is the same, the Turn the same; and all the
difference, that the great Men are each to suffer in his Character, the one by
a Poetical Riddle, the other by a Philosophical Problem. But these are Actions
which can only proceed from the Meanness of Pride, or Extravagance of Madness:
A Soul enlarged with Knowledge (so vastly as was that of Homer) better knows
the proper Stress which is to be laid upon every Incident, and the Proportion
of Concern, or Carelessness, with which it ought to be affected. But it is the
Fate of narrow Capacities to measure Mankind by a false Standard, and imagine
the Great, like themselves, capable of being disconcerted by little Occasions;
to frame their malignant Fables according to this Imagination, and to stand
detected by it as by an evident Mark of Ignorance.

III. Stories of Homer proceeding from trifling Curiosity.
III. The third Manner in which the Life of Homer has been written, is but a
heaping of all the Traditions and Hints which the Writers could meet with,
great or little, in order to tell a Story of him to the World. Perhaps the want
of choice Materials might put them upon the Necessity; or perhaps an
injudicious Desire of saying all they could, occasioned the fault. However it
be, a Life composed of trivial Circumstances, which (though it give a true
account of several Passages) has but little of that Appearance in which a Man
was most famous, and hardly any thing correspondent to the Idea we entertain of
him: Such a Life, I say, will never answer rightly the demand the World has
upon an Historian. Yet the most formal Account we have of Homer is of this
Nature, I mean that which is said to be collected by Herodotus. It is, in
short, an unsupported minute Treatise, composed of Events which lie within the
Compass of Probability, and belong to the lowest Sphere of Life. It seems
through all its Frame to be entirely conducted by the Spirit of a Grammarian,
ever abounding with extempore Verses, as if it were to prove a thing so
unquestionable as our Author's Title to Rapture; and at the same time the
Occasions are so poorly invented, that they misbecome the Warmth of a Poetical
Imagination. There is nothing in it above the Life which a Grammarian might
lead himself; nay, it is but such an one as they commonly do lead, the highest
Stage of which is to be Master of a School. But because this is a Treatise to
which Writers have had recourse for want of a better, I shall give the
following Abstract.

Homer was born at Smyrna, about one hundred sixty eight Years after the Siege
of Troy, and six hundred twenty two Years before the Expedition of Xerxes. His
Mother's Name was Crytheis, who proving unlawfully with Child, was sent away
from Cumae by her Uncle, with Ismenias, one of those who led the Colony to
Smyrna then building. A while after, as she was celebrating a Festival with
other Women on the Banks of the River Meles, she was delivered of Homer, whom
she therefore named Melesigenes. Upon this she left Ismenias, and supported
herself by Working, 'til Phemius (who taught a School in Smyrna) fell in love
with her, and married her. But both dying in process of Time, the School fell
to Homer, who managed it with such Wisdom, that he was universally admired both
by Natives and Strangers. Amongst these latter was Mentes, a Master of a Ship
from Leucadia, by whose Persuasions and Promises he gave up his School, and
went to travel: With him he visited Spain and Italy, but was left behind at
Ithaca upon account of a Defluxion in his Eyes. During his Stay he was
entertained by one Mentor, a Man of Fortune, Justice, and Hospitality, and
learned the principal Incidents of Ulysses's Life. But at the Return of Mentes,
he went from thence to Colophon, where, his Defluxion renewing, he fell
entirely blind. Upon this he could think of no better Expedient than to go back
to Smyrna, where perhaps he might be supported by those who knew him, and have
the leisure to addict himself to Poetry. But there he found his Poverty
increase, and his hopes of Encouragement fail; so that he removed for Cumae,
and by the way was entertained for some time at the House of one Tychius a
Leather-Dresser. At Cumae his Poems were wonderfully admired, but when he
proposed to eternize their Town if they would allow him a Sallary, he was
answered, That there would be no end of maintaining all the (...), or blind
Men, and hence he got the Name of Homer. From Cumae he went to Phocaea, where
one Thestorides (a Schoolmaster also) offered to maintain him if he would
suffer him to transcribe his Verses: This Homer complying with for mere
Necessity, the other had no sooner gotten them, but he removed to Chois; There
the Poems gained him Wealth and Honor, while the Author himself hardly earned
his Bread by repeating them. At last, some who came from Chios having told the
People that the same Verses were published there by a Schoolmaster, Homer
resolved to find him out. Having therefore landed near that Place, he was
received by one Glaucus a Shepherd (at whose Door he had like to have been
worried by Dogs) and carried by him to his Master at Bollissus, who admiring
his Knowledge, entrusted him with the Education of his Children. Here his
Praise began to spread, and Thestorides, who heard of his Neighborhood, fled
before him. He removed however some time afterward to Chois, where he set up a
School of Poetry, gained a competent Fortune, married a Wife, and had two
Daughters, the one of which died young, the other was married to his Patron at
Bollissus. Here he inserted in his Poems the Names of those to whom he had been
most obliged, as, Mentes, Phemius, Mentor, and Tychius: and resolving for
Athens, he made honorable mention of that City, to prepare the Athenians for a
kind Reception. But as he went, the Ship put in at Samos, where he continued
the whole Winter, singing at the Houses of great Men, with a Train of Boys
after him. In Spring he went on board again in order to prosecute his Journey
to Athens, but landing by the way at Ios, he fell sick, died, and was buried on
the Seashore.

This is the Life of Homer ascribed to Herodotus, though it is wonderful it
should be so, since it evidently contradicts his own History, by placing Homer
six hundred twenty two Years before the Expedition of Xerxes; whereas Herodotus
himself, who was alive at the time of that Expedition, says Homer was only
Herod. l. 2.
four hundred Years before him. However, if we can imagine that there may be any
thing of Truth in the main Parts of this Treatise, we may gather these general
Observations from it: That he showed a great Thirst of Knowledge, by
undertaking such long and numerous Travels; That he manifested an unexampled
Vigor of Mind, by being able to write with more Fire under the Disadvantages of
Blindness, and the utmost Poverty, than any Poet after him in better
Circumstances; And that he had an unlimited Sense of Fame (the Attendant of
noble Spirits) which prompted him to engage in new Travels, both under these
Disadvantages, and the additional Burden of old Age.

But it will not perhaps be either improper or difficult to make some
Conjectures, which seem to lay open the Foundation from whence the Traditions
which frame the low Lives of Homer have arisen. In the first place we may
consider, That there are no Historians of his Time (or none handed down to us)
who have mentioned him; and that he has never spoken plainly of himself, in
those Works which have been ascribed to him without Controversy. However, an
eager Desire to know something concerning him has occasioned Mankind to labor
the Point under these Disadvantages, and turn on all Hands to see if there were
any thing left which might have the least Appearance of Information. Upon the
Search, they find no Remains but his Name and Works, and resolve to torture
these upon the Rack of Invention, in order to give some account of the Person
they belong to.

The first Thing therefore they settle is, That what passed for his Name, must
be his Name no longer, but an additional Title used instead of it. The reason
why it was given, must be some Accident of his Life. Having thus found an end
of the Clue, they proceed to consider every thing that the word may imply by
its Derivation. One finds that (...) signifies a Thigh; whence arises the
Tradition in Hell. l. 3.
Heliodorus, that he was banished Egypt for the Mark on that Part, which
showed a spurious Birth; and this they imagine ground enough to give him the
Life of a Wanderer. A second finds that (...) signifies an Hostage, and then he
must be delivered as such in a War (according to Proc. vis. Hom.
Proclus) between Smyrna and Chios. A third can derive the Name (...), non
videns, from whence he must be a blind Man (as in the Piece ascribed to Herod.
vit. Hom.
Herodotus.) A fourth brings him from (...), speaking in Council; and then (as
it is in Suidas) he must, by a divine Inspiration, declare to the Smyrnaeans,
that they should war against Colophon. A fifth finds the word may be brought to
signify following others, or joining himself to them, and then he must be
called Homer for saying (as it is quoted from Plut. vit. Hom.
Aristotle in the Life ascribed to Plutarch) that he would (...), or follow the
Lydians from Smyrna. Thus has the Name been turned and winded enough at least
to give a Suspicion, that he who got a new Etymology, got a handle either for a
new Life of him, or something which he added to the old one.

However, the Name itself not affording enough to furnish out a whole Life, his
Works must be brought in for Assistance, and it is taken for granted, That
where he has not spoken of himself, he lies veiled beneath the Persons or
Actions of those whom he describes. Because he calls a Poet by the Name of
Phemius in his Odysses, they conclude this Herod. vit. Hom.
Phemius was his Master. Because he speaks of Demodocus as another Poet who was
blind, and frequented Palaces, he must be sent about Ibid.
blind, to sing at the Doors of rich Men. If Ulysses be set upon by Dogs at his
Shepherd's Cottage, because this is a low Adventure, it is thought to be his
own at Bollissus. Ibid.
And if he calls the Leather-dresser, who made Ajax's Shield, by the Name of
Tychius, he has been supported by such an one in his Wants: Nay, some have been
so violently carried into this way of conjecturing, that the bare Vid. M.
Dacier 's Life of Homer.
Simile of a Woman who works hard for her Livelihood, is said to have been
borrowed from his Mother's Condition, and brought as a Proof of it. Thus he is
still imagined to intend himself; and the Fictions of Poetry, converted into
real Facts, are delivered for his Life, who has assigned them to others. All
those Stories in his Works which suit with a mean Condition are supposed to
have happened to him, though the same way of Inference might as well prove him to
have acted in a higher Sphere, from the many Passages that show his Skill in
Government, and his Knowledge of the great Parts of Life.

There are some other scattered Stories of Homer which fall not under these
Heads, but are however of as trifling a Nature; as much unfit for the Materials
of History, still more ungrounded, if possible, and arising merely from Chance,
or the Humors of Men: Such is the Report we meet with from Diogenes Lacrtius
ex Heracl. in vita Socratis.
Heraclides, That " Homer was fined at Athens for a Madman;" which seems
invented by the Disciples of Socrates to cast an Odium upon the Athenians for
their consenting to the Death of their Master, and carries in it something like
a declaiming Revenge of the Schools, as if the World should imagine the one
could be esteemed mad, where the other was put to Death for being wicked. Such
another Report is that in Aelian. l. 9. cap. 15.
Aelian, That " Homer portion'd his Daughter with some of his Works for want of
Money;" which looks but like a Whim delivered in the Gaiety of Fancy; a Jest
upon a poor Wit, which at first might have had an Epigrammatist for its Father,
and been afterward gravely understood by some painful Collector. In short,
Mankind have labored heartily about him to no purpose; they have caught up
every thing greedily, with that busy minute Curiosity and unsatisfactory
Inquisitiveness which Seneca calls the Disease of the Greeks; they have puzzled
the Cause by their Attempts to find it out; and, like Travelers entirely
destitute of a Road, yet resolved to make it over unpassable Deserts, they
superinduce Error, instead of removing Ignorance.

IV. Probable Conjectures concerning Homer.
IV. Whenever Men have set themselves to write a Life of Homer, clear from
Superstition, Envy, and Trifling, they have grown ashamed of all these
Traditions. This, however, has not occasioned every one to desist from the
Undertaking; but still the Difficulty which could not make them desist, has
necessitated them, either to deliver the old Story with Excuses; or else,
instead of a Life, to compose a Treatise partly of Criticism, and partly of
Character; rather descriptive, than supported by Action, and the Air of History.

His Time.
They begin with letting us know, that the Time in which he lived has never
been fixed beyond dispute, and that the Opinions of Authors are various
concerning it: But the Controversy, in its several Conjectures, includes a
Space of Years between the earliest and latest, from twenty four to about five
hundred after the Siege of Troy. Whenever the Time was, it seems not to have
been near that Siege, from his own (...). Iliad 2.
Invocation of the Muses to recount the Catalogue of the Ships: "For we, says
he, have only heard a Rumor, and know nothing particularly." It is remarked by
Hic long a temporibus belli quod composuit, Troici, quam quidam rentur,
abfuit. Nam ferme ante annos 950 floruit, intra mill natus est: (quo nomine
non est mirandum quod saepe illud usurpat, (...). Hoc enim ut hominum ita
saeculorum notatur differentia. Vell. Paterc. lib. 1.
Velleius Paterculus, That it must have been considerably later, from his own
Confession, that Mankind was but half as strong in his Age, as in that he writ
of; which, as it is founded upon a Notion of a gradual Degeneracy in our
Nature, discovers the Interval to have been long between Homer and his Subject.
But not to trouble our selves with entering into all the dry Dispute, we may
here take notice, that the World is inclined to stand by the Vide Dacier, Du
Pin, etc. concerning the Arundelian Marble.
Arundelian Marble, as the most certain Computation of those early Times; and
this, by placing him at the time when Diognetus ruled in Athens, makes him
flourish a little before the Olympiads were established; about three hundred
Years after the taking of Troy, and near a thousand before the Christian Era.
For a farther Confirmation of this, we have some great Names of Antiquity, who
give him a Cotemporary agreeing with the Computation. Cicero Qu. Tuscul. l. 5.
Cicero says, There was a Tradition that Homer lived about the time of
Lycurgus. Strabo, l. 10.
Strabo tells us, It was reported that Lycurgus went to Chios for an Interview
with him. And even Plut. vita Lycurgi.
Plutarch, when he says, Lycurgus received Homer's Works from the Grandson of
that Creophilus with whom he had lived, does not put him so far backward, but
that possibly they might have been alive together.

His Country.
The next Dispute regards his Country, concerning which, (...), of Adrian 's
Oracle.
Adrian inquired of the Gods, as a Question not to be settled by Men; and
Appion (according to Plin. l. 30. cap. 2.
Pliny) raised a Spirit for his Information. That which has increased the
difficulty, is the Number of contesting Places, of which Suidas has reckoned up
nineteen in one Breath. But his ancient Commentator, Seneca Ep. 88. concerning
Didymus.
Didymus, found the Subject so fertile, as to employ a great Part of his four
thousand Volumes upon it. There is a Prophecy of the Sybils that he should be
born at Salamis in Cyprus; and then to play an Argument of the same Nature
against it, there is the Oracle given to Adrian afterward, that says he was
born in Ithaca. There are Customs of Aeolia and Egypt cited from his Works, to
make out by turns, and with the same Probability, that he belonged to each of
them. There was a School showed for his at Colophon, and a Tomb at Io, both of
equal Strength to prove he had his Birth in either. As for the Athenians, they
challenged him as born where they had a Colony; or else in behalf of Greece in
general, and as the Metropolis of its Learning, they made his Name free of
their City, ( qu. Licinia and Mutia lege, says Politian. Pref. in Homerum.
Politian) after the manner of that Law by which all Italy became free of Rome.
All these have their Authors to record their Titles, but still the Weight of
the Question seems to lie between Smyrna and Chios, which we must therefore
take a little more notice of. That Homer then was born at Smyrna is endeavored
to be proved by an Epigram on Pisistratus in the anonymous Life before Homer.
Epigram, recorded to have been under the Statue of Pisistratus at Athens; by
the Reports mentioned in Cicero, Strabo, and A. Gellius; and by the Greek
Lives, which are prefixed to him with the Names of Herodotus, Plutarch, and
Proclus; as also the two that are anonymous. For this the Vitruvius Proem. l. 7.
Smyrnaeans built him a Temple, cast Medals of him, and grew so possessed of his
having been theirs, that it is said they burned Zoilus for affronting them in
the Person of Homer. On the other hand, the Chians plead the ancient
Authorities of Simonides Frag. de brevitat. Vitae, quoting a Verse of Homer,
(...)
Simonides and Theocritus in Dioscuris, -- (...)
(...)
(...) --

Theocritus for his being born among them. They mention a Race they had, called
the Homeridae, whom they reckoned his Posterity; they cast Medals of him; they
show to this Day an Homaerium, or Temple of Homer, near Bollissus; and close
their Arguments with a Quotation from the Hymn to Apollo (which is acknowledged
for Homer's by Thucyd. lib. 3.
Thucydides) where he calls himself, "The blind Man that inhabits Chios."The
Reader has here the Sum of the large Treatise of Leo Allatius, written
particularly on this Subject Leo Allatius de Patria Homeri.
, in which, after having separately weighed the Pretensions of all, he
concludes for Chios. For my part, I determine nothing in a Point of so much
Uncertainty; neither which of these was honored with his Birth, nor whether
any of them was, nor, again, whether each may not have produced his own Homer;
since Xenophon de Aequivocis.
Xenophon says, there were many of the Name. But one cannot avoid being
surpised at the prodigious Veneration of his Character, which could engage
Mankind with such Eagerness in a Point so little essential; that Kings should
send to Oracles for the Enquiry of his Birthplace; that Cities should be in
Strife about it, and whole Lives of learned Men employed upon it; that some
should write Treatises concerning it; that others should call up Spirits
unavailingly; that thus, in short, Heaven, Earth and Hell should be sought to,
for the Decision of a Question which terminates in Curiosity only.

His Parents.
If we endeavor to find the Parents of Homer, we immediately perceive the
Search is fruitless. Plut. vita Hom. ex Ephoro.
Ephorus has made Maeon to be his Father, by a Niece whom he deflour'd; and
this has so far obtained, as to give him the derivative Name of Maeonides. His
Mother (if we allow the Story of Maeon) is called Crytheis: But we are lost
again in Uncertainty if we search farther; for Suidas has mentioned Eumetis or
Polycaste; and Pausanias, l. 10.
Pausanias, Clymene or Themisto; which happens, because the contesting Countries
find out Mothers of their own for him. Tradition has in this case afforded us
no more Light, than what may serve to show its Shadows in a Confusion; they
strike the Sight with so equal a Probability, that we are in doubt which to
choose, and must pass the Question undecided.

His Name.
If we enquire concerning his own Name, even that is doubted of. He has been
called Melesigenes from the River where he was born. Homer has been reckoned an
ascititious Name, from some Accident in his Life: The Certamen Homericum calls
him once Auletes, perhaps from his musical Genius; and Lucian 's true History,
l. 2.
Lucian, Tigranes; it may be from a Confusion with that Tigranes or Suidas de
Tigrete.
Tigretes, who was Brother of Queen Artemisia, and whose Name has been so far
mingled with his, as to make him be esteemed Author of some of the lesser Works
which are ascribed to Homer. It may not be amiss to close these Criticisms with
that agreeable Derision wherewith Lucian treats the over-busy Humor of
Grammarians in their Search after minute and impossible Enquiries, when he
feigns, that he had talked over the Point with Homer in the Island of the
Blessed. "I asked him, says he, of what Country he was? a Question hard to be
resolved with Us: to which he answered, He could not certainly tell, because
some had informed him, that he was of Chios, some of Smyrna, and others of
Colophon; but he took himself for a Babylonian; called Tigranes, while he lived
among his Countrymen, and Homer, while he was an Hostage among the Graecians."

His Blindness
At his Birth he appears not to have been blind, whatever he might be
afterward. The The Medal is exhibited at the beginning of this Essay.
Chian Medal of him (which is of great Antiquity, according to Leo Allatius)
seats him with a Volume open, and reading intently: But there is no need of
Proofs from Antiquity for that which every Line of his Works will demonstrate.
With what an Exactness, agreeable to the natural Appearance of Things, do his
Cities stand, his Mountains rise, his Rivers wind, and his Regions lie
extended? How beautifully are the Surfaces of all things drawn in their
Figures, and adorned with their Paintings? What Address in Action, what visible
Characters of the Passions inspirit his Heroes? It is not to be imagined, that
a Man could have been always blind, who thus inimitably copies Nature, who
gives every where the proper Proportion, Figure, Color, and Life: " Quem si
quis caecum genitum putat (says Paterculus, l. 1.
Paterculus) omnibus sensibus orbus est:" He must certainly have beheld the
Creation, considered it with a long Attention, and enriched his Fancy by the
most sensible Knowledge of those Ideas which he makes the Reader see while he
but describes them.

His Education and Master.
As he grew forward in Years, he was trained up to Learning (if we credit Diod.
Sic. l. 3.
Diodorus) under one " Pronapides, a Man of excellent natural Endowments, who
taught the Pelasgick Letter invented by Linus." From him might he learn to
preserve his Poetry by committing it to Writing; which we mention, because it
is generally believed Joseph. cont. Apion, l. 1.
no Poems before his were so preserved; and he himself in the third Line of his
Batrochomuomachia (if that Piece be allowed to be his) expressly speaks of --
(...)
(...)
Batroch.
writing his Works in his Tablets.

His Travels.
When he was of riper Years, for his farther Accomplishment, and the
Gratification of his Thirst of Knowledge, he spent a considerable part of his
time in traveling. Upon which account, Procl. vita Hom.
Proclus has taken notice that he must have abounded in Riches: "For long
Travels, says he, occasion high Expenses, and especially at those times when
Men could neither sail without imminent Danger and Inconveniences, nor had a
regulated manner of Commerce with one another." This way of reasoning appears
very probable; and if it does not prove him to have been rich, it shows him, at
least, to have had Patrons of a generous Spirit, who, observing the Vastness of
his Capacity, believed themselves beneficent to Mankind, while they supported
one who seemed born for something extraordinary.

Egypt being at that time the Seat of Learning, the greatest Wits and Genius's
of Greece used to travel thither. Among these Diod Sic. l. 1.
Diodorus reckons Homer, and to strengthen his Opinion, alleges that Multitude
of their Notions which he has received into his Poetry, and of their Customs,
to which he alludes in his Fictions: Such as his Gods, which are named from the
first Egyptian Kings; the Number of the Muses taken from the nine Minstrels
which attended Osyris; the Feast wherein they used to send their Statues of the
Deities into Aethiopia, and to return after twelve Days; and the carrying their
dead Bodies over the Lake to a pleasant Place called Acherusia near Memphis,
from whence arose the Stories of Charon, Styx, and Elysium. These are Notions
which so abound in him, as to make (...) Herodot. l. 2.
Herodotus say, He had introduced from thence the Religion of Greece. And if
others have believed he was an Egyptian, from his Knowledge of their Rites and
Traditions which were revealed but to few; and of the Arts and Customs which
were practiced among them in general; it may prove at least thus much, that he
was there in his Travels.

As Greece was in all Probability his native Country, and had then began to
make an Effort for Learning, we cannot doubt but he traveled there also, with a
particular Observation. He uses the different Dialects which were spoken in its
different Parts, as one who had been conversant with them all. But the Argument
which appears most irrefragable, is to be taken from his Catalogue of the
Ships: He has there given us an exact Geography of Greece; where its Cities,
Mountains, and Plains, are particularly mentioned; where the Courses of its
Rivers are traced out; where the Countries are laid in order, their Bounds
assigned, and the uses of their Soils specified; which the Ancients, who
compared it with the Original, have allowed to be so true in all Points, that
it could never have been owing to a loose and casual Information. Even Strabo's
Account of Greece is but a kind of Commentary upon Homer's.

We may carry this Argument farther, to suppose his having been round Asia
Minor, from his exact Division of the Regnum Priami vetus (as Horace calls it)
into its separate Dynasties, and the Account he gives of the bordering Nations
in Alliance with it. Perhaps too, in the Wanderings of Ulysses about Sicily,
whose Ports and neighboring Islands are mentioned, he might contrive to send
his Hero where he had made his own Voyage before. Nor will the Fables he has
intermingled be any Objection to his having traveled in those Parts, since they
are not related as the History of the present time, but the Tradition of the
former. His mention of Thrace, his Description of the Beasts of Lybia, and of
the Climate in the Fortunate Islands, may seem also to give us a view of him in
the Extremes of the Earth, where it was not barbarous or uninhabited. It is
hard to set limits to the Travels of a Man, who has set none to that desire of
Knowledge which made him undertake them. Who can say what People he has not
seen, who appears to be versed in the Customs of all? He takes the Globe for
the Scene in which he introduces his Subjects; he launches forward intrepidly,
like one to whom no place is new, and appears a Citizen of the World in general.

When he returned from his Travels, he seems to have applied himself to the
finishing his Poems, however he might have either designed, begun, or pursued
them before. In these he has treasured up his various Acquisitions of
Knowledge, where they have been preserved through Ages, to be as well the
Proofs of his own Industry, as the Instructions of Posterity. He might then
describe his Sacrifices after the Aeolian manner; or Iliad 3.
his Leagues with a Mixture of Trojan and Spartan Ceremonies: Il. 2.. 145.
He could then compare the Confusion of a Multitude to that Tumult he had
observed in the Icarian Sea, dashing and breaking among its Crowd of Islands:
He could represent the Numbers of an Army, by those Flocks of Iliad 2.. 461.
Swans he had seen on the Banks of the Cayster; or being to describe that Heat
of Battle with which Achilles drove the Trojans into the River, Il. 21.. 12.
he could illustrate it with an Allusion from Cyrene or Cyprus, where, when the
Inhabitants burned their Fields, the Grass-hoppers fled before the Fire to
perish in the Ocean. His Fancy being fully replenished, might supply him with
every proper occasional Image, and his Soul after having enlarged itself, and
taken in an extensive Variety of the Creation, might be equal to the Task of an
Iliad and an Odysses.

His old Age and Death.
In his Age, we hear he fell blind, and settled at Chios, as he says in the
Hymn to Apollo, which (as is before observed) is acknowledged for his by
Thucydides, and might occasion both Simonides and Theocritus to call him a
Chian. Strabo, l. 10.
Strabo relates, That Lycurgus, the great Legislator of Sparta, was reported to
have gone to Chios to have a Conference with Homer, after he had studied the
Laws of Crete and Egypt in order to form his Constitutions. If this be true,
how much a nobler Representation does it give of him, and indeed more agreeable
to what we conceive of this mighty Genius, than those spurious Accounts which
keep him down among the meanest of Mankind? What an Idea could we frame to our
selves of a Conversation, held between two Persons so considerable; a
Philosopher conscious of the Force of Poetry, and a Poet knowing in the Depths
of Philosophy; both their Souls improved with Learning, both eminently raised
above little Designs, or the meaner kind of Interest, and meeting together to
consult the Good of Mankind? But in this, I have only indulged a Thought which
is not to be insisted upon; the Evidence of History rather tends to prove that
Lycurgus brought his Works from Asia after his Death: which Procl. vita Hom.
Proclus imagines to have happened at a great old Age, on account of his
Circumference of Learning, for which a short Life could never suffice.

His Character and Manners.
If we would now make a Conjecture concerning the Genius and Temper of this
great Man; perhaps his Works, which would not furnish us with Facts for his
Life, will be more reasonably made use of to give us a Picture of his Mind: To
this end therefore, we may suffer the very Name and Notion of a Book to vanish
for a while, and look upon what is left us as a Conversation, in order to gain
an Acquaintance with Homer. Perhaps the general Air of his Works will become
the general Character of his Genius, and the particular Observations give some
Light to the particular Turns of his Temper. His comprehensive Knowledge shows
that his Soul was not formed like a narrow Chanel for a single Stream, but as
an Expanse which might receive an Ocean into its Bosom; that he had the
strongest Desire of Improvement, and an unbounded Curiosity, which made its
Advantage of every transient Circumstance, or obvious Accident. His solid and
sententious Manner may make us admire him for a Man of Judgment; one who, in
the darkest Ages, could enter far into a Disquisition of human Nature; who,
notwithstanding all the Changes which Governments, Manners, Rites, and even the
Notions of Virtue have undergone, could still abound with so many Maxims
correspondent to Truth, and Notions applicable to so many Sciences. The Fire,
which is so observable in his Poem, as to give every thing the most active
Appearance, may make us naturally conjecture him to have been of a warm Temper,
and lively Behavior; and the pleasurable Air which every where overspreads it,
may give us reason to think, that Fire of Imagination was tempered with
Sweetness and Affability. If we farther observe the Particulars he treats of,
and imagine that he laid a Stress upon the Sentiments he delivers, pursuant to
his real Opinions; we shall take him to be of a religious Spirit, by his
inculcating in almost every Page the worship of the Gods. We shall imagine him
to be a generous Lover of his Country, from his care to extol it every where:
which is carried to such a height, as to make Plutarch de And. Poetis.
Plutarch observe, That though many of the Barbarians are made Prisoners or
Suppliants, yet neither of these disgraceful Accidents (which are common to all
Nations in War) ever happens to one Greek throughout his Works. We shall take
him to be a compassionate Lover of Mankind, from his numberless Praises of
Hospitality and Charity; (if indeed we are not to account for 'em, as the
common Writers of his Life imagine, from his owing his Support to these
Virtues.) It might seem from his Love of Stories, with his manner of telling
them sometimes, that he gave his own Picture when he painted his Nestor, and,
as wise as he was, was no Enemy to Talking. One would think from his Praises of
Wine, his copious Goblets, and pleasing Descriptions of Banquets, that he was
addicted to a cheerful, sociable Life, which Horace takes notice of as a kind
of Tradition; "Laudibus arguitur vini vinosus Homerus."
Ep. 19. l. 1. And that he was not (as may be guessed of Virgil from his Works)
averse to the Female Sex, will appear from his care to paint them amiably upon
all occasions: His Andromache and Penelope are in each of his Poems most
shining Characters of conjugal Affection; even his Helena herself is drawn with
all the Softnings imaginable; his Soldiers are exhorted to combat with the
hopes of Women; his Commanders are furnished with fair Slaves in their Tents,
nor is the venerable Nestor without a Mistress.

It is true, that in this way of turning a Book into a Man, this reasoning from
his Works to himself, we can at best but hit off a few Out-strokes of a
Character: Wherefore I shall decline the carrying it into more minute Points,
and conclude with one Discovery which we may make from his Silence, a Discovery
extremely proper to be made in this manner, which is, that he was of a very
modest Temper. There is in all other Poets a Custom of speaking of themselves,
and a Vanity of promising Eternity to their Writings: In both which Homer, who
has the best Title to speak out, is altogether silent. As to the last of them,
the World has made him ample Recompense; it has given him that Eternity he
would not promise himself: But whatever Endeavors have been offered in respect
of the former, we find our selves still under an irreparable Loss. That which
others have said of him has amounted to no more than Conjecture; that which I
have said is no farther to be insisted on: I have used the liberty which is
indulged me by Precedent, to give in my Opinions among the Accounts of others,
and the World may be pleased to receive them as so many willing Endeavors to
gratify its Curiosity.

Catalogue of his Works.
The only uncontestable Works which Homer has left behind him are the Iliad and
Odysses: The Batrachomuomachia or Battle of the Frogs and Mice, has been
disputed, but is however allowed for his by many great Authorities; amongst
whom Statius Pres. ad Sylu. 1
Statius has reckoned it like the Culex of Virgil, a Trial of his Force before
his larger Performances. It is indeed a beautiful Piece of Raillery, in which a
great Writer may delight to unbend himself; an Instance of that agreeable
Trifling, which has been at some time or other indulged by the finest Genius's,
and the Offspring of that amusing and cheerful Humor, which generally
accompanies the Character of a rich Imagination, like a Vein of Mercury running
mingled with a Mine of Gold.

The Hymns have been doubted also, and attributed by the Scholiasts to
Cynaethus the Rhapsodist; but notwithstanding the Tradition, neither Thucyd. l.
3.
Thucydides, Lucian Phalarid. 2.
Lucian, nor Pausan. Boeotic.
Pausanias, have scrupled to cite them as genuine. We have the Authority of the
two former for that to Apollo, though it be observed that the word (...) is found
in it, which the Book de Poesi Homerica (ascribed to Plutarch) tells us, was
not in use in Homer's Time. We have also an Authority of the last for a Paus.
Messen.
Hymn to Ceres, of which he has given us a Fragment. That to Mars is objected
against for mentioning (...), and that which is the first to Minerva for using
(...), both of them being (according to the Author of the Treatise before
mentioned) words of a later Invention. The Hymn to Venus has many of its Lines
copied by Virgil in the Enterview between Aeneas, and that Goddess in the first
Aeneid: But whether these Hymns are Homer's or not, they are always judged to
be near as ancient, if not of the same Age with him.

The Epigrams are extracted out of the Life said to be written by Herodotus,
and we leave them as such to stand or fall with it; except the Epitaph on
Midas, which is of very ancient Authority, quoted without its Author both by
Plat. in Phaed.
Plato and Longin..36. Edit. Tollii.
Longinus, and (according to Laertius in vita Cleobuli.
Laertius) ascribed by Simonides to Cleobulus the wise Man; who living long
after Homer answers better to the Age of Midas the Son of Gordias.

The Margites, which is lost, is said by Arist. Poet. cap. 4.
Aristotle to have been a Poem of a comic Nature, wherein Homer made use of
Iambick Verses as proper for Raillery. It was a Jest upon the Fair Sex, and had
its Name from one Margites, a weak Man who was the Subject of it. The Story is
something loose, as may be seen by the Account of it still preserved in
Eustath. in Odyss. 10.
Eustathius's Comment on the Odysses.

The Cercopes was a Satirical Work which is also lost; we may however imagine
it was levelled against the Vices of Men, if our Conjecture be right that it was
founded upon the Ovid Metam. l. 14. de Cercop.
old Fable of the Cercopes, a Nation who were turned into Monkies for their
Frauds and Impostures.

The Destruction of Oechalia, was a Poem of which (according to Eustathius)
Hercules was the Hero; and the Subject, his ravaging that Country; because
Eurytus the King had denied him his Daughter Iole.

The Ilias Minor was a Piece which included both the taking of Troy, and the
return of the Graecians; In this was the Story of Sinon, which Virgil has made
use of: Arist. Poet. cap. 24.
Aristotle has judged it not to belong to Homer.

The Cypriacks, if it was upon them that Nevius founded his Ilias Cypria, (as
Dac. on Arist. Poet. cap. 24.
Mr. Dacier conjectures) were the Love-Adventures of the Ladies at the Siege:
these are rejected by Herod. l. 2.
Herodotus, for saying that Paris brought Helen to Troy in three Days; whereas
Homer asserts they were long driven from Place to Place.

There are also other Things ascribed to him, such as the Heptapection Goat,
the Arachnomachia, etc. in the ludicrous Manner; and the Thebais, Epigoni, or
second Siege of Thebes, the Phocais, Amazonia, etc. in the serious: which, if
they were his, are now to be reputed a real Loss to the learned World. Time, in
some Things, may have prevailed over Homer himself, and left only the Names of
these Works as Memorials that such were in being; but while the Iliad and
Odysses remain, he seems like a Leader, who, though he may have failed in a
Skirmish, has carried a Victory, for which he passes in Triumph through all
future Ages.

Monuments, Coins, Marbles, remaining of him.
THE Remains we have at present of those Monuments Antiquity had framed for
him, are but few. It could not be thought that they who knew so little of the
Life of Homer, could have a right Knowledge of his Person; yet had they Statues
of him as of their Gods, whose Forms they had never seen. " Quinimo quae non
sunt, finguntur (says Pliny, l. 35. c. 2.
Pliny) pariuntque desideria non traditi vultus, sicut in Homero evenit." But
though the ancient Portraits of him seem purely notional, yet they agree (as I
think Raph. Fabret. Explicatio Veteris Tabellae Anaglyphae Hom. Iliad.
Fabretti has observed) in representing him with a short curled Beard, and
distinct Marks of Age in his Forehead. That which is prefixed to this Book, is
taken from an ancient Marble Bust, in the Palace of Farnese at Rome.

In Bollissus near Chios there is a Ruin, which was shown for the House of
Homer, which Leo Allat. de patria Hom. cap. 13.
Leo Allatius went on Pilgrimage to visit, and (as he tells us) found nothing
but a few Stones crumbling away with Age, over which he and his Companions wept
for Satisfaction.

They erected Temples to Homer in Smyrna, as appears from Cicero pro Archia.
Cicero; one of these is supposed to be yet extant, and the same which they
show for the Temple of Janus. It agrees with Strabo, l. 14. To (...), etc. de
Smyrna.
Strabo's Description, a square Building of Stone, near a River, thought to be
the Meles, with two Doors opposite to each other, North and South, and a large
Niche within the East-Wall, where the Image stood: But M. Spon denies this to
be the true Homaerium.

Of the Medals struck for him, there are some both of Chios and Smyrna still in
being, and exhibited at the beginning of this Essay. The most valuable with
respect to the Largeness of the Head is that of Amastris, which is carefully
copied from an Original belonging to the present Earl of Pembroke, and is the
same which Gronovius Cuperus and Dacier have Copies of, but very incorrectly
performed.

But that which of all the Remains has been of late the chief Amusement of the
Learned, is the Marble called his Apotheosis, the Work of Archelaus of Priene,
and now in the Palace of Colonna. We see there a Temple hung with its Veil,
where Homer is placed on a Seat with a Footstool to it, as he has described the
Seats of his Gods; supported on each side with Figures known for the Iliad and
the Odysses, the one by the Sword, the other by the Ornament of a Ship, which
denotes the Voyages of Ulysses. On each side of his Footstool are Mice, in
Allusion to the Batrachomuomachia. Behind, is Time waiting upon him, and a
Figure with Turrets on its Head, which signifies the World, crowning him with
the Laurel. Before him is an Altar, at which all the Arts are sacrificing to
him as to their Deity. On one side of the Altar stands a Boy, representing
Mythology, on the other, a Woman, representing History; after her is Poetry
bringing the Sacred Fire; and in a long following Train, Tragedy, Comedy,
Nature, Virtue, Memory, Rhetoric, and Wisdom, in all their proper Attitudes.

SECT. II.
HAVING now finished what was proposed concerning the History of Homer's Life,
I shall proceed to that of his Works; and considering him no longer as a Man,
but as an Author, prosecute the Thread of his Story in this his second Life,
through the different Degrees of Esteem which those Writings have obtained in
different Periods of Time.

It has been the fortune of several great Genius's not to be known while they
lived, either for want of Historians, the Meanness of Fortune, or the Love of
Retirement, to which a Poetical Temper is peculiarly addicted. Yet after Death
their Works give themselves a Life in Fame, without the help of an Historian;
and, notwithstanding the Meanness of their Author, or his Love of Retreat, they
go forth among Mankind, the Glories of that Age which produced them, and the
Delight of those which follow it. This is a Fate particularly verified in
Homer, than whom no considerable Author is less known as to himself, or more
highly valued as to his Productions.

The first Publication of his Works by Lycurgus.
The earliest Account of these is said by Plut. vit. Lycurgi.
Plutarch to be some time after his Death, when Lycurgus sailed to Asia: "There
he had the first sight of Homer's Works, which were probably preserved by the
Grandchildren of Creophilus; and having observed that their pleasurable Air of
Fiction did not hinder the Poets abounding in Maxims of State, and Rules of
Morality, he transcribed and carried with him that entire Collection we have
now among us: For at that time (continues this Author) there was only an
obscure Rumor in Greece to the Reputation of these Poems, and but a few
scattered Fragments handed about, 'till Lycurgus published them entire." Thus
they were in danger of being lost as soon as they were produced, by the
Misfortune of the Age, a want of Taste in Learning, or the manner in which they
were left to Posterity, when they fell into the Hands of Lycurgus. He was a Man
of great Learning, a Lawgiver to a People divided and untractable, and one who
had a Notion that Poetry influenced and civilized the Minds of Men; which made
him smooth the way to his Constitution by the Songs of Thales the Cretan, whom
he engaged to write upon Obedience and Concord. As he proposed to himself that
the Constitution he would raise upon this their Union should be of a martial
Nature, these Poems were of an extraordinary Value to him: for they came with a
full Force into his Scheme; the Moral they inspired was Unity; the Air they
breathed was Martial; and their Story had this particular Engagement for the
Lacedaemonians, that it showed Greece in War, and Asia subdued under the
Conduct of one of their own Monarchs, who commanded all the Grecian Princes.
Thus the Poet both pleased the Lawgiver, and the People: from whence he had a
double Influence when the Laws were settled. For his Poem then became a
Panegyric on their Constitution, as well as a Register of their Glory; and
confirmed them in the Love of it by a gallant Description of those Qualities
and Actions for which it was adapted. This made Plutarch. Apoptheg.
Cleomenes call him The Poet of the Lacedaemonians: And therefore when we
remember that Homer owed the Publication of his Works to Lycurgus, we should
grant too, that Lycurgus owed in some degree the Enforcement of his Laws to the
Works of Homer.

Their Reception in Greece
At their first Appearance in Greece, they were not digested into a regular
Body, but remained as they were brought over in several detached Pieces, called
(according to Aelian l 13. cap. 14.
Aelian) from the Subject on which they treated; as the Battle at the Ships,
the Death of Dolon, the Valor of Agamemnon, the Patroclea, the Grot of
Calypso, Slaughter of the Wooers, and the like. Nor were these entitled Books,
but Rhapsodies; from whence they who sung them had the Title of Rhapsodists. It
was in this manner they began to be dispersed, while their Poetry, their
History, the Glory they ascribed to Greece in general, the particular
Description they gave of it, and the Compliment they paid to every little State
by an honorable mention, so influenced all, that they were transcribed and
sung with general Approbation. But what seems to have most recommended them
was, that Greece which could not be great in its divided Condition, looked upon
the Fable of them as a likely Plan of future Grandeur. They seem from
thenceforward to have had an Eye upon the Conquest of Asia; as a proper
Undertaking which by its Importance might occasion Union enough to give a
Diversion from Civil Wars, and by its Prosecution bring in an Acquisition of
Honor and Empire. This is the meaning of (...). Isocrat. Paneg.
Isocrates, when he tells us, That " Homer's Poetry was in the greater Esteem,
because it gave exceeding Praise to those who fought against the Barbarians.
Our Ancestors (continues he) honored it with a Place in Education and musical
Contests, that by often hearing it we should have a Notion of an original
Enmity between us and those Nations; and that admiring the Virtue of those who
fought at Troy, we should be induced to emulate their Glory." And indeed they
never quitted this thought, 'till they had successfully carried their Arms
wherever Homer might thus excite them.

Digested into order at Athens.
But while his Works were suffered to lie in an unconnected manner, the Chain
of Story was not always perceived, so that they lost much of their Force and
Beauty by being read disorderly. Wherefore as Lacedaemon had the first Honor
of their Publication by Lycurgus, that of their Regulation fell to the share of
Athens in the time of Diog. Laert. vit. Sol.
Solon, who himself made a Law for their recital. It was then that Pisistratus,
the Tyrant of Athens, who was a Man of great Learning and Eloquence (as Quis
doctior iisdem illis temporibus aut cujus cloquentia litteris instructior quam
Pisistrati? Qui primus Homeri libros, confusos antea, sic disposuisse dicitur
ut nunc habemus. Cic. de Orat. l. 3. Vide ctiam Ael. l. 13. cap. 14. Liban.
Panegyr. in Jul. Anonymam Homeri vitam. Fusius vero in Commentatoribus Dyon.
Thracis.
Cicero has it) first put together the confused Parts of Homer, according to
that Regularity in which they are now handed down to us. He divided them into
the two different Works, entitled the Iliad and Odysses; he digested each
according to the Author's design, to make their Plans become evident; and
distinguished each again into twenty four Books, to which were afterward
prefixed the twenty four Letters. There is a Passage indeed in Plato in
Hypparcho.
Plato, which takes this Work from Pisistratus, by giving it to his Son
Hypparchus; with this addition, that he commanded them to be sung at the Feast
called Panathenaea. Perhaps it may be, as Leo Allatius de Patria Hom. cap. 5.
Leo Allatius has imagined, because the Son published the Copy more correctly:
This he offers, to reconcile so great a Testimony as Plato's to the Cloud of
Witnesses which are against him in it: But be that as it will, Athens still
claims its proper Honor of rescuing the Father of Learning from the Injuries
of Time, of having restored Homer to himself, and given the World a view of him
in his Perfection. So that if his Verses were before admired for their Use and
Beauty, as the Stars were before they were considered in a System of Science;
they are now admired much more for their graceful Harmony, and that Sphere of
Order in which they appear to move. They became henceforward more the Pleasure
of the Wits of Greece; more the Subject of their Studies, and the Employment of
their Pens.

About the time that this new Edition of Homer was published in Athens, there
was one Cynaethus, a learned Rhapsodist, who (as the Schol. Pind. in Nem. Od. 2.
Scholiast of Pindar informs us) settled first at Syracuse in that Employment;
and if (as Leo Allatius believes) he had been before an Assistant in the
Edition, he may be supposed to have first carried it abroad. But it was not
long preserved correct among his Followers; they committed Mistakes in their
Transcriptions and Repetitions, and had even the Presumption to alter some
Lines, and interpolate others. Thus the Works of Homer ran the danger of being
utterly defaced; which made it become the concern of Kings and Philosophers,
that they should be restored to their Primitive Beauty.

The Edition in Macedon under Alexander.
In the Front of these is Alexander the Great, for whom they will appear
peculiarly calculated, if we consider that no Books more enliven or flatter
personal Valor, which was great in him to what we call Romantic: Neither has
any Book more places applicable to his Designs on Asia, or (as it happened) to
his Actions there. It was then no ill Compliment in Plut. in vita Alexandri.
Aristotle to purge the Iliad, upon his account, from those Errors and
Additions which had crept into it. And so far was Alexander himself from
esteeming it a Matter of small Importance, that he afterward (...) Strabo,
lib. 13.
assisted in a strict Review of it with Anaxarchus and Calisthenes; whether it
was merely because he esteemed it a Treasury of military Virtue and Knowledge;
or that (according to a late ingenious Conjecture) he had a farther Aim, in
promoting the Propagation of it when he was ambitious to be esteemed a Son of
Jupiter; as a Book which treating of the Sons of the Gods, might make the
Intercourse between them and Mortals become a familiar Notion. The Review being
finished, he laid it up in a Casket which was found among the Spoils of Darius
as what best deserved so inestimable a Case, and from this Circumstance it was
named The Edition of the Casket.

Editions in Egypt.
The Place where the Works of Homer were next found in the greatest Regard, is
Egypt, under the Reign of the Ptolomys. These Kings being descended from
Greece retained always a Passion for their original Country. The Men, the
Books, the Qualifications of it, were in esteem in their Court; they preserved
the Language in their Family; they encouraged a Concourse of learned Men;
erected the greatest Library in the World; and trained up their Princes under
Grecian Tutors; among whom the most considerable were appointed for Revisers
of Homer. The first of these was Suidas
Zenodotus, Library Keeper to the first Ptolomy, and qualified for this
Undertaking by being both a Poet, and a Grammarian; a compounded Character in
which there was Fancy for a Discovery of Beauties, and a minuter Judgment for a
Detection of Faults. But neither his Copy nor that which his Disciple
Aristophanes had made, satisfying Aristarchus, (whom Ptolomy Philometor had
appointed over his Son Euergetes) he set himself to another Correction with all
the Wit and Learning he was Master of. He restored some Verses to their former
Readings, rejected others which he marked with Obelisks as spurious, and
proceeded with such industrious Accuracy, that, notwithstanding there were some
who wrote against his Performance, Antiquity has generally acquiesc'd in it.
Nay, so far have they carried their Opinion in his favor, as to call a Man an
Argue ambigue dictum; mutanda notabit;
Fiet Aristarchus. --
Horat. Ars Poetica.
Aristarchus when they meant to say a candid, judicious Critic; in the same
manner as they call the contrary a Zoilus, from that Zoilus who about this time
wrote an envious Criticism against Homer. And now we mention these two
together, I fancy it will be no small Pleasure to the benevolent Part of
Mankind, to see how their Characters stand in Contrast to each other, for
Examples to future Ages, at the head of the two contrary sorts of Criticism,
which proceed from good Nature, or from ill Will. The one was honored with the
Offices and Countenance of the Court; the other, Vitruv. l. 7. in Prooem.
when he applied to the same Place for an Encouragement amongst the Men of
Learning, had his Petition rejected: The one had his Fame continued to
Posterity; the other is only remembered with Infamy: If the one had
Antagonists, they were obliged to pay him the deference of a formal Answer; the
other was never answered but in general, with those opprobrious Names of
Thracian Slave and Rhetorical Dog: The one is supposed to have his Copy still
remaining; while the other's Remarks are perished as things that Men were
ashamed to preserve, the just Desert of whatever arises from the miserable
Principles of ill Will or Envy.

In Syria and other Parts of Asia.
It was not the Ambition of Egypt only to have a correct Edition of Homer. We
find in the Author vitae Arati, and Suidas in Arato.
Life of the Poet Aratus, that he, having finished a Copy of the Odysses, was
sent for by Antiochus King of Syria, and entertained by him while he finished
one of the Iliad. We read too of others which were published with the Names of
Countries; such as the Eustathius Initio Iliados.
Massaliotick and Synopick: as if the World were agreed to make his Works in
their Survival undergo the same Fate with himself; and that as different Cities
contended for his Birth, so they might again contend for his true Edition. But
though these Reviews were not peculiar to Egypt, the greatest Honor was
theirs, in that universal Approbation which the Performance of Aristarchus
received; and if it be not his Edition which we have at present, we know not to
whom to ascribe it.

In India and Persia.
But the World was not contented barely to have settled an Edition of his
Works. There were innumerable Comments in which they were opened like a
Treasury of Learning; and Translations whereby other Languages became enriched
by an Infusion of his Spirit of Poetry. Aelian, l. 12. cap. 48.
Aelian tells us, that even the Indians had them in their Tongue, and the
Persian Kings sung them in theirs. Persius, Sat. 1.
Persius mentions a Version into Latin by Labeo, and in general the Passages
and Imitations which are taken from him, are so numerous that he may be said to
have been translated by piecemeal into that, and all other Languages. Which
affords us this Remark, that there is hardly any thing in him, which has not
been pitched upon by some Author or other for a particular Beauty.

The Extent and Height of their Reputation in the Heathen World.
It is almost incredible to what an Height the Idea of that Veneration the
Ancients paid to Homer will arise, to one who reads particularly with this
view, through all these Periods. He was no sooner come from his Obscurity, but
Greece received him with Delight and Profit: There were then but few Books to
divide their Attention, and none which had a better Title to engross it all.
They made some daily Discoveries of his Beauties, which were still promoted in
their different Channels by the favorite Qualities of different Nations.
Sparta and Macedon considered him most in respect of his warlike Spirit; Athens
and Egypt with regard to his Poetry and Learning; and all their Endeavors
united under the Hands of the Learned, to make him blaze forth into an
universal Character. His Works, which from the beginning passed for excellent
Poetry, grew to be History and Geography; they rose to be a Magazine of
Sciences; were exalted into a Scheme of Religion; gave a Sanction to whatever
Rites they mentioned; were quoted in all Cases for the Conduct of Life, and
learned by Heart as the very Book of Belief and Practice. From him the Poets
drew their Inspirations, the Critics their Rules, and the Philosophers a
Defense of their Opinions: Every Author was fond to use his Name; and every
Profession writ Books upon him, 'till they swelled to Libraries. The Warriors
formed themselves by his Heroes, and the Oracles delivered his Verses for
Answers. Nor was Mankind satisfied to have thus seated his Character at the top
of human Wisdom, but being overborn with an imagination that he transcended
their Species, they admitted him to share in those Honors they gave the
Deities. They instituted Games for him, dedicated Statues, erected Temples, as
at Smyrna, Chios and Alexandria; and Aelian, l. 9. cap. 15.
Aelian tells us, That when the Argives sacrificed with their Guests, they used
to invoke the Presence of Apollo and Homer together.

The Decline of their Character in the beginning of Christianity.
Thus he was settled on a Foot of Adoration, and continued highly venerated in
the Roman Empire, when Christianity began. Heathenism was then to be destroyed,
and Homer appeared the Father of it; whose Fictions were at once the Belief of
the Pagan Religion, and the Objections of Christianity against it. He became
therefore very deeply involved in the Question; and not with that Honor which
hitherto attended him, but as a Criminal who had drawn the World into Folly. He
was on one hand accused for having framed Justin Martyr, Admonit. ad Gentes.
Fables upon the Works of Moses; as the Rebellion of the Giants from the
building of Babel, and the casting Ate or Strife out of Heaven from the Fall of
Lucifer. He was exposed on the other hand for those which he is said to invent,
as when Arnobius adversus gentes, l. 7.
Arnobius cries out, "This is the Man who wounded your Venus, imprisoned your
Mars, who freed even your Jupiter by Briareus, and who finds Authorities for
all your Vices," etc. Mankind was Vid. Tertull. Apol. cap. 14.
derided for whatever he had hitherto made them believe; and Arnobius, ibid.
Eusebius praep. Evangel. l. 14. cap. 10.
Plato, who expelled him his Commonwealth, has, of all the Philosophers, found
the best Quarter from the Fathers, for passing that Sentence. His finest
Beauties began to take a new Appearance of pernicious Qualities; and because
they might be considered as Allurements to Fancy, or Supports to those Errors
with which they were mingled, they were to be depreciated while the Contest of
Faith was in being. It was hence, that the reading them was discouraged, that
we hear Ruffinus accusing St. Jerome for it, and that St. August. confess. l.
1. cap. 14.
St. Austin rejects him as the grand Master of Fable; though indeed the dulcissime
vanus which he applies to Homer, looks but like a fondling manner of parting
with him.

This strong Attack against our Author obliged those Philosophers who could
have acquiesc'd as his Admirers, to appear as his Defenders; who because they
saw the Fables could not be literally supported, endeavored to find a hidden
Sense, and to carry on every where that Vein of Allegory which was already
broken open with Success in some Places. But how miserably were they forced to
Shifts, when they made Plutarch on reading the Poets.
Juno's dressing in the Cestos for Jupiter to signify the purging of the Air as
it approached the Fire? Or the Story of Mars and Venus, that Inclination they
have to Incontinency who are born when these Planets are in Conjunction? Wit
and Learning had here a large Field to display themselves, and to disagree in:
for sometimes Jupiter, and sometimes Vulcan, was made to signify the Fire; or
Mars and Venus were allowed to give us a Lecture of Morality at one time, and a
Problem of Astronomy at another. And these strange Discoveries, which
Porphyrius de Antro Nymph. etc.
Porphyry and the rest would have to pass for the genuine Theology of the
Greeks, prove but (as Eusebii praepar. Evangel. l. 3. cap. 1.
Eusebius terms it) the perverting of Fables into a mystic Sense. They did
indeed often defend Homer, but then they allegorized away their Gods by doing
so. What the World took for substantial Objects of Adoration, dissolved before
its Eyes into a figurative Meaning, a moral Truth, or a Piece of Learning which
might equally correspond to any Religion; and the Learned at last had left
themselves nothing to worship, when they came to find an Object in Christianity.

Restoration of Homer 's Works to their just Character.
The Dispute of Faith being over, ancient Learning reassumed its Dignity, and
Homer obtained his proper Place in the Esteem of Mankind. His Books are now no
longer the Scheme of a living Religion, but become the Register of one of
former Times. They are not now received for a Rule of Life, but valued for
those just Observations which are dispersed through them. They are no longer
pronounced from Oracles, but quoted still by Authors for their Learning. Those
Remarks which the Philosophers made upon them, have their Weight with us; those
Beauties which the Poets dwell'd upon, their Admiration: And even after the
Abatement of what was extravagant in his Run of Praise, he remains confessedly
a mighty Genius not transcended by any which have since arisen; a Prince, as
well as a Father, of Poetry.

SECT. III.
A View of the Learning of Homer 's Time.
IT remains in this Historical Essay, to regulate our present Opinion of Homer
by a view of his Learning, compared with that of his Age. For this end he may
first be considered as a Poet, that Character which was his professedly; and
secondly as one endowed with other Sciences, which must be spoken of not as in
themselves, but as in Subserviency to his main Design. Thus he will be seen on
his right Foot of Perfection in one view, and with the just Allowances which
should be made on the other: While we pass through the several Heads of
Science, the State of those Times in which he writ will show us both the
Impediments he rose under, and the Reasons why several things in him which have
been objected to, either could not, or should not be otherwise than they are.

In Poetry.
As for the State of Poetry, it was at a low Pitch in the Age of Homer. There
is mention of Orpheus, Linus, and Musaeus, venerable Names in Antiquity, and
eminently celebrated in Fable for the wonderful Power of their Songs and
Music. The learned Fabricius, in his Bibliotheca Graeca, has reckoned about
seventy who are said to have written before Homer: but their Works were not
preserved, and can be only considered (if they were really excellent) as the
Happiness of their own Generation. What sort of Poets Homer saw in his own Time
may be gathered from his Description of Od. 1st and Od. 8th.
Demodocus and Phemius, whom he has introduced as Opportunities to celebrate
his Profession. The imperfect Risings of the Art lay then among the
Extempore-Singers of Stories at Banquets, who were half Singers, half
Musicians. Nor was the Name of Poet then in being, or once used throughout
Homer's Works. From this poor State of Poetry, he has taken a handle to usher
it into the World with the boldest Stroke of Praise which has ever been given
it. It is in the eighth Odyssey, where Ulysses puts Demodocus upon a trial of
Skill. Demodocus having diverted the Guests with some Actions of the Trojan
War; " Odyss. l. 8.. 487, etc.
All this (says Ulysses) you have sung very elegantly, as if you had either been
present, or heard it reported; but pass now to a Subject I shall give you, sing
the Management of Ulysses in the wooden Horse, just as it happened, and I will
acknowledge the Gods have taught you your Songs." This the Singer being
inspired from Heaven begins immediately, and Ulysses by weeping at the recital
confesses the Truth of it. We see here a Narration which could only pass upon
an Age extremely ignorant in the Nature of Poetry, where that Claim of
Inspiration is given to it, which it has never since laid down, and (which is
more) a Power of prophesying at pleasure ascribed to it. Thus much therefore we
gather from himself concerning the most ancient State of Poetry in Greece; that
no one was honored with the Name of Poet, before Him whom it has especially
belonged to ever after. And if we farther appeal to the consent of Authors, we
find he has other Titles for being called the first. Joseph. contra Apion. l. r.
Josephus observes, That the Greeks have not contested but he was the most
ancient, whose Books they had in Writing. Arist. Poet. cap. 25.
Aristotle says, He was the "first who brought all the Parts of a Poem into one
Piece," to which he adds, "with true Judgment," to give him a Praise including
both the Invention and Perfection. And Horace acquaints us, that he invented
the very Measure which is called Heroic from the Subjects on which he employed
it; Res gestae regumque, ducumque, and fortia bella,
Quo scribi possint numero monstravit Homerus Hor. Epist. ad Pisones.. 73.
.
Whatever was serious or magnificent made a part of his Subject: War and Peace
were the comprehensive Division in which he considered the World; and the Plans
of his Poems were founded on the most active Scenes of each, the Adventures of
a Siege, and the Accidents of a Voyage. For these his Spirit was equally active
and various, lofty in Expression, clear in Narration, natural in Description,
rapid in Action, abundant in Figures. If ever he appears less than himself, it
is from the Time he writ in; and if he runs into Errors, it is from an Excess,
rather than a Defect of Genius. Thus he rose over the Poetical World, shining
out like a Sun all at once, which if it sometimes make too faint an Appearance,
it is to be ascribed only to the necessity of the Season that keeps it at a
distance; and if he is sometimes too violent, we confess at the same time that
we owe all things to his Heat.

Theology.
As for his Theology, we see the Heathen System entirely followed. This was all
he could then have to work upon, and where he fails of Truth for want of
Revelation he at least shows his Knowledge in his own Religion by the
Traditions he delivers. But we are now upon a Point to be farther handled,
because the greatest Controversy concerning the Merit of Homer depends upon it.
Let us consider then that there was an Age in Greece, when natural Reason only
discovered there must be something superior to us, and Tradition had affixed
the Notion to a Number of Deities. At this time Homer rose with the finest Turn
imaginable for Poetry, who designing to instruct Mankind in the manner for
which he was most adapted, writ Poems wherein he made use of the Ministry of
the Gods to give the highest Air of Surprise and Veneration to his Writings. He
found the Religion of Mankind wrapped up in Fables; it was thought then the
easiest way to convey Morals to the People, who were allured to Attention by
Pleasure, and awed with the Opinion of a hidden Mystery. Nor was it his
Business when he undertook the Province of a Poet (not of a mere Philosopher)
to be the first who should discard That which furnishes Poetry with its most
beautiful Appearance: and especially since the Age he lived in, by discovering
its Taste, had not only given him Authority, but even put him under the
necessity of preserving it. Whatever therefore he might think of his Gods, he
took them as he found them: he brought them into Action according to the
Notions which were then entertained, and in some Stories as they were then
believed; unless we imagine that he invented every thing he delivers. Yet there
are several Rays of Truth streaming through all this Darkness, in those
Sentiments he entertains concerning the Gods; and several Allegories lightly
veiled over, from whence the learned drew new Knowledges, each according to his
Power of Penetration and Fancy. But that we may the better comprehend him in
all the Parts of this general View, let us extract from him a Scheme of his
Religion.

He has a Jupiter, a Father of Gods and Men, whom he makes supreme, and to whom
he applies several Attributes, as Wisdom, Justice, Knowledge, Power, etc. which
are essentially inherent to the Idea of a God. Iliad 24.. 527.
He has given him two Vessels, out of which he distributes natural Good or Evil
for the Life of Man; he places the Gods in Council round him; he makes Il. 9..
498.
Prayers pass to and fro before him; and Mankind adore him with Sacrifice. But
all this grand Appearance, wherein Poetry paid a deference to Reason, is dashed
and mingled with the Imperfection of our Nature; not only with the applying our
Passions to the supreme Being (for Men have always been treated with this
Compliance to their Notions) but that he is not even exempted from our common
Appetites and Frailties: For he is made to eat, drink, and sleep: but this his
Admirers would imagine to be only a grosser way of representing a general
Notion of Happiness, because he says in one place, Il. 5.. 340.
that the Food of the Gods was not of the same Nature with ours. But upon the
whole, while he endeavored to speak of a Deity without a right Information, he
was forced to take him from that Image he discovered in Man; and (like one who
being dazzled with the Sun in the Heavens, would view him as he is reflected in
a River) he has taken off the Impression not only ruffled with the Emotion of
our Passions, but obscured with the earthy Mixture of our Natures.

The other Gods have all their Provinces assigned 'em: "Every thing has its
peculiar Deity, says Maxim. Tyrius, Diss. 16.
Maximus Tyrius, by which Homer would insinuate that the Godhead was present to
all things." When they are considered farther, we find he has turned the
Virtues and Endowments of our Minds into Persons, to make the Springs of Action
become visible; and because they are given by the Gods, he represents them as
Gods themselves descending from Heaven. In the same strong Light he shows our
Vices when they occasion Misfortunes, like extraordinary Powers which inflict
them upon us, and even our natural Punishments are represented as Punishers
themselves. But when we come to see the manner they are introduced in, they are
found feasting, fighting, wounded by Men, and shedding a sort of Blood; in
which his Machines play a little too grossly: the Fable which was admitted to
procure the Pleasure of Surprise, violently oppresses the Allegory, and it may
be lost labor to search for it in every minute Circumstance, if indeed it was
intended to be there. The main Design was however Philosophical, the Dress the
Poet's, which is used for necessity and allowed to be ornamental. And there
will be something still to be offered in his Defense, if he has both preserved
the grand Moral from being obscured, and adorned the Parts of his Works with
such Sentiments of the Gods as belonged to the Age he lived in; which that he
did, appears from his having then had that Success for which Allegory was
contrived. "It is the Madness of Man, says Maxim. Tyr. Diss. 29.
Maximus Tyrius, to dis-esteem what is plain and admire what is hidden; This
the Poets discovering invented the Fable for a Remedy, when they treated of
holy Matters; which being more obscure than Conversation, and more clear than
the Riddle, is a Mean between Knowledge and Ignorance; believed partly for
being agreeable, and partly for being wonderful. Thus as Poets in Name, and
Philosophers in Effect, they drew Mankind gradually to a search after Truth,
when the Name of Philosopher would have been harsh and displeasing."

When Homer proceeds to tell us our Duty to these superior Beings, we find
Prayer, Sacrifice, Lustration, and all the Rites which were esteemed religious,
constantly recommended under fear of their Displeasure. We find too a Notion of
the Soul's subsisting after this Life, but for want of Revelation he knows not
what to reckon the Happiness of a future State, to any one who was not deify'd:
Which is plain from the Speech of Odyss. 11.. 488.
Achilles to Ulysses in the Region of the dead; where he tells him, that "he
would rather serve the poorest Creature upon Earth than rule over all the
departed." It was chiefly for this Reason that Plato excluded him his
Commonwealth; he thought Homer spoke indecently of the Gods, and dreadfully of
a future State; in which Sentence he has made no Allowance for the Times he
writ in. But if he can not be defended in every thing as a Theologist, yet we
may say in respect of his Poetry, that he has enriched it from Theology with
true Sentiments for Profit, adorned it with Allegories for Pleasure, and by
using some Machines which have no farther Significancy or are so refined as to
make it doubted if they have any, he has however produced that Character in
Poetry which we call the Mavelous, and from which the Agreeable (according to
Aristotle) is always inseparable.

Politics.
If we take the State of Greece at his time in a Political View, we find it a
See Thucydides, lib. 1.
disunited Country, made up of small States; and whatever was managed in War
amounted to no more than intestine Skirmishes or Pyracies abroad, which were
easily revenged on account of their Disunion. Thus one People stole Europa, and
another Io; the Graecians took Hesione from Troy, and the Trojans took Helena
from Greece in Revenge. But this last having greater Friends and Alliances than
any upon whom the Rapes had hitherto fallen, the Ruin of Troy was the
Consequence; and the Force of the Asiatick Coasts was so broken, that this
Accident put an end to the Age of Pyracies. Then the intestine Broils of Greece
(which had been discontinued during the League) were renewed upon its
Dissolution. War and Sedition moved People from Place to Place during its want
of Inhabitants; Exiles from one Country were received for Kings in another; and
Leaders took Tracts of Ground to bestow them upon their Followers. Commerce was
neglected, living at home unsafe, and nothing of Moment tranfacted by any but
against their Neighbors: Athens only, where the People were undisturbed
because it was a barren Soil which no Body coveted, had begun to send Colonies
abroad, being over-stock'd with Inhabitants.

Now a Poem coming out at so seasonable a Time, with a Moral capable of healing
these Disorders by promoting Union, we may reasonably think it was designed for
that End to which it is so peculiarly adapted. If we imagine therefore that
Homer was a Politician in this Affair, we may suppose him to have looked back
into the Ages past, to see if at any time the Disorder had been less; and to
have pitched upon that Story wherein it found a temporary Cure, that by
celebrating it with all possible Honor he might instill a Desire of the same
sort of Union into the Hearts of his Countrymen. This indeed was a Work which
could belong to none but a Poet, when Governors had Power only over small
Territories, and the numerous Governments were every way independent. It was
then that all the Charms of Poetry were called forth to insinuate the important
Glory of an Alliance, and the Iliad delivered from the Muses with all the Pomp
of Words and artificial Influence. Union among themselves was recommended,
Peace at home, and Glory abroad: And lest this should be rendered useless by
Mismanagements, he lets us into farther Lessons concerning it. How when his
Kings quarrel, their Subjects suffer; when they act in Conjunction, Victory
attends them. When they meet in Council, Plans are drawn and Provisions made
for future Action; and when in the Field, the Arts of War are described with
the greatest Exactness. These were Lectures of general Concern to Mankind,
proper for the Poet to deliver and Kings to attend to; such as made Porphyry
write of the Profit that Princes might receive from Homer; and Stratocles,
Hermias, and Frontinus extract military Discipline out of him. Thus though Plato
has banished him from one imaginary Commonwealth, he has still been serviceable
to many real Kingdoms.

Morality.
The Morality of Greece could not be perfect while there was a Weakness in its
Government; Faults in Politics are occasioned by Faults in Ethics, and
occasion them in their turn. The Division into so many States was the rise of
frequent Quarrels, whereby Men were bred up in a kind of rough untractable
Disposition. Bodily Strength met with the greatest Honors, because it was
daily necessary to the Subsistence of little Governments; and that headlong
Courage which throws itself forward to Enterprise and Plunder, was universally
caressed, because it carried all things before it. It is no wonder in an Age of
such Education and Customs, that, as Thucyd. lib. 1.
Thucydides says, "Robbing was honored, provided it were done with Gallantry,
and that the ancient Poets made People question one another as they sailed by,
if they were Thieves? as a thing for which no one ought either to be scorned or
upbraided." These were the sort of Actions which the Singers then recorded, and
it was out of such an Age that Homer was to take his Subjects. For this reason
(not a want of Morality in him) we see a boasting Temper and unmanag'd
Roughness in the Spirit of his Heroes, which ran out in Pride, Anger, or
Cruelty. It is not in him as in our modern Romances, where Men are drawn in
Perfection, and we but read with a tender Weakness what we can neither apply
nor emulate. Homer writ for Men, and therefore he writ of them; if the World
had been better, he would have shown it so; as the Matter now stands, we see
his People with the turn of his Age, insatiably thirsting after Glory and
Plunder; for which however he has found them a lawful Cause, and taken care to
retard their Success by those very Faults.

In the Prosecution of the Story every Part of it has its Lessons of Morality:
There is brotherly Love in Agamemnon and Menelaus, Friendship in Achilles and
Patroclus, and the Love of his Country in Hector. But since we have spoken of
the Iliad as more particular for its Politics, we may consider the Odysses as
its Moral is more directly framed for Ethics. It carries the Hero through a
world of Trials both of the dangerous and pleasurable Nature. It shows him
first under most surprising Weights of Adversity, among Shipwrecks and Savages;
all these he is made to pass through in the Methods by which it becomes a Man
to conquer; a Patience in suffering, and a Presence of Mind in every Accident.
It shows him again in another View, tempted with the Baits of idle or unlawful
Pleasures, and then points out the Methods of being safe from them. But if in
general we consider the care our Author has taken to fix his Lessons of
Morality by the Proverbs and Precepts he delivers, we shall not wonder if
Greece which afterward gave the Appellation of Wise to Men who settled single
Sentences of Truth, should give him the Title of the Father of Virtue for
introducing such a Number. To be brief, if we take the Opinion of Qui quid sit
pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non,
Before and melius Chrysippo and Crantore dicit.
Hor. Ep. 2. lib 1.
Horace, he has proposed him to us as a Master of Morality; he lays down the
common Philosophical Division of Good into pleasant, profitable, and honest;
and then asserts that Homer has more fully and clearly instructed us in each of
them, than the most rigid Philosophers.

Some indeed have thought notwithstanding all this, that Homer had only a
design to please in his Inventions; and that others have since extracted Morals
out of his Stories (and indeed all Stories are capable of being used so.) But
this is an Opinion concerning Poetry which the World has rather degenerated
into, than begun with. The Traditions of Orpheus's civilizing Mankind by Hymns
on the Gods, with others of the like Nature, may show there was a better use of
the Art both known and practiced. There is also a remarkable Passage of this
kind in the third Book of the Odysses, that Agamemnon left one of the Odyss.
3.. 267.
Poets of his Times in the Court when he sailed for Troy; and that his Queen was
preserved virtuous by his Songs, 'till Aegysthus was forced to expel him in
order to debauch her. Here he has hinted what a true Poetical Spirit can do
when applied to the Promotion of Virtue; and from this one may judge he could
not but design That himself, which he recommends as the Duty and Merit of his
Profession. Others since his Time may have seduced the Art to worse Intentions;
but they who are offended at the Liberties of some Poets, should not judge all
in the gross for trifling or Corruption; especially when the Evidence runs so
strongly for any One to the contrary.

We may in general go on to observe, that the time when Homer was born did not
abound in Learning. For wherever Politics and Morality is weak, it wants its
peaceable Air to thrive in, and that Opportunity which is not known in the Ages
of unsettled Life. He is himself the Man from whom we have the first Accounts
of Antiquity, either in its Actions or Learning; from whom we hear what Egypt
or Greece could inform him in, and whatever himself could discover by the
Strength of Nature or Industry. But however that we may not mistake the Elogies
of those Ancients who call him the Father of Arts and Sciences, and be
surpised to find so little of them (as they are now in Perfection) in his
Works; we should know that this Character is not to be understood at large, as
if he had included the full and regular Systems of every thing: He is to be
considered professedly only in Quality of a Poet; this was his Business, to
which, as whatever he knew was to be subservient, so he has not failed to
introduce those Strokes of Knowledge from the whole Circle of Arts and
Sciences, which the Subject demanded either for Necessity or Ornament. This
will appear on a fair View of him in each of these Lights.

History.
Before his Time there were no Historians in Greece: He treated Historically of
past Transactions, according as he could be informed by Tradition, Song, or
whatever Method there was of preserving their Memory. For this we have the
Consent of Antiquity; they have generally more appealed to his Authority, and
more insisted on it than on the Testimony of any other Writer, when they treat
of the Rites, Customs, and Manners of the first Times. They have generally
believed that the Acts of Tydeus at Thebes, the second Siege of that City, the
Settlement of Rhodes, the Battle between the Curetes and the Aetolians, the
Account of the Kings of Mycenae by the Scepter of Agamemnon, the Acts of the
Greeks at Troy, and many other such Accounts, are some of them wholly preserved
by him, and the rest as faithfully related as by any Historian. Nor perhaps was
all of his Invention which seems to be feigned, but rather frequently the
obscure Traces and Remains of real Persons and Actions; which as Strabo, l. 1.
Strabo observes, when History was transmitted by Oral Tradition, might be
mixed with Fable before it came into the Hands of the Poet. "This happened
(says he) to Herodotus, the first professed Historian, who is often as fabulous
as Homer when he defers to the common Reports of Countries; and it is not to be
reckoned to either as a fault, but as a necessity of the Times." Nay, the very
Passages which cause us to tax them at this distance with being fabulous, might
be occasioned by their Diligence, and a fear of erring, if they too hastily
rejected those Reports which had passed current in the Nations they described.

Geography.
Before his Time there was no such thing as Geography in Greece. For this we
have the Suffrage of Strabo, ibid. initio.
Strabo the best of Geographers, who approves the Opinion of Hipparchus and
other Ancients, that Homer was the very Author of it; and upon this Account
begins his Treatise of the Science itself with an Encomium on him. As to the
general Part of it, we find he had a Knowledge of the Earth's being surrounded
with the Ocean, because he makes the Sun and Stars both to rise and set in it;
and that he knew the Use of the Stars is plain from his making Odyss. l. 5..
272.
Ulysses sail by the Observation of them. But the Instance oftnest alleged
upon this Point is the Iliad 18.. 482, etc.
Shield of Achilles: where he places the Earth encompassed with the Sea, and
gives the Stars the Names they are yet known by, as the Hyades, Pleiades, the
Bear, and Orion. By the three first of these he represents the Constellations
of the Northern Region; and in the last he gives a single Representative of the
Southern, to which (as it were for a counter-balance) he adds a Title of
Greatness, (...). Then he tells us that the Bear, or Stars of the Arctick
Circle, never disappear; as an Observation which agrees with no other. And if
to this we add (what Eratosthenes thought he meant) that the five Plates which
were fastened on the Shield, divided it by the Lines where they met, into the
five Zones, it will appear an original design of Globes and Spheres. In the
particular Parts of Geography, his Knowledge is entirely incontestable. Strabo
refers to him upon all occasions, allowing that he knew the Extremes of the
Earth, some of which he names and others describes by Signs, as the Fortunate
Islands. The same Strabo, l. 1.
Author takes notice of his Accounts concerning the several Soils, Plants,
Animals, and Customs; as Aegypt's being fertile of medicinal Herbs, Lybia's
Fruitfulness, where the Sheep have Horns, and yean thrice a Year, etc. which
are Knowledges that make Geography more various and profitable. But what all
have agreed to celebrate is his Description of Greece; which has had Laws made
for its Preservation, and Contests between Governments decided by its
Authority: Which Strab. l. 8.
Strabo acknowledges to have no Epithet, or ornamental Expression for any
Place, that is not drawn from its Nature, Quality, or Circumstances; and
professes after so long an Interval to deviate from it only where the Country
had undergone Alterations, that cast the Description into Obscurity.

Rhetoric.
In his time, Rhetoric was not known; that Art took its Rise out of Poetry,
which was not 'till then established. "The Oratorial Elocution (says Strabo, l.
1.
Strabo) is but an Imitation of the Poetical: this appeared first and was
approved: They who imitated it took off the Measures, but still preserved all
the other Parts of Poetry in their Writings: Such as these were Cadmus the
Milesian, Pherecydes, and Hecataeus. Then their Followers took something more
from what was left, and at last Elocution descended into the Prose which is now
among us." But if Rhetoric is owing to Poetry, the Obligation is still more
due to Homer. He (as Quintil. l. 10. cap. 1.
Quintilian tells us) gave both the Pattern and Rise to all the Parts of it. "
Hic omnibus eloquentiae partibus exemplum and ortum dedit: hunc nemo in magnis
rebus sublimitate, in parvis proprietate, superavit. Idem laetus and pressus,
jucundus and gravis, tum copia tum brevitate admirabilis, nec Poetica modo sed
oratoria virtute eminentissimus." From him therefore they who settled the Art
found it proper to deduce the Rules, which was easily done, when they had
divided their Observations into the Kinds and the Ornaments of Elocution. For
the Kinds, the "Ancients (says Aulus Gell. l. 7. cap. 14.
A. Gell.) settled them according to the three which they observe in his
principal Speakers; his Ulysses who is magnificent and flowing, his Menelaus
who is short and close, and his Nestor who is moderate and dispassion'd, and
has a kind of middle Eloquence participating of both the former." And for the
Ornaments, Arist. Topic.
Aristotle, the great Master of the Rhetoricians, shows what deference is paid
to Homer, when he orders the Orator to lay down his Heads, and express both the
Manners and Affections of his Work with an Imitation of that Diction, and those
Figures, which the divine Homer excelled in. This is the constant Language of
those who succeeded him, and the Opinion so far prevailed as to make Quintil.
l. 10.
Quintilian observe, that they who have written concerning the Arts of
Speaking, take from Homer most of the Instances of their Similitudes,
Amplifications, Examples, Digressions, and Arguments.

Natural Philosophy.
As to Natural Philosophy, the Age was not arrived in which it flourished;
however some of its Notions may be traced in him. As when he says that the
Fountains and Rivers come from the Ocean, he holds a Circulation of Fluids in
the Earth. But as this is a Branch of Learning which does not lie much in the
way of a Poet who speaks of Heroes and Wars; the desire to prove his Knowledge
this way has only run Politian, Praesatio in Hom.
Politian and others into trifling Inferences: as when they would have it that
he understood Nature, because he mentions Sun, Rain, Wind, and Thunder. The
most probable way of making out his Knowledge in this kind, is by supposing he
couched it in Allegories; and that he sometimes used the Names of the Gods as
his Terms for the Elements, as the Chemists now use them for Metals. But in
applying this to him we must tread very carefully; not searching for Allegory
too industriously where the Passage may instruct by Example; and endeavoring
rather to find the Fable an Ornament to what is easily known, than to make it a
Cover to curious and unknown Problems.

Physic.
As for Medicine, something of it must have been understood in that Age, though
it was so far from Perfection that (according to Celsus, lib. 1.
Celsus) what concerned Diet was invented long afterward by Hippocrates. The
Accidents of Life make the Search after Remedies too indispensible a Duty to be
neglected at any time. Accordingly he Odvss. l. 4.. 231.
tells us, that the Egyptians who had many medicinal Plants in their Country,
were all Physicians: and perhaps he might have learnt his own Skill from his
Acquaintance with that Nation. The State of War which Greece had lived in,
required a Knowledge in the healing of Wounds: and this might make him breed
his Princes, Achilles, Patroclus, Podalirius, and Machaon to the Science. What
Homer thus attributes to others he knew himself, and he has given us reason to
believe, not slightly. For if we consider his Insight into the Structure of the
human Body, it is so nice, that he has been judged by some to have wounded his
Heroes with too much Science: Or if we observe his Cure of Wounds, which are
the Accidents proper to an Epic Poem, we find him directing the Chirurgical
Operation, sometimes infusing Il. 4.. 218 and Il. 11. in fine.
Lenitives, and at other times bitter Powders, when the Effusion of Blood
required astringent Qualities.

Statuary.
For Statuary, it appears by the Accounts of Egypt and the Palladium, that
there was enough of it very early in the World for those Images which were
required in the Worship of their Gods; but there are none mentioned as valuable
in Greece so early, nor was the Art established on its Rules before Homer. He
found it agreeable to the Worship in use, and necessary for his Machinery, that
his Gods should be clothed in Bodies: Wherefore he took care to give them such
as carried the utmost Perfection of the human Form; and distinguished them from
each other even in this superior Beauty, with such Marks as were agreeable to
each of the Deities. "This, says Strabo, l. 8.
Strabo, awakened the Conceptions of the eminent Statuaries, while they strove
to keep up the Grandeur of that Idea which Homer had impressed upon their
Imagination; as we read of Phidias concerning the Statue of Jupiter." And
because they copied their Gods from him in their best Performances, his
Descriptions became the Characters which were afterward pursued in all Works
of a good Taste. Hence came the common Saying of the Ancients, "That either
Homer was the only Man who had seen the Forms of the Gods, or the only one who
had shown them to Men;" a Passage which Dacier, Preface to Homer.
Madam Dacier wrests to prove the Truth of his Theology, different from Strabo's
Acceptance of it.

There are, besides what we have spoken of, other Sciences pretended to be
found in him. Thus Macrobius discovers that the Chain with which Il. 8.. 19.
Vid Macrob. de somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 14.
Jupiter says he could lift the World, is a metaphysical Notion, that means a
Connection of all Things from the supreme Being to the meanest Part of the
Creation. Others, to prove him skilful in judicial Astrology, bring a Quotation
concerning the Births of Il. 18.. 252.
Hector and Polydamas on the same Night; who were nevertheless of different
Qualifications, one excelling in War, and the other in Eloquence. Others again
will have him to be versed in Magic, from his Stories concerning Ciree. These
and many of the like Nature are Interpretations strained or trifling, such as
Homer does not want for a Proof of his Learning, and by which we contribute
nothing to raise his Character, while we sacrifice our Judgment to him in the
Eyes of others.

It is sufficient to have gone thus far, in showing he was a Father of
Learning, a Soul capable of ranging over the whole Creation with an
intellectual View, shining alone in an Age of Obscurity, and shining beyond
those who have had the Opportunity of more learned Ages; leaving behind him a
Work adorned with the Knowledge of his own Time, and in which he has
beforehand broken up the Fountains of several Sciences which were brought
nearer to Perfection by Posterity: A Work which shall always stand at the top
of the sublime Character, to be gazed at by Readers with an Admiration of its
Perfection, and by Writers with a Despair that it should ever be emulated with
Success.

FINIS.
ERRATA in the ESSAY.
PAge 15. line 34. for brings him, read brings it. Page 17. in the References
at the bottom, for (...), read (...), and for (...), read (...). Page 36. in
the Citation from Horace, for Argue, read Arguet.

map of Troy TROJA cum Locis pertingentibus. 1. Porta Scoea and Fagus. 2.
Caprificus. 3. Fonles Scamandri duo. 4. Callicolone prope Simoim. 5. Batiea seu
Sepulcrum Myrinnes. 6. Jli Monimentum. 7. Tumulus. Esiclis AA. Murus Achivorum.
B. Locus Pugnoe ante naves in lib. 8. 12. 13. 14. C. Gesta Diomedis hoc loco
lib. 5. D. Achillis and Scamandri Certalio lib. 22. E. Locus Pugnoe in lib. 6.
F. Pugnoe in lib. 11. G. Pugnoe in lib. 20.



THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Contention of Achilles and Agamemnon.
IN the War of Troy, the Greeks having sacked some of the neighboring Towns,
and taken from thence two beautiful Captives, Chruseis and Briseis, allotted
the first to Agagamemnon, and the last to Achilles. Chryses, the Father of
Chruseis and Priest of Apollo, comes to the Grecian Camp to ransom her; with
which the Action of the Poem opens, in the Tenth Year of the Siege. The Priest
being refused and insolently dismissed by Agamemnon, entreats for Vengeance
from his God, who inflicts a Pestilence on the Greeks. Achilles calls a
Council, and encourages Chalcas to declare the Cause of it, who attributes it
to the Refusal of Chruseis. The King being obliged to send back his Captive,
enters into a furious Contest with Achilles, which Nestor pacifies; however as
he had the absolute Command of the Army, he seizes on Briseis in revenge.
Achilles in discontent withdraws himself and his Forces from the rest of the
Greeks; and complaining to Thetis, she supplicates Jupiter to render them
sensible of the Wrong done to her Son, by giving Victory to the Trojans.
Jupiter granting her Suit incenses Juno, between whom the Debate runs high,
'till they are reconciled by the Address of Vulcan.

The Time of two and twenty Days is taken up in this Book; nine during the
Plague, one in the Council and Quarrel of the Princes, and twelve for Jupiter's
Stay with the Aethiopians, at whose Return Thetis prefers her Petition. The
Scene lies in the Grecian Camp, then changes to Chrysa, and lastly to the Gods
on Olympus.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
THE Wrath of Peleus' Son, the direful Spring
Of all the Grecian Woes, O Goddess, sing!
That Wrath which hurled to Pluto's gloomy Reign
The Souls of mighty Chiefs untimely slain;
Whose Limbs unbury'd on the naked Shore
Devouring Dogs and hungry Vultures tore.
Since Great Achilles and Atrides strove,
Such was the Sovereign Doom, and such the Will of Jove.
Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated Hour
Sprung the fierce Strife, from what offended Power?
Latona's Son a dire Contagion spread,
And heaped the Camp with Mountains of the Dead;
The King of Men his Reverend Priest defied,
And, for the King's Offense, the People died.
For Chryses sought with costly Gifts to gain
His Captive Daughter from the Victor's Chain.
Suppliant the Venerable Father stands,
Apollo's awful Ensigns grace his Hands:
By these he begs; and lowly bending down,
Extends the Scepter and the Laurel Crown.
He su'd to All, but chief implored for Grace
The Brother-Kings, of Atreus' Royal Race.
Ye Kings and Warriors! may your Vows be crowned,
And Troy's proud Walls lie level with the Ground.
May Jove restore you, when your Toils are over,
Safe to the Pleasures of your native Shore.
But oh! relieve a wretched Parent's Pain,
And give Chruseis to these Arms again;
If Mercy fail, yet let my Presents move,
And dread avenging Phoebus, Son of Jove.
The Greeks in Shouts their joint Assent declare
The Priest to reverence, and release the Fair.
Not so Atrides: He, with Kingly Pride,
Repulsed the sacred Sire, and thus replied.
Hence on thy Life, and fly these hostile Plains,
Nor ask, Presumptuous, what the King detains;
Hence, with thy Laurel Crown, and Golden Rod,
Nor trust too far those Ensigns of thy God.
Mine is thy Daughter, Priest, and shall remain;
And Prayers, and Tears, and Bribes shall plead in vain;
'Till Time shall rifle every youthful Grace,
And Age dismiss her from my cold Embrace,
In daily Labors of the Loom employed,
Or doomed to deck the Bed she once enjoyed.
Hence then: to Argos shall the Maid retire;
Far from her native Soil, and weeping Sire.
The trembling Priest along the Shore returned,
And in the Anguish of a Father mourned.
Disconsolate, nor daring to complain,
Silent he wandered by the sounding Main:
'Till, safe at distance, to his God he prays,
The God who darts around the World his Rays.
O Smintheus! sprung from fair Latona's Line,
Thou Guardian Power of Cilla the Divine,
Thou Source of Light! whom Tenedos adores,
And whose bright Presence gilds thy Chrysa's Shores.
If ever with Wreaths I hung thy sacred Fane,
Or fed the Flames with Fat of Oxen slain;
God of the Silver Bow! thy Shafts employ,
Avenge thy Servant, and the Greeks destroy.
Thus Chryses prayed: the favoring Power attends,
And from Olympus' lofty Tops descends.
Bent was his Bow, the Grecian Hearts to wound;
Fierce as he moved, his Silver Shafts resound.
Breathing Revenge, a sudden Night he spread,
And gloomy Darkness rolled around his Head.
The Fleet in View, he twang'd his deadly Bow,
And hissing fly the feathered Fates below.
On Mules and Dogs the Infection first began,
And last, the vengeful Arrows fixed in Man.
For nine long Nights, through all the dusky Air
The Fires thick-flaming shot a dismal Glare.
But ere the tenth revolving Day was run,
Inspired by Juno, Thetis' God-like Son
Convened to Council all the Grecian Train;
For much the Goddess mourned her Heroes slain.
The Assembly seated, rising over the rest,
Achilles thus the King of Men addressed.
Why leave we not the fatal Trojan Shore,
And measure back the Seas we crossed before?
The Plague destroying whom the Sword would spare,
It Is time to save the few Remains of War.
But let some Prophet, or some sacred Sage,
Explore the Cause of great Apollo's Rage;
Or learn the wastful Vengeance to remove,
By mystic Dreams; for Dreams descend from Jove.
If broken Vows this heavy Curse have laid,
Let Altars smoke, and Hecatombs be paid.
So Heaven atoned shall dying Greece restore,
And Phoebus dart his burning Shafts no more.
He said and sat: when Chalcas thus replied,
Chalcas the wise, the Grecian Priest and Guide,
That sacred Seer whose comprehensive View
The past, the present, and the future knew.
Uprising slow, the venerable Sage
Thus spoke the Prudence and the Fears of Age.
Beloved of Jove, Achilles! would thou know
Why angry Phoebus bends his fatal Bow?
First give thy Faith, and plight a Prince's Word
Of sure Protection by thy Power and Sword.
For I must speak what Wisdom would conceal,
And Truths invidious to the Great reveal.
Bold is the Task, when Subjects grown too wise
Instruct a Monarch where his Error lies;
For though we deem the short-lived Fury past,
It Is sure, the Mighty will revenge at last.
To whom Pelides. From thy inmost Soul
Speak what thou know, and speak without control.
Even by that God I swear, who rules the Day;
To whom thy Hands the Vows of Greece convey,
And whose blessed Oracles thy Lips declare;
Long as Achilles breathes this vital Air,
No daring Greek of all the numerous Band,
Against his Priest shall lift an impious Hand:
Not even the Chief by whom our Hosts are led,
The King of Kings, shall touch that sacred Head.
Encouraged thus, the blameless Priest replies:
Nor Vows unpaid, nor slighted Sacrifice,
But He, our Chief, provoked the raging Pest,
Appollo's Vengeance for his injured Priest.
Nor will the God's awakened Fury cease,
But Plagues shall spread, and Funeral Fires increase,
'Till the great King, without a Ransom paid,
To her own Chrysa send the black-ey'd Maid.
Perhaps, with added Sacrifice and Prayer,
The Priest may pardon, and the God may spare.
The Prophet spoke; when with a gloomy Frown,
The Monarch started from his shining Throne;
Black Choler filled his Breast that boiled with Ire,
And from his Eyeballs flashed the living Fire.
Augur accursed! denouncing Mischief still,
Prophet of Plagues, for ever boding Ill!
Still must that Tongue some wounding Message bring,
And still thy Priestly Pride provoke thy King?
For this are Phoebus' Oracles explored,
To teach the Greeks to murmur at their Lord?
For this with Falsehoods is my Honor stained;
Is Heaven offended, and a Priest profaned,
Because my Prize, my beauteous Maid I hold,
And heavenly Charms prefer to proffered Gold?
A Maid, unmatched in Manners as in Face,
Skilled in each Art, and crowned with every Grace.
Not half so dear were Clytemnestra's Charms,
When first her blooming Beauties blessed my Arms.
Yet if the Gods demand her, let her sail;
Our Cares are only for the Public Weal:
Let me be deemed the hateful Cause of all,
And suffer, rather than my People fall.
The Prize, the beauteous Prize I will resign,
So dearly valued, and so justly mine.
But since for common Good I yield the Fair,
My private Loss let grateful Greece repair;
Nor unrewarded let your Prince complain,
That He alone has fought and bled in vain.
Insatiate King ( Achilles thus replies)
Fond of the Power, but fonder of the Prize!
Would thou the Greeks their lawful Prey should yield,
The due Reward of many a well-fought Field?
The Spoils of Cities razed, and Warriors slain,
We share with Justice, as with Toil we gain:
But to resume whatever thy Avarice craves,
(That Trick of Tyrants) may be born by Slaves.
Yet if our Chief for Plunder only fight,
The Spoils of Ilion shall thy Loss requite,
Whenever, by Jove's Decree, our conquering Powers
Shall humble to the Dust her lofty Towers.
Then thus the King. Shall I my Prize resign
With tame Content, and Thou possessed of thine?
Great as thou art, and like a God in Fight,
Think not to rob me of a Soldier's Right.
At thy Demand shall I restore the Maid?
First let the just Equivalent be paid;
Such as a King might ask; and let it be
A Treasure worthy Her, and worthy Me.
Or grant me this, or with a Monarch's Claim
This Hand shall seize some other Captive Dame.
The mighty Ajax shall his Prize resign,
Ulysses' Spoils, or even thy own be mine.
The Man who suffers, loudly may complain;
And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
But this when Time requires -- It now remains
We launch a Bark to plow the watery Plains,
And waft the Sacrifice to Chrysa's Shores,
With chosen Pilots, and with laboring Oars.
Soon shall the Fair the sable Ship ascend,
And some deputed Prince the Charge attend;
This Creta's King, or Ajax shall fulfill,
Or wise Ulysses see performed our Will,
Or, if our Royal Pleasure shall ordain,
Achilles self conduct her over the Main;
Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his Rage,
The God propitiate, and the Pest assuage.
At this, Pelides frowning stern, replied:
O Tyrant, armed with Insolence and Pride!
Inglorious Slave to Interest, ever joined
With Fraud, unworthy of a Royal Mind.
What generous Greek obedient to thy Word,
Shall form an Ambush, or shall lift the Sword?
What Cause have I to war at thy Decree?
The distant Trojans never injured me.
To Pthia's Realms no hostile Troops they led;
Safe in her Vales my warlike Coursers fed:
Far hence removed, the hoarse-resounding Main
And Walls of Rocks, secure my native Reign,
Whose fruitful Soil luxuriant Harvests grace,
Rich in her Fruits, and in her martial Race.
Hither we sailed, a voluntary Throng,
TO avenge a private, not a public Wrong:
What else to Troy the assembled Nations draws,
But thine, Ungrateful, and thy Brother's Cause?
Is this the Pay our Blood and Toils deserve,
Disgraced and injured by the Man we serve?
And dare thou threat to snatch my Prize away,
Due to the Deeds of many a dreadful Day?
A Prize as small, O Tyrant! matched with thine,
As thy own Actions if compared to mine.
Thine in each Conquest is the wealthy Prey,
Though mine the Sweat and Danger of the Day.
Some trivial Present to my Ships I bear,
Or barren Praises pay the Wounds of War.
But know, proud Monarch, I Am thy Slave no more;
My Fleet shall waft me to Thessalia's Shore.
Left by Achilles on the Trojan Plain,
What Spoils, what Conquests shall Atrides gain?
To this the King: Fly, mighty Warrior! fly,
Thy Aid we need not, and thy Threats defy.
There want not Chiefs in such a Cause to fight,
And Jove himself shall guard a Monarch's Right.
Of all the Kings (the Gods distinguished Care)
To Power superior none such Hatred bear:
Strife and Debate thy restless Soul employ,
And Wars and Horrors are thy savage Joy.
If thou have Strength, 'twas Heaven that Strength bestowed,
For know, vain Man! thy Valor is from God.
Haste, launch thy Vessels, fly with Speed away,
Rule thy own Realms with arbitrary Sway:
I heed thee not, but prize at equal rate
Thy short-lived Friendship, and thy groundless Hate.
Go, threat thy Earth-born Myrmidons; but here
It Is mine to threaten, Prince, and thine to fear.
Know, if the God the beauteous Dame demand,
My Bark shall waft her to her native Land;
But then prepare, Imperious Prince! prepare,
Fierce as thou art, to yield thy captive Fair:
Even in thy Tent I Will seize the blooming Prize,
Thy loved Briseis with the radiant Eyes.
Hence shall thou prove my Might, and curse the Hour,
Thou stood'st a Rival of Imperial Power;
And hence to all our Host it shall be known,
That Kings are subject to the Gods alone.
Achilles heard, with Grief and Rage oppressed,
His Heart swelled high, and labored in his Breast.
Distracting Thoughts by turns his Bosom ruled,
Now fired by Wrath, and now by Reason cooled:
That prompts his Hand to draw the deadly Sword,
Force through the Greeks, and pierce their haughty Lord;
This whispers soft his Vengeance to control,
And calm the rising Tempest of his Soul.
Just as in Anguish of Suspense he stayed,
While half unsheathed appeared the glittering Blade,
Minerva swift descended from above,
Sent by the Juno.
Sister and the Wife of Jove;
(For both the Princes claimed her equal Care)
Behind she stood, and by the Golden Hair
Achilles seized; to him alone confessed;
A sable Cloud concealed her from the rest.
He saw, and sudden to the Goddess cries,
Known by the Flames that sparkled from her Eyes.
Descends Minerva, in her guardian Care,
A heavenly Witness of the Wrongs I bear
From Atreus' Son? Then let those Eyes that view
The daring Crime, behold the Vengeance too.
Forbear! (the Progeny of Jove replies)
To calm thy Fury I forsook the Skies:
Let great Achilles, to the Gods resigned,
To Reason yield the Empire over his Mind.
By awful Juno this Command is given;
The King and You are both the Care of Heaven.
The Force of keen Reproaches let him feel,
But sheath, Obedient, thy revenging Steel.
For I pronounce (and trust a heavenly Power)
Thy injured Honor has its fated Hour,
When the proud Monarch shall thy Arms implore,
And bride thy Friendship with a boundless Store.
Then let Revenge no longer bear the Sway,
Command thy Passions, and the Gods obey.
To her Pelides. With regardful Ear
It Is just, O Goddess! I thy Dictates hear.
Hard as it is, my Vengeance I suppress:
Those who revere the Gods, the Gods will bless.
He said, observant of the blue-ey'd Maid;
Then in the Sheath returned the shining Blade.
The Goddess swift to high Olympus flies,
And joins the sacred Senate of the Skies.
Nor yet the Rage his boiling Breast forsook,
Which thus redoubling on the Monarch broke.
O Monster, mixed of Insolence and Fear,
Thou Dog in Forehead, but in Heart a Deer!
When were thou known in ambush'd Fights to dare,
Or nobly face the horrid Front of War?
It Is ours, the Chance of fighting Fields to try,
Thine to look on, and bid the Valiant dye.
So much it is safer through the Camp to go,
And rob a Subject, than despoil a Foe.
Scourage of thy People, violent and base!
Sent in Jove's Anger on a slavish Race,
Who lost to Sense of generous Freedom past
Are tamed to Wrongs, or this had been thy last.
Now by this sacred Scepter, hear me swear,
Which never more shall Leaves or Blossoms bear,
Which severed from the Trunk (as I from thee)
On the bare Mountains left its Parent Tree;
This Scepter, formed by tempered Steel to prove
An Ensign of the Delegates of Jove,
From whom the Power of Laws and Justice springs:
(Tremendous Oath! inviolate to Kings)
By this I swear, when bleeding Greece again
Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain.
When flushed with Slaughter, Hector comes, to spread
The purpled Shore with Mountains of the Dead,
Then shall thou mourn the Affront thy Madness gave,
Forced to deplore, when impotent to save:
Then rage in Bitterness of Soul, to know
This Act has made the bravest Greek thy Foe.
He spoke; and furious, hurled against the Ground
His Scepter starr'd with golden Studs around.
Then sternly silent sat: With like Disdain,
The raging King returned his Frowns again.
To calm their Passion with the Words of Age,
Slow from his Seat arose the Pylian Sage;
The experienced Nestor, in Persuasion skilled,
Words, sweet as Honey, from his Lips distilled:
Two Generations now had past away,
Wise by his Rules, and happy by his Sway;
Two Ages over his native Realm he reigned,
And now the Example of the third remained.
All viewed with Awe the Venerable Man;
Who thus, with mild Benevolence, began;
What Shame, what Woe is this to Greece! what Joy
To Troy's proud Monarch, and the Friends of Troy!
That adverse Gods commit to stern Debate
The best, the bravest of the Grecian State.
Young as you are, this youthful Heat restrain,
Nor think your Nestor's Years and Wisdom vain.
A Godlike Race of Heroes once I knew,
Such, as no more these aged Eyes shall view!
Lives there a Chief to match Pirithous' Fame,
Dryas the bold, or Ceneus' deathless Name.
Theseus, endu'd with more than mortal Might,
Or Polyphemus, like the Gods in Fight?
With these of old to Toils of Battle bred,
In early Youth my hardy Days I led;
Fired with the Thirst which Virtuous Envy breeds,
And smit with Love of Honorable Deeds.
Strongest of Men, they pierced the Mountain Boar,
Ranged the wild Deserts red with Monsters Gore,
And from their Hills the shaggy Centaurs tore.
Yet these with soft, persuasive Arts I swayed,
When Nestor spoke, they listened and obeyed.
If, in my Youth, even these esteemed me wise,
Do you, young Warriors, hear my Age advise.
Atrides, seize not on the beauteous Slave;
That Prize the Greeks by common Suffrage gave:
Nor, thou, Achilles, treat our Prince with Pride;
Let Kings be just, and Sovereign Power preside.
Thee, the first Honors of the War adorn,
Like Gods in Strength, and of a Goddess born;
Him awful Majesty exalts above
The Powers of Earth, and sceptred Sons of Jove.
Let both unite, with well-consenting Mind,
So shall Authority with Strength be joined.
Leave me, O King! to calm Achilles' Rage;
Rule thou thy self, as more advanced in Age.
Forbid it Gods! Achilles should be lost,
The Pride of Greece, and Bulwark of our Host.
This said, he ceased: The King of Men replies;
Thy Years are awful, and thy Words are wise.
But that imperious, that unconquered Soul,
No Laws can limit, no Respect control.
Before his Pride must his Superiors fall,
His Word the Law, and He the Lord of all?
Him must our Hosts, our Chiefs, our Self obey?
What King can bear a Rival in his Sway?
Grant that the Gods his matchless Force have given;
Has foul Reproach a Privilege from Heaven?
Here on the Monarch's Speech Achilles broke,
And furious, thus, and interrupting spoke.
Tyrant, I well deserved thy galling Chain,
To live thy Slave, and still to serve in vain,
Should I submit to each unjust Decree:
Command thy Vassals, but command not Me.
Seize on Briseis, whom the Grecians doomed
My Prize of War, yet tamely see resumed;
And seize secure; No more Achilles draws
His conquering Sword in any Woman's Cause.
The Gods command me to forgive the past;
But let this first Invasion be the last:
For know, thy Blood, when next thou dare invade,
Shall stream in Vengeance on my reeking Blade.
At this, they ceased; the stern Debate expired:
The Chiefs in sullen Majesty retired.
Achilles with Patroclus took his Way.
Where near his Tents his hollow Vessels lay.
Mean time Atrides launched with numerous Oars
A well-rigg'd Ship for Chrysa's sacred Shores:
High on the Deck was fair Chruseis placed,
And sage Ulysses with the Conduct graced:
Safe in her Sides the Hecatomb they stowed,
Then swiftly sailing, cut the liquid Road.
The Host to expiate next the King prepares,
With pure Lustrations, and with solemn Prayers.
Washed by the briny Wave, the pious Train
Are cleans'd, and cast the Ablutions in the Main.
Along the Shore whole Hecatombs were laid,
And Bulls and Goats to Phoebus' Altars paid.
The sable Fumes in curling Spires arise,
And waft their grateful Odours to the Skies.
The Army thus in sacred Rites engaged,
Atrides still with deep Resentment raged.
To wait his Will two sacred Heralds stood,
Talthybius and Eurybates the good.
Haste to the fierce Achilles' Tent (he cries)
Thence bear Briseis as our Royal Prize:
Submit he must; or if they will not part,
Ourself in Arms shall tear her from his Heart.
The unwilling Heralds act their Lord's Commands;
Pensive they walk along the barren Sands:
Arrived, the Hero in his Tent they find,
With gloomy Aspect, on his Arm reclined.
At awful Distance long they silent stand,
Loath to advance, or speak their hard Command;
Decent Confusion! This the Godlike Man
Perceived, and thus with Accent mild began.
With Leave and Honor enter our Abodes,
Ye sacred Ministers of Men and Gods!
I know your Message; by Constraint you came;
Not you, but your Imperious Lord I blame.
Patroclus haste, the fair Briseis bring;
Conduct my Captive to the haughty King.
But witness, Heralds, and proclaim my Vow,
Witness to Gods above, and Men below!
But first, and loudest, to your Prince declare,
That lawless Tyrant whose Commands you bear;
Unmoved as Death Achilles shall remain,
Though prostrate Greece should bleed at every Vein:
The raging Chief in frantic Passion lost,
Blind to himself, and useless to his Host,
Unskilled to judge the Future by the Past,
In Blood and Slaughter shall repent at last.
Patroclus now the unwilling Beauty brought;
She, in soft Sorrows, and in pensive Thought,
Supported by the Chiefs on either Hand,
In Silence past along the winding Strand.
Not so his Loss the fierce Achilles bore;
But sad retiring to the sounding Shore,
Over the wild Margin of the Deep he hung,
That kindred Deep, from whence his Mother sprung.
There, bathed in Tears of Anger and Disdain,
Thus loud lamented to the stormy Main.
O Parent Goddess! since in early Bloom
Thy Son must fall, by too severe a Doom;
Sure, to so short a Race of Glory born,
Great Jove in Justice should this Span adorn:
Honor and Fame at least the Thund'rer owed,
And ill he pays the Promise of a God;
If yon proud Monarch thus thy Son defies,
Obscures my Glories, and resumes my Prize.
Far in the deep Recesses of the Main,
Where aged Ocean holds his watery Reign,
The Goddess-Mother heard. The Waves divide;
And like a Mist she rose above the Tide;
Beheld him mourning on the naked Shores,
And thus the Sorrows of his Soul explores.
Why grieves my Son? Thy Anguish let me share,
Reveal the Cause, and trust a Parent's Care.
He deeply sighing said: To tell my Woe,
Is but to mention what too well you know.
From Thebe sacred to Apollo's Name,
( Aetion's Realm) our conquering Army came,
With Treasure loaded and triumphant Spoils,
Whose just Division crowned the Soldier's Toils;
But bright Chruseis, heavenly Prize! was led
By Vote selected, to the Gen'ral's Bed.
The Priest of Phoebus sought by Gifts to gain
His beauteous Daughter from the Victor's Chain;
The Fleet he reached, and lowly bending down,
Held forth the Scepter and the Laurel Crown,
Entreating All: but chief implored for Grace
The Brother Kings of Atreus' Royal Race:
The generous Greeks their joint Consent declare,
The Priest to reverence, and release the Fair;
Not so Atrides: He, with wonted Pride,
The Sire insulted, and his Gifts denied:
The insulted Sire (his God's peculiar Care)
To Phoebus prayed, and Phoebus heard the Prayer:
A dreadful Plague ensues; The avenging Darts
Incessant fly, and pierce the Grecian Hearts:
A Prophet then, inspired by Heaven arose,
And points the Crime, and thence derives the Woes:
My self the first the assembled Chiefs incline
T'avert the Vengeance of the Power Divine;
Then rising in his Wrath, the Monarch stormed;
Incensed he threatened, and his Threats performed:
The fair Chruseis to her Sire was sent,
With offered Gifts to make the God relent;
But now He seized Briseis' heavenly Charms,
And of my Valor's Prize defrauds my Arms,
Defrauds the Votes of all the Grecian Train;
And Service, Faith, and Justice plead in vain.
But Goddess! thou, thy suppliant Son attend,
To high Olympus' shining Court ascend,
Urge all the Ties to former Service owed,
And sue for Vengeance to the Thundering God.
Often have thou triumphed in the glorious Boast,
That thou stood'st forth, of all th'Aethereal Host,
When bold Rebellion shook the Realms above,
The undaunted Guard of Cloud-compelling Jove.
When the bright Partner of his awful Reign,
The Warlike Maid, and Monarch of the Main,
The Traytor-Gods, by mad Ambition driven,
Durst threat with Chains the Omnipotence of Heaven.
Then called by thee: the Monster Titan came,
(Whom Gods Briareus, Men Aegeon name)
Through wondering Skies enormous stalked along;
Not Neptune.
He that shakes the solid Earth so strong:
With Giant-Pride at Jove's high Throne he stands,
And brandished round him all his Hundred Hands;
The affrighted Gods confessed their awful Lord,
They dropped the Fetters, trembled and adored.
This, Goddess, this to his Remembrance call,
Embrace his Knees, at his Tribunal fall;
Conjure him far to drive the Grecian Train,
To hurl them headlong to their Fleet and Main,
To heap the Shores with copious Death, and bring
The Greeks to know the Curse of such a King:
Let Agamemnon lift his haughty Head
Over all his wide Dominion of the Dead,
And mourn in Blood, that ever he durst disgrace
The boldest Warrior of the Grecian Race.
Unhappy Son! (fair Thetis thus replies,
While Tears Celestial trickled from her Eyes)
Why have I born thee with a Mother's Throes,
To Fates averse, and nursed for future Woes?
So short a Space the Light of Heaven to view!
So short a Space, and filled with Sorrow too!
Oh might a Parent's careful Wish prevail,
Far, far from Ilion should thy Vessels sail,
And thou, from Camps remote, the Danger shun,
Which now, alas! too nearly threats my Son.
Yet (what I can) to move thy Suit I Will go,
To great Olympus crowned with fleecy Snow.
Mean time, secure within thy Ships from far
Behold the Field, nor mingle in the War.
The Sire of Gods, and all the Etherial Train,
On the warm Limits of the farthest Main,
Now mix with Mortals, nor disdain to grace
The Feasts of Aethiopia's blameless Race:
Twelve Days the Powers indulge the Genial Rite,
Returning with the twelfth revolving Light.
Then will I mount the Brazen Dome, and move
The high Tribunal of Immortal Jove.
The Goddess spoke: The rolling Waves unclose;
Then down the Deep she plunged from whence she rose,
And left him sorrowing on the lonely Coast,
In wild Resentment for the Fair he lost.
In Chrysa's Port now sage Ulysses rode;
Beneath the Deck the destined Victims stowed:
The Sails they furled, they lashed the Mast aside,
And dropped their Anchors, and the Pinnace tied.
Next on the Shore their Hecatomb they land,
Chruseis last descending on the Strand.
Her, thus returning from the furrowed Main,
Ulysses led to Phoebus sacred Fane;
Where at his solemn Altar, as the Maid
He gave to Chryses, thus the Hero said.
Hail Reverend Priest! to Phoebus' awful Dome
A Suppliant I from great Atrides come:
Unransom'd here receive the spotless Fair;
Accept the Hecatomb the Greeks prepare;
And may thy God who scatters Darts around,
Atoned by Sacrifice, desist to wound.
At this, the Sire embraced the Maid again,
So sadly lost, so lately sought in vain.
Then near the Altar of the darting King,
Disposed in Rank their Hecatomb they bring:
With Water purify their Hands, and take
The sacred Offering of the salted Cake;
While thus with Arms devoutly raised in Air,
And solemn Voice, the Priest directs his Prayer.
God of the Silver Bow, thy Ear incline,
Whose Power encircles Cilla the Divine,
Whose sacred Eye thy Tenedos surveys,
And gilds fair Chrysa with distinguished Rays!
If, fired to Vengeance at thy Priests request,
Thy direful Darts inflict the raging Pest;
Once more attend! avert the wastful Woe,
And smile propitious, and unbend thy Bow.
So Chryses prayed, Apollo heard his Prayer:
And now the Greeks their Hecatomb prepare;
Between their Horns the salted Barley threw,
And with their Heads to Heaven the Victims slew:
The Limbs they sever from the enclosing Hide;
The Thighs, selected to the Gods, divide:
On these, in double Cawls involved with Art,
The choicest Morsels lay from every Part.
The Priest himself before his Altar stands,
And burns the Victims with his holy Hands,
Pours the black Wine, and sees the Flames aspire;
The Youth with Instruments surround the Fire:
The Thighs thus sacrificed, and Entrails dressed,
Th'Assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest:
Then spread the Tables, the Repast prepare,
Each takes his Seat, and each receives his Share.
When now the Rage of Hunger was represt,
With pure Libations they conclude the Feast;
The Youths with Wine the copious Goblets crowned,
And pleased, dispense the flowing Bowls around.
With Hymns Divine the joyous Banquet ends,
The Paeans lengthened 'till the Sun descends:
The Greeks restored the grateful Notes prolong;
Apollo listens, and approves the Song.
'Twas Night: the Chiefs beside their Vessel lie,
'Till rosy Morn had purpled over the Sky:
Then launch, and hoise the Mast; Indulgent Gales
Supplied by Phoebus, fill the swelling Sails;
The milk-white Canvas bellying as they blow;
The parted Ocean foams and roars below:
Above the bounding Billows swift they flew,
'Till now the Grecian Camp appeared in view.
Far on the Beach they haul their Bark to Land,
(The crooked Keel divides the yellow Sand)
Then part, where stretched along the winding Bay
The Ships and Tents in mingled Prospect lay.
But raging still amidst his Navy sat
The stern Achilles, steadfast in his Hate;
Nor mixed in Combat, nor in Council joined,
But wasting Cares lay heavy on his Mind:
In his black Thoughts Revenge and Slaughter roll,
And Scenes of Blood rise dreadful in his Soul.
Twelve Days were past, and now the dawning Light
The Gods had summoned to the Olympian Height.
Jove first ascending from the Watery Bowers,
Leads the long Order of Aetherial Powers.
When like a Morning Mist, in early Day,
Rose from the Flood the Daughter of the Sea;
And to the Seats Divine her Flight addressed.
There, far apart, and high above the rest,
The Thund'rer sat; where old Olympus shrouds
His hundred Heads in Heaven, and props the Clouds.
Suppliant the Goddess stood: One Hand she placed
Beneath his Beard, and one his Knees embraced.
If ever, O Father of the Gods! she said,
My Words could please thee, or my Actions aid;
Some Marks of Honor on my Son bestow,
And pay in Glory what in Life you owe.
Fame is at least by Heavenly Promise due
To Life so short, and now dishonored too.
Avenge this Wrong, oh ever just and wise!
Let Greece be humbled, and the Trojans rise;
'Till the proud King, and all the Achaian Race
Shall heap with Honors him they now disgrace.
Thus Thetis spoke, but Jove in Silence held
The facred Counsels of his Breast concealed.
Not so repulsed, the Goddess closer pressed,
Still grasped his Knees, and urged the dear Request.
O Sire of Gods and Men! thy Suppliant hear,
Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear?
Or oh declare, of all the Powers above
Is wretched Thetis least the Care of Jove?
She said, and sighing thus the God replies
Who rolls the Thunder over the vaulted Skies.
What have thou asked? Ah why should Jove engage
In foreign Contests, and domestic Rage,
The Gods Complaints, and Juno's fierce Alarms,
While I, too partial, aid the Trojan Arms?
Go, lest the haughty Partner of my Sway
With jealous Eyes thy close Access survey;
But part in Peace, secure thy Prayer is sped:
Witness the sacred Honors of our Head,
The Nod that ratifies the Will Divine,
The faithful, fixed, irrevocable Sign;
This seals thy Suit, and this fulfills thy Vows --
He spoke, and awful, bends his sable Brows;
Shakes his Ambrosial Curls, and gives the Nod;
The Stamp of Fate, and Sanction of the God:
High Heaven with trembling the dread Signal took,
And all Olympus to the Center shook.
Swift to the Seas profound the Goddess flies,
Jove to his starry Mansion in the Skies.
The shining Synod of the Immortals wait
The coming God, and from their Thrones of State
Arising silent, wrapped in Holy Fear,
Before the Majesty of Heaven appear.
Trembling they stand, while Jove assumes the Throne,
All, but the God's Imperious Queen alone:
Late had she viewed the Silver-footed Dame,
And all her Passions kindled into Flame.
Say, artful Manager of Heaven (she cries)
Who now partakes the Secrets of the Skies?
Thy Juno knows not the Decrees of Fate,
In vain the Partner of Imperial State.
What favorite Goddess then those Cares divides,
Which Jove in Prudence from his Consort hides?
To this the Thund'rer: Seek not thou to find
The sacred Counsels of Almighty Mind:
Involved in Darkness lies the great Decree,
Nor can the Depths of Fate be pierced by thee.
What fits thy Knowledge, thou the first shall know;
The first of Gods above and Men below:
But thou, nor they, shall search the Thoughts that roll
Deep in the close Recesses of my Soul.
Full on the Sire the Goddess of the Skies
Rolled the large Orbs of her majestic Eyes,
And thus returned. Austere Saturnius, say,
From whence this Wrath, or who controuls thy Sway?
Thy boundless Will, for me, remains in Force,
And all thy Counsels take the destined Course.
But it is for Greece I fear: For late was seen
In close Consult, the Silver-footed Queen.
Jove to his Thetis nothing could deny,
Nor was the Signal vain that shook the Sky.
What fatal Favor has the Goddess won,
To grace her fierce, inexorable Son?
Perhaps in Grecian Blood to drench the Plain,
And glut his Vengeance with my People slain.
Then thus the God: Oh restless Fate of Pride,
That strives to learn what Heaven resolves to hide;
Vain is the Search, presumptuous and abhorred,
Anxious to thee, and odious to thy Lord.
Let this suffice; the immutable Decree
No Force can shake: What is, that ought to be.
Goddess submit, nor dare our Will withstand,
But dread the Power of this avenging Hand;
The united Strength of all the Gods above
In vain resists the Omnipotence of Jove.
The Thund'rer spoke, nor durst the Queen reply;
A reverend Horror silenced all the Sky.
The Feast disturbed with Sorrow Vulcan saw,
His Mother menaced, and the Gods in Awe;
Peace at his Heart, and Pleasure his Design,
Thus interposed the Architect Divine.
The wretched Quarrels of the mortal State
Are far unworthy, Gods! of your Debate:
Let Men their Days in senseless Strife employ,
We, in eternal Peace and constant Joy.
Thou, Goddess-Mother, with our Sire comply,
Nor break the sacred Union of the Sky:
Lest, roused to Rage, he shake the blessed Abodes,
Launch the red Lightning, and dethrone the Gods.
If you submit, the Thund'rer stands appeased;
The gracious Power is willing to be pleased.
Thus Vulcan spoke; and rising with a Bound,
The double Bowl with sparkling Nectar crowned,
Which held to Juno in a cheerful way,
Goddess (he cried) be patient and obey.
Dear as you are, if Jove his Arm extend,
I can but grieve, unable to defend.
What God so daring in your Aid to move,
Or lift his Hand against the Force of Jove?
Once in your Cause I felt his matchless Might,
Hurled headlong downward from the Etherial Height;
Tossed all the Day in rapid Circles round;
Nor 'till the Sun descended, touched the Ground:
Breathless I fell, in giddy Motion lost;
The Sinthians raised me on the Lemnian Coast.
He said, and to her Hands the Goblet heaved,
Which, with a Smile, the white-arm'd Queen received.
Then to the rest he filled; and, in his Turn,
Each to his Lips applied the nectar'd Urn.
Vulcan with awkward Grace his Office plies,
And unextinguish'd Laughter shakes the Skies.
Thus the blessed Gods the Genial Day prolong,
In Feasts Ambrosial, and Celestial Song.
Apollo tuned the Lyre; the Muses round
With Voice alternate aid the silver Sound.
Meantime the radiant Sun, to mortal Sight
Descending swift, rolled down the rapid Light.
Then to their starry Domes the Gods depart,
The shining Monuments of Vulcan's Art:
Jove on his Couch reclined his awful Head,
And Juno slumber'd on the golden Bed.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE First Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE FIRST BOOK.
IT is something strange that of all the Commentators upon Homer, there is
hardly one whose principal Design is to illustrate the Poetical Beauties of the
Author. They are voluminous in explaining those Sciences which he made but
subservient to his Poetry, and sparing only upon that Art which constitutes his
Character. This has been occasioned by the Ostentation of Men who had more
Reading than Taste, and were fonder of showing their Variety of Learning in all
Kinds, than their single Understanding in Poetry. Hence it comes to pass that
their Remarks are rather Philosophical, Historical, Geographical, Allegorical,
or in short rather any thing than Critical and Poetical. Even the Grammarians,
though their whole Business and Use be only to render the Words of an Author
intelligible, are strangely touched with the Pride of doing something more than
they ought. The grand Ambition of one sort of Scholars is to increase the
Number of Various Lections; which they have done to such a degree of obscure
Diligence, that we now begin to value the first Editions of Books as most
correct, because they have been least corrected. The prevailing Passion of
others is to discover New Meanings in an Author, whom they will cause to appear
mysterious purely for the Vanity of being thought to unravel him. These account
it a disgrace to be of the Opinion of those that preceded them; and it is
generally the Fate of such People who will never say what was said before, to
say what will never be said after them. If they can but find a Word that has
once been strained by some dark Writer to signify any thing different from its
usual Acceptance, it is frequent with them to apply to constantly to that
uncommon Meaning, whenever they meet it in a clear Writer: For Reading is so
much dearer to them than Sense, that they will discard it at any time to make
way for a Criticism. In other Places where they cannot contest the Truth of the
common Interpretation, they get themselves room for Dissertation by imaginary
Amphibologies, which they will have to be designed by the Author. This
Disposition of finding out different Significations in one thing, may be the
Effect of either too much, or too little Wit: For Men of a right Understanding
generally see at once all that an Author can reasonably mean, but others are
apt to fancy Two Meanings for want of knowing One. Not to add, that there is a
vast deal of difference between the Learning of a Critic, and the Puzzling of
a Grammarian.

It is no easy Task to make something out of a hundred Pedants that is not
Pedantical; yet this he must do, who would give a tolerable Abstract of the
former Expositors of Homer. The Commentaries of Eustathius are indeed an
immense Treasury of the Greek Learning; but as he seems to have amassed the
Substance of whatever others had written upon the Author, so he is not free
from some of the foregoing Censures. There are those who have said, that a
judicious Abstract of Him alone might furnish out sufficient Illustrations upon
Homer. It was resolved to take the trouble of reading through that voluminous
Work, and the Reader may be assured, those Remarks that any way concern the
Poetry or Art of the Poet, are much fewer than is imagined. The greater Part of
these is already plundered by succeeding Commentators, who have very little but
what they owe to him: and I am obliged to say even of Madam Dacier, that she is
either more beholden to him than she has confessed, or has read him less than
she is willing to own. She has made a farther Attempt than her Predecessors to
discover the Beauties of the Poet; though we have often only her general Praises
and Exclamations instead of Reasons. But her Remarks all together are the most
judicious Collection extant of the scattered Observations of the Ancients and
Moderns, as her Preface is excellent, and her Translation equally careful and
elegant.

The chief Design of the following Notes is to comment upon Homer as a Poet;
whatever in them is extracted from others is constantly owned; the Remarks of
the Ancients are generally set at length, and the Places cited: all those of
Eustathius are collected which fall under this Scheme: many which were not
acknowledged by other Commentators, are restored to the true Owner; and the
same Justice is shown to those who refused it to others.

I.
THE Plan of this Poem is formed upon Anger and its ill Effects, the Plan of
Virgil's upon pious Resignation and its Rewards: and thus every Passion or
Virtue may be the Foundation of the Scheme of an Epic Poem. This Distinction
between two Authors who have been so successful, seemed necessary to be taken
notice of, that they who would imitate either may not stumble at the very
Entrance, or curb their Imaginations so as to deprive us of noble Morals told
in a new Variety of Accidents. Imitation does not hinder Invention: We may
observe the Rules of Nature, and write in the Spirit of those who have best hit
upon them, without taking the same Track, beginning in the same Manner, and
following the Main of their Story almost step by step; as most of the modern
Writers of Epic Poetry have done after one of these great Poets.

II.
VERSE 1.] Quintilian has told us, that from the beginning of Homer's two Poems
the Rules of all Exordiums were derived. " In paucissimis versibus utriusque
operis ingressu, legem Prooemiorum non dico servavit, sed constituit." Yet
Rapin has been very free with this Invocation, in his Comparison between Homer
and Virgil; which is by no means the most judicious of his Works. He cavils
first at the Poet's insisting so much upon the Effects of Achilles's Anger,
That it was "the Cause of the Woes of the Greeks," that it "sent so many Heroes
to the Shades," that "their Bodies were left a Prey to Birds and Beasts," the
first of which he thinks had been sufficient. One may answer, that the Woes of
Greece might consist in several other things than in the Death of her Heroes,
which was therefore needful to be specified: As to the Bodies, he might have
reflected how great a Curse the want of Burial was accounted by the Ancients,
and how prejudicial it was esteemed even to the Souls of the deceased: We have
a most particular Example of the Strength of this Opinion from the Conduct of
Sophocles in his Ajax; who thought this very Point sufficient to make the
Distress of the last Act of that Tragedy after the Death of his Hero, purely
to satisfy the Audience that he obtained the Rites of Sepulture. Next he
objects it as preposterous in Homer to desire the Muse to tell him the whole
Story, and at the same time to inform her solemnly in his own Person that 'twas
the Will of Jove which brought it about. But is a Poet then to be imagined
entirely ignorant of his Subject, though he invokes the Muse to relate the
Particulars? May not Homer be allowed the Knowledge of so plain a Truth, as
that the Will of God is fulfilled in all things? Nor does his Manner of saying
this infer that he informs the Muse of it, but only corresponds with the usual
way of desiring Information from another concerning any thing, and at the same
time mentioning that little we know of it in general. What is there more in
this Passage? "Sing, O Goddess, that Wrath of Achilles, which proved so
pernicious to the Greeks: We only know the Effects of it, that it sent
innumerable brave Men to the Shades, and that it was Jove's Will it should be
so. But tell me, O Muse, what was the Source of this destructive Anger?" I
cannot apprehend what Rapin means by saying, it is hard to know where this
Invocation ends, and that it is confounded with the Narration, which so
manifestly begins at (...). But upon the whole, methinks the French Critics
play double with us, when they sometimes represent the Rules of Poetry to be
formed upon the Practice of Homer, and at other times arraign their Master as
if he transgressed them. Horace has said the Exordium of an Epic Poem ought to
be plain and modest, and instances Homer's as such; and Rapin from this very
Rule will be trying Homer and judging it otherwise (for he criticizes also upon
the beginning of the Odysses) But for a full Answer we may bring the Words of
Quintilian (whom Rapin himself allows to be the best of Critics) concerning
these Propositions and Invocations of our Author. " Benevolum Auditorem
invocatione dearum quas praesidere vatibus creditum est, intentum proposita
rerum magnitudine, and docilem summa^ celeriter comprehensa, facit."

III.
VERSE 1.] (...)
Plutarch observes there is a Defect in the Measure of this first Line (I
suppose he means in the Eta's of the Patronymick.) This he thinks the fiery
Vein of Homer making haste to his Subject, past over with a bold Neglect, being
conscious of his own Power and Perfection in the greater Parts; as some (says
he) who make Virtue their sole Aim, pass by Censure in smaller Matters. But
perhaps we may find no occasion to suppose this a Neglect in him, if we
consider that the word Pelides, had he made use of it without so many
Alterations as he has put it to in (...), would still have been true to the
Rules of Measure. Make but a Diphthong of the second Eta and the Iota, instead
of their being two Syllables (perhaps by the fault of Transcribers) and the
Objection is gone. Or perhaps it might be designed that the Verse in which he
professes to sing of violent Anger should run off in the Rapidity of Dactyles.
This Art he is allowed to have used in other Places, and Virgil has been
particularly celebrated for it.

IV.
VERSE 8. Will of Jove.] Plutarch in his Treatise of reading Poets, interprets
(...) in this Place to signify Fate, not imagining it consistent with the
Goodness of the supreme Being, or Jupiter, to contrive or practice any Evil
against Men. Eustathius makes [ Will] here to refer to the Promise which
Jupiter gave to Thetis, that he would honor her Son by siding with Troy while
he should be absent. But to reconcile these two Opinions, perhaps the Meaning
may be that when Fate had decreed the Destruction of Troy, Jupiter having the
Power of Incidents to bring it to pass, fulfilled that Decree by providing
Means for it. So that the Words may thus specify the Time of Action, from the
beginning of the Poem, in which those Incidents worked, 'till the Promise to
Thetis was fulfilled, and the Destruction of Troy ascertained to the Greeks by
the Death of Hector. However it is certain that this Poet was not an absolute
Fatalist, but still supposed the Power of Jove superior: For in the sixteenth
Iliad we see him designing to save Sarpedon though the Fates had decreed his
Death, if Juno had not interposed. Neither does he exclude Free Will in Men;
for as he attributes the Destruction of the Heroes to the Will of Jove in the
beginning of the Iliad, so he attributes the Destruction of Ulysses's Friends
to their own Folly in the beginning of the Odysses, (...)


V.
VERSE 9. Declare, O Muse.] It may be questioned whether the first Period ends
at (...), and the Interrogation to the Muse begins with (...) -- Or whether the
Period does not end 'till the words, (...), with only a single Interrogation at
(...) --? I should be inclined to favor the former, and think it a double
Interrogative, as Milton seems to have done in his Imitation of this Place at
the beginning of Paradise Lost. -- Say first what Cause
Moved our grand Parents? etc.
And just after, Who first seduced them to that foul Revolt?
Besides that I think the Proposition concludes more nobly with the Sentence
Such was the Will of Jove. But the latter being followed by most Editions, and
by all the Translations I have seen in any Language, the general Acceptance is
here complied with, only transposing the Line to keep the Sentence last: And
the next Verses are so turned as to include the double Interrogation, and at
the same time do justice to another Interpretation of the Words (...), Ex quo
tempore; which marks the Date of the Quarrel from whence the Poem takes its
Rise. Chapman would have Ex quo understood of Jupiter, from whom the Debate was
suggested; but this clashes with the Line immediately following, where he asks
What God inspired the Contention? and answers, It was Apollo.

VI.
VERSE 11. Latona 's Son.] Here the Author who first invoked the Muse as the
Goddess of Memory, vanishes from the Reader's view, and leaves her to relate
the whole Affair through the Poem, whose Presence from this time diffuses an
Air of Majesty over the Relation. And lest this should be lost to our Thoughts
by the Continuation of the Story, he sometimes refreshes them with a new
Invocation at proper Intervals. Eustathius.

VII.
VERSE 20. The Scepter and the Laurel Crown.] There is something exceedingly
venerable in this Appearance of the Priest to command Attention. He comes with
the Ensigns of the God he belonged to; the Laurel Crown, now carried in his
Hand to show he was a Suppliant; and a golden Scepter which the Ancients gave
in particular to Apollo, as they did a silver one to the Moon, and other sorts
to other Planets. Eustathius.

VIII.
VERSE 23. Ye Kings and Warriors.] The Art of this Speech is remarkable.
Chryses considers the Constitution of the Greeks before Troy, as made up of
Troops partly from Kingdoms and partly from Democracies: Wherefore he begins
with a distinction which comprehends all. After this, as Apollo's Priest, he
prays that they may obtain the two Blessings they had most in view, the
Conquest of Troy, and a safe Return. Then as he names his Petition, he offers
an extraordinary Ransom, and concludes with bidding them fear the God if they
refuse it; like one who from his Office seems to foresee their Misery and
exhorts them to shun it. Thus he endeavors to work by the Art of a general
Application, by Religion, by Interest, and the Insinuation of Danger. This is
the Substance of what Eustathius remarks on this Place; and in pursuance to his
last Observation, the Epithet Avenging is added to this Version, that it may
appear the Priest foretells the Anger of his God.

IX.
VERSE 33. He with Pride repulsed.] It has been remarked in Honor of Homer's
Judgment, and the Care he took of his Reader's Morals, that where he speaks of
evil Actions committed, or hard Words given, he generally characterises them as
such by a previous Expression. This Passage is given as one Instance of it,
where he says the Repulse of Chryses was a proud injurious Action in Agamemnon:
And it may be remarked that before his Heroes fall on one another with hard
Language, in this Book, he still takes care to let us know they were under a
Distraction of Anger. Plutarch of reading Poets.

X.
VERSE 41. 'Till Time shall rifle every youthful Grace,
And Age dismiss her from my cold Embrace,
In daily Labors of the Loom employed,
Or doomed to deck the Bed she once enjoyed.]
The Greek is (...), which signifies either making the Bed, or partaking it.
Eustathius and Madam Dacier insist very much upon its being taken in the former
Sense only, for fear of presenting a loose Idea to the Reader, and of offending
against the Modesty of the Muse who is supposed to relate the Poem. This
Observation may very well become a Bishop and a Lady: But that Agamemnon was
not studying here for Civility of Expression, appears from the whole Tenor of
his Speech; and that he designed Chryseis for more than a Servant-Maid may be
seen from some other things he says of her, as that he preferred her to his
Queen Clytemnestra, etc. The Impudence of which Confession Madam Dacier herself
has elsewhere animadverted upon. Mr. Dryden in his Translation of this Book,
has been juster to the Royal Passion of Agamemnon; though he has carried the
Point so much on the other side, as to make him promise a greater Fondness for
her in her old Age than in her Youth, which indeed is hardly credible. Mine she
shall be, 'till creeping Age and Time
Her Bloom have withered and destroyed her Prime;
'Till then my nuptial Bed she shall attend,
And having first adorned it, late ascend.
This for the Night; by Day the Web and Loom,
And homely Houshold-Tasks shall be her Doom.
Nothing could have made Mr. Dryden capable of this Mistake but extreme haste
in Writing; which never ought to be imputed as a Fault to him, but to those who
suffered so noble a Genius to lie under the necessity of it.

XI.
VERSE 47. The trembling Priest.] We may take notice here, once for all, that
Homer is frequently Eloquent in his very Silence. Chryses says not a word in
answer to the Insults of Agamemnon, but walks pensive along the Shore, and the
melancholy Flowing of the Verse admirably expresses the Condition of the
mournful and deserted Father. (...)


XII.
VERSE 61. The favoring God attends.] Upon this first Prayer in the Poem
Eustathius takes occasion to observe, that the Poet is careful throughout his
whole Work to let no Prayer ever fall entirely which has Justice on its side;
but he who prays either kills his Enemy, or has Signs given him that he has
been heard, or his Friends return, or his Undertaking succeeds, or some other
visible Good happens. So far instructive and useful to Life has Homer made his
Fable.

XIII.
VERSE 67. He bent his deadly Bow.] In the tenth Year of the Siege of Troy a
Plague happened in the Grecian Camp, occasioned perhaps by immoderate Heats and
gross Exhalations. At the Introduction of this Accident Homer begins his Poem,
and takes occasion from it to open the Scene of Action with a most beautiful
Allegory. He supposes that such Afflictions are sent from Heaven for the
Punishment of our evil Actions, and because the Sun whom the Heathens worshipped
was a principal Instrument of it, he says it was sent to punish Agamemnon for
despising that God and injuring his Priest. Eustathius.

XIV.
VERSE 69. Mules and Dogs.] Hippocrates observes two things of Plagues; that
their Cause is in the Air, and that different Animals are differently touched
by them according to their Nature or Nourishment. This Philosophy Spondanus
refers to the Plague here mentioned. First, the Cause is in the Air, by reason
of the Darts or Beams of Apollo. Secondly, the Mules and Dogs are said to die
sooner than the Men; partly because they have by Nature a Quickness of Smell
which makes the Infection sooner perceivable; and partly by the Nourishment
they take, their feeding on the Earth with prone Heads making the Exhalation
the more easy to be sucked in with it. Thus has Hippocrates so long after Homer
writ, subscribed to his Knowledge in the Rise and Progress of this Distemper.
There have been some who have referred this Passage to a religious Sense, making
the Death of the Mules and Dogs before the Men to point out a kind Method of
Providence in punishing, whereby it sends some previous Afflictions to warn
Mankind so as to make them shun the greater Evils by Repentance. This Monsieur
Dacier in his Notes on Aristotles's Art of Poetry calls a Remark perfectly
fine, and agreeable to God's Method of sending Plagues on the Egyptians, where
first Horses, Asses, etc. were smitten, and afterward the Men themselves.

XV.
VERSE 74. Thetis' God-like Son convenes a Council.] On the tenth Day a Council
is held to enquire why the Gods were angry? We may observe with Plutarch, how
justly he applies the Characters of his Persons to the Incidents; not making
Agamemnon but Achilles call this Council, who of all the Kings was most capable
of making Observations upon the Plague, and of foreseeing its Duration, as
having been bred by Chiron to the Study of Physic. One may mention also a
Remark of Eustathius in pursuance to this, that Juno's advising him in this
case might allude to his Knowledge of an evil Temperament in the Air, of which
she was Goddess.

XVI.
VERSE 79. Why leave we not the fatal Trojan Shore, etc.] The Artifice of this
Speech (according to Dionysius of Halicarnassus in his second Discourse, (...))
is admirably carried on to open an Accusation against Agamemnon, whom Achilles
suspects to be the Cause of all their Miseries. He directs himself not to the
Assembly, but to Agamemnon; he names not only the Plague but the War too, as
having exhausted them all, which was evidently due to his Family. He leads the
Augurs he would consult, by pointing at something lately done with respect to
Apollo. And while he continues within the guard of civil Expression, scattering
his Insinuations, he encourages those who may have more Knowledge to speak out
boldly, by letting them see there is a Party made for their Safety; which has
its Effect immediately in the following Speech of Chalcas, whose demand of
Protection shows upon whom the Offense is to be placed.

XVII.
VERSE 85. By mystic Dreams.] It does not seem that by the word (...) an
Interpreter of Dreams is meant, for we have no hint of any preceding Dream
which wants to be interpreted. We may therefore more probably refer it to such
who used (after performing proper Rites) to lie down at some sacred Place, and
expect a Dream from the Gods upon any particular Subject which they desired.
That this was a Practice amongst them, appears from the Temples of Amphiaraus
in Boeotia, and Podalirius in Apulia, where the Enquirer was obliged to sleep
at the Altar upon the Skin of the Beast he had sacrificed in order to obtain an
Answer. It is in this manner that Latinus in Virgil's seventh Book goes to
dream in the Temple of Faunus, where we have a particular Description of the
whole Custom. Strabo, Lib. 16. has spoken concerning the Temple of Jerusalem as
a Place of this Nature; "where (says he) the People either dreamed for
themselves, or procured some good Dreamer to do it:" By which it should seem he
had read something concerning the Visions of their Prophets, as that which
Samuel had when he was ordered to sleep a third time before the Ark, and upon
doing so had an Account of the Destruction of Eli's House: or that which
happened to Solomon after having sacrificed before the Ark at Gibeon. The same
Author also has mentioned the Temple of Serapis in his seventeenth Book as a
Place for receiving Oracles by Dreams.

XVIII.
VERSE 97. Beloved of Jove, Achilles!] These Appellations of Praise and Honor
with which the Heroes in Homer so frequently salute each other, were agreeable
to the Style of the ancient Times, as appears from several of the like Nature
in the Scripture. Milton has not been wanting to give his Poem this Cast of
Antiquity, throughout which our first Parents almost always accost each other
with some Title that expresses a Respect to the Dignity of human Nature.
Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve.
Adam, Earth's hallowed Mould of God inspired.
Offspring of Heaven and Earth, and all Earth's Lord. etc.


XIX.
VERSE 115. Not even the Chief.] After Achilles had brought in Chalcas by his
dark Doubts concerning Agamemnon, Chalcas who perceived them, and was unwilling
to be the first that named the King, artfully demands a Protection in such a
manner, as confirms those Doubts, and extorts from him that warm and particular
Expression "that he would protect him even against Agamemnon," who, as he says,
is now the greatest Man of Greece, to hint that at the Expiration of the War he
should be again reduced to be barely King of Mycenae. This Place Plutarch takes
notice of as the first in which Achilles shows his Contempt of Sovereign
Authority.

XX.
VERSE 117. The Blameless Priest.] The Epithet (...) or blameless, is frequent
in Homer, but not always used with so much Propriety as here. The Reader may
observe that Care has not been wanting through this Translation to preserve those
Epithets which are peculiar to the Author, whenever they receive any Beauty
from the Circumstances about them: as this of blameless manifestly does in the
present Passage. It is not only applied to a Priest, but to one who being
conscious of the Truth, prepares with an honest Boldness to discover it.

XXI.
VERSE 131. Augur accursed.] This Expression is not merely thrown out by chance,
but proves what Chalcas said of the King when he asked Protection; that he
harbored Anger in his Heart. For it aims at the Prediction Chalcas had given
at Aulis nine Years before, for the sacrificing his Daughter Iphigenia.
Spondanus.

This, and the two following Lines are in a manner Repetitions of the same
thing thrice over. It is left to the Reader to consider how far it may be
allowed, or rather praised for a Beauty, when we consider with Eustathius that
it is a most natural Effect of Anger to be full of Words and insisting on that
which galls us. We may add, that these reiterated Expressions might be supposed
to be thrown out one after another, according as Agamemnon is struck in the
Confusion of his Passion, first by the Remembrance of one Prophecy, and then of
another, which the same Man had uttered against him.

XXII.
VERSE 143. Not half so dear were Clytemnestra 's Charms.] Agamemnon having
heard the Charge which Chalcas drew up against him in two Particulars, that he
had affronted the Priest, and refused to restore his Daughter; he offers one
Answer which gives softening Colors to both, that he loved her as well as his
Queen Clytemnestra for her Perfections. Thus he would seem to satisfy the
Father by Kindness to his Daughter, to excuse himself before the Greeks for
what is past, and to make a Merit of yielding her in the following Lines, and
sacrificing his Passion for their Safety.

XXIII.
VERSE 155. Insatiate King.] Here, where this Passion of Anger grows loud, it
seems proper to prepare the Reader, and prevent his Mistake in the Character of
Achilles, which might shock him in several Particulars following. We should
know that the Poet has rather studied Nature than Perfection in the laying down
his Characters. He resolved to sing the Consequences of Anger; he considered
what Virtues and Vices would conduce most to bring his Moral out of the Fable;
and artfully disposed them in his chief Persons after the manner in which we
generally find them; making the Fault which most peculiarly attends any good
Quality, to reside with it. Thus he has placed Pride with Magnanimity in
Agamemnon, and Craft with Prudence in Ulysses. And thus we must take his
Achilles, not as a mere heroic dispassion'd Character, but as one compounded
of Courage and Anger; one who finds himself almost invincible, and assumes an
uncontrolled Carriage upon the Self-consciousness of his Worth; whose high
Strain of Honor will not suffer him to betray his Friends or fight against
them, even when he thinks they have affronted him; but whose inexorable
Resentment will not let him hearken to any Terms of Accommodation. These are
the Lights and Shades of his Character, which Homer has heightened and darkened
in Extremes; because on the one side Valor is the darling Quality of Epic
Poetry, and on the other, Anger the particular Subject of his Poem. When
Characters thus mixed are well conducted, though they be not morally beautiful
quite through, they conduce more to the end, and are still poetically perfect.

Plutarch takes occasion from the Observation of this Conduct in Homer, to
applaud his just Imitation of Nature and Truth, in representing Virtues and
Vices intermixed in his Heroes: contrary to the Paradoxes and strange Positions
of the Stoics, who held that no Vice could consist with Virtue, nor the least
Virtue with Vice. Plut. de and. Poetis.

XXIV.
VERSE 169. Great as thou art, and like a God in Fight.] The Words in the
Original are (...). Ulysses is soon after called (...), and others in other
Places. The Phrase of Divine or God-like is not used by the Poet to signify
Perfection in Men, but applied to considerable Persons upon account of some
particular Qualification or Advantage which they were possessed of far above
the common Standard of Mankind. Thus it is ascribed to Achilles upon account of
his great Valor, to Ulysses for his Pre-eminence in Wisdom, even to Paris for
his exceeding Beauty, and to Clytemnestra for several fair Endowments.

XXV.
VERSE 172. First let the just Equivalent.] The Reasoning in point of Right
between Achilles and Agamemnon seems to be this. Achilles pleads that Agamemnon
could not seize upon any other Man's Captive without a new Distribution, it
being an Invasion of private Property. On the other hand, as Agamemnon's Power
was limited, how came it that all the Grecian Captains would submit to an
illegal and arbitrary Action? I think the legal Pretense for his seizing
Briseis must have been founded upon that Law, whereby the Commander in Chief
had the Power of taking what part of the Prey he pleased for his own Use: And
he being obliged to restore what he had taken, it seemed but just that he
should have a second Choice.

XXVI.
VERSE 213. And dare thou threat to snatch my Prize away,
Due to the Deeds of many a dreadful Day?]
The Anger of these two Princes was equally upon the account of Women, but yet
it is observable that there is a different Air with which they are conducted.
Agamemnon appears as a Lover, Achilles as a Warrior: The one speaks of
Chryseis as a Beauty whom he valued equal to his Wife, and whose Merit was too
considerable to be easily resigned; the other treats Briseis as a Slave, whom
he is concerned to preserve in point of Honor, and as a Testimony of his
Glory. Hence it is that we never hear him mention her but as his Spoil, the
Reward of War, the Gift the Graecians gave him, or the like Expressions: and
accordingly he yields her up, not in Grief for a Mistress whom he loses, but in
Sullenness for an Injury that is done him. This Observation is Madam Dacier's,
and will often appear just as we proceed farther. Nothing is finer than the
Moral exhibited to us in this Quarrel, of the Blindness and Partiality of
Mankind to their own Faults: The Graecians make a War to recover a Woman that
was ravished, and are in danger to fail in the Attempt by a Dispute about
another. Agamemnon while he is revenging a Rape, commits one; and Achilles
while he is in the utmost Fury himself, reproaches Agamemnon for his passionate
Temper.

XXVII.
VERSE 225. Fly, mighty Warrior.] Achilles having threatened to leave them in
the former Speech, and spoken of his Acts of War; the Poet here puts an artful
Piece of Spite in the Mouth of Agamemnon, making him opprobriously brand his
Retreat as a Flight, and lessen the Appearance of his Courage by calling it the
Love of Contention and Slaughter.

XXVIII.
VERSE 229. Kings, the Gods distinguished Care.] In the Original it is (...),
or nursed by Jove. Homer often uses to call his Kings by such Epithets as (...),
born of the Gods, or (...), bred by the Gods; by which he points out to
themselves, the Offices they were ordained for; and to their People, the
Reverence that should be paid them. These Expressions of his are perfectly in
the exalted Style of the Eastern Nations, and correspondent to those Places of
holy Scripture where they are called Gods, and the Sons of the most High.

XXIX.
VERSE 261. Minerva swift descended from above.] Homer having by degrees raised
Achilles to such a Pitch of Fury as to make him capable of attempting
Agamemnon's Life in the Council, Pallas the Goddess of Wisdom descends, and
being seen only by him, pulls him back in the very Instant of Execution. He
parlies with her a while as imagining she would advise him to proceed, but upon
the promise of a time wherein there should be a full Reparation of his Honor,
he sheaths his Sword in Obedience to her. She ascends to Heaven, and he being
left to himself, falls again upon his General with bitter Expressions. The
Allegory here may be allowed by every Reader to be unforced: The Prudence of
Achilles checks him in the rashest Moment of his Anger, it works upon him
unseen to others, but does not entirely prevail upon him to desist, 'till he
remembers his own Importance, and depends upon it that there will be a
necessity of their courting him at any Expense into the Alliance again. Having
persuaded himself by such Reflections, he forbears to attack his General, but
thinking that he sacrifices enough to Prudence by this Forbearance, lets the
thought of it vanish from him, and no sooner is Wisdom gone but he falls into
more violent Reproaches for the Gratification of his Passion. All this is a
most beautiful Passage whose Moral is evident, and generally agreed upon by the
Commentators.

XXX.
VERSE 268. Known by the Flames that sparkled from her Eyes.] They who carry on
this Allegory after the most minute manner, refer this to the Eyes of Achilles,
as indeed we must, if we entirely destroy the bodily Appearance of Minerva. But
what Poet designing to have his Moral so open, would take pains to form it into
a Fable? In the proper mythological Sense, this Passage should be referred to
Minerva: according to an Opinion of the Ancients, who supposed that the Gods
had a peculiar Light in their Eyes. That Homer was not ignorant of this Opinion
appears from his use of it in other Places, as when in the third Iliad Helena
by this means discovers Venus: and that he meant it here is particularly
asserted by Heliodorus in the third Book of his Aethiopick History. "The Gods,
says he, are known in their Apparitions to Men by the fixed Glare of their
Eyes, or their gliding Passage through Air without moving the Feet; these Marks
Homer has used from his Knowledge of the Egyptian Learning, applying one to
Pallas, and the other to Neptune." Madam Dacier has gone into the contrary
Opinion, and blames Eustathius and others without overthrowing these
Authorities, or assigning any other Reason but that it was not proper for
Minerva's Eyes to sparkle, when her Speech was mild.

XXXI.
VERSE 298. Thou Dog in Forehead.] It has been one of the Objections against
the Manners of Homer's Heroes, that they are abusive. Mons. de la Motte affirms
in his Discourse upon the Iliad, that great Men differ from the vulgar in their
manner of expressing their Passion; but certainly in violent Passions (such as
those of Achilles and Agamemnon) the Great are as subject as any others to
these Sallies; of which we have frequent Examples both from History and
Experience. Plutarch, taking notice of this Line, gives it as a particular
Commendation of Homer, that "he constantly affords us a fine Lecture of
Morality in his Reprehensions and Praises, by referring them not to the Goods
of Fortune or the Body, but those of the Mind, which are in our Power, and for
which we are blameable or praiseworthy. Thus, says he, Agamemnon is reproached
for Impudence and Fear, Ajax for vain-bragging, Idomeneus for the Love of
Contention, and Ulysses does not reprove even Thersites but as a Babbler, though
he had so many personal Deformities to object to him. In like manner also the
Appellations and Epithets with which they accost one another, are generally
founded on some distinguishing Qualification of Merit, as Wise Ulysses, Hector
equal to Jove in Wisdom, Achilles chief Glory of the Greeks," and the like
Plutarch of reading Poets.

XXXII.
VERSE 299. In ambush'd Fights to dare.] Homer has magnified the Ambush as the
boldest manner of Fight. They went upon those Parties with a few Men only, and
generally the most daring of the Army, on Occasions of the greatest Hazard,
where they were therefore more exposed than in a regular Battle. Thus Idomeneus
in the thirteenth Book expressly tells Meriones that the greatest Courage
appears in this way of Service, each Man being in a manner singled out to the
Proof of it. Eustathius.

XXXIII.
VERSE 309. Now by this sacred Scepter.] Spondanus in this Place blames
Eustathius, for saying that Homer makes Achilles in his Passion swear by the
first thing he meets with; and then assigns (as from himself) two Causes which
the other had mentioned so plainly before, that it is a wonder they could be
overlooked. The Substance of the whole Passage in Eustathius is, that if we
consider the Scepter simply as Wood, Achilles after the manner of the Ancients
takes in his Transport the first thing to swear by; but that Homer himself has
in the Process of the Description assigned Reasons why it is proper for the
Occasion, which may be seen by considering it Symbolically. First, That as the
Wood being cut from the Tree will never reunite and flourish, so neither
should their Amity ever flourish again, after they were divided by this
Contention. Secondly, That a Scepter being the mark of Power and Symbol of
Justice, to swear by it might in effect be construed swearing by the God of
Power, and by Justice itself; and accordingly it is spoken of by Aristotle, 3
l. Polit. as a usual solemn Oath of Kings.

I cannot leave this Passage without showing in Opposition to some Moderns who
have criticiz'd upon it as tedious, that it has been esteemed a Beauty of so
fine a Nature by the Ancients as to engage them in its Imitation. Virgil has
almost transcribed it in his 12 Aen. for the Scepter of Latinus. Ut sceptrum
hoc (sceptrum dextra nam forte gerebat)
Nunquam fronde levi sundet virgulta nec umbras;
Cum semel in silvis imo de stirpe recisum,
Matre caret, posuitque comas and brachia ferro:
Olim arbos, nunc artificis manus aere decoro
Inclusit, Patribusque dedit gestare Latinis.
But I cannot think this comes up to the Spirit or Propriety of Homer,
notwithstanding the Judgment of Scaliger who decides for Virgil upon a trivial
comparison of the Wording in each, l. 5. cap. 3. Poet. It fails in a greater
Point than any he has mentioned, which is that being there used on occasion of
a Peace, it has no emblematical reference to Division, and yet describes the
cutting of the Wood and its Incapacity to bloom and branch again, in as many
Words as Homer. It is borrowed by Valerius Flaccus in his third Book, where he
makes Jason swear as a Warrior by his Spear, Hanc ego magnanimi spolium
Didymaonis hastam,
Ut semel est avulsa jugis a matre perempta,
Quae neque jam frondes virides neque proferet umbras,
Fida ministeria and duras obit horrida pugnas,
Testor. --


And indeed, however he may here borrow some Expressions from Virgil or fall
below him in others, he has nevertheless kept to Homer in the Emblem, by
introducing the Oath upon Jason's Grief for sailing to Colchis without
Hercules, when he had separated himself from the Body of the Argonauts to
search after Hylas. To render the Beauty of this Passage more manifest, the
Allusion is inserted (but with the fewest Words possible) in this Translation.

XXXIV.
VERSE 324. Thy Rashness made the bravest Greek thy Foe.] Though self-praise had
not been agreeable to the haughty Nature of Achilles, yet Plutarch has
mentioned a Case, and with respect to him, wherein it is allowable. He says
that Achilles has at other times ascribed his Success to Jupiter, but it is
permitted to a Man of Merit and Figure who is injuriously dealt with, to speak
frankly of himself to those who are forgetful and unthankful.

XXXV.
VERSE 333. Two Generations.] The Commentators make not Nestor to have lived
three hundred Years (according to Ovid's Opinion;) they take the word (...) not
to signify a Century or Age of the World; but a Generation, or compass of Time
in which one Set of Men flourish, which in the common Computation is thirty
Years; and accordingly it is here translated as much the more probable.

From what Nestor says in this Speech, Madam Dacier computes the Age he was of,
at the end of the Trojan War. The Fight of the Lapithae and Centaurs fell out
fifty five or sixty Years before the War of Troy: The Quarrel of Agamemnon and
Achilles happened in the tenth and last Year of that War. It was then fifty
five or sixty five Years since Nestor fought against the Centaurs; he was
capable at that time of giving Counsel, so that one cannot imagine him to have
been under twenty: From whence it will appear that he was now almost arrived to
the Conclusion of his third Age, and about fourscore and five, or fourscore and
six Years of Age.

XXXVI.
VERSE 339. What Shame.] The Quarrel having risen to its highest Extravagance,
Nestor the wisest and most aged Greek is raised to quiet the Princes, whose
Speech is therefore framed entirely with an opposite Air to all which has been
hitherto said, sedate and inoffensive. He begins with a soft affectionate
Complaint which he opposes to their Threats and haughty Language; he reconciles
their Attention in an awful manner, by putting them in mind that they hear one
whom their Fathers and the greatest Heroes have heard with deference. He sides
with neither, that he might not anger any one, while he advises them to the
proper Methods of Reconciliation; and he appears to side with both while he
praises each, that they may be induced by the Recollection of one another's
Worth to return to that Amity which would bring Success to the Cause. It was
not however consistent with the Plan of the Poem that this should entirely
appease them, for then the Anger would be at an end which was proposed to be
sung through the whole. Homer has not therefore made this Speech to have its
full Success; and yet that the Eloquence of his Nestor might not be thrown out
of Character by its proving unavailable, he takes care that the Violence with
which the Dispute was managed should abate immediately upon his speaking;
Agamemnon confesses that all he spoke was right, Achilles promises not to fight
for Briseis if she should be sent for, and the Council dissolves.

It is to be observed that this Character of Authority and Wisdom in Nestor, is
every where admirably used by Homer, and made to exert itself through all the
great Emergencies of the Poem. As he quiets the Princes here, he proposes that
Expedient which reduces the Army into their Order after the Sedition in the
second Book. When the Greeks are in the utmost Distresses, it is he who advises
the building the Fortification before the Fleet, which is the chief means of
preserving them. And it is by his Persuasion that Patroclus puts on the Armor
of Achilles, which occasions the Return of that Hero, and the Conquest of Troy.

XXXVII.
VERSE 394. -- No more Achilles draws
His conquering Sword in any Woman's Cause.]
When Achilles promises not to contest for Briseis, he expresses it in a sharp
despising Air, I will not fight for the sake of a Woman: by which he glances at
Helena, and casts an oblique Reflection upon those Commanders whom he is about
to leave at the Siege for her Cause. One may observe how well it is fancied of
the Poet, to make one Woman the ground of a Quarrel which breaks an Alliance
that was only formed upon account of another: and how much the Circumstance
thus considered contributes to keep up the Anger of Achilles, for carrying on
the Poem beyond this Dissolution of the Council. For (as he himself argues with
Ulysses in the 9 th Iliad) it is as reasonable for him to retain his Anger upon
the account of Briseis, as for the Brothers with all Greece to carry on a War
upon the score of Helena. I do not know that any Commentator has taken notice
of this Sarcasm of Achilles, which I think a very obvious one.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 413. The Ablutions.] All our former English Translations seem to have
erred in the Sense of this Line; the word (...) being differently rendered by
them, Offals, or Entrails, or Purgaments, or Ordures, a gross Set of Ideas of
which Homer is not guilty. The word comes from (...), eluo, the same Verb from
whence (...), which precedes in the Line, is derived. So that the Sense appears
to be as it is rendered here [ They washed, and threw away their Washings.]
Perhaps this Lustration might be used as a Physical Remedy in cleansing them
from the Infection of the Plague: as Pausanias tells us it was by the
Arcadians, from whence he says the Plague was called (...) by the Greeks.

XXXIX.
VERSEE 430. At awful distance silent.] There was required a very remarkable
Management to preserve all the Characters which are concerned in this nice
Conjuncture, wherein the Heralds were to obey at their Peril. Agamemnon was to
be gratified by an Insult on Achilles, and Achilles was to suffer so as might
become his Pride, and not have his violent Temper provoked. From all this the
Poet has found the Secret to extricate himself, by only taking care to make his
Heralds stand in sight, and silent. Thus they neither make Agamemnon's Majesty
suffer by uttering their Message submissively, nor occasion a rough Treatment
from Achilles by demanding Briseis in the peremptory Air he ordered; and at the
same time Achilles is gratified with the Opportunity of giving her up, as if he
rather sent her than was forced to relinquish her. The Art of this has been
taken notice of by Eustathius.

XL.
VERSE 451. She in soft Sorrows.] The Behavior of Briseis in her Departure is
no less beautifully imagined than the former. A French or Italian Poet had
lavished all his Wit and Passion in two long Speeches on this Occasion, which
the Heralds must have wept to hear; instead of which Homer gives us a fine
Picture of Nature. We see Briseis passing unwillingly along, with a dejected
Air, melted in Tenderness, and not able to utter a word: And in the Lines
immediately following, we have a Contraste to this in the gloomy Resentment of
Achilles, who suddenly retires to the Shore and vents his Rage aloud to the
Seas. The Variation of the Numbers just in this Place adds a great Beauty to
it, which has been endeavored at in the Translation.

XLI.
VERSE 458. There bathed in Tears.] Eustathius observes on this Place that it
is no Weakness in Heroes to weep, but the very Effect of Humanity and Proof of
a generous Temper; for which he offers several Instances, and takes notice that
if Sophocles would not let Ajax weep, it is because he is drawn rather as a
Madman than a Hero. But this general Observation is not all we can offer in
excuse for the Tears of Achilles: His are Tears of Anger and Disdain (as I have
ventured to call them in the Translation) of which a great and fiery Temper is
more susceptible than any other; and even in this case Homer has taken care to
preserve the high Character, by making him retire to vent his Tears out of
sight. And we may add to these an Observation of which Madam Dacier is fond,
which is, the Reason why Agamemnon parts not in Tears from Chryseis, and
Achilles should from Briseis: The one parts willingly from his Mistress, and
because he does it for his People's Safety it becomes an Honor to him: the
other is parted unwillingly, and because his General takes her by force the
Action reflects a Dishonor upon him.

XLII.
VERSE 464. The Thund'rer owed.] This alludes to a Story which Achilles tells
the Ambassadors of Agamemnon, Il. 9. That he had the Choice of two Fates: one
less glorious at home, but blessed with a very long Life; the other full of
Glory at Troy, but then he was never to return. The Alternative being thus
proposed to him (not from Jupitcr but Thetis who revealed the Decree) he chose
the latter, which he looks upon as his due, since he gives away length of Life
for it: and accordingly when he complains to his Mother of the Disgrace he lies
under, it is in this manner he makes a demand of Honor.

Mons. de la Motte very judiciously observes, that but for this Foreknowledge
of the Certainty of his Death at Troy, Achilles's Character could have drawn
but little Esteem from the Reader. A Hero of a vicious Mind, blessed only with a
Superiority of Strength, and invulnerable into the bargain, was not very proper
to excite Admiration; but Homer by this exquisite Piece of Art has made him the
greatest of Heroes, who is still pursuing Glory in contempt of Death, and even
under that Certainty generously devoting himself in every Action.

XLIII.
VERSE 478. From Thebae.] Homer who opened his Poem with the Action which
immediately brought on Achilles's Anger, being now to give an Account of the
same thing again, takes his Rise more backward in the Story. Thus the Reader is
informed in what he should know, without having been delayed from entering upon
the promised Subject. This is the first Attempt which we see made toward the
Poetical Method of Narration, which differs from the Historical in that it does
not proceed always directly in the Line of Time, but sometimes relates things
which have gone before when a more proper Opportunity demands it to make the
Narration more informing or beautiful.

The foregoing Remark is in regard only to the first six Lines of this Speech.
What follows is a Rehearsal of the preceding Action of the Poem, almost in the
same Words he had used in the opening it; and is one of those Faults which has
with most Justice been objected to our Author. It is not to be denied but the
Account must be tedious, of what the Reader had been just before informed: and
especially when we are given to understand it was no way necessary, by what
Achilles says at the beginning, that Thetis knew the whole Story already. As to
repeating the same Lines, a Practice usual with Homer, it is not so excusable
in this Place as in those where Messages are delivered in the Words they were
received, or the like; it being unnatural to imagine, that the Person whom the
Poet introduces as actually speaking, should fall into the self-same Words that
are used in the Narration by the Poet himself. Yet Milton was so great an
Admirer and Imitator of our Author, as not to have scrupled even this kind of
Repetition. The Passage is at the end of his tenth Book, where Adam having
declared he would prostrate himself before God in certain particular Acts of
Humiliation, those Acts are immediately after described by the Poet in the same
Words.

XLIV.
VERSE 514. Often have thou triumphed.] The Persuasive which Achilles is here
made to put into the Mouth of Thetis, is most artfully contrived to suit the
present Exigency. You, says he, must entreat Jupiter to bring Miseries on the
Greeks who are protected by Juno, Neptune, and Minerva: Put him therefore in
mind that those Deities were once his Enemies, and adjure him by that Service
you did him when those very Powers would have bound him, that he will now in
his turn assist you against the Endeavors they will certainly oppose to my
Wishes. Eustathius.

As for the Story itself, some have thought (with whom is Madam Dacier) that
there was some imperfect Tradition of the Fall of the Angels for their
Rebellion, which the Greeks had received by Commerce with Egypt: and thus they
account the Rebellion of the Gods, the Precipitation of Vulcan from Heaven; and
Jove's threatening the inferior Gods with Tartarus in Il. 8. but as so many
Hints of Scripture faintly imitated. But it seems not improbable that the Wars
of the Gods, described by the Poets, allude to the Confusion of the Elements
before they were brought into their natural Order. It is almost generally
agreed that by Jupiter is meant the Ether, and by Juno the Air. The ancient
Philosophers supposed the Ether to be igneous, and by its kind Influence upon
the Air to be the Cause of all Vegetation: Therefore Homer says in the 14 th
Iliad,. 346. That upon Jupiter's embracing his Wife, the Earth put forth its
Plants. Perhaps by Thetis's assisting Jupiter, may be meant that the watery
Element subsiding and taking its natural Place, put an end to this Combat of
the Elements.

XLV.
VERSE 523. Whom Gods Briareus, Men Aegeon name.] This manner of making the
Gods speak a Language different from Men (which is frequent in Homer) is a
Circumstance that as far as it widens the distinction between divine and human
Natures, so far might tend to heighten the Reverence paid the Gods. But besides
this, as the difference is thus told in Poetry, it is of use to the Poets
themselves: For it appears like a kind of Testimony of their Inspiration, or
their Converse with the Gods, and thereby gives a Majesty to their Works.

XLVI.
VERSE 554. The Sire of Gods, and all the Etherial Train,
On the warm Limits of the farthest Main,
Now mix with Mortals, nor disdain to grace
The Feasts of Aethiopia 's blameless Race.]
The Aethiopians, says Diodorus, l. 3. are said to be the Inventors of Pomps,
Sacrifices, solemn Meetings, and other Honors paid to the Gods. From hence
arose their Character of Piety, which is here celebrated by Homer. Among these
there was an annual Feast at Diospolis, which Eustathius mentions, wherein they
carried about the Statues of Jupiter and the other Gods, for twelve Days,
according to their Number: to which if we add the ancient Custom of setting
Meat before Statues, it will appear a Rite from which this Fable might easily
arise. But it would be a great Mistake to imagine from this Place, that Homer
represents the Gods as eating and drinking upon Earth: a gross Notion he was
never guilty of, as appears from these Verses in the fifth Book, Line 340. (...)
(...)
(...)
Macrobius would have it, that by Jupiter here mentioned is meant the Sun, and
that the Number Twelve hints at the twelve Signs; but whatever may be said in a
critical Defense of this Opinion, I believe the Reader will be satisfied that
Homer considered as a Poet would have his Machinery understood upon that System
of the Gods which is properly Grecian.

One may take notice here, that it were to be wished some Passage were found in
any authentic Author that might tell us the time of the Year when the
Aethiopians kept this Festival at Diospolis: For from thence one might
determine the precise Season of the Year wherein the Actions of the Iliad are
represented to have happened; and perhaps by that means farther explain the
Beauty and Propriety of many Passages in the Poem.

XLVII.
VERSE 600. The Sacrifice.] If we consider this Passage, it is not made to
shine in Poetry: All that can be done is to give it Numbers, and endeavor to
set the Particulars in a distinct View. But if we take it in another Light, and
as a Piece of Learning, it is valuable for being the most exact Account of the
ancient Sacrifices any where left us. There is first the Purification, by
washing of Hands. Secondly the offering up of Prayers. Thirdly the Mola, or
Barley Cakes thrown upon the Victim. Fourthly the manner of killing it with the
Head turned upwards to the celestial Gods (as they turned it downwards when
they offered to the Infernals.) Fifthly their selecting the Thighs and Fat for
their Gods as the best of the Sacrifice, and the disposing about them pieces
cut from every part for a Representation of the whole: (Hence the Thighs, or
(...), are frequently used in Homer and the Greek Poets for the whole Victim.)
Sixthly the Libation of Wine. Seventhly consuming the Thighs in the Fire of the
Altar. Eighthly the Sacrificers dressing and Feasting on the rest, with Joy and
Hymns to the Gods. Thus punctually have the ancient Poets and in particular
Homer, written with a care and respect to Religion. One may question whether
any Country as much a Stranger to Christianity as we are to Heathenism, might
be so well informed by our Poets in the Worship belonging to any Profession of
Religion at present.

I am obliged to take notice how entirely Mr. Dryden has mistaken the Sense of
this Passage, and the Custom of Antiquity; for in his Translation, the Cakes
are thrown into the Fire instead of being cast on the Victim; the Sacrificers
are made to eat the Thighs and whatever belonged to the Gods; and no part of
the Victim is consumed for a Burnt-offering, so that in effect there is no
Sacrifice at all. Some of the Mistakes (particularly that of turning the
Roast-meat on the Spits, which was not known in Homer's Days) he was led into
by Chapman's Translation.

XLVIII.
VERSE 681. The faithful, fixed, irrevocable Sign.] There are among Men three
things by which the Efficacy of a Promise may be made void; the Design not to
perform it, the want of Power to bring it to pass, and the Instability of our
Tempers, from all which Homer saw that the Divinity must be exempted, and
therefore he describes the Nod, or Ratification of Jupiter's word, as faithful
in Opposition to Fraud, sure of being performed in Opposition to Weakness, and
irrevocable in Opposition to our repenting of a Promise. Eustathius.

XLIX.
VERSE 683. He spoke, and awful bends.] This Description of the Majesty of
Jupiter has something exceedingly grand and venerable. Macrobius reports, that
Phidias having made his Olympian Jupiter which past for one of the greatest
Miracles of Art, he was asked from what Pattern he framed so divine a Figure,
and answered, it was from that Archetype which he found in these Lines of
Homer. The same Author has also taken notice of Virgil's imitating it, l. 10.
Dixerat, idque ratum Stygii per flumina fratris,
Per pice torrentes atraque voragine ripas;
Annuit, and totum nutu tremefecit Olympum.
Here indeed he has preserved the Nod with its stupendous Effect, the making
the Heavens tremble. But he has neglected the Description of the Eyebrows and
the Hair, those chief Pieces of Imagery from whence the Artist took the Idea of
a Countenance proper for the King of Gods and Men.

Thus far Macrobius, whom Scaliger answers in this manner; Aut ludunt Phidiam,
aut nos ludit Phidias: Etiam sine Homero puto illum scisse, Jovem non carere
superciliis and caesarie.

L.
VERSE 694. Jove assumes the Throne.] As Homer makes the first Council of his
Men to be one continued Scene of Anger, whereby the Grecian Chiefs became
divided, so he makes the first Meeting of the Gods to be spent in the same
Passion; whereby Jupiter is more fixed to assist the Trojans and Juno more
incensed against them. Thus the Design of the Poem goes on: the Anger which
began the Book overspreads all existent Beings by the latter end of it: Heaven
and Earth become engaged in the Subject, by which it rises to a great
Importance in the Reader's Eyes, and is hastened forward into the briskest
Scenes of Action that can be framed upon that violent Passion.

LI.
VERSE 698. Say, artful Manager.] The Gods and Goddesses being described with
all the Desires and Pleasures, the Passions and Humors of Mankind, the
Commentators have taken a License from thence to draw not only moral
Observations, but also satirical Reflections out of this part of the Poet.
These I am sorry to see fall so hard upon Womankind, and all by Juno's means.
Sometimes she procures them a Lesson for their Curiosity and Unquietness, and
at other times for their loud and vexatious Tempers. Juno deserves them on the
one hand, Jupiter thunders them out on the other, and the learned Gentlemen are
very particular in enlarging with Remarks on both sides. In her first Speech
they make the Poet describe the inquisitive Temper of Womankind in general, and
their Restlesness if they are not admitted into every Secret. In his Answer to
this, they trace those Methods of grave Remonstrance by which it is proper for
Husbands to calm them. In her Reply, they find it is the Nature of Women to be
more obstinate for being yielded to: and in his second Return to her, they see
the last Method to be used with them upon failure of the first, which is the
Exercise of Sovereign Authority.

Mr. Dryden has translated all this with the utmost Severity upon the Ladies,
and spirited the whole with satirical Additions of his own. But Madam Dacier
(who has elsewhere animadverted upon the good Bishop of Thessalonica, for his
sage Admonitions against the Fair Sex) has not taken the least notice of this
general Defection from Complaisance in all the Commentators. She seems willing
to give the whole Passage a more important Turn, and incline us to think that
Homer designed to represent the Folly and Danger of prying into the Secrets of
Providence. It Is thrown into that Air in this Translation, not only as it is
more noble and instructive in general, but as it is more respectful to the
Ladies in particular; nor should we (any more than Madam Dacier) have mentioned
what those old Fellows have said, but to desire their Protection against some
modern Critics their Disciples, who may arraign this Proceeding.

LII.
VERSE 713. Rolled the large Orbs.] The Greek is (...), which is commonly
translated The venerable Oxey'd Juno. Madam Dacier very well observes that
(...) is only an augmentative Particle, and signifies no more than valde. It
may be added, that the Imagination of Oxen having larger Eyes than ordinary is
ill grounded, and has no Foundation in Truth; their Eyes are no larger in
proportion than those of Men, or of most other Animals. But be it as it will,
the design of the Poet which is only to express the Largeness of her Eyes, is
answered in this Paraphrase.

LIII.
VERSE 741. Thus interposed the Architect divine.] This Quarrel of the Gods
being come to its height, the Poet makes Vulcan interpose, who freely puts them
in mind of Pleasure, inoffensively advises Juno, illustrates his Advice by an
Example of his own Misfortune, turning the Jest on himself to enliven the
Banquet; and concludes the Part he is to support with serving Nectar about.
Homer had here his Minerva or Wisdom to interpose again, and every other
Quality of the Mind resided in Heaven under the Appearance of some Deity: So
that his introducing Vulcan, proceeded not from a want of Choice, but an
Insight into Nature. He knew that a Friend to Mirth often diverts or stops
Quarrels, especially when he contrives to submit himself to the Laugh, and
prevails on the angry to part in good Humor or in a Disposition to Friendship;
when grave Representations are sometimes Reproaches, sometimes lengthen the
Debate by occasioning Defenses, and sometimes introduce new Parties into the
Consequences of it.

LIVE.
VERSE 760. Once in your Cause I felt his matchless Might.] They who search
another Vein of Allegory for hidden Knowledges in Natural Philosophy, have
considered Jupiter and Juno as Heaven and the Air, whose Alliance is
interrupted when the Air is troubled above, but restored again when it is
cleared by Heat, or Vulcan the God of Heat. Him they call a divine Artificer,
from the Activity or general Use of Fire in working. They suppose him to be
born in Heaven where Philosophers say that Element has its proper Place; and is
thence derived to the Earth which is signified by the Fall of Vulcan; that he
fell in Lemnos, because that Island abounds with Subterranean Fires; and that
he contracted a Lameness or Imperfection by the Fall; the Fire not being so
pure and active below, but mixed and terrestrial. Eustathius.

LVI.
VERSE 767. Which with a Smile the white-arm'd Queen received.] The Epithet
(...), or white-arm'd, is used by Homer several times before in this Book. This
was the first Passage where it could be introduced with any Ease or Grace,
because the Action she is here described in, of extending her Arm to the Cup,
gives it an occasion of displaying its Beauties, and in a manner demands the
Epithet.

LVII.
VERSE 771. Laughter shakes the Skies.] Vulcan designed to move Laughter by
taking upon him the Office of Hebe and Ganymede, with his awkward limping
Carriage. But though he prevailed and Homer tells you the Gods did laugh, yet he
takes care not to mention a word of Lameness. It would have been cruel in him
and Wit out of Season, to have enlarged with Derision upon an Imperfection
which is out of one's Power to remedy.

According to this good-natured Opinion of Eustathius, Mr. Dryden has treated
Vulcan a little barbarously. He makes his Character perfectly comical, he is
the Jest of the Board, and the Gods are very merry upon the Imperfections of
his Figure. Chapman led him into this Error in general, as well as into some
Indecencies of Expression in particular, which will be seen upon comparing them.

LVIII.
VERSE 778. Then to their starry Domes.] The Astrologers assign twelve Houses
to the Planets, wherein they are said to have Dominion. Now because Homer tells
us Vulcan built a Mansion for every God, the Ancients write that he first gave
occasion for this Doctrine.

LIX.
VERSE 780. Jove on his Couch reclined his awful Head.] Eustathius makes a
distinction between (...) and (...); the Words which are used at the end of
this Book and the beginning of the next, with regard to Jupiter's sleeping. He
says (...) only means Lying down in a Disposition to sleep; which salves the
Contradiction that else would follow in the next Book, where it is said Jupiter
did not sleep. I only mention this to vindicate the Translation which differs
from Mr. Dryden's.

It has been remarked by the Scholiasts, that this is the only Book of the
twenty four without any Simile, a Figure in which Homer abounds every where
else. The like Remark is made by Madam Dacier upon the first of the Odysses;
and because the Poet has observed the same Conduct in both Works, it is
concluded he thought a Simplicily of Style without the great Figures was proper
during the first Information of the Reader. This Observation may be true, and
admits of refined Reasonings; but for my part I cannot think the Book had been
the worse, though he had thrown in as many Similes as Virgil has in the first
Aeneid.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Trial of the Army and Catalogue of the Forces.
JUPITER in pursuance of the Request of Thetis, sends a deceitful Vision to
Agamemnon, persuading him to lead the Army to Battle; in order to make the
Greeks sensible of their want of Achilles. The General, who is deluded with the
hopes of taking Troy without his Assistance, but fears the Army was discouraged
by his Absence and the late Plague, as well as by length of Time, contrives to
make trial of their Disposition by a Stratagem. He first communicates his
Design to the Princes in Council, that he would propose a Return to the
Soldiers, and that they should put a stop to them if the Proposal was embraced.
Then he assembles the whole Host, and upon moving for a Return to Greece, they
unanimously agree to it and run to prepare the Ships. They are detained by the
Management of Ulysses, who chastises the Insolence of Thersites. The Assembly
is recalled, several Speeches made on the occasion, and at length the Advice of
Nestor followed, which was to make a general Muster of the Troops, and to
divide them into their several Nations, before they proceeded to Battle. This
gives occasion to the Poet to ennumerate all the Forces of the Greeks and
Trojans, in a large Catalogue.

The Time employed in this Book consists not entirely of one Day. The Scene
lies in the Grecian Camp and upon the Seashore; toward the end it removes to
Troy.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
NOW pleasing Sleep had sealed each mortal Eye,
Stretched in the Tents the Grecian Leaders lie,
The Immortals slumber'd on their Thrones above;
All, but the ever-wakeful Eyes of Jove.
To honor Thetis' Son he bends his Care,
And plunge the Greeks in all the Woes of War:
Then bids an empty Phantome rise to sight,
And thus commands the Vision of the Night.
Fly hence, deluding Dream! and light as Air,
To Agamemnon's ample Tent repair.
Bid him in Arms draw forth the embattel'd Train,
Lead all his Grecians to the dusty Plain.
Declare, even now it is given him to destroy
The lofty Towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the Gods with Fate contend,
At Juno's Suit the Heavenly Factions end.
Destruction hangs over yon' devoted Wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending Fall.
Swift as the Word the vain Illusion fled,
Descends and hovers over Atrides' Head;
Clothed in the Figure of the Pylian Sage,
Renowned for Wisdom, and revered for Age;
Around his Temples spreads his golden Wing,
And thus the flattering Dream deceives the King.
Can thou, with all a Monarch's Cares oppressed,
Oh Atreus' Son! can thou indulge thy Rest?
Ill fits a Chief who mighty Nations guides,
Directs in Council, and in War presides,
To whom its Safety a whole People owes,
To waste long Nights in indolent Repose?
Monarch awake! it is Jove's Command I bear,
Thou, and thy Glory, claim his heavenly Care.
In just Array draw forth the embattel'd Train,
Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty Plain;
Even now, O King! it is given thee to destroy
The lofty Towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the Gods with Fate contend,
At Juno's Suit the Heavenly Factions end.
Destruction hangs over yon' devoted Wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending Fall.
Awake, but waking this Advice approve,
And trust the Vision that descends from Jove.
The Phantome said; then, vanished from his sight,
Resolves to Air, and mixes with the Night.
A thousand Schemes the Monarch's Mind employ;
Elate in Thought, he sacks untaken Troy:
Vain as he was, and to the Future blind;
Nor saw what Jove and secret Fate designed,
What mighty Toils to either Host remain,
What Scenes of Grief and Mountains of the Slain!
Eager he rises, and in Fancy hears
The Voice Celestial murmuring in his Ears.
First on his Limbs a slender Vest he drew,
Around him next the Regal Mantle threw,
The embroidered Sandals on his Feet were tied,
The starry Faulchion glittered at his side;
And last his Arm the massy Scepter loads,
Unstained, immortal, and the Gift of Gods.
Now rosy Morn ascends the Court of Jove,
Lifts up her Light, and opens Day above.
The King dispatched his Heralds with Commands
To range the Camp, and summon all the Bands:
The gathering Hosts the Monarch's Word obey;
While to the Fleet Atrides bends his way.
In his black Ship the Pylian Prince he found,
There calls a Senate of the Peers around.
The Assembly placed, the King of Men expressed
The Counsels laboring in his artful Breast.
Friends and Confed'rates! with attentive Ear
Receive my Words, and credit what you hear.
Late as I slumber'd in the Shades of Night,
A Dream Divine appeared before my Sight;
Whose Visionary Form like Nestor came,
The same in Habit, and in Mien the same.
The heavenly Phantome hovered over my Head,
And, Do thou sleep, Oh Atreus' Son? (he said)
Ill suits a Chief who mighty Nations guides,
Directs in Council and in War presides,
To whom its Safety a whole People owes;
To waste long Nights in indolent Repose.
Monarch awake! it is Jove's Command I bear,
Thou and thy Glory claim his heavenly Care;
In just Array draw forth the embattel'd Train,
And lead the Grecians to the dusty Plain;
Even now, O King! it is given thee to destroy
The lofty Towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the Gods with Fate contend,
At Juno's Suit the Heavenly Factions end.
Destruction hangs over yon' devoted Wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending Fall.
This hear observant; and the Gods obey!
The Vision spoke, and past in Air away.
Now, valiant Chiefs! since Heaven itself alarms,
Unite, and rouse the Sons of Greece to Arms.
But first, with Caution, try what yet they dare,
Worn with nine Years of unsuccessful War?
To move the Troops to measure back the Main,
Be mine; and yours the Province to detain.
He spoke, and sat; when Nestor rising said,
( Nestor, whom Pylos' sandy Realms obeyed)
Princes of Greece, your faithful Ears incline,
Nor doubt the Vision of the Powers Divine;
Sent by great Jove to him who rules the Host,
Forbid it Heaven! this Warning should be lost!
Then let us haste, obey the Gods Alarms,
And join to rouse the Sons of Greece to Arms.
Thus spoke the Sage: The Kings without Delay
Dissolve the Council, and their Chief obey:
The sceptred Rulers lead; the following Host
Poured forth in Millions, darkens all the Coast.
As from some Rocky Cleft the Shepherd sees
Clust'ring in Heaps on Heaps the driving Bees,
Rolling, and black'ning, Swarms succeeding Swarms,
With deeper Murmurs and more hoarse Alarms;
Dusky they spread, a close-embody'd Crowd,
And over the Vale descends the living Cloud.
So, from the Tents and Ships, a lengthening Train
Spreads all the Beach, and wide o'ershades the Plain:
Along the Region runs a deaf'ning Sound;
Beneath their Footsteps groans the trembling Ground.
Fame flies before, the Messenger of Jove,
And shining soars and claps her Wings above.
Nine sacred Heralds now proclaiming loud
The Monarch's Will, suspend the listening Crowd.
Soon as the Throngs in Order ranged appear,
And fainter Murmurs died upon the Ear,
The King of Kings his awful Figure raised;
High in his Hand the Golden Scepter blazed:
The Golden Scepter, of Celestial Frame,
By Vulcan formed, from Jove to Hermes came:
To Pelops He the immortal Gift resigned;
The immortal Gift great Pelops left behind,
In Atreus' Hand; which not with Atreus ends,
To rich Thyestes next the Prize descends;
And now the Mark of Agamemnon's Reign,
Subjects all Argos, and controuls the Main.
On this bright Scepter now the King reclined,
And artful thus pronounced the Speech designed.
Ye Sons of Mars, partake your Leader's Care,
Heroes of Greece, and Brothers of the War!
Of partial Jove with Justice I complain,
And Heavenly Oracles believed in vain.
A safe Return was promised to our Toils,
Renowned, triumphant, and enriched with Spoils.
Our Now shameful Flight alone can save the Host,
Blood, our Treasure, and our Glory lost.
So Jove decrees, resistless Lord of All!
At whose Command whole Empires rise or fall:
He shakes the feeble Props of human Trust,
And Towns and Armies humbles to the Dust.
What Shame to Greece a fruitless War to wage,
Oh lasting Shame in every future Age!
Once great in Arms, the common Scorn we grow,
Repulsed and baffled by a feeble Foe.
So small their Number, that if Wars were ceased,
And Greece triumphant held a general Feast,
All ranked by Tens; whole Decads when they dine
Must want a Trojan Slave to pour the Wine.
But other Forces have our Hopes overthrown,
And Troy prevails by Armies not her own.
Now nine long Years of mighty Jove are run,
Since first the Labors of this War begun:
Our Cordage torn, decayed our Vessels lie,
And scarce ensure the wretched Power to fly.
Haste then, for ever leave the Trojan Wall!
Our weeping Wives, our tender Children call:
It Is Love, Duty, Safety, summon us away,
Nature's Voice, and Nature we obey.
Our shattered Barks may yet transport us over,
Safe and inglorious, to our native Shore.
Fly, Grecians fly, your Sails and Oars employ,
And dream no more of Heav'n-defended Troy.
His deep Design unknown, the Hosts approve
Atrides' Speech. The mighty Numbers move.
So roll the Billows to the Icarian Shore,
From East and South when Winds begin to roar,
Burst their dark Mansions in the Clouds, and sweep
The whitening Surface of the ruffled Deep.
And as on Corn when Western Gusts descend,
Before the Blast the lofty Harvests bend:
Thus over the Field the moving Host appears,
With nodding Plumes and Groves of waving Spears.
The gathering Murmur spreads; their trampling Feet
Beat the loose Sands, and thicken to the Fleet.
With long-resounding Cries they urge the Train,
To fit the Ships, and launch into the Main.
They toil, they sweat, thick Clouds of Dust arise,
The doubling Clamours echo to the Skies.
Even then the Greeks had left the hostile Plain,
And Fate decreed the Fall of Troy in vain;
But Jove's Imperial Queen their Flight surveyed,
And sighing thus bespoke the blue-ey'd Maid.
Shall then the Grecians fly? Oh dire Disgrace!
And leave unpunished this perfidious Race?
Shall Troy, shall Priam, and th'Adult'rous Spouse,
In Peace enjoy the Fruits of broken Vows?
And bravest Chiefs, in Helen's Quarrel slain,
Lie unrevenged on yon' detested Plain?
No -- let my Greeks, unmoved by vain Alarms,
Once more refulgent shine in Brazen Arms.
Haste, Goddess, haste! the flying Host detain,
Nor let one Sail be hoisted on the Main.
Pallas obeys, and from Olympus' Height
Swift to the Ships precipitates her Flight;
Ulysses, first in public Cares, she found,
For prudent Counsel like the Gods renowned:
Oppressed with generous Grief the Hero stood,
Nor drew his sable Vessels to the Flood.
And is it thus, divine Laertes' Son!
Thus fly the Greeks (the Martial Maid begun)
Thus to their Country bear their own Disgrace,
Fame eternal leave to Priam's Race?
Shall beauteous Helen still remain unfreed,
Still unrevenged a thousand Heroes bleed?
Haste generous Ithacus! prevent the Shame,
Recall your Armies, and your Chiefs reclaim.
Your own resistless Eloquence employ,
And to the Immortals trust the Fall of Troy.
The Voice Divine confessed the Warlike Maid,
Ulysses heard, nor uninspir'd obeyed.
Then meeting first Atrides, from his Hand
Received the Imperial Scepter of Command,
Thus graced, Attention and Respect to gain,
He runs, he flies, through all the Grecian Train,
Each Prince of Name, or Chief in Arms approved,
He fired with Praise or with Persuasion moved.
Warriors like you, with Strength and Wisdom blessed,
By brave Examples should confirm the rest.
The Monarch's Will not yet revealed appears;
He tries our Courage, but resents our Fears.
The unwary Greeks his Fury may provoke;
Not thus the King in secret Council spoke.
Jove loves our Chief, from Jove his Honor springs,
Beware! for dreadful is the Wrath of Kings.
But if a clamorous vile Plebeian rose,
Him with Reproof he checked, or tamed with Blows.
Be still thou Slave! and to thy Betters yield;
Unknown alike in Council and in Field!
Ye Gods, what Dastards would our Host command?
Swept to the War, the Lumber of a Land.
Be silent Wretch, and think not here allowed
That worst of Tyrants, an usurping Crowd.
To One sole Monarch Jove commits the Sway;
His are the Laws, and Him let all obey.
With Words like these the Troops Ulysses ruled,
The loudest silenced, and the fiercest cooled.
Back to the Assembly roll the thronging Train,
Desert the Ships, and pour upon the Plain.
Murmuring they move, as when old Ocean roars,
And heaves huge Surges to the trembling Shores:
The groaning Banks are burst with bellowing Sound,
The Rocks remurmur, and the Deeps rebound.
At length the Tumult sinks, the Noises cease,
And a still Silence lulls the Camp to Peace.
Thersites only clamoured in the Throng,
Loquacious, loud, and turbulent of Tongue:
Awed by no Shame, by no Respect controlled,
In Scandal busy, in Reproaches bold:
With witty Malice, studious to defame,
Scorn all his Joy, and Laughter all his Aim.
But chief he gloried with licentious Style
To lash the Great, and Monarchs to revile.
His Figure such as might his Soul proclaim;
One Eye was blinking, and one Leg was lame:
His Mountain-Shoulders half his Breast overspread,
Thin Hairs bestrew'd his long misshapen Head.
Spleen to Mankind his envious Heart possessed,
And much he hated All, but most the Best.
Ulysses or Achilles still his Theme;
But Royal Scandal his Delight supreme.
Long had he lived the Scorn of every Greek,
Vexed when he spoke, yet still they heard him speak.
Sharp was his Voice; which in the shrillest Tone,
Thus with injurious Taunts attacked the Throne.
Amidst the Glories of so bright a Reign,
What moves the great Atrides to complain?
It Is thine whatever the Warrior's Breast inflames,
The golden Spoil, and thine the lovely Dames.
With all the Wealth our Wars and Blood bestow,
Thy Tents are crowded, and thy Chests overflow.
Thus at full Ease in Heaps of Riches rolled,
What grieves the Monarch? Is it Thirst of Gold?
Say shall we march with our unconquered Powers,
(The Greeks and I) to Ilion's hostile Towers,
And bring the Race of Royal Bastards here,
For Troy to ransom at a Price too dear?
But safer Plunder thy own Host supplies;
Say would thou seize some valiant Leader's Prize?
Or, if thy Heart to generous Love be led,
Some Captive Fair, to bless thy Kingly Bed?
Whatever our Master craves, submit we must,
Plagued with his Pride, or punished for his Lust.
Oh Women of Achaia! Men no more!
Hence let us fly, and let him waste his Store
In Loves and Pleasures on the Phrygian Shore.
We may be wanted on some busy Day,
When Hector comes: So great Achilles may:
From him he forced the Prize we jointly gave,
From him, the fierce, the fearless, and the brave:
And durst he, as he ought, resent that Wrong,
This mighty Tyrant were no Tyrant long.
Fierce from his Seat, at this, Ulysses springs,
In generous Vengeance of the King of Kings.
With Indignation sparkling in his Eyes,
He views the Wretch, and sternly thus replies.
Peace, factious Monster, born to vex the State,
With wrangling Talents formed for foul Debate:
Curb that impetuous Tongue, nor rashly vain
And singly mad, asperse the Sovereign Reign.
Have we not known thee, Slave! of all our Host,
The Man who acts the least, upbraids the most?
Think not the Greeks to shameful Flight to bring,
Nor let those Lips profane the Name of King.
For our Return we trust the heavenly Powers;
Be that their Care; to fight like Men be ours.
But grant the Host with Wealth the General load,
Except Detraction, what have thou bestowed?
Suppose some Hero should his Spoils resign,
Art thou that Hero, could those Spoils be thine?
Gods! let me perish on this hateful Shore,
And let these Eyes behold my Son no more;
If, on thy next Offense, this Hand forbear
To strip those Arms thou ill deserve to wear,
Expel the Council where our Princes meet,
And send thee scourged, and howling through the Fleet.
He said, and cow'ring as the Dastard bends,
The weighty Scepter on his Back descends:
On the round Bunch the bloody Tumors rise;
The Tears spring starting from his haggard Eyes:
Trembling he sat, and shrunk in abject Fears,
From his vile Visage wiped the scalding Tears.
While to his Neighbor each expressed his Thought;
Ye Gods! what Wonders has Ulysses wrought?
What Fruits his Conduct and his Courage yield?
Great in the Council, glorious in the Field.
Generous he rises in the Crown's Defense,
To curb the factious Tongue of Insolence.
Such just Examples on Offenders shown,
Sedition silence, and assert the Throne.
'Twas thus the general Voice the Hero praised,
Who rising, high the Imperial Scepter raised:
The blue-ey'd Pallas, his Celestial Friend,
(In Form a Herald) bade the Crowds attend.
The expecting Crowds in still Attention hung,
To hear the Wisdom of his heavenly Tongue.
Then deeply thoughtful, pausing e're he spoke,
His Silence thus the prudent Hero broke.
Unhappy Monarch! whom the Grecian Race
With Shame deserting, heap with vile Disgrace.
Not such at Argos was their generous Vow,
Once all their Voice, but ah! forgotten now:
Never to return, was then the common Cry,
'Till Troy's proud Structures should in Ashes lie.
Behold them weeping for their native Shore!
What could their Wives or helpless Children more?
What Heart but melts to leave the tender Train,
And, one short Month, endure the Wintry Main?
Few Leagues removed, we wish our peaceful Seat,
When the Ship tosses, and the Tempests beat:
Then well may this long Stay provoke their Tears,
The tedious Length of nine revolving Years.
Not for their Grief the Grecian Host I blame;
But vanquished! baffled! oh eternal Shame!
Expect the Time to Troy's Destruction given,
And try the Faith of Calchas and of Heaven.
What past at Aulis, Greece can witness bear,
And all who live to breathe this Phrygian Air.
Beside a Fountain's sacred Brink we raised
Our verdant Altars, and the Victims blazed;
('It Was where the Plane-tree spread its Shades around)
The Altars heaved; and from the crumbling Ground
A mighty Dragon shot, of dire Portent;
From Jove himself the dreadful Sign was sent.
Strait to the Tree his sanguine Spires he rolled,
And curled around in many a winding Fold.
The topmost Branch a Mother-Bird possessed;
Eight callow Infants filled the mossie Nest;
Herself the ninth: The Serpent as he hung,
Stretched his black Jaws, and crash'd the crying Young;
While hovering near, with miserable Moan,
The drooping Mother wail'd her Children gone.
The Mother last, as round the Nest she flew,
Seized by the beating Wing, the Monster slew:
Nor long survived; to Marble turned he stands
A lasting Prodigy on Aulis' Sands.
Such was the Will of Jove; and hence we dare
Trust in his Omen, and support the War.
For while around we gazed with wondering Eyes,
And trembling sought the Powers with Sacrifice,
Full of his God, the reverend Calchas cried,
Ye Grecian Warriors! lay your Fears aside.
This wondrous Signal Jove himself displays,
Of long, long Labors, but Eternal Praise.
As many Birds as by the Snake were slain,
So many Years the Toils of Greece remain;
But wait the Tenth, for Ilion's Fall decreed:
Thus spoke the Prophet, thus the Fates succeed.
Obey, ye Grecians! with Submission wait,
Nor let your Flight avert the Trojan Fate.
He said: the Shores with loud Applauses sound,
The hollow Ships each deaf'ning Shout rebound.
Then Nestor thus -- These vain Debates forbear,
Ye talk like Children, not like Heroes dare.
Where now are all your high Resolves at last,
Your Leagues concluded, your Engagements past?
Vowed with Libations and with Victims then,
Now vanished like their Smoke: The Faith of Men!
While useless Words consume the unactive Hours,
No wonder Troy so long resists our Powers.
Rise, great Atrides! and with Courage sway;
We march to War if thou direct the Way.
But leave the few that dare resist thy Laws,
The mean Deserters of the Grecian Cause,
To grudge the Conquests mighty Jove prepares,
And view, with Envy, our successful Wars.
On that great Day when first the martial Train
Big with the Fate of Ilion, plowed the Main,
Jove, on the Right, a prosperous Signal sent,
And Thunder rolling shook the Firmament.
Encouraged hence, maintain the glorious Strife,
'Till every Soldier grasp a Phrygian Wife,
'Till Helen's Woes at full revenged appear,
And Troy's proud Matrons render Tear for Tear.
Before that Day, if any Greek invite
His Country's Troops to base, inglorious Flight,
Stand forth that Greek! and hoist his Sail to fly;
And dye the Dastard first, who dreads to dye.
But now, O Monarch! all thy Chiefs advise:
Nor what they offer, thou thy self despise.
Among those Counsels, let not mine be vain;
In Tribes and Nations to divide thy Train:
His separate Troops let every Leader call,
Each strengthen each, and all encourage all.
What Chief, or Soldier, of the numerous Band,
Or bravely fights, or ill obeys Command,
When thus distinct they war, shall soon be known,
And what the Cause of Ilion not overthrown?
If Fate resists, or if our Arms are slow,
If Gods above prevent, or Men below?
To him the King: How much thy Years excel,
In Arts of Council, and in speaking well!
Oh would the Gods, in Love to Greece, decree
But ten such Sages as they grant in thee;
Such Wisdom soon should Priam's Force destroy,
And soon should fall the haughty Towers of Troy!
But Jove forbids, who plunges those he hates
In fierce Contention and in vain Debates.
Now great Achilles from our Aid withdraws,
By me provoked; a Captive Maid the Cause:
If ever as Friends we join, the Trojan Wall
Must shake, and heavy will the Vengeance fall!
But now, ye Warriors, take a short Repast;
And, well refreshed, to bloody Conflict haste.
His sharpened Spear let every Grecian wield,
And every Grecian fix his Brazen Shield,
Let all excite the fiery Steeds of War,
And all for Combat fit the rattling Car.
This Day, this dreadful Day, let each contend;
No Rest, no Respite, 'till the Shades descend;
'Till Darkness, or 'till Death shall cover all:
Let the War bleed, and let the Mighty fall!
'Till bathed in Sweat be every manly Breast,
With the huge Shield each brawny Arm deprest,
Each aching Nerve refuse the Lance to throw,
And each spent Courser at the Chariot blow.
Who dares, inglorious, in his Ships to stay,
Who dares to tremble on this signal Day,
That Wretch, too mean to fall by martial Power,
The Birds shall mangle, and the Dogs devour.
The Monarch spoke: and strait a Murmur rose,
Loud as the Surges when the Tempest blows,
That dashed on broken Rocks tumultuous roar,
And foam and thunder on the stony Shore.
Strait to the Tents the Troops dispersing bend,
The Fires are kindled, and the Smokes ascend;
With hasty Feasts they sacrifice, and pray
T'avert the Dangers of the doubtful Day.
A Steer of five Year's Age, large limbed, and fed,
To Jove's high Altars Agamemnon led:
There bade the noblest of the Grecian Peers;
And Nestor first, as most advanced in Years.
Next came Idomeneus and Tydeus' Son,
Ajax the less, and Ajax Telamon;
Then wise Ulysses in his Rank was placed;
And Menelaus came unbid, the last.
The Chiefs surround the destined Beast, and take
The sacred Offering of the salted Cake:
When thus the King prefers his solemn Prayer.
Oh Thou! whose Thunder rends the clouded Air,
Who in the Heaven of Heavens have fixed thy Throne,
Supreme of Gods! unbounded, and alone!
Hear! and before the burning Sun descends,
Before the Night her gloomy Veil extends,
Low in the Dust be laid yon' hostile Spires,
Be Priam's Palace sunk in Grecian Fires,
In Hector's Breast be plunged this shining Sword,
And slaughtered Heroes groan around their Lord!
Thus prayed the Chief: His unavailing Prayer
Great Jove refused, and tossed in empty Air:
The God averse, while yet the Fumes arose,
Prepared new Toils and doubled Woes on Woes.
Their Prayers performed, the Chiefs the Rite pursue,
The Barley sprinkled, and the Victim slew.
The Limbs they sever from the enclosing Hyde,
The Thighs, selected to the Gods, divide.
On these, in double Cauls involved with Art,
The choicest Morsels lie from every Part.
From the cleft Wood the crackling Flames aspire,
While the fat Victim feeds the sacred Fire.
The Thighs thus sacrificed and Entrails dressed,
Th'Assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest;
Then spread the Tables, the Repast prepare,
Each takes his Seat, and each receives his Share.
Soon as the Rage of Hunger was suppressed,
The generous Nestor thus the Prince addressed.
Now bid thy Heralds sound the loud Alarms,
And call the Squadrons sheathed in Brazen Arms:
Now seize the Occasion, now the Troops survey,
And lead to War, when Heaven directs the Way.
He said; the Monarch issued his Commands;
Strait the loud Heralds call the gathering Bands.
The Chiefs enclose their King; the Hosts divide,
In Tribes and Nations ranked on either side.
High in the midst the blue-ey'd Virgin flies;
From Rank to Rank she darts her ardent Eyes:
The dreadful Aegis, Jove's immortal Shield,
Blazed on her Arm, and lightened all the Field:
Round the vast Orb an hundred Serpents rolled,
Formed the bright Fringe, and seemed to burn in Gold.
With this, each Grecian's manly Breast she warms,
Swells their bold Hearts, and strings their nervous Arms;
No more they sigh, inglorious to return,
But breathe Revenge, and for the Combat burn.
As on some Mountain, through the lofty Grove
The crackling Flames ascend and blaze above,
The Fires expanding as the Winds arise,
Shoot their long Beams, and kindle half the Skies:
So from the polished Arms, and brazen Shields,
A gleamy Splendour flashed along the Fields.
Not less their Number, than the embodied Cranes,
Or milk-white Swans in Asius' watery Plains,
That over the Windings of Cayster's Springs,
Stretch their long Necks, and clap their rustling Wings,
Now tower aloft, and course in airy Rounds;
Now light with Noise; with Noise the Field resounds.
Thus numerous and confused, extending wide,
The Legions crowd Scamander's flowery Side,
With rushing Troops the Plains are covered over,
And thundering Footsteps shake the sounding Shore:
Along the River's level Meads they stand,
Thick as in Spring the Flowers adorn the Land,
Or Leaves the Trees; or thick as Insects play,
The wandering Nation of a Summer's Day,
That drawn by milky Steams, at Evening Hours,
In gathered Swarms surround the Rural Bowers;
From Pail to Pail with busy Murmur run
The gilded Legions glittering in the Sun.
So thronged, so close, the Grecian Squadrons stood
In radiant Arms, and thirst for Trojan Blood.
Each Leader now his scattered Force conjoins
In close Array, and forms the deep'ning Lines.
Not with more Ease, the skilful Shepherd Swain
Collects his Flock from Millions on the Plain.
The King of Kings, majestically tall,
Towers over his Armies, and outshines them all:
Like some proud Bull that round the Pastures leads
His Subject-Herds, the Monarch of the Meads.
Great as the Gods the exalted Chief was seen,
His Strength like Neptune, and like Mars his Mien,
Jove over his Eyes celestial Glories spread,
And dawning Conquest played around his Head.
Say, Virgins, seated round the Throne Divine,
All-knowing Goddesses! immortal Nine!
Since Earth's wide Regions, Heaven's unmeasured Height,
And Hell's Abyss hide nothing from your sight,
(We, wretched Mortals! lost in Doubts below,
But guess by Rumor, and but boast we know)
Oh say what Heroes, fired by Thirst of Fame,
Or urged by Wrongs, to Troy's Destruction came?
To count them all, demands a thousand Tongues,
A Throat of Brass, and Adamantine Lungs.
Daughters of Jove assist! inspired by You
The mighty Labor dauntless I pursue:
What crowded Armies, from what Climes they bring,
Their Names, their Numbers, and their Chiefs I sing.
THE CATALOGUE of the SHIPS.
THE hardy Warriors whom Boeotia bred,
Peneleus, Leitus, Prothoenor led:
With these Arcesilaus and Clonius stand,
Equal in Arms, and equal in Command.
These head the Troops that Rocky Aulis yields,
And Eteon's Hills, and Hyrie's watery Fields,
And Schoenos, Scolos, Graea near the Main,
And Mycalessia's ample Piny Plain.
Those who in Peteon or Ilesion dwell,
Or Harma where Apollo's Prophet fell;
Heleon and Hyle, which the Springs overflow;
And Medeon lofty, and Ocalea low;
Or in the Meads of Haliartus stray,
Or Thespia sacred to the God of Day.
Onchestus, Neptune's celebrated Groves;
Copae, and Thisbe, famed for silver Doves,
For Flocks Erythrae, Glissa for the Vine;
Plataea green, and Nisa the divine.
And they whom Thebe's well built Walls enclose,
Where Myde, Eutresis, Corone rose;
And Arne rich, with purple Harvests crowned;
And Anthedon, Boeotia's utmost Bound.
Full fifty Ships they send, and each conveys
Twice sixty Warriors through the foaming Seas.
To these succeed Aspledon's martial Train,
Who plow the spacious Orchomenian Plain.
Two valiant Brothers rule the undaunted Throng,
Ialmen and Ascalaphus the strong:
Sons of Astyoche the Heavenly Fair,
Whose Virgin Charms subdued the God of War:
(In Actor's Court as she retired to Rest,
The Strength of Mars the blushing Maid comprest)
Their Troops in thirty sable Vessels sweep
With equal Oars, the hoarse-resounding Deep.
The Phocians next in forty Barks repair,
Epistrophus and Schedius head the War.
From those rich Regions where Cephisus leads
His silver Current through the flowery Meads;
From Panopea, Chrysa the Divine,
Where Anemoria's stately Turrets shine,
Where Pytho, Daulis, Cyparissus stood,
And fair Lilaea views the rising Flood.
These ranged in Order on the floating Tide,
Close, on the left, the bold Boeotians side.
Fierce Ajax led the Locrian Squadrons on,
Ajax the less, Oileus' valiant Son;
Skilled to direct the flying Dart aright;
Swift in Pursuit, and active in the Fight.
Him, as their Chief, the chosen Troops attend,
Which Bessa, Thronus, and rich Cynos send:
Opus, Calliarus, and Scarphe's Bands;
And those who dwell where pleasing Augia stands,
And where Boagrius floats the lowly Lands,
Or in fair Tarphe's Sylvan Seats reside;
In forty Vessels cut the yielding Tide.
Euboea next her martial Sons prepares,
And sends the brave Abantes to the Wars:
Breathing Revenge, in Arms they take their Way
From Chalcis' Walls, and strong Eretria;
The Isteian Fields for generous Vines renowned,
The fair Carystos, and the Styrian Ground;
Where Dios from her Towers o'erlooks the Plain,
And high Cerinthus views the Neighboring Main.
Down their broad Shoulders falls a Length of Hair;
Their Hands dismiss not the long Lance in Air;
But with portended Spears in fighting Fields,
Pierce the tough Cors'lets and the brazen Shields.
Twice twenty Ships transport the warlike Bands,
Which bold Elphenor, fierce in Arms, commands.
Full fifty more from Athens stem the Main,
Led by Menestheus through the liquid Plain,
( Athens the fair, where great Erectheus swayed,
That owed his Nurture to the blue-ey'd Maid,
But from the teeming Furrow took his Birth,
The mighty Offspring of the foodful Earth.
Him Pallas placed amidst her wealthy Fane,
Adored with Sacrifice and Oxen slain;
Where as the Years revolve her Altars blaze,
And all the Tribes resound the Goddess' Praise.)
No Chief like thee, Menestheus! Greece could yield,
To martial Armies in the dusty Field,
The extended Wings of Battle to display,
Or close the embodied Host in firm Array.
Nestor alone, improved by Length of Days,
For martial Conduct bore an equal Praise.
With these appear the Salaminian Bands,
Whom the Gigantic Telamon commands;
In twelve black Ships to Troy they steer their Course,
And with the great Athenians join their Force.
Next move to War the generous Argive Train,
From high Troezene, and Maseta's Plain,
And fair Aegina circled by the Main:
Whom strong Tyrinthe's lofty Walls surround,
And Epidaure with Viny Harvests crowned:
And where fair Asinen and Hermion show
Their Cliffs above, and ample Bay below.
These by the brave Euryalus were led,
Great Sthenelus, and greater Diomed,
But chief Tydides bore the Sovereign Sway;
In fourscore Barks they plow the watery Way.
The proud Mycoene arms her martial Powers,
Cleone, Corinth, with Imperial Towers,
Fair Arethyrea, Ornia's fruitful Plain,
And Aegion, and Adrastus' ancient Reign;
And those who dwell along the sandy Shore,
And where Pellene yields her fleecy Store,
Where Helice and Hyperesia lie,
And Gonoessa's Spires salute the Sky.
Great Agamemnon rules the numerous Band,
A hundred Vessels in long Order stand,
And crowded Nations wait his dread Command.
High on the Deck the King of Men appears,
And his refulgent Arms in Triumph wears;
Proud of his Host, unrivaled in his Reign,
In silent Pomp he moves along the Main.
His Brother follows, and to Vengeance warms
The hardy Spartans, exercised in Arms:
Phares and Brysia's valiant Troops, and those
Whom Lacedaemon's lofty Hills enclose:
Or Messe's. Towers for silver Doves renowned,
Amyclae, Laas, Augia's happy Ground,
And those whom Oetylos' low Walls contain,
And Helos, on the Margin of the Main.
These, over the bending Ocean, Helen's Cause
In sixty Ships with Menelaus draws:
Eager and loud, from Man to Man he flies,
Revenge and Fury flaming in his Eyes;
While vainly fond, in Fancy often he hears
The Fair one's Grief, and sees her falling Tears.
In ninety Sail, from Pylos' sandy Coast,
Nestor the Sage conducts his chosen Host:
From Amphigenia's ever-fruitful Land;
Where Aepy high, and little Pteleon stand;
Where beauteous Arene her Structures shows,
And Thryon's Walls Alpheus' Streams enclose:
And Dorion, famed for Thamyris' Disgrace,
Superior once of all the tuneful Race,
'Till vain of Mortal's empty Praise, he strove
To match the Seed of Cloud-compelling Jove.
Too daring Bard! whose unsuccessful Pride
The Immortal Muses in their Art defied.
The avenging Muses of the Light of Day
Deprived his Eyes, and snatched his Voice away;
No more his heavenly Voice was heard to sing;
His Hand no more awaked the silver String.
Where under high Cyllene crowned with Wood,
The shaded Tomb of old Aepytus stood;
From Ripe, Stratie, Tegea's bord'ring Towns,
The Phenean Fields, and Orchomenian Downs,
Where the fat Herds in plenteous Pasture rove;
And Stymphelus with her surrounding Grove;
Parrhasia, on her snowy Cliffs reclined,
And high Enispe shook by wintry Wind,
And fair Mantinea's ever-pleasing Site;
In sixty Sail the Arcadian Bands unite.
Bold Agapenor glorious at their Head,
( Ancoeus' Son) the mighty Squadron led.
Their Ships, supplied by Agamemnon's Care,
Through roaring Seas the wondering Warriors bear;
The first to battle on the appointed Plain,
But new to all the Dangers of the Main.
Those, where fair Elis and Buprasium join;
Whom Hyrmin, here, and Myrsinus confine,
And bounded there, where over the Valleys rose
The Olenian Rock; and where Alisium flows;
Beneath four Chiefs (a numerous Army) came:
The Strength and Glory of the Epean Name.
In separate Squadrons these their Train divide,
Each leads ten Vessels through the yielding Tide.
One was Amphimachus, and Thalpius one;
( Eurytus' this, and that Teatus' Son)
Diores sprung from Amarynceus' Line;
And great Polyxenus, of Force divine.
But those who view fair Elis over the Seas
From the blessed Islands of the Echinades,
In forty Vessels under Meges move,
Begot by Phyleus, the Beloved of Jove.
To strong Dulichium from his Sire he fled,
And thence to Troy his hardy Warriors led.
Ulysses followed through the watery Road,
A Chief, in Wisdom equal to a God.
With those whom Cephalenia's Isle enclosed,
Or tilled their Fields along the Coast opposed;
Or where fair Ithaca o'erlooks the Floods,
Where high Neritos shakes his waving Woods,
Where Aegilipa's rugged Sides are seen,
Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green.
These in twelve Galleys with Vermillion Prores,
Beneath his Conduct sought the Phrygian Shores,
Thoas came next, Andraemon's valiant Son,
From Pleuron's Walls and chalky Calydon,
And rough Pylene, and the Olenian Steep,
And Chalcis, beaten by the rolling Deep.
He led the Warriors from the Aetolian Shore,
For now the Sons of Oeneus were no more!
The Glories of the mighty Race were fled!
Oeneus himself, and Meleager dead;
To Thoas' Care now trust the martial Train,
His forty Vessels follow through the Main.
Next eighty Barks the Cretan King commands,
Of Gnossus, Lyctus, and Gortyna's Bands,
And those who dwell where Rhytion's Domes arise,
Or white Lycastus glitters to the Skies,
Or where by Phoestus silver Jardan runs;
Crete's hundred Cities pour forth all her Sons.
These marched, Idomeneus, beneath thy Care,
And Merion, dreadful as the God of War.
Tlepolemus, the Son of Hercules,
Led nine swift Vessels through the foamy Seas;
From Rhodes with everlasting Sunshine bright,
Jalyssus, Lindus, and Camirus white.
His captive Mother fierce Alcides bore
From Ephyr's Walls, and Selle's winding Shore,
Where mighty Towns in Ruins spread the Plain,
And saw their blooming Warriors early slain.
The Hero, when to Manly Years he grew,
Alcides' Uncle, old Lycimnius, slew;
For this, constrained to quit his native Place,
And shun the Vengeance of the Herculean Race,
A Fleet he built, and with a numerous Train
Of willing Exiles wandered over the Main;
Where many Seas, and many Sufferings past,
On happy Rhodes the Chief arrived at last:
There in three Tribes divides his native Band,
And rules them peaceful in a foreign Land:
Increased and prosper'd in their new Abodes,
By mighty Jove, the Sire of Men and Gods;
With Joy they saw the growing Empire rise,
And Showers of Wealth descending from the Skies.
Three Ships with Nireus sought the Trojan Shore,
Nireus, whom Aglae to Charopus bore,
Nireus, in faultless Shape, and blooming Grace,
The loveliest Youth of all the Grecian Race;
Pelides only matched his early Charms;
But few his Troops, and small his Strength in Arms.
Next thirty Galleys cleave the liquid Plain,
Of those Calydnoe's Sea-girt Isles contain;
With them the Youth of Nisyrus repair,
Casus the strong, and Crapathus the fair;
Cos, where Eurypylus possessed the Sway,
'Till great Alcides made the Realms obey:
These Antiphus and bold Phidippus bring,
Sprung from the God, by Thessalus the King.
Now Muse recount Pelasgic Argos' Powers,
From Alos, Alope, and Trechin's Towers;
From Pthia's spacious Vales; and Hella, blessed
With Female Beauty far beyond the rest.
Full fifty Ships beneath Achilles' Care
The Achaians, Myrmidons, Helleneans bear,
Thessalians all, though various in their Name,
The same their Nation, and their Chief the same.
But now inglorious, stretched along the Shore,
They hear the brazen Voice of War no more;
No more the Foe they face in dire Array;
Close in his Fleet their angry Leader lay:
Since fair Briseis from his Arms was torn,
The noblest Spoil from sacked Lyrnessus born,
Then, when the Chief the Theban Walls o'erthrew,
And the bold Sons of great Evenus slew.
There mourned Achilles, plunged in Depth of Care,
But soon to rise in Slaughter, Blood, and War.
To these the Youth of Phylace succeed,
Itona, famous for her fleecy Breed,
And grassy Pteleon decked with cheerful Greens,
The Bowers of Ceres, and the Sylvan Scenes,
Sweet Pyrrhasus, with blooming Flourets crowned,
And Antron's watery Dens and cavern'd Ground.
These owned as Chief Protesilas the brave,
Who now lay silent in the gloomy Grave:
The first who boldly touched the Trojan Shore,
And died a Phrygian Lance with Grecian Gore:
There lies, far distant from his native Plain;
Unfinished his proud Palaces remain,
And his sad Consort beats her Breast in vain.
His Troops in forty Ships Podarces led,
Iphiclus' Son, and Brother to the Dead;
Nor he unworthy to command the Host;
Yet still they mourned their ancient Leader lost.
The Men who Glaphyra's fair Soil partake,
Where Hills encircle Boebe's lowly Lake,
Where Pherae hears the neighboring Waters fall,
Or proud Iolcus lifts her Airy Wall:
In ten black Ships embarked for Ilion's Shore,
With bold Eumelus, whom Alceste bore.
All Pelias' Race Alceste far outshin'd,
The Grace and Glory of the beauteous Kind.
The Troops Methone, or Thaumacia yields,
Olyzon's Rocks, or Moelibaea's Fields,
With Philoctetes sailed, whose matchless Art
From the tough Bow directs the feathered Dart.
Sev'n were his Ships; each Vessel fifty row,
Skilled in his Science of the Dart and Bow.
But he lay raging on the Lemnian Ground,
A poisonous Hydra gave the burning Wound,
There groaned the Chief in agonizing Pain;
Whom Greece at length shall wish, nor wish in vain.
His Forces Medon led from Lemnos' Shore,
Oileus' Son whom beauteous Rhena bore.
The Oechalian Race, in those high Towers contained,
Where once Eurytus in proud Triumph reigned,
Or where her humbler Turrets Trica rears,
Or where Ithome, rough with Rocks, appears;
In thirty Sail the sparkling Waves divide,
Which Podalirius and Machaon guide.
To these his Skill their Aesculapius.
Parent-God imparts,
Divine Professors of the Healing Arts.
The bold Ormenian and Asterian Bands
In forty Barks Eurypilus commands,
Where Titan hides his hoary Head in Snow,
And where Hyperia's silver Fountains flow.
Thy Troops, Argissa, Polyphaetes leads,
And Eleon, sheltered by Olympus' Shades,
Girtone's Warriors; and where Orthe lies,
And Oloosson's chalky Cliffs arise.
Sprung from Pirithous of immortal Race,
The Fruit of fair Hippodame's Embrace,
(That Day, when hurled from Pelion's cloudy Head,
To distant Dens the shaggy Centaurs fled)
With Polypaetes joined in equal Sway
Leonteus leads, and forty Ships obey.
In twenty Sail the bold Perrhebians came
From Cyphus, Guneus was their Leader's Name.
With these the Aenians joined, and those who freeze
Where cold Dodona lifts her Holy Trees;
Or where the pleasing Titaresius glides,
And into Peneus rolls his easy Tides;
Yet over the silver Surface pure they flow,
The sacred Stream unmixed with Streams below,
Sacred and awful! From the dark Abodes
Styx pours them forth, the dreadful Oath of Gods!
Last under Prothous the Magnesians stood,
Prothous the swift, of old Tenthredon's Blood;
Who dwell where Pelion crowned with Piny Boughs
Obscures the Glade, and nods his shaggy Brows,
Or where through flowery Tempe Peneus strayed,
(The Region stretched beneath his mighty Shade)
In forty sable Barks they stem'd the Main;
Such were the Chiefs, and such the Grecian Train.
Say next O Muse! of all Achaia breeds,
Who bravest fought, or rein'd the noblest Steeds?
Eumelus' Mares were foremost in the Chase,
As Eagles fleet, and of Pheretian Race;
Bred where Pieria's fruitful Fountains flow,
And trained by Him who bears the Silver Bow.
Fierce in the Fight, their Nostrils breathed a Flame,
Their Height, their Color, and their Age the same;
Over Fields of Death they whirl the rapid Car,
And break the Ranks, and thunder through the War.
Ajax in Arms the first Renown acquired,
While stern Achilles in his Wrath retired:
(His was the Strength that mortal Might exceeds,
And his, the unrivaled Race of Heavenly Steeds)
But Thetis' Son now shines in Arms no more;
His Troops, neglected on the sandy Shore,
In empty Air their sportive Jav'lins throw,
Or whirl the Disk, or bend an idle Bow:
Unstained with Blood his covered Chariots stand;
The Immortal Coursers graze along the Strand;
But the brave Chiefs the inglorious Life deplored,
And wandering over the Camp, required their Lord
Now, like a Deluge, covering all around,
The shining Armies swept along the Ground;
Swift as a Flood of Fire, when Storms arise,
Floats the wide Field, and blazes to the Skies.
Earth groaned beneath them; as when angry Jove
Hurls down the forky Lightning from above,
On Arime when he the Thunder throws,
And fires Typhoeus with redoubled Blows,
Where Typhon, pressed beneath the burning Load,
Still feels the Fury of the avenging God.
But various Iris, Jove's Commands to bear,
Speeds on the Wings of Winds through liquid Air;
In Priam's Porch the Trojan Chiefs she found,
The Old consulting, and the Youths around.
Polites' Shape, the Monarch's Son, she chose,
Who from Aesetes' Tomb observed the Foes;
High on the Mound; from whence in Prospect lay
The Fields, the Tents, the Navy, and the Bay.
In this dissembled Form, she hasts to bring
The unwelcome Message to the Phrygian King.
Cease to consult, the Time for Action calls,
War, horrid War, approaches to your Walls!
Assembled Armies often have I beheld;
But never 'till now such Numbers charged a Field.
Thick as Autumnal Leaves, or driving Sand,
The moving Squadrons blacken all the Strand.
Thou, Godlike Hector! all thy Force employ,
Assemble all the united Bands of Troy;
In just Array let every Leader call
The foreign Troops: This Day demands them all.
The Voice Divine the mighty Chief alarms;
The Council breaks, the Warriors rush to Arms.
The Gates unfolding pour forth all their Train,
Nations on Nations fill the dusky Plain,
Men, Steeds, and Chariots shake the trembling Ground;
The Tumult thickens, and the Skies resound.
Amidst the Plain in sight of Ilion stands
A rising Mount the Work of human Hands,
(This for Myrinne's Tomb the Immortals know,
Though called Bateia in the World below)
Beneath their Chiefs in martial Order here,
The Auxiliar Troops and Trojan Hosts appear.
The Godlike Hector, high above the rest,
Shakes his huge Spear, and nods his Plumy Crest:
In Throngs around his native Bands repair,
And Groves of Lances glitter in the Air.
Divine Aeneas brings the Dardan Race,
Anchises' Son, by Venus' stolen Embrace,
Born in the Shades of Ida's secret Grove,
(A Mortal mixing with the Queen of Love)
Archilochus and Achamas divide
The Warrior's Toils, and combat by his side.
Who fair Zeleia's wealthy Valleys till,
Fast by the Foot of Ida's sacred Hill:
Or drink, Aesepus, of thy sable Flood;
Were led by Pandarus, of Royal Blood.
To whom his Art Apollo deigned to show,
Graced with the Present of his Shafts and Bow.
From rich Apaesus and Adrestia's Towers,
High Teree's Summits, and Pityea's Bowers;
From these the congregated Troops obey
Young Amphius and Adrastus' equal Sway;
Old Merops Sons; whom skilled in Fate to come
The Sire forewarned, and prophesied their Doom:
Fate urged them on! the Sire forewarned in vain,
They rushed to War, and perished on the Plain.
From Practius' Stream, Percote's Pasture Lands,
And Sestos and Abydos' neighboring Strands,
From great Arisba's Walls and Selle's Coast,
Asius Hyrtacides conducts his Host:
High on his Car he shakes the flowing Reins,
His fiery Coursers thunder over the Plains.
The fierce Pelasgi next, in War renowned,
March from Larissa's ever-fertile Ground:
In equal Arms their Brother-Leaders shine,
Hippothous bold, and Pyleus the Divine.
Next Acamas and Pyrous lead their Hosts
In dread Array, from Thracia's wintry Coasts;
Round the bleak Realms where Hellespontus roars,
And Boreas beats the hoarse-resounding Shores.
With great Euphemus the Ciconians move,
Sprung from Trezenian Ceus, loved by Jove.
Pyrechmes the Poeonian Troops attend,
Skilled in the Fight their crooked Bows to bend;
From Axius' ample Bed he leads them on,
Axius, that laves the distant Amydon,
Axius, that swells with all his neighboring Rills,
And wide around the floated Region fills.
The Paphlagonians Pylaemenes rules,
Where rich Henetia breeds her savage Mules,
Where Erythinus' rising Clifts are seen,
Thy Groves of Box, Cytorus! ever green;
And where Aegyalus and Cromna lie,
And lofty Sesamus invades the Sky;
And where Parthenius, rolled through Banks of Flowers,
Reflects her bord'ring Palaces and Bowers.
Here marched in Arms the Halizonian Band,
Whom Odius and Epistrophus command,
From those far Regions where the Sun refines
The ripening Silver in Alybean Mines.
There, mighty Chromis led the Mysian Train,
And Augur Ennomus, inspired in vain,
For stern Achilles lopt his sacred Head,
Rolled down Scamander with the Vulgar Dead.
Phorcys and brave Ascanius here unite
The Ascanian Phrygians, eager for the Fight.
Of those who round Moeonia's Realms reside,
Or whom the Vales in Shade of Tmolus hide,
Mestles and Antiphus the Charge partake;
Born on the Banks of Gyges' silent Lake.
There, from the Fields where wild Maeander flows,
High Mycale, and Latmos' shady Brows,
And proud Miletus, came the Carian Throngs,
With mingled Clamors, and with barbarous Tongues.
Amphimachus and Naustes guide the Train,
Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain,
Who tricked with Gold, and glittering on his Car,
Rode like a Woman to the Field of War.
Fool that he was! by fierce Achilles slain,
The River swept him to the briny Main:
There whelmed with Waves the gaudy Warrior lies;
The valiant Victor seized the golden Prize.
The Forces last in fair Array succeed,
Which blameless Glaucus and Sarpedon lead;
The warlike Bands that distant Lycia yields,
Where gulphy Xanthus foams along the Fields.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Second Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE SECOND BOOK.
I.
VERSE 1. NOW pleasing Sleep, etc.] Aristotle tells us in the twenty sixth
Chapter of his Art of Poetry, that this Place had been objected to by some
Critics in those Times. They thought it gave a very ill Idea of the military
Discipline of the Greeks, to represent a whole Army unguarded, and all the
Leaders a-sleep: They also pretended it was ridiculous to describe all the Gods
sleeping besides Jupiter. To both these Aristotle answers, that nothing is more
usual or allowable than that Figure which puts All for the greater Part. One
may add with respect to the latter Criticism, that nothing could give a better
Image of the Superiority of Jupiter to the other Gods (or of the supreme Being
to all second Causes) than the Vigilance here ascribed to him, over all Things
Divine and Human.

II.
VERSE 9. Fly hence, deluding Dream.] It appears from Aristotle, Poet. cap. 26.
that Homer was accused of Impiety, for making Jupiter the Author of a Lie in
this Passage. It seems there were anciently these Words in his Speech to the
Dream; (...), Let us give him great Glory. (Instead of which we have in the
present Copies, (...)) but Hippias found a way to bring off Homer, only by
placing the Accent on the last Syllable but one, (...), for (...), the
Infinitive for the Imperative: which amounts to no more than that he bade the
Dream to Promise him great Glory. But Macrobius de somnio Scip. l. 1. c. 7.
takes off this Imputation entirely, and will not allow there was any Lie in the
Case. " Agamemnon (says he) was ordered by the Dream to lead out All the Forces
of the Greeks ((...) is the word) and promised the Victory on that Condition:
Now Achilles and his Forces not being summoned to the Assembly with the rest,
that Neglect absolved Jupiter from his Promise." This Remark Madam Dacier has
inserted without mentioning its Author. Mr. Dacier takes notice of a Passage in
the Scripture exactly parallel to this, where God is represented making use of
the Malignity of his Creatures to accomplish his Judgments. It Is in 2 Chronicles..
chapter 18.. 19, 20, 21. And the Lord said, Who will persuade Ahab, that he may go
up and fall at Ramoth Gilead? And there came forth a Spirit, and stood before
the Lord, and said, I will persuade him. And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith?
And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying Spirit in the Mouth of all
his Prophets, And he said, Thou shall persuade him and prevail also: Go forth
and do so. Vide Dacier upon Aristotle, cap. 26.

III.
VERSE 20. Descends and hovers over Atrides' Head.] The whole Action of the
Dream is beautifully natural, and agreeable to Philosophy. It perches on his
Head, to intimate that Part to be the Seat of the Soul: It is circumfused about
him, to express that total Possession of the Senses which Fancy has during our
Sleeps. It takes the Figure of the Person who was dearest to Agamemnon; as
whatever we think of most when awake, is the common Object of our Dreams. And
just at the Instant of its vanishing, it leaves such an Impression that the
Voice seems still to sound in his Ear. No Description can be more exact or
lively. Eustathius, Dacier.

IV.
VERSE 33. Draw forth the embattel'd Train, etc.] The Dream here repeats the
Message of Jupiter in the same Terms that he received it. It is no less than
the Father of Gods and Men who gives the Order, and to alter a word were
Presumption. Homer constantly makes his Envoys observe this Practice as a Mark
of Decency and respect. Madam Dacier and others have applauded this in general,
and asked by what Authority an Ambassador could alter the Terms of his
Commission, since he is not greater or wiser than the Person who gave the
Charge? But this is not always the Case in our Author, who not only makes use
of this Conduct with respect to the Orders of a higher Power, but in regard to
Equals also; as when one Goddess desires another to represent such an Affair,
and she immediately takes the Words from her Mouth and repeats them, of which
we have an Instance in this Book. Some Objection too may be raised to this
manner, when Commissions are given in the utmost haste (in a Battle or the
like) upon sudden Emergencies; where it seems not very natural to suppose a Man
has time to get so many Words by heart as he is made to repeat exactly. In the
present Instance, the Repetition is certainly graceful, though Zenodotus thought
it not so the third time, when Agamemnon tells his Dream to the Council. I do
not pretend to decide upon the Point: For though the Reverence of the Repetition
seemed less needful in that Place than when it was delivered immediately from
Jupiter; yet (as Eustathius observes) it was necessary for the Assembly to know
the Circumstances of this Dream, that the Truth of the Relation might be
unsuspected.

V.
VERSE 93. Now valiant Chiefs, etc.] The best Commentary extant upon the first
Part of this Book is in Dionysius of Halicarnassus, who has given us an
admirable Explication of this whole Conduct of Agamemnon in his second Treatise
(...). He says, "This Prince had nothing so much at Heart as to draw the Greeks
to a Battle, yet knew not how to proceed without Achilles, who had just retired
from the Army; and was apprehensive that the Greeks who were displeased at the
Departure of Achilles, might refuse Obedience to his Orders, should he
absolutely command it. In this Circumstance he proposes to the Princes in
Council to make a Trial of arming the Graecians, and offers an Expedient
himself; which was that he should sound their Dispositions by exhorting him to
set sail for Greece, but that then the other Princes should be ready to
dissuade and detain them. If any object to this Stratagem that Agamemnon's
whole Scheme would be ruined if the Army should take him at his word (which was
very probable) it is to be answered, that his Design lay deeper than they
imagine, nor did he depend upon his Speech only for detaining them. He had some
Cause to fear the Greeks had a Pique against him which they had concealed, and
whatever it was, he judged it absolutely necessary to know it before he
proceeded to a Battle. He therefore furnishes them with an Occasion to manifest
it, and at the same time provides against any ill Effects it might have by his
secret Orders to the Princes. It succeeds accordingly, and when the Troops are
running to embark, they are stopped by Ulysses and Nestor." -- One may farther
observe that this whole Stratagem is concerted in Nestor's Ship, as one whose
Wisdom and Secrecy was most confided in. The Story of the Vision's appearing in
his Shape, could not but engage him in some degree: It looked as if Jupiter
himself added Weight to his Counsels by making use of that venerable
Appearance, and knew this to be the most powerful Method of recommending them
to Agamemnon. It was therefore but natural for Nestor to second the Motion of
the King, and by the help of his Authority it prevailed on the other Princes.

VI.
VERSE 111. As from some rocky Cleft.] This is the first Simile in Homer, and
we may observe in general that he excels all Mankind in the Number, Variety,
and Beauty of his Comparisons. There are scarce any in Virgil which are not
translated from him, and therefore when he succeeds best in them he is to be
commended but as an Improver. Scaliger seems not to have thought of this when
he compares the Similes of these two Authors (as indeed they are the Places
most obvious to Comparison.) The present Passage is an Instance of it, to which
he opposes the following Verses in the first Aeneid. Qualis apes aestate nova
per florea rura
Exercet sub sole labor, cum gentis adultos
Educunt foetus, aut cum liquentia mella
Stipant, and dulci distendunt nectare cellas:
Aut onera accipiunt venientum, aut agmine facto
Ignavum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent;
Fervet opus, redolentque thymo fragrantia mella.
This he very much prefers to Homer's, and in particular extols the Harmony and
Sweetness of the Versification above that of our Author; against which Censure
we need only appeal to the Ears of the Reader. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...) etc.
But Scaliger was unlucky in his Choice of this particular Comparison: There is
a very fine one in the sixth Aeneid,. 707. that better agrees with Homer's: And
nothing is more evident than that the design of these two is very different:
Homer intended to describe the Multitude of Greeks pouring out of the Ships,
Virgil the Diligence and Labor of the Builders at Carthage. And Macrobius who
observes this difference Sat. l. 5. c. 11. should also have found, that
therefore the Similes ought not to be compared together. The Beauty of Homer's
is not inferior to Virgil's, if we consider with what Exactness it answers to
its end. It consists of three Particulars; the vast Number of the Troops is
expressed in the Swarms, their tumultuous manner of issuing out of the Ships, and
the perpetual Egression which seemed without end, are imaged in the Bees
pouring out of the Rock; and lastly their Dispersion over all the Shore, in
their descending on the Flowers in the Vales. Spondanus was therefore mistaken
when he thought the whole Application of this Comparison lay in the single word
(...), catervatim, as Chapman has justly observed.

VII.
VERSE 121. Fame flies before.] This assembling of the Army is full of
Beauties: The lively Description of their overspreading the Field, the noble
Boldness of the Figure when Fame is represented in Person shining at their
Head, the universal Tumult succeeded by a solemn Silence; and lastly the
graceful rising of Agamemnon, all contribute to cast a Majesty on this Part. In
the Passage of the Scepter, Homer has found an artful and poetical manner of
acquainting us with the high Descent of Agamemnon, and celebrating the
hereditary Right of his Family; as well as finely hinted the Original of his
Power to be derived from Heaven, in saying the Scepter was first the Gift of
Jupiter. It is with reference to this that in the Line where he first mentions
it, he calls it (...), and accordingly it is translated in that Place.

VIII.
VERSE 138. And artful thus pronounced the Speech designed.] The Remarks of
Dionysius upon this Speech I shall give the Reader altogether, though they lie
scattered in his two Discourses (...), the second of which is in a great Degree
but a Repetition of the Precepts and Examples of the first. This happened, I
believe, from his having composed them at distinct Times and upon different
Occasions.

"It is an exquisite Piece of Art, when you seem to aim at persuading one
thing, and at the same time enforce the contrary. This kind of Rhetoric is of
great use in all Occasions of Danger, and is what Homer has afforded a most
powerful Example of in the Oration of Agamemnon. It Is a Method perfectly
wonderful, and even carries in it an Appearance of Absurdity; for all that we
generally esteem the Faults of Oratory, by this means become the Virtues of it.
Nothing is looked upon as a greater Error in a Rhetorician than to allege such
Arguments as either are easily answered, or may be retorted upon himself, the
former is a weak Part, the latter a dangerous one; and Agamemnon here
designedly deals in both. For it is plain that if a Man must not use weak
Arguments, or such as may make against him, when he intends to persuade the
Thing he says; then on the other side, when he does not intend it; he must
observe the contrary Proceeding, and make what are the Faults of Oratory in
general, the Excellencies of that Oration in particular, or otherwise he will
contradict his own Intention and perssuade the contrary to what he means.
Agamemnon begins with an Argument easily answered, by telling them that Jupiter
had promised to crown their Arms with Victory. For if Jupiter had promised
this, it was a reason for the Stay in the Camp. But now (says he) Jove has
deceived us, and we must return with Ignominy. This is another of the same
kind, for it shows what a Disgrace it is to return. What follows is of the
second sort and may be turned against him. Jove will have it so: For which they
have only Agamemnon's Word, but Jove's own Promise for the contrary. That God
has overthrown many Cities, and will yet overturn many others. This was a
strong Reafon to stay, and put their Confidence in him. It is shameful to have
it told to all Posterity that so many thousand Greeks, after a War of so long
Continuance, at last returned home baffled and unsuccessful. All this might
have been said by a professed Adversary to the Cause he pleads, and indeed is the
same thing Ulysses says elsewhere in Reproach of their Flight. The Conclusion
evidently shows the Intent of the Speaker. Haste then, let us fly; (...), the
Word which of all others was most likely to prevail upon them to stay; the most
open Term of Disgrace he could possibly have used: It Is the same which Juno
makes use of to Minerva, Minerva to Ulysses, and Ulysses again to the Troops,
to dissuade their Return; the same which Agamemnon himself had used to insult
Achilles, and which Homer never employs but with the Mark of Cowardice and
Infamy."

The same Author farther observes, "That this whole Oration has the Air of
being spoken in a Passion. It begins with a Stroke of the greatest Rashness and
Impatience. Jupiter has been unjust, Heaven has deceived us. This renders all
he shall say of the less Authority, at the same time that it conceals his own
Artifice; for his Anger seems to account for the Incongruities he utters." I
could not suppress so fine a Remark, though it falls out of the Order of those
which precede it.

Before I leave this Article, I must take notice that this Speech of Agamemnon
is again put into his Mouth in the ninth Iliad, and (according to Dionysius)
for the same Purpose, to detain the Army at the Siege after a Defeat; though it
seems unartful to put the same Trick twice upon the Greeks by the same Person,
and in the same Words too. We may indeed suppose the first Feint to have
remained undiscovered, but at best it is a Management in the Poet not very
entertaining to the Readers.

IX.
VERSE 155. So small their Number, etc.] This Part has a low Air in Comparison
with the rest of the Speech. Scaliger calls it Tabernariam Orationem: But it is
well observed by Madam Dacier, that the Image Agamemnon here gives of the
Trojans, does not only render their Numbers contemptible in Comparison of the
Greeks, but their Persons too. For it makes them appear but as a few vile
Slaves fit only to serve them with Wine: To which we may add that it affords a
Prospect to his Soldiers of their future State and Triumph after the Conquest
of their Enemies.

This Passage gives me occasion to animadvert upon a Computation of the Number
of the Trojans, which the learned Angelus Politian has offered at in his
Preface to Homer. He thinks they were fifty thousand without the Auxiliaries,
from the Conclusion of the eighth Iliad, where it is said there were a thousand
funeral Piles of Trojans, and fifty Men attending each of them. But that the
Auxiliaries are to be admitted into that Number appears plainly from this
Place: Agamemnon expressly distinguishes the native Trojans from the Aids, and
reckons but one to ten Graecians, at which Estimate there could not be above
ten thousand Trojans. See the Notes on the Catalogue.

X.
VERSE 163. -- Decayed our Vessels lie,
And scarce ensure the wretched Power to fly.
This, and some other Passages, are here translated correspondent to the general
Air and Sense of this Speech, rather than just to the Letter. The telling them
in this Place how much their Shipping was decayed, was a Hint of their Danger
in returning, as Madam Dacier has remarked.

XI.
VERSE 175. So roll the Billows, etc.] One may take notice that Homer in these
two Similitudes has judiciously made choice of the two most wavering and
inconstant Things in Nature, to compare with the Multitude; the Waves, and Ears
of Corn. The first alludes to the Noise and Tumult of the People, in the
breaking and rolling of the Billows; the second to their taking the same
Course, like Corn bending one way; and both to the Easiness with which they are
moved by every Breath.

XII.
VERSE 243. To one sole Monarch.] Those Persons are under a Mistake who would
make this Sentence a Praise of Absolute Monarchy. Homer speaks it only with
regard to a General of an Army during the time of his Commission. Nor is
Agamemnon styled King of Kings in any other Sense, than as the rest of the
Princes had given him the supreme Authority over them in the Siege. Aristotle
defines a King, (...); Leader of the War, Judge of Controversies, and President
of the Ceremonies of the Gods. That he had the principal Care of religious
Rites appears from many Places in Homer; and that his Power was no where
absolute but in War: for we find Agamemnon insulted in the Council, but in the
Army threatening Deserters with Death. He was under an Obligation to preserve
the Privileges of his Country, pursuant to which Kings are called by our Author
(...), and (...), the Dispensers or Managers of Justice. And Dionysius of
Halicarnassus acquaints us, that the old Grecian Kings, whether Hereditary or
Elective, had a Council of their chief Men, as Homer and the most ancient Poets
testify; nor was it (he adds) in those Times as in ours, when Kings have a full
Liberty to do whatever they please. Dion. Hal. lib. 2. Hist.

XIII.
VERSE 255. Thersites only.] The Ancients have ascribed to Homer the first
Sketch of Satyric or Comic Poetry, of which sort was his Poem called Margites,
as Aristotle reports. Though that Piece be lost, this Character of Thersites may
give us a Taste of his Vein in that kind. But whether ludicrous Descriptions
ought to have Place in the Epic Poem, has been justly questioned: Neither
Virgil nor any of the most approved Ancients have thought fit to admit them
into their Compositions of that Nature; nor any of the best Moderns except
Milton, whose Fondness for Homer might be the reason of it. However this is in
its kind a very masterly Part, and our Author has shown great Judgment in the
Particulars he has chosen to compose the Picture of a pernicious Creature of
Wit; the chief of which are a Desire of promoting Laughter at any rate, and a
Contempt of his Superiors. And he sums up the whole very strongly, by saying
that Thersites hated Achilles and Ulysses; in which, as Plutarch has remarked
in his Treatise of Envy and Hatred, he makes it the utmost Completion of an ill
Character to bear a Malevolence to the best Men. What is farther observable is,
that Thersites is never heard of after this his first Appearance: Such a
scandalous Character is to be taken no more notice of, than just to show that
it is despised. Homer has observed the same Conduct with regard to the most
deformed and most beautiful Person of his Poem: For Nireus is thus mentioned
once and no more throughout the Ilaid. He places a worthless Beauty and an
ill-natured Wit upon the same Foot, and shows that the Gifts of the Body
without those of the Mind are not more despicable, than those of the Mind
itself without Virtue.

XIV.
VERSE 275. Amidst the Glories.] It Is remarked by Dionysius Halicar. in his
Treatise of the Examination of Writers; that there could not be a better
Artifice thought on to recall the Army to their Obedience, than this of our
Author. When they were offended at their General in favor of Achilles, nothing
could more weaken Achilles's Interest than to make such a Fellow as Thersites
appear of his Party, whose Impertinence would give them a Disgust of thinking
or acting like him. There is no surer Method to reduce generous Spirits, than
to make them see they are pursuing the same Views with People of no Merit, and
such whom they cannot forbear despising themselves. Otherwise there is nothing
in this Speech but what might become the Mouth of Nestor himself, if you except
a word or two. And had Nestor spoken it, the Army had certainly set sail for
Greece; but because it was uttered by a ridiculous Fellow whom they are ashamed
to follow, they are reduced, and satisfied to continue the Siege.

XV.
VERSE 284. The Greeks and I.] These Boasts of himself are the few Words which
Dionysius objects to in the foregoing Passage. I cannot but think the grave
Commentators here very much mistaken, who imagine Thersites in earnest in these
Vaunts, and seriously reprove his Insolence. They seem to me manifest Strokes
of Irony, which had rendered them so much the more improper in the Mouth of
Nestor, who was otherwise none of the least Boasters himself. And considered as
such they are equal to the rest of the Speech, which has an infinite deal of
Spirit, Humor, and Satyr.

XVI.
VERSE 326. He said, and cow'ring.] The vile Figure Thersites makes here is a
good Piece of Grotesque; the Pleasure expressed by the Soldiers at this Action
of Ulysses (notwithstanding they are disappointed by him of their Hopes of
returning) is agreeable to that generous Temper, at once honest and
thoughtless, which is commonly found in military Men; to whom nothing is so
odious as a Dastard, and who have not naturally the greatest Kindness for a Wit.

XVII.
VERSE 348. Unhappy Monarch! etc.] Quintilian speaking of the various Kinds of
Oratory which may be learned from Homer, mentions among the greatest Instances
the Speeches in this Book. Nonne vel unus liber quo missa ad Achillem legatio
continetur, vel in primo inter duces illa contentio, vel dictae in secundo
sententiae, omnes litium ac consiliorum explicat arts? Affectus quidem vel
illos mites, vel hos concitatos, nemo erit tam indoctus, qui non sua in
potestate hunc autorem habuisse fateatur. It is indeed hardly possible to find
any where more refined Turns of Policy, or more artful Touches of Oratory. We
have no sooner seen Agamemnon excel in one sort, but Ulysses is to shine no
less in another directly opposite to it. When the Stratagem of pretending to
set sail, had met with too ready a Consent from the People, his Eloquence
appears in all the Forms of Art. In his first Speech he had persuaded the
Captains with Mildness, telling them the People's Glory depended upon them, and
readily giving a Turn to the first Design, which had like to have been so
dangerous, by representing it only as a Project of Agamemnon to discover the
cowardly. In his second, he had commanded the Soldiers with Bravery, and made
them know what Part they sustained in the War. In his third, he had rebuked the
Seditious in the Person of Thersites, by Reproofs, Threats, and actual
Chastisements. And now in this fourth, when all are gathered he applies to them
in Topics which equally affect them all: He raises their Hearts by putting them
in mind of the Promises of Heaven, and those Prophecies of which as they had
seen the Truth in the nine Years Delay, they might now expect the
Accomplishment in the tenth Year's Success: which is a full Answer to what
Agamemnon had said of Jupiter's deceiving them.

Dionysius observes one singular Piece of Art, in Ulysses's manner of applying
himself to the People when he would insinuate any thing to the Princes, and
addressing to the Princes when he would blame the People. He tells the
Soldiers, they must not all pretend to be Rulers there, let there be one King,
one Lord; which is manifestly a Precept designed for the Leaders to take to
themselves. In the same manner Tiberius Rhetor remarks the beginning of his
last Oration to be a fine Ethopopeia or oblique Representation of the People,
upon whom the Severity of the Reproach is made to fall, while he seems to
render the King an Object of their Pity. Unhappy Monarch! whom the Grecian Race
With Shame deserting, etc.


XVIII.
VERSE 402. Then Nestor thus.] Nothing is more observable than Homer's Conduct
of this whole Incident; by what judicious and well-imagined Degrees the Army is
restrained, and wrought up to the Desires of the General. We have given the
Detail of all the Methods Ulysses proceeded in: The Activity of his Character
is now to be contrasted with the Gravity of Nestor's, who covers and
strengthens the other's Arguments, and constantly appears through the Poem a
weighty Closer of Debates. The Greeks had already seen their General give way
to his Authority, in the Dispute with Achilles in the former Book, and could
expect no less than that their Stay should be concluded on by Agamemnon as soon
as Nestor undertook that Cause. For this was all they imagined his Discourse
aimed at; but we shall find it had a farther Design, from Dionysius of
Halicarnassus. "There are two things (says that excellent Critic) worthy of
Admiration in the Speeches of Ulysses and Nestor, which are the different
Designs they speak with, and the different Applauses they receive. Ulysses has
the Acclamations of the Army, and Nestor the Praise of Agamemnon. One may
enquire the Reason, why he extols the latter preferably to the former, when all
that Nestor alleges seems only a Repetition of the same Arguments which
Ulysses had given before him? It might be done in Encouragement to the old Man,
in whom it might raise a Concern to find his Speech not followed with so
general an Applause as the other's. But we are to refer the Speech of Nestor to
that Part of Oratory which seems only to confirm what another has said, and yet
superinduces and carries a farther Point. Ulysses and Nestor both compare the
Greeks to Children for their unmanly Desire to return home; they both reproach
them with the Engagements and Vows they had past, and were now about to break;
they both allege the prosperous Signs and Omens received from Heaven.
Notwithstanding this, the End of their Orations is very different. Ulysses's
Business was to detain the Graecians when they were upon the Point of flying;
Nestor finding that Work done to his Hands, designed to draw them instantly to
Battle. This was the utmost Agamemnon had aimed at, which Nestor's Artifice
brings to pass; for while they imagine by all he says that he is only
persuading them to stay, they find themselves unawares put into Order of
Battle, and led under their Princes to fight." Dion. Hal. (...), Part 1 and 2.

We may next take notice of some Particulars of this Speech: Where he says they
lose their time in empty Words, he hints at the Dispute between Agamemnon and
Achilles: Where he speaks of those who deserted the Grecian Cause, he glances
at Achilles in particular. When he represents Helen in Affliction and Tears, he
removes the Odium from the Person in whose Cause they were to fight; and when
he moves Agamemnon to advise with his Council, artfully prepares for a
Reception of his own Advice by that modest way of proposing it. As for the
Advice itself, to divide the Army into Bodies, each of which should be composed
entirely of Men of the same Country; nothing could be better judged both in
regard to the present Circumstance, and with an Eye to the future carrying on
of the War. For the first, its immediate Effect was to take the whole Army out
of its Tumult, break whatever Cabals they might have formed together by
separating them into a new Division, and cause every single Mutineer to come
instantly under the View of his own proper Officer for Correction. For the
second, it was to be thought the Army would be much strengthened by this Union:
Those of different Nations who had different Aims, Interests and Friendships,
could not assist each other with so much Zeal or so well concur to the same
End, as when Friends aided Friends, Kinsmen their Kinsmen, etc. when each
Commander had the Glory of his own Nation in view, and a greater Emulation was
excited between Body and Body; as not only warring for the Honor of Greece in
general, but for that of every distinct State in particular.

XIX.
VERSE 440. How much thy Years excel.] Every one has observed how glorious an
Elogium of Wisdom Homer has here given, where Agamemnon so far prefers it to
Valor, as to wish not for ten Ajax's or Achilles's but only for ten Nestors.
For the rest of this Speech, Dionysius has summed it up as follows. " Agamemnon
being now convinced the Greeks were offended at him on account of the Departure
of Achilles, pacifies them by a generous Confession of his Fault, but then
asserts the Character of a supreme Ruler, and with the Air of Command threatens
the Disobedient." I cannot conclude this Part of the Speeches without remarking
how beautifully they rise above one another, and how they more and more awaken
the Spirit of War in the Graecians. In this last there is a wonderful Fire and
Vivacity, when he prepares them for the glorious Toils they were to undergo by
a warm and lively Description of them. The Repetition of the Words in that Part
has a Beauty, which (as well as many others of the same kind) has been lost by
most Translators. (...)
(...)
(...) --
I cannot but believe Milton had this Passage in his Eye in that of his sixth
Book. -- Let each
His Adamantine Coat gird well; and each
Fit well his Helm, gripe fast his orbed Shield, etc.


XX.
VERSE 485. And Menelaus came unbid.] The Critics have entered into a warm
Dispute, whether Menelaus was in the right or in the wrong, in coming
uninvited: Some maintaining it the Part of an Impertinent or a Fool to intrude
upon another Man's Table; and others insisting upon the Privilege a Brother or
a Kinsman may claim in this Case. The English Reader had not been troubled with
the Translation of this Word (...), but that Plato and Plutarch have taken
notice of the Passage. The Verse following this in most Editions, (...), etc.
being rejected as spurious by Demetrius Phalereus, is omitted here upon his
Authority.

XXI.
VERSE 526. The dreadful Aegis, Jove 's immortal Shield.] Homer does not
expressly call it a Shield in this Place, but he does in the fifth Iliad, where
this Aegis is described with a Sublimity that is inexpressible. The Figure of
the Gorgon's Head upon it is there specified, which will justify the mention of
the Serpents in the Translation here: The Verses are remarkably sonorous in the
Original. The Image of the Goddess of Battles blazing with her immortal Shield
before the Army, inspiring every Hero, and assisting to range the Troops, is
agreeable to the bold Painting of our Author. And the Encouragement of a divine
Power seemed no more than was requisite to change so totally the Dispositions
of the Graecians, as to make them now more ardent for the Combat than they
were before desirous of a Return. This finishes the Conquest of their
Inclinations, in a manner at once wonderfully Poetical, and correspondent to
the Moral which is every where spread through Homer, that nothing is entirely
brought about but by the divine Assistance.

XXII.
VERSE 534. As on some Mountain, etc.] The Imagination of Homer was so vast and
so lively, that whatsoever Objects presented themselves before him impressed
their Images so forcibly, that he poured them forth in Comparisons equally
simple and noble; without forgetting any Circumstance which could instruct the
Reader, and make him see those Objects in the same strong Light wherein he saw
them himself. And in this one of the principal Beauties of Poetry consists.
Homer, on the sight of the March of this numerous Army, gives us five Similes
in a Breath, but all entirely different. The first regards the Splendour of
their Armor, As a Fire, etc. The second the various Movements of so many
thousands before they can range themselves in Battel-Array, Like the Swans,
etc. The third respects their Number, As the Leaves or Flowers, etc. The fourth
the Ardour with which they run to the Combat, Like the Legions of Insects,
etc. And the fifth the Obedience and exact Discipline of the Troops, ranged
without Confusion under their Leaders, As Flocks under their Shepherds. This
Fecundity and Variety can never be enough admired. Dacier.

XXIII.
VERSE 545. Or milk white Swans on Asius' watery Plains.] Scaliger, who is
seldom just to our Author, yet confesses these Verses to be plenissima
Nectaris. But he is greatly mistaken when he accuses this Simile of
Impropriety, on the Supposition that a Number of Birds flying without Order are
here compared to an Army ranged in Array of Battle. On the contrary, Homer in
this expresses the Stir and Tumult the Troops were in, before they got into
Order, running together from the Ships and Tents: (...). But when they are
placed in their Ranks, he compares them to the Flocks under their Shepherds.
This Distinction will plainly appear from the Detail of the five Similes in the
foregoing Note.

Virgil has imitated this with great Happiness in his seventh Aeneid. Ceu
quondam nivei liquida inter nubila cycni
Cum sese e pastu referunt, and longa canoros
Dant per colla modos, sonat amnis and Asia long
Pulsa palus --.
Like a long Team of snowy Swans on high,
Which clap their Wings and cleave the liquid Sky,
When homeward from their watery Pastures born,
They sing, and Asia's Lakes their Notes return.
Mr. Dryden in this Place has mistaken Asius for Asia, which Virgil took care
to distinguish by making the first Syllable of Asius long, as of Asia short.
Though (if we believe Madam Dacier) he was himself in an Error, both here and in
the first Georgic. -- Quae Asia circum
Dulcibus in stagnis rimantur prata Caystri.
For she will not allow that (...) can be a Patronymic Adjective, but the
Genitive of a proper Name, (...), which being turned into Ionic is (...), and
by a Syncope makes (...). This puts me in mind of another Criticism upon the
290th Verse of this Book: It Is observed that Virgil uses Inarime for Arime, as
if he had read (...), instead of (...). Scaliger ridicules this trivial Remark,
and asks if it can be imagined that Virgil was ignorant of the Name of a Place
so near him as Baiae? It is indeed unlucky for good Writers, that Men who have
Learning should lay a Stress upon such Trifles, and that those who have none
should think it Learning to do so.

XXIV.
VERSE 552. Or thick as Insects play.] This Simile translated literally runs
thus; As the numerous Troops of Flies about a Shepherd's Cottage in the Spring,
when the Milk moistens the Pails; such Numbers of Greeks stood in the Field
against the Trojans, desiring their Destruction. The Lowness of this Image in
Comparison with those which precede it, will naturally shock a modern Critic,
and would scarce be forgiven in a Poet of these Times. The utmost a Translator
can do is to heighten the Expression, so as to render the Disparity less
observable: which is endeavored here, and in other Places. If this be done
successfully the Reader is so far from being offended at a low Idea, that it
raises his Surprise to find it grown great in the Poet's Hands, of which we
have frequent Instances in Virgil's Georgicks. Here follows another of the same
kind, in the Simile of Agamemnon to a Bull just after he has been compared to
Jove, Mars, and Neptune. This, Eustathius tells us, was blamed by some
Critics, and Mr. Hobbes has left it out in his Translation. The Liberty has
been taken here to place the humbler Simile first, reserving the noble one as a
more magnificent Close of the Description: The bare turning the Sentence
removes the Objection. Milton who was a close Imitator of our Author, has often
copied him in these humble Comparisons. He has not scrupled to insert one in
the midst of that pompous Description of the Rout of the Rebel-Angels in the
sixth Book, where the Son of God in all his dreadful Majesty is represented
pouring his Vengeance upon them: -- As a Herd
Of Goats, or timorous Flocks together thronged,
Drove them before him Thunderstruck --.


XXV.
VERSE 568. Great as the Gods.] Homer here describes the Figure and Port of
Agamemnon with all imaginable Grandeur, in making him appear clothed with the
Majesty of the greatest of the Gods; and when Plutarch (in his second Oration
of the Fortune of Alexander) blamed the Comparison of a Man to three Deities at
once, that Censure was not passed upon Homer as a Poet, but by Plutarch as a
Priest. This Character of Majesty in which Agamemnon excels all the other
Heroes, is preserved in the different Views of him throughout the Iliad. It is
thus he appears on his Ship in the Catalogue, thus he shines in the Eyes of
Priam in the third Book, thus again in the beginning of the thirteenth, and so
in the rest.

XXVI.
VERSE 572. Say Virgins.] It is hard to conceive any Address more solemn, any
Opening to a Subject more noble and magnificent, than this Invocation of Homer
before his Catalogue. That Omnipresence he gives to the Muses, their Post in
the highest Heaven, their comprehensive Survey through the whole Extent of the
Creation, are Circumstances greatly imagined. Nor is any thing more perfectly
fine or exquisitely moral, than the Opposition of the extensive Knowledge of
the Divinities on the one side, to the Blindness and Ignorance of Mankind on
the other. The Greatness and Importance of his Subject is highly raised by his
exalted manner of declaring the Difficulty of it, Not though my Lungs were Brass,
etc. and by the Air he gives as if what follows were immediately inspired, and
no less than the joint Labor of all the Muses.

XXVII.
VERSE 586. The hardy Warriors.] The Catalogue begins in this Place, which I
forbear to treat of at present: only I must acknowledge here that the
Translation has not been exactly punctual to the Order in which Homer places
his Towns. However it has not trespassed against Geography; the Transpositions
I mention being no other than such minute ones, as Strabo confesses the Author
himself is not free from: (...). Lib. 8. There is not to my Remembrance any
Place throughout this Catalogue omitted; a Liberty which Mr. Dryden has made no
difficulty to take and to confess, in his Virgil. But a more scrupulous Care
was owing to Homer, on account of that wonderful Exactness and unequaled
Diligence, which he has particularly shown in this Part of his Work.

XXVIII.
VERSE 649. Down their broad Shoulders, etc.] The Greek has it (...), a tergo
comantes. It was the Custom of these People to shave the forepart of their
Heads, which they did that their Enemies might not take the Advantage of
seizing them by the Hair: the hinder Part they let grow, as a valiant Race that
would never turn their Backs. Their manner of fighting was hand to hand,
without quitting their Javelins (in the way of our Pike-men.) Plutarch tells us
this in the Life of Theseus, and cites to strengthen the Authority of Homer,
some Verses of Archilochus to the same Effect. Eobanus Hessus who translated
Homer into Latin Verse was therefore mistaken in his Version of this Passage.
Praecipue Jaculatores, hastamque periti
Vibrare, and longis contingere pectora telis.


XXIX.
VERSE 711. Eager and loud from Man to Man he flies.] The Figure Menelaus makes
in this Place is remarkably distinguished from the rest, and sufficient to show
his Concern in the War was personal, while the others acted only for Interest
or Glory in general. No Leader in all the List is represented thus eager and
passionate; he is louder than them all in his Exhortations; more active in
running among the Troops; and inspirited with the Thoughts of Revenge, which he
still increases with the secret Imagination of Helen's Repentance. This
Behavior is finely imagined.

The Epithet (...) which is applied in this and other Places to Menelaus, and
which literally signifies loud-voiced, is made by the Commentators to mean
valiant, and translated bello strenuus. The reason given by Eustathius is, that
a loud Voice is a Mark of Strength, the usual Effect of Fear being to cut short
the Respiration. I own this seems to be forced, and rather believe it was one
of those kind of Sir-Names given from some distinguishing Quality of the Person
(as that of a loud Voice might belong to Menelaus) which Mons. Boileau mentions
in his ninth Reflection upon Longinus; in the same manner as some of our Kings
were called Edward Long-shanks, William Rufus, etc. But however it be, the
Epithet taken in the literal Sense has a Beauty in this Verse from the
Circumstance Menelaus is described in, which determined the Translator to use
it.

XXX.
VERSE 746. New to all the Dangers of the Main.] The Arcadians being an Inland
People were unskilled in Navigation, for which reason Agamemnon furnished them
with Shipping. From hence, and from the last Line of the Description of the
Scepter, where he is said to preside over many Islands, Thucydides takes
occasion to observe that the Power of Agamemnon was superior to the rest of the
Princes of Greece, on account of his Naval Forces, which had rendered him
Master of the Sea. Thucyd. lib. 1.

XXXI.
VERSE 815. Three Ships with Nireus.] This Leader is no where mentioned but in
these Lines, and is an Exception to the Observation of Macrobius that all the
Persons of the Catalogue make their Appearance afterward in the Poem. Homer
himself gives us the reason, because Nireus had but a small Share of Worth and
Valor; his Quality only gave him a Privilege to be named among Men. The Poet
has caused him to be remembered no less than Achilles or Ulysses, but yet in no
better manner than he deserved, whose only Qualification was his Beauty: It Is
by a bare Repetition of his Name three times, which just leaves some Impression
of him on the Mind of the Reader. Many others, of as trivial Memory as Nireus,
have been preserved by Poets from Oblivion; but few Poets have ever done this
Favor to Want of Merit with so much Judgment. Demetrius Phalereus (...), Sect.
61. takes notice of this beautiful Repetition, which in a just Deference to so
delicate a Critic is here preserved in the Translation.

XXXII.
VERSE 871. The Grace and Glory of the beauteous Kind.] He gives Alcestis this
Elogy of the Glory of her Sex, for her conjugal Piety, who died to preserve the
Life of her Husband Admetus. Euripides has a Tragedy on this Subject, which
abounds in the most masterly Strokes of Tenderness: In particular the first
Act, which contains the Description of her Preparation for Death; and her
Behavior in it can never be enough admired.

XXXIII.
VERSE 906. In twenty Ships the bold Perrhaebians came.] I cannot tell whether
it be worth observing that, except Ogilby, we have not met with one Translator
who has exactly preserved the Number of the Ships. Chapman puts eighteen under
Eumelus instead of eleven. Hobbes but twenty under Ascalaphus and Ialmen
instead of thirty, and but thirty under Menelaus instead of sixty. Valterie
(the former French Translator) has given Agapenor forty for sixty, and Nestor
forty for ninety. Madam Dacier gives Nestor but eighty. I must confess this
Translation not to have been quite so exact as Ogilby's, having cut off one
from the Number of Eumelus's Ships, and two from those of Guneus: Eleven and
two and twenty would sound but oddly in English Verse, and a Poem contracts a
Littleness by insisting on such trivial Niceties.

XXXIV.
VERSE 925. Or rein'd the noblest Steeds.] This coupling together the Men and
Horses seems odd enough, but Homer every where treats these noble Animals with
remarkable Regard. We need not wonder at this Enquiry, which were the best
Horses? from him, who makes his Horses of heavenly Extraction as well as his
Heroes, who makes his Warriors address them with Speeches and excite them by
all those Motives which affect a human Breast, who describes them sheding Tears
of Sorrow, and even capable of Voice and Prophecy: In most of which Points
Virgil has not scrupled to imitate him.

XXXV.
VERSE 939. His Troops, etc.] The Image in these Lines of the Amusements of the
Myrmidons, while Achilles detained them from the Fight, has an exquisite
Propriety in it. Though they are not in Action, their very Diversions are
Military, and a kind of Exercise of Arms. The covered Chariot and feeding
Horses, make a natural Part of the Picture; and nothing is finer than the manly
Concern of the Captains, who as they are supposed more sensible of Glory than
the Soldiers, take no share in their Diversions, but wander sorrowfully round
the Camp, and lament their being kept from the Battle. This difference betwixt
the Soldiers and the Leaders (as Dacier observes) is a Decorum of the highest
Beauty. Milton has admirably imitated this in the Description he gives in his
second Book of the Diversions of the Angels during the Absence of Lucifer. Part
on the Plain, or in the Air sublime,
Upon the Wing, or in swift Race contend;
Part curb their fiery Steeds, or shun the Goal
With rapid Wheels, or fronted Brigades form.
But how nobly and judiciously has he raised the Image, in proportion to the
Nature of those more exalted Beings, in that which follows. Others with vast
Typhoean Rage more fell
Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air
In Whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wild Uproar.


XXXVI.
VERSE 950. As when angry Jove.] The Comparison preceding this, of a Fire which
runs through the Corn and blazes to Heaven, had expressed at once the dazzling of
their Arms and the Swiftness of their March. After which Homer having mentioned
the Sound of their Feet, superadds another Simile, which comprehends both the
Ideas of the Brightness and the Noise: for here (says Eustathius) the Earth
appears to burn and groan at the same time. Indeed the first of these Similes
is so full and so noble, that it scarce seemed possible to be exceeded by any
Image drawn from Nature. But Homer to raise it yet higher, has gone into the
Mavelous, given a prodigious and supernatural Prospect, and brought down
Jupiter himself, arrayed in all his Terrors, to discharge his Lightnings and
Thunders on Typhoeus. The Poet breaks out into this Description with an Air of
Enthusiasm, which greatly heightens the Image in general, while it seems to
transport him beyond the Limits of an exact Comparison. And this daring manner
is particular to our Author above all the Ancients, and to Milton above all the
Moderns.

XXXVII.
VERSE 1012. From Practius' Stream, Percote 's Pasture Lands.] Homer does not
expressly mention Practius as a River, but Strabo, lib. 13. tells us it is to be
understood so in this Passage. The Appellative of Pasture Lands to Percote is
justified in the 15 th Iliad,. 547. where Hicetaon is said to feed his Oxen in
that Place.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 1032. Axius, that swells with all his neighboring Rills.] According to
the common Reading this Verse should be translated, Axius that diffuses his
beautiful Waters over the Land. But we are assured by Strabo that Axius was a
muddy River, and that the Ancients understood it thus, Axius that receives into
it several beautiful Rivers. The Criticism lies in the last word of the Verse,
(...), which Strabo reads (...), and interprets of the River Aea, whose Waters
were poured into Axius. However Homer describes this River agreeable to the
vulgar reading in Il. 21.. 158. (...). This Version takes in both.

OBSERVATIONS on the CATALOGUE.
IF we look upon this Piece with an Eye to ancient Learning, it may be observed
that however fabulous the other Parts of Homer's Poem may be according to the
Nature of Epic Poetry, this Account of the People, Princes, and Countries is
purely Historical, founded on the real Transactions of those Times, and by far
the most valuable Piece of History and Geography left us concerning the State
of Greece in that early Period. Greece was then divided into several Dynasties,
which our Author has enumerated under their respective Princes; and his
Division was looked upon so exact, that we are told of many Controversies
concerning the Boundaries of Grecian Cities which have been decided upon the
Authority of this Piece. Eustathius has collected together the following
Instances. The City of Calydon was adjudg'd to the Aetolians notwithstanding
the Pretensions of Aeolia, because Homer had ranked it among the Towns
belonging to the former. Sestos was given to those of Abydos, upon the Plea
that he had said, the Abydonians were Possessors of Sestos, Abydos, and Arisbe.
When the Milesians and People of Priene disputed their Claim to Mycale, a Verse
of Homer carried it in favor of the Milesians. And the Athenians were put in
Possession of Salamis by another which was cited by Solon, or (as some think)
interpolated by him for that Purpose. Nay in so high Estimation has this
Catalogue been held, that (as Porphyry has written) there have been Laws in
some Nations for the Youth to learn it by heart, and particularly Cerdias (whom
Cuperus de Apoth. Homer. takes to be Cercydas a Lawgiver of the
Megalopolitans) made it one to his Countrymen.

But if we consider the Catalogue purely as poetical, it will not want its
Beauties in that Light. Rapin who was none of the most superstitious Admirers
of our Author, reckons it among those Parts which had particularly charmed him.
We may observe first, what an Air of Probability is spread over the whole Poem
by the particularizing of every Nation and People concerned in this War.
Secondly, what an entertaining Scene he presents to us, of so many Countries
drawn in their liveliest and most natural Colors, while we wander along with
him amidst a beautiful Variety of Towns, Havens, Forests, Vineyards, Groves,
Mountains, and Rivers, and are perpetually amused with his Observations on the
different Soils, Products, Situations, or Prospects. Thirdly, what a noble
Review he passes before us of so mighty an Army, drawn out in order Troop by
Troop; which had the Number only been told in the Gross, had never filled the
Reader with so great a Notion of the Importance of the Action. Fourthly, the
Description of the differing Arms and manner of fighting of the Soldiers, and
the various Attitudes he had given to the Commanders: Of these Leaders, the
greatest Part are either the immediate Sons of Gods, or the Descendants of
Gods; and how great an Idea must we have of a War, to the waging of which so
many Demigods and Heroes are assembled? Fifthly, the several artful
Compliments he paid by this means to his own Country in general, and many of
his Contemporaries in particular, by a Celebration of the Genealogies, ancient
Seats, and Dominions of the great Men of his Time. Sixthly, the agreeable
Mixture of Narrations from Passages of History or Fables, with which he amuses
and relieves us at proper Intervals. And lastly, the admirable Judgment
wherewith he introduces this whole Catalogue, just at a Time when the Posture
of Affairs in the Army rendered such a Review of absolute Necessity to the
Greeks; and in a Pause of Action, while each was refreshing himself to prepare
for the ensuing Battles.

Macrobius in his Saturnalia, lib. 5. cap. 15. has given us a judicious Piece
of Criticism, in the Comparison betwixt the Catalogues of Homer and of Virgil,
in which he justly allows the Preference to our Author for the following
Reasons. Homer (says he) has begun his Description from the most noted
Promontory of Greece (he means that of Aulis, where was the narrowest Passage
to Euboea.) From thence with a regular Progress he describes either the
maritime or mediterranean Towns as their Situations are contiguous; he never
passes with sudden Leaps from Place to Place, omitting those which lie between;
but proceeding like a Traveller in the way he has begun, constantly returns to
the Place from whence he digress'd, 'till he finishes the whole Circle he
designed. Virgil on the contrary has observed no Order in the Regions described
in his Catalogue, l. 10. but is perpetually breaking from the Course of the
Country in a loose and desultory manner. You have Clusium and Cosae at the
beginning, next Populonia and Ilva, then Pisae, which lie at a vast distance in
Etruria; and immediately after Cerete, Pyrgi, and Graviscae, Places adjacent to
Rome: From hence he is snatched to Liguria, then to Mantua. The same Negligence
is observable in his Enumeration of the Aids that followed Turnus in l. 7.
Macrobius next remarks, that whatever Persons are named by Homer in his
Catalogue, are afterward introduced in his Battles, and whenever any others
are killed, he mentions only a Multitude in general. Whereas Virgil (he
continues) has spared himself the Labor of that Exactness; For not only
several whom he mentions in the List are never heard of in the War, but others
make a Figure in the War of whom we had no notice in the List. For Example, he
specifies a thousand Men under Massicus who came from Clusium, l. 10.. 167.
Turnus soon afterward is in the Ship which had carried King Osinius from the
same Place, l. 10.. 655. This Osinius was never named before, nor is it
probable a King should serve under Massicus. Nor indeed does either Massicus or
Osinius ever make their Appearance in the Battles -- He proceeds to instance
several others, who though celebrated for Heroes in the Catalogue, have no
farther notice taken of them throughout the Poem. In the third Place he
animadverts upon the Confusion of the same Names in Virgil: As where Corinaeus
in the ninth Book is killed by Asylas,. 571. and Corinaeus in the twelfth kills
Ebusus,. 298. Numa is slain by Nisus, l. 9.. 554. and Aeneas is afterward in
pursuit of Numa, l. 10.. 562. Aeneas kills Camertes in the tenth Book,. 562.
and Juturna assumes his Shape in the twelfth,. 224. He observes the same
Obscurity in his Patronymics. There is Palinurus Iasides, and Iapix Iasides,
Hippocoon Hyrtacides, and Asylas Hyrtacides. On the contrary the Caution of
Homer is remarkable, who having two of the Name of Ajax is constantly careful
to distinguish them by Oileus or Telamonius, the lesser or the greater Ajax.

I know nothing to be alleged in Defense of Virgil, in answer to this Author,
but the common Excuse that his Aeneis was left unfinished. And upon the whole,
these are such trivial Slips as great Wits may pass over, and little Critics
rejoice at.

But Macrobius has another Remark which one may accuse of evident Partiality on
the side of Homer. He blames Virgil for having varied the Expression in his
Catalogue to avoid the Repetition of the same Words, and prefers the bare and
unadorned Reiterations of Homer; who begins almost every Article the same way,
and ends perpetually, (...), etc. Perhaps the best reason to be given for this,
had been the artless Manner of the first Times, when such Repetitions were not
thought ungraceful. This may appear from several of the like Nature in the
Scripture; as in the twenty sixth Chapter of Numbers, where the Tribes of
Israel are enumerated in the Plains of Moab, and each Division recounted in the
same Words. So in the seventh Chapter of the Revelations: Of the Tribe of Gad
were sealed twelve thousand, etc. But the Words of Macrobius are Has copias
fortasse putat aliquis Divinae illi simplicitati praeferendas. Sed nescio quo
modo Homerum repetitio illa unice decet, and est genio antiqui Poetae digna.
This is exactly in the Spirit, and almost in the Cant of a true modern Critic.
The Simplicitas, the Nescio quo modo, the Genio antiqui Poetae digna, are
excellent general Phrases for those who have no Reasons. Simplicity is our Word
of Disguise for a shameful unpoetical Neglect of Expression: The Term of the Je
ne scay quoy is the very Support of all ignorant Pretenders to Delicacy; and to
lift up our Eyes, and talk of the Genius of an Ancient, is at once the cheapest
way of showing our own Taste, and the shortest way of criticizing the Wit of
others our Contemporaries.

One may add to the foregoing Comparison of these two Authors, some Reasons for
the Length of Homer's, and the Shortness of Virgil's Catalogues. As, that Homer
might have a Design to settle the Geography of his Country, there being no
Description of Greece before his Days; which was not the Case with Virgil.
Homer's Concern was to compliment Greece at a time when it was divided into
many distinct States, each of which might expect a Place in his Catalogue: But
when all Italy was swallowed up in the sole Dominion of Rome, Virgil had only
Rome to celebrate. Homer had a numerous Army, and was to describe an important
War with great and various Events; whereas Virgil's Sphere was much more
confined. The Ships of the Greeks are computed at about one thousand two
hundred, those of Aeneas and his Aids but at two and forty; and as the Time of
the Action of both Poems is the same, we may suppose the Built of their Ships,
and the Number of Men they contained, to be much alike. So that if the Army of
Homer amounts to about a hundred thousand Men, that of Virgil cannot be above
four thousand. If any one be farther curious to know upon what this Computation
is founded, he may see it in the following Passage of Thucidydes, lib. 1. "
Homer's Fleet (says he) consisted of one thousand two hundred Vessels: those of
the Boeotians carried one hundred and twenty Men in each, and those of
Philoctetes fifty. By these I suppose Homer expressed the largest and the
smallest Size of Ships, and therefore mentions no other sort. But he tells us
of those who sailed with Philoctetes, that they served both as Mariners and
Soldiers, in saying the Rowers were all of them Archers. From hence the whole
Number will be seen, if we estimate the Ships at a Medium between the greatest
and the least." That is to say, at eighty five Men to each Vessel (which is the
Mean between fifty and a hundred and twenty) the Total comes to a hundred and
two thousand Men. Plutarch was therefore in a Mistake when he computed the Men
at a hundred and twenty thousand, which proceeded from his supposing a hundred
and twenty in every Ship; the contrary to which appears from the
abovementioned Ships of Philoctetes, as well as from those of Achilles, which
are said to carry but fifty Men a-piece, in the sixteenth Iliad,. 167.

Besides Virgil's Imitation of this Catalogue, there has scarce been any Epic
Writer but has copied after it; which is at least a Proof how beautiful this
Part has been ever esteemed by the finest Genius's in all Ages. The Catalogues
in the ancient Poets are generally known, only I must take notice that the
Phocian and Boeotian Towns in the fourth Thebaid of Statius are translated from
hence. Of the Moderns, those which most excel, owe their Beauty to the
Imitation of some single Particular only of Homer. Thus the chief Grace of
Tasso's Catalogue consists in the Description of the Heroes, without any thing
remarkable on the side of the Countries: Of the Pieces of Story he has
interwoven, that of Tancred's Amor to Clorinda is ill placed, and evidently
too long for the rest. Spencer's Enumeration of the British and Irish Rivers in
the eleventh Canto of his fourth Book, is one of the noblest in the World; if
we consider his Subject was more confined, and can excuse his not observing the
Order or Course of the Country; but his Variety of Description, and
Fruitfulness of Imagination are no where more admirable than in that Part.
Milton's List of the fallen Angels in his first Book is an exact Imitation of
Homer, as far as regards the Digressions of History and Antiquities, and his
manner of inserting them: In all else I believe it must be allowed inferior.
And indeed what Macrobius has said to cast Virgil below Homer, will fall much
more strongly upon all the rest.

I had some cause to fear that this Catalogue which contributed so much to the
Success of the Author, should ruin that of the Translator. A mere heap of
proper Names though but for a few Lines together, could afford little
Entertainment to an English Reader, who probably could not be appriz'd either
of the Necessity or Beauty of this Part of the Poem. There were but two things
to be done to give it a chance to please him; to render the Versification very
flowing and musical, and to make the whole appear as much a Landscape or Piece
of Painting as possible. For both of these I had the Example of Homer in
general; and Virgil, who found the Necessity in another Age to give more into
Description, seemed to authorize the latter in particular. Dionysius of
Halicarnassus in his Discourse of the Structure and Disposition of Words,
professes to admire nothing more than that harmonious Exactness with which
Homer has placed these Words, and softened the Syllables into each other, so as
to derive Music from a Crowd of Names which have in themselves no Beauty or
Dignity. I would flatter my self that I have practiced this not unsuccessfully
in our Language, which is more susceptible of all the Variety and Power of
Numbers than any of the modern, and second to none but the Greek and Roman. For
the latter Point, I have ventured to open the Prospect a little, by the
addition of a few Epithets or short Hints of Description to some of the Places
mentioned; though seldom exceeding the Compass of half a Verse (the Space to
which my Author himself generally confines these Pictures in Miniature.) But
this has never been done without the best Authorities from the Ancients, which
may be seen under the respective Names in the Geographical Table following.

The Table itself I thought but necessary to annex to the Map, as my Warrant
for the Situations assigned in it to several of the Towns. For in whatever Maps
I have seen to this Purpose, many of the Places are omitted, or else set down
at random. Sophianus and Gerbelius have labored to settle the Geography of old
Greece, many of whose Mistakes were rectified by Laurenbergius. These however
deserved a greater Commendation than those who succeeded them; and particularly
Sanson's Map prefixed to Du Pin's Bibliotheque Historique is miserably
defective both in Omissions and false Placings; which I am obliged to mention,
as it pretends to be designed expressly for this Catalogue of Homer. I am
persuaded the greater Part of my Readers will have no Curiosity this way,
however they may allow me the Endeavor of gratifying those few who have: The
rest are at liberty to pass the two or three following Leaves unread.

A GEOGRAPHICAL TABLE of the Towns, etc. in HOMER's Catalogue of Greece, with
the Authorities for their Situation, as placed in this Map.
BOEOTIA, under five Captains, Peneleus, etc. containing, AULIS, a Haven on the
Euboean Sea opposite to Chalcis, where the Passage to Euboea is narrowest.
Strabo lib. 9. Eteon, Homer describes it a Hilly Country, and Statius after him
-- densamque jugis Eteonen iniquis. Theb. 7. Hyrie, a Town and Lake of the same
Name, belonging to the Territory of Tanagra or Graea. Strab. l. 9. Schaenus, it
lay in the Road between Thebes and Anthedon, 50 Stadia from Thebes. Strab.
ibid. Scolos, a Town under Mount Cythaeron. Ibid. Thespia, near Haliartus under
Mount Helicon. Paus. Boeot. near the Corinthian Bay. Strab. l. 9. Graea, the
same with Tanagra, 30 Stadia from Aulis, on the Euboean Sea; by this Place the
River Asopus falls into that Sea. Ibid. Mycalessus, between Thebes and Chalcis.
Paus. Boeot. near Tanagra or Graea. Strab. l. 9. famous for its Pine-trees. --
Pinigeris Mycalessus in agris. Statius, l. 7. Harma, close by Mycalessus.
Strab. l. 9. This Town as well as the former lay near the Road from Thebes to
Chalcis. Paus. Boeot. It was here that Amphiaraus was swallowed by the Earth in
his Chariot, from whence it received its Name. Strab. ibid. Ilesion, it was
situate in the Fens near Heleon and Hyle, not far from Tanagra. These three
Places took their Name from being so scated ((...), Palus.) Strab. l. 9.
Erythrae, in the Confines of Attica near Plataea. Thucyd. l. 3. -- dites
Pecorum comitantur Erythroe. Stat. Theb. 7. Peteon, in the way from Thebes to
Anthedon. Strab. l. 9. Ocalea, in the midway betwixt Haliartus and
Alalcomenes. Ibid. Medeon, near Onchestus. Ibid. Copae, a Town on the Lake
Copais, by the River Cephisus, next Orchomenus. Ibid. Eutresis, a small Town of
the Thespians near Thisbe. Ibid. Thisbe, under Mount Helicon. Paus. Boeot.
Coronea, seated on the Cephisus where it falls into the Lake Copais. Strab. l.
9. Haliartus, on the same Lake, Strab. ibid. bordering on Coronea and Plataea.
Paus. Boeot. Plataea, between Cithaeron and Thebes, divided from the latter by
the River Asopus. Strab. l. 9 Viridesque Plataeas. Stat. Th. 7. Glissa, in the
Territory of Thebes, abounding with Vines. Baccho Glisanta colentes. Stat. Th.
7. Thebe, situate between the Rivers Ismenus and Asopus. Strab. l. 9.
Onchestus, on the Lake Copais. The Grove consecrated to Neptune in this Place,
and celebrated by Homer, together with a Temple and Statue of that God, were
shown in the Time of Pausanias. Vide Boeot. Arne, seated on the same Lake,
famous for Vines. Strab. Hom. Midea, on the same Lake. Ibid. Nissa, or Nysa (
apud Statium) or according to Strabo l. 9. Isa; near Anthedon. Anthedon, a City
on the Seaside opposite to Euboea, the utmost on the Shore toward Locris.
Strab. l. 9. Teque ultima tractu Anthedon. Statius, l. 7. Aspledon, 20 Stadia
from Orchomenus. Strab. l. 9. Orchomenus, and the Plains about it, being the
most spacious of all in Boeotia. ( Plutarch in vit. Syllae, circa medium.)
Homer distinguishes these two last from the rest of Boeotia. They were
commanded by Ascalaphus and Ialmen.
PHOCIS, under Schedius and Epistropus, containing, Cyparissus, the same with
Anticyrrha according to Pausanias, on the Bay of Corinth. Pytho, adjoining to
Parnassus: some think it the same with Delphi. Pausan. Phocic. Crissa, a
Sea-Town on the Bay of Corinth near Cyrrha. Strab. l. 9. Daulis, upon the
Cephisus at the Foot of Parnassus. Ibid. Panopea, upon the same River,
adjoining to Orchomenia, just by Hyampolis or Anemoria. Ibid. Hyampolis,
Anemoria, both the same according to Strabo. Ibid. confining upon Locris. Paus.
Phoc. Lilaea, at the Head of the River Cephisus, just on the Edge of Phocis.
Ibid. -- propellentemque Lilaeam Cephissi glaciale caput. Statius, l. 7.
LOCRIS, under Ajax Oileus,, containing, Cynns, a maritime Town toward Euboea.
Strab. l. 9. Opus, a Locrian City, 15 Stadia from the Sea, adjacent to Panopea
in Phocis. Ibid. Calliarus. Bessa, so called from being covered with Shrubs.
Strab. l. 9. Scarphe seated between Thronium and Thermopylae, ten Stadia from
the Sea. Ibid. Augiae. Tarphe. Thronius, on the Melian Bay. Strab. l. 9.
Boagrius, a River that passes by Thronius, and runs into the Bay of O Eta,
between Cynus and Scarphe. Ibid. All these opposite to the Isle of Euboea.
EUBOEA, under Elephenor, containing, Chalcis, the City nearest to the
Continent of Greece, just opposite to Aulis in Boeotia. Strab. l. 10. Eretria,
between Chalcis and Gerestus. Ibid. Histioea, a Town with Vineyards over
against Thessaly. Herod. l. 7. Cerinthus, on the Seashore. Hom. near the River
Budorus. Strab. l. 10. Dios, seated high. Hom. near Histioea. Strab. ibid.
Carystos, a City at the Foot of the Mountain Ocha. Strab. ibid. between Eretria
and Gerestus. Ptolom. l. 3. Styra, a Town near Carystos. Strab. ibid.
ATHENS, under Menestheus. The Isle of SALAMIS, under Ajax Telamon.
PELOPONNESUS, the East Part divided into Argia and Mycenae, under Agamemnon,
contains, Argos, 40 Stades from the Sea. Paus. Corin. Tyrinthe, between Argos
and Epidaurus. Ibid. Asinen, Hermion, Traezene, Three Cities lying in this
Order on the Bay of Hermione. Strab. l. 8. Paus. Corinth. Traezene was seated
high, and Asine a Rocky Coast. -- Altaque Traezene. Ovid. Fast. 2. -- Quos
Asinae cautes. Lucan. l. 8. Eionae was on the Seaside, for Strabo tells us the
People of Mycenae made it a Station for their Ships. Lib. 8. Epidaurus, a Town
and little Island adjoining in the inner Part of the Saronic Bay. Strab. l. 8.
It was fruitful in Vines in Homer's Time. The Isle of Aegina, over against
Epidaurus. Maseta belongs to the Argolic Shore according to Strabo, who
observes that Homer names it not in the exact Order, placing it with Aegina.
Strab. l. 8. MYCENAE, between Cleone and Argos. Str. Pausan. Corinth, near the
Isthmus. Cleone, between Argos and Corinth. Paus. Corinth. Ornia, on the
Borders of Sicyonia. Ibid. Arethyria, the same with Phliasia, at the Source of
the Achaian Asopus. Strab. l. 8. Sicyon, (anciently the Kingdom of Adrastus)
betwixt Corinth and Achaia. Paus. Corinth. Hyperesia, the same with Aegira,
says Pausan. Achaic. seated betwixt Pellene and Helice. Strab. l. 8. opposite
to Parnassus. Polyb. l. 4. Gonoessa, Homer describes it situate very high, and
Seneca Troas. Cares nunquam Gonoessa vento. Pellene, bordering on Sicyon and
Pheneus, 60 Stadia from the Sea. Paus. Arcad. celebrated anciently for its
Wool. Strab. l. 8. Jul. Poll. Aegium, Helice, Next Sicyon lies Pellene, etc.
then Helice, and next to Helice, Aegium. Strab. l. 8. Helice lies on the
Seaside, 40 Stadia from Aegium. Paus. Ach.
The West Part of PELOPONNESUS, divided into Laconia, Messenia, Arcadia, and
Elis. LACONIA, under Menelaus, containing, Sparta, the capital City, on the
River Eurotas. Phares, on the Bay of Messenia. Strab. l. 8. Messa, Strabo
thinks this a Contraction of Messena, and Statius in his Imitation of this
Catalogue, lib. 4. calls it so. Brysia, under Mount Taygetus. Paus. Lacon.
Augiae, the same with Aegiae in the Opinion of Pausanias ( Laconicis) 30 Stadia
from Gythium. Amyclae, 20 Stades from Sparta toward the Sea. Ptol. l. 4. under
the Mountain Taygetus. Strab. l. 8. Helos, on the Seaside. Hom. upon the River
Eurotas. Strab. ibid. Laas, O Etylos, near the Promontory of Taenarus. Paus.
Lac.
MESSENIA, under Nestor, containing, Pylos, the City of Nestor on the
Seashore. Arene, seated near the River Minyeius. Hom. Il. 11. Strab. l. 8.
Thryon, on the River Alpheus, the same which Homer elsewhere calls Thryoessa.
Strab. ibid. Aepy, the ancient Geographers differ about the Situation of this
Town, but agree to place it near the Sea. Vide Strab. l. 8. -- Summis ingestum
montibus Aepy. Stat. l. 4. Cyparisie, on the Borders of Messenia, and upon the
Bay called from it Cyparissaeus. Paus. Messen. Amphigenia, -- Fertilis
Amphigenia. Stat. Th. 4. near the former. So also, Pteleon, which was built by
a Colony from Pteleon in Thessaly. Strab. l. 8. Helos, near the River Alpheus.
Ibid. Dorion, a Field or Mountain near the Sea. Ibid.
ARCADIA, under Agapenor, containing, The Mountain Cyllene, the highest of
Peloponnesus, on the Borders of Achaia and Arcadia, near Pheneus. Paus. Arcad.
Under this stood the Tomb of Aepytus. That Monument (the same Author tells us)
was remaining in his Time, it was only a heap of Earth enclosed with a Wall of
rough Stone. Pheneus, confining on Pellene and Stymphelus. Ibid. Orchomenus,
confining on Pheneus and Mantinaea. Ibid. Ripe, Stratie, Enispe, These three,
Strabo tells us, are not to be found, nor their Situation assigned. Lib. 8.
prope fin. Enispe stood high, as appears from Homer, and Statius l. 4.
Ventosaque donat Enispe. Tegea, between Argos and Sparta. Polyb. l. 4.
Mantinaea, bordering upon Tegea, Argia, and Orchomenus. Paus. Arcad.
Stymphelus, confining on Phliasia or Arethyria. Strab. l. 8. Parrahasia,
adjoining to Laconia. Thucyd. l. 5. -- Parrhasiaeque nives. Ovid. Fast. 2.
ELIS, under four Leaders, Amphimachus, etc. containing, The City Elis, 120
Stades from the Sea. Paus. Eliacis 2. Buprasium near Elis. Strab. l. 8. The
Places bounded by the Fields of Hyrmine, in the Territory of Elis, between
Mount Cyllene and the Sea. Myrsinus, on the Seaside 70 Stades from Elis.
Strab. l. 8. The Olenian Rocks, which stood near the City Olenos at the Mouth
of the River Pierus. Paus. Achaic. And Alysium, the Name of a Town or River, in
the way from Elis to Pisa. Strab. l. 8.

The ISLES over against the Continent of Elis, Achaia, or Acarnania. Echinades
and Dulichium, under Meges. The Cephalenians under Ulysses, being those from
Samos (the same with Cephalenia) from Zacynthus, Grocylia, Aegilipa, Neritus,
and Ithaca. This last is generally supposed to be the largest of these Islands
on the East side of Cephalenia, and next to it; but that is, according to
Wheeler, 20 Italian Miles in Circumference, whereas Strabo gives Ithaca but 80
Stadia about. It was rather one of the lesser Islands toward the Mouth of the
Achelous. Homer adds to these Places under the Dominion of Ulysses, Epirus and
the opposite Continent, by which (as M. Dacier observes) cannot be meant Epirus
properly so called, which was never subject to Ulysses, but only the Seacoast
of Acarnania opposite to the Islands.
The Continent of ACARNANIA and AETOLIA, under Thoas. Pleuron, seated between
Chalcis and Calydon, by the Seashore upon the River Evenus, West of Chalcis.
Strab. l. 10. Olenos, lying above Calydon, with the Evenus on the East of it.
Ibid. Pylene, the same with Proschion, not far from Pleuron, but more in the
Land, Strab. l. 10. Chalcis, a Sea Town. Hom. situate on the East side of the
Evenus. Strab. ibid. There was another Chalcis at the Head of the Evenus called
by Strabo Hypo-Chalcis. Calydon, on the Evenus also. Ibid.
The Isle of CRETE, under Idomeneus, containing, Gnossus, seated in the Plain
between Lyctus and Gortyna, 120 Stad. from Lyctus. Strab. l. 10. Gortyna, 90
Stad. from the African Sea. Ibid. Lyctus, 80 Stad. from the same Sea. Ibid.
Miletus, Phestus, 60. Stad. from Gortyna, 20 from the Sea, under Gortyna.
Strab. ibid. It lay on the River Jardan, as appears by Homer's Description of
it in the third Book of the Odysses. Lycastus, Rhytium, under Gortyna. Strab.
The Isle of RHODES, under Tlepolemus, containing, Lindus, on the right Hand to
those who sail from the City Rhodes, Southward. Strab. l. 14. Jalyssus, between
Camirus and Rhodes. Ibid. Camirus.
The Islands, Syma (under Nireus) Nisyrus, Carpathus, Casus, Cos, Calydnae,
under Antiphus and Phidippus. The Continent of THESSALY toward the Aegean Sea,
under Achilles. Argos Pelasgicum (the same which was since called Pthiotis.)
Strabo lib. 9. says that some thought this the Name of a Town, others that
Homer meant by it this Part of Thessaly in general (which last seems most
probable.) Steph. Byzant. observes, there was a City Argos in Thessaly as well
as in Peloponnesus; the former was called Pelasgic in Contradistinction to the
Achaian: for though the Pelasgi possessed several Parts of Epirus, Crete,
Peloponnesus, etc. yet they retained their principal Seat in Thessaly. Steph.
Byz. in v. Panel. Alos, Alope, Both on the Shore of Thessaly toward Locris.
Strab. l 9. Alos lies in the Passage of Mount Othrys. Ibid. Trechine, under the
Mountain O Eta. Eustath. in Il. 2. Phthia, Hellas. Some supposed these two to
be Names of the same Place, as Strabo says; though it is plain Homer distinguishes
them. Whether they were Cities or Regions Strabo is not determined. Lib. 9. The
Hellenes. This Denomination, afterward common to all the Greeks, is here to be
understood only of those who inhabited Phthiotis. It was not 'till long after
Homer's Time that the People of other Cities of Greece desiring Assistance from
these, began to have the same Name from their Communication with them, as
Thucydides remarks in the beginning of his first Book.
The following under Protesilaus. Phylace, on the Coast of Phthiotis toward the
Melian Bay. Strab. l. 9. Pyrrhasus, beyond the Mountain Othrys, had the Grove
of Ceres within two Stadia of it. Ibid. Itona, 60 Stad. from Alos, it lay
higher in the Land than Pyrrhasus, above Mount Othrys. Ibid. Antron, on the
Seaside Hom. in the Passage to Euboea. Ibid. Pteleon, the Situation of this
Town in Strabo seems to be between Antron and Pyrrhasus: But Pliny describes it
with great Exactness to lie on the Shore toward Boeotia, on the Confines of
Phthiotis, upon the River Sperchius; according to which Particulars it must
have been seated as I have placed it. Livy also seats it on the Sperchius. All
those Towns which were under Protesilans (says Strabo, lib. 9.) being the five
last mentioned, lay on the Eastern side of the Mountain Othrys.
These under Eumelus. Pherae, in the farthest Part of Magnesia confining on
Mount Pelion. Strab. l. 9. near the Lake of Baebe. Ptol. and plentifully
watered with the Fountains of Hyperia. Strab. Glaphyrae, Iolcos, a Sea-Town on
the Pegasaean Bay. Livy, l. 4. and Strab.
Under Philoctetes. Methone, a City of Macedonia, 40 Stadia from Pydna in
Pieria. Strab. Thaumacia, Moehbea, in Phthiotis near Pharsalus, according to
the same Author. Ibid. Olyzon. It seems that this Place lay near Baebe, Iolcos,
and Ormenium, from Strab. l. 9. where he says, Demetrius caused the Inhabitants
of these Towns to remove to Demetrias, on the same Coast.

The Upper THESSALY. The following under Podalirius and Machaon. Trice, or
Tricce, not far from the Mountain Pindus, on the left Hand of the Peneus as it
runs from Pindus. Strab. l. 9. Ithome, near Trica. Ibid. O Echalia, the
Situation not certain, somewhere near the forementioned Towns. Str. ibid.
Under Eurypylus. Ormenium, under Pellon, on the Pegasaean Bay, near Baebe.
Ibid. Asterium, hard by Phoerae and Titanus. Ibid.
Under Polyphaetes. Agrissa, lying upon the River Peneus. Str, l. 9. Gyrtone, a
City of Perrhaebia at the Foot of Olympus. Ibid. Orthe, near Peneus and Tempe.
Ibid. Elope, Oloosson, both lying under Olympus near the River Titaresius. Ibid.
Under Guneus and Protheus. Cyphus, seated in the mountainous Country toward
Olympus. Ibid. Dodona, among the Mountains toward Olympus. Ibid. Titaresius, a
River rising in the Mountain Titarus near Olympus, and running into Peneus.
Ibid. It Is also called Eurotas. The River Peneus rises from Mount Pindus, and
flows through Tempe into the Sea. Strab. l. 7. and 9. Pelion, near Ossa, in
Magnesia. Herod. lib. 7,


A Table of TROY, and the Auxiliar COUNTRIES.
THE Kingdom of Priam divided into eight Dynasties. 1. Troas, under Hector,
whose Capital was Ilion. 2. Dardania, under Aeneas, the Capital Dardanus. 3.
Zeleia, at the Foot of Ida, by the Aesepus, under Pandarus. 4. Adrestia,
Apaesus, Pityea, Mount Teree, under Adrastus and Amphius. Sestos, Abydos,
Arisbe on the River Selle, Percote and Practius, under Asius. These Places lay
between Troy and the Propontis. The other three Dynasties were under Mines,
Eetion, and Alteus, the Capital of the first was Lyrnessus, of the second Thebe
of Cilicia, of the third Pedasus, in Lelegia. Homer does not mention these in
the Catalogue, having been before destroyed and depopulated by the Greeks.
The Auxiliar Nations.
The Pelasgi, under Hippothous and Pyleus, whose Capital was Larissa, near the
Place where Cuma was afterward built. Strab. l. 13. The Thracians, by the side
of the Hellespont opposite to Troy, under Acamas and Pyrous, and those of
Ciconia, under Euphemus. The Poeonians from Macedonia and the River Axius,
under Pyrechmes. The Paphlagonians, under Pylaemeneus. The Halizonians, under
Odius and Epistrophus. The Mysians, under Cromis and Ennomus. The Phrygians of
Ascania, under Phorcys and Ascanius. The Maeonians, under Mestles and Antiphus,
who inhabited under the Mountain Tmolus. The Carians, under Naustes and
Amphimachus, from Miletus, the farthermost City of Caria toward the South.
Herodot. lib. 1. Mycale, a Mountain and Promontory opposite to Samos. Ibid.
Pthiron, the same Mountain as Latmos, according to Hecataeus. The Lycians,
under Sarpedon and Glaucus, from the Banks of the River Xanthus, which runs
into the Sea betwixt Rhodes and Cyprus. Homer mentions it to distinguish this
Lycia from that which lies on the Propontis.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Duel of Menelaus and Paris.
THE Armies being ready to engage, a single Combat is agreed upon between
Menelaus and Paris (by the Intervention of Hector) for the Determination of the
War. Iris is sent to call Helena to behold the Fight. She leads her to the
Walls of Troy, where Priam sat with his Counselors observing the Grecian
Leaders on the Plain below, to whom Helen gives an Account of the chief of
them. The Kings on either Part take the solemn Oath for the Conditions of the
Combat. The Duel ensues, wherein Paris being overcome is snatched away in a
Cloud by Venus, and transported to his Apartment. She then calls Helen from the
Walls, and brings the Lovers together. Agamemnon on the Part of the Graecians,
demands the Restoration of Helen, and the Performance of the Articles.

The three and twentieth Day still continues throughout this Book. The Scene is
sometimes in the Fields before Troy, and sometimes in Troy itself.

THE THIRD BOOK. OF THE ILIAD.
THUS by their Leader's Care each martial Band
Moves into Ranks, and stretches over the Land.
With Shouts the Trojans rushing from afar
Proclaim their Motions, and provoke the War:
So when inclement Winters vex the Plain
With piercing Frosts, or thick-descending Rain,
To warmer Seas the Cranes embodied fly,
With Noise, and Order, through the midway Sky;
To Pygmy-Nations Wounds and Death they bring,
And all the War descends upon the Wing.
But silent, breathing Rage, resolved, and skilled
By mutual Aids to fix a doubtful Field,
Swift march the Greeks: the rapid Dust around
Dark'ning arises from the labored Ground.
Thus from his flaggy Wings when Notus sheds
A Night of Vapors round the Mountain-Heads,
Swift-gliding Mists the dusky Fields invade,
To Thieves more grateful than the Midnight Shade;
While scarce the Swains their feeding Flocks survey,
Lost and confused amidst the thickened Day:
So wrapped in gathering Dust, the Grecian Train
A moving Cloud, swept on, and hid the Plain.
Now Front to Front the hostile Armies stand,
Eager of Fight, and only wait Command:
When, to the Van, before the Sons of Fame
Whom Troy sent forth, the beauteous Paris came:
In Form a God! the Panther's speckled Hyde
Flowed over his Armor with an easy Pride,
His bended Bow across his Shoulders flung,
His Sword beside him negligently hung,
Two pointed Spears he shook with gallant Grace,
And dared the Bravest of the Grecian Race.
As thus with glorious Air and proud Disdain,
He boldly stalked, the foremost on the Plain,
Him Menelaus, loved of Mars, espies,
With Heart elated, and with joyful Eyes:
So joys a Lion if the branching Deer
Or Mountain Goat, his bulky Prize, appear;
In vain the Youths oppose, the Mastives bay,
The Lordly Savage rends the panting Prey.
Thus fond of Vengeance, with a furious Bound,
In clanging Arms he leaps upon the Ground
From his high Chariot: Him, approaching near,
The beauteous Champion views with Marks of Fear,
Smit with a conscious Sense, retires behind,
And shuns the Fate he well deserved to find.
As when some Shepherd from the rustling Trees
Shot forth to View, a scaly Serpent sees;
Trembling and pale, he starts with wild Affright,
And all confused, precipitates his Flight.
So from the King the shining Warrior flies,
And plunged amid the thickest Trojans lies.
As Godlike Hector sees the Prince retreat,
He thus upbraids him with a generous Heat.
Unhappy Paris! but to Women brave,
So fairly formed, and only to deceive!
Oh had thou died when first thou saw the Light,
Or died at least before thy Nuptial Rite!
A better Fate, than vainly thus to boast,
And fly, the Scandal of thy Trojan Host.
Gods! how the scornful Greeks exult to see
Their Fears of Danger undeceived in thee!
Thy Figure promised with a martial Air,
But ill thy Soul supplies a Form so fair.
In former Days, in all thy gallant Pride,
When thy tall Ships triumphant stem'd the Tide,
When Greece beheld thy painted Canvas flow,
And Crowds stood wondering at the passing Show;
Say, was it thus, with such a baffled Mien,
You met the Approaches of the Spartan Queen,
Thus from her Realm conveyed the beauteous Prize,
And Theseus and Menelaus.
both her warlike Lords outshin'd in Helen's Eyes?
This Deed, thy Foes Delight, thy own Disgrace,
Thy Father's Grief, and Ruin of thy Race;
This Deed recalls thee to the proffered Fight;
Or have thou injured whom thou dare not right?
Soon to thy Cost the Field would make thee know
Thou keep'st the Consort of a braver Foe.
Thy graceful Form instilling soft Desire,
Thy curling Tresses, and thy silver Lyre,
Beauty and Youth, in vain to these you trust,
When Youth and Beauty shall be laid in Dust:
Troy yet may wake, and one avenging Blow
Crush the dire Author of his Country's Woe.
His Silence here, with Blushes, Paris breaks;
It Is just, my Brother, what your Anger speaks:
But who like thee can boast a Soul sedate,
So firmly Proof to all the Shocks of Fate?
Thy Force like Steel a tempered Hardness shows,
Still edged to wound, and still untir'd with Blows,
Like Steel, uplifted by some strenuous Swain,
With falling Woods to strew the wasted Plain.
Thy Gifts I praise, nor thou despise the Charms
With which a Lover golden Venus arms;
Soft moving Speech, and pleasing outward Show,
No Wish can gain 'em, but the Gods bestow.
Yet, wou'd'st thou have the proffered Combat stand,
The Greeks and Trojans seat on either Hand;
Then let a midway Space our Hosts divide,
And, on that Stage of War, the Cause be tried:
By Paris there the Spartan King be fought,
For beauteous Helen and the Wealth she brought;
And who his Rival can in Arms subdue,
His be the Fair, and his the Treasure too.
Thus with a lasting League your Toils may cease,
And Troy possess her fertile Fields in Peace;
Thus may the Greeks review their native Shore,
Much famed for generous Steeds, for Beauty more.
He said. The Challenge Hector heard with Joy,
Then with his Spear restrained the Youth of Troy,
Held by the midst, athwart; and near the Foe
Advanced with Steps majestically slow.
While round his dauntless Head the Grecians pour
Their Stones and Arrows in a mingled Shower.
Then thus the Monarch great Atrides cried;
Forbear ye Warriors! lay the Darts aside:
A Parley Hector asks, a Message bears;
We know him by the various Plume he wears.
Awed by his high Command the Greeks attend,
The Tumult silence, and the Fight suspend.
While from the Center Hector rolls his Eyes
On either Host, and thus to both applies.
Hear, all ye Trojans, all ye Grecian Bands!
What Paris, Author of the War, demands.
Your shining Swords within the Sheath restrain,
And pitch your Lances in the yielding Plain.
Here, in the midst, in either Army's sight,
He dares the Spartan King to single Fight;
And wills, that Helen and the ravished Spoil
That caused the Contest, shall reward the Toil.
Let these the brave triumphant Victor grace,
And differing Nations part in Leagues of Peace.
He spoke: in still Suspense on either side
Each Army stood: The Spartan Chief replied.
Me too ye Warriors hear, whose fatal Right
A World engages in the Toils of Fight.
To me the Labor of the Field resign;
Me Paris injured; all the War be mine.
Fall he that must beneath his Rival's Arms,
And live the rest secure of future Harms.
Two Lambs, devoted by your Country's Rite,
To Earth a sable, to the Sun a white,
Prepare ye Trojans! while a third we bring
Select to Jove, the Inviolable King.
Let reverend Priam in the Truce engage,
And add the Sanction of consid'rate Age;
His Sons are faithless, headlong in Debate,
And Youth itself an empty wavering State:
Cool Age advances venerably wise,
Turns on all hands its deep-discerning Eyes;
Sees what befell, and what may yet befall;
Concludes from both, and best provides for all.
The Nations hear, with rising Hopes possessed,
And peaceful Prospects dawn in every Breast.
Within the Lines they drew their Steeds around,
And from their Chariots issued on the Ground:
Next all unbuckling the rich Mail they wore,
Laid their bright Arms along the sable Shore.
On either side the meeting Hosts are seen,
With Lances fixed, and close the Space between.
Two Heralds now dispatched to Troy, invite
The Phrygian Monarch to the Peaceful Rite;
Talthybius hastens to the Fleet, to bring
The Lamb for Jove the Inviolable King.
Meantime, to beauteous Helen from the Skies
The various Goddess of the Rainbow flies:
(Like fair Laodice in Form and Face,
The loveliest Nymph of Priam's Royal Race)
Her in the Palace, at her Loom she found;
The golden Web her own sad Story crowned,
The Trojan Wars she weaved (herself the Prize)
And the dire Triumphs of her fatal Eyes.
To whom the Goddess of the painted Bow;
Approach, and view the wondrous Scene below!
Each hardy Greek and valiant Trojan Knight,
So dreadful late, and furious for the Fight,
Now rest their Spears, or lean upon their Shields;
Ceased is the War, and silent all the Fields.
Paris alone and Sparta's King advance,
In single Fight to toss the beamy Lance;
Each met in Arms the Fate of Combat tries,
Thy Love the Motive, and thy Charms the Prize.
This said, the many-colour'd Maid inspires
Her Husband's Love, and wakes her former Fires;
Her Country, Parents, all that once were dear,
Rush to her Thought, and force a tender Tear.
Over her fair Face a snowy Veil she threw,
And, softly sighing, from the Loom withdrew.
Her Handmaids Clymene and Aethra wait
Her silent Footsteps to the Scaean Gate.
There sat the Seniors of the Trojan Race,
(Old Priam's Chiefs, and most in Priam's Grace)
The King the first; Thymaetes at his side;
Lampus and Clytius, long in Council tried;
Panthus, and Hicetaon, once the strong,
And next the wisest of the Reverend Throng,
Antenor grave, and sage Ucalegon,
Leaned on the Walls, and bask'd before the Sun.
Chiefs, who no more in bloody Fights engage,
But Wise through Time, and Narrative with Age,
In Summer-Days like Grasshoppers rejoice,
A bloodless Race, that send a feeble Voice.
These, when the Spartan Queen approached the Tower,
In secret owned resistless Beauty's Power:
They cried, No wonder such Celestial Charms
For nine long Years have set the World in Arms;
What winning Graces! what majestic Mien!
She moves a Goddess, and she looks a Queen!
Yet hence oh Heaven! convey that fatal Face,
And from Destruction save the Trojan Race.
The good old Priam welcomed her, and cried,
Approach my Child, and grace thy Father's Side.
See on the Plain thy Grecian Spouse appears,
The Friends and Kindred of thy former Years.
No Crime of thine our present Sufferings draws,
Not Thou, but Heavens disposing Will, the Cause;
The Gods these Armies and this Force employ,
The hostile Gods conspire the Fate of Troy.
But lift thy Eyes, and say, What Greek is He
(Far as from hence these aged Orbs can see)
Around whose Brow such martial Graces shine,
So tall, so awful, and almost Divine?
Though some of larger Stature tread the Green,
None match his Grandeur and exalted Mien:
He seems a Monarch, and his Country's Pride.
Thus ceased the King, and thus the Fair replied.
Before thy Presence, Father, I appear
With conscious Shame and reverential Fear.
Ah! had I died, e're to these Walls I fled,
False to my Country and my Nuptial Bed,
My Brothers, Friends, and Daughter left behind,
False to them all, to Paris only kind!
For this I mourn, 'till Grief or dire Disease
Shall waste the Form whose Crime it was to please!
The King of Kings, Atrides, you survey,
Great in the War, and great in Arts of Sway.
My Brother once, before my Days of Shame;
And oh! that still he bore a Brother's Name!
With Wonder Priam viewed the Godlike Man,
Extolled the happy Prince, and thus began.
O blessed Atrides! born to prosperous Fate,
Successful Monarch of a mighty State!
How vast thy Empire? Of yon' matchless Train
What Numbers lost, what Numbers yet remain?
In Phrygia once were gallant Armies known,
In ancient Time, when Otreus' filled the Throne,
When Godlike Mygdon led their Troops of Horse,
And I, to join them, raised the Trojan Force:
Against the Manlike Amazons we stood,
And Sangar's Stream ran purple with their Blood.
But far inferior those, in manly Grace
And Strength of Numbers, to this Grecian Race.
This said, once more he viewed the martial Train:
What Is He, whose Arms lie scattered on the Plain?
Broad is his Breast, his Shoulders larger spread,
Though great Atrides overtops his Head.
Nor yet appear his Care and Conduct small;
From Rank to Rank he moves, and orders all.
The stately Ram thus measures over the Ground,
And, Master of the Flocks, surveys them round.
Then Helen thus. Whom your discerning Eyes
Have singled out, is Ithacus the Wife:
A barren Island boasts his glorious Birth;
His Fame for Wisdom fills the spacious Earth.
Antenor took the Word, and thus began:
My self, O King! have seen that wondrous Man;
When trusting Jove and hospitable Laws,
To Troy he came, to plead the Grecian Cause;
(Great Menelaus urged the same Request)
My House was honored with each Royal Guest:
I knew their Persons, and admired their Parts,
Both brave in Arms, and both approved in Arts.
Erect, the Spartan most engaged our View,
Ulysses seated, greater Reverence drew.
When Atreus' Son harangu'd the listening Train,
Just was his Sense, and his Expression plain,
His Words succinct, yet full, without a Fault;
He spoke no more than just the Thing he ought.
But when Ulysses rose, in Thought profound,
His modest Eyes he fixed upon the Ground,
As one unskilled or dumb, he seemed to stand,
Nor raised his Head, nor stretched his sceptred Hand;
But, when he speaks, what Elocution flows!
Soft as the Fleeces of descending Snows
The copious Accents fall, with easy Art;
Melting they fall, and sink into the Heart!
Wondering we hear, and fixed in deep Surprise
Our Ears refute the Censure of our Eyes.
The King then asked (as yet the Camp he viewed)
What Chief is that with Giant Strength endu'd,
Whose brawny Shoulders, and whose swelling Chest,
And lofty Stature far exceed the rest?
Ajax the great (the beauteous Queen replied)
Himself an Host: the Grecian Strength and Pride.
See! bold Idomeneus superior towers
Amidst yon' Circle of his Cretan Powers,
Great as a God! I saw him once before,
With Menelaus, on the Spartan Shore.
The rest I know, and could in Order name;
All valiant Chiefs, and Men of mighty Fame.
Yet two are wanting of the numerous Train,
Whom long my Eyes have sought, but sought in vain;
Castor and Pollux, first in martial Force,
One bold on Foot, and one renowned for Horse.
My Brothers these; the same our native Shore,
One House contained us, as one Mother bore.
Perhaps the Chiefs, from warlike Toils at ease,
For distant Troy refused to sail the Seas:
Perhaps their Sword some nobler Quarrel draws,
Ashamed to combat in their Sister's Cause.
So spoke the Fair, nor knew her Brothers Doom,
Wrapped in the cold Embraces of the Tomb;
Adorned with Honors in their native Shore,
Silent they slept, and heard of Wars no more.
Meantime the Heralds, through the crowded Town,
Bring the rich Wine and destined Victims down.
Idaeus' Arms the golden Goblets pressed,
Who thus the venerable King addressed.
Arise, O Father of the Trojan State!
The Nations call, thy joyful People wait,
To seal the Truce and end the dire Debate.
Paris thy Son, and Sparta's King advance,
In measured Lists to toss the weighty Lance;
And who his Rival shall in Arms subdue,
His be the Dame, and his the Treasure too.
Thus with a lasting League our Toils may cease,
And Troy possess her fertile Fields in Peace;
So shall the Greeks review their native Shore,
Much famed for generous Steeds, for Beauty more.
With Grief he heard, and bade the Chiefs prepare
To join his milk-white Coursers to the Car:
He mounts the Seat, Antenor at his side;
The gentle Steeds through Scaea's Gates they guide:
Next from the Car descending on the Plain,
Amid the Grecian Host and Trojan Train
Slow they proceed: The sage Ulysses then
Arose, and with him rose the King of Men.
On either side a sacred Herald stands,
The Wine they mix, and on each Monarch's Hands
Pour the full Urn; Then drew the Grecian Lord
His Cutlace sheathed beside his pondrous Sword.
From the signed Victims crops the curling Hair,
The Heralds part it, and the Princes share;
Then loudly thus before the attentive Bands
He calls the Gods, and spreads his lifted Hands.
O first and greatest Power! whom all obey,
Who high on Ida's holy Mountain sway,
Eternal Jove! and you bright Orb that roll
From East to West, and view from Pole to Pole!
Thou Mother Earth! and all ye living Floods!
Infernal Furies, and Tartarean Gods,
Who rule the Dead, and horrid Woes prepare
For perjured Kings, and all who falsely swear!
Hear, and be Witness. If, by Paris slain,
Great Menelaus press the fatal Plain;
The Dame and Treasures let the Trojan keep,
And Greece returning plow the watery Deep.
If by my Brother's Lance the Trojan bleed;
Be his the Wealth and beauteous Dame decreed:
The appointed Fine let Ilion justly pay,
And every Age record the signal Day.
This if the Phrygians shall refuse to yield,
Arms must revenge, and Mars decide the Field.
With that, the Chief the tender Victims slew,
And in the Dust their bleeding Bodies threw,
The vital Spirit issued at the Wound,
And left the Members quivering on the Ground.
From the same Urn they drink the mingled Wine,
And add Libations to the Powers Divine.
While thus their Prayers united mount the Sky;
Hear mighty Jove! and hear ye Gods on high!
And may their Blood who first the League confound,
Shed like this Wine, distain the thirsty Ground;
May all their Consorts serve promiscuous Lust,
And all their Race be scattered as the Dust!
Thus either Host their Imprecations joined,
Which Jove refused, and mingled with the Wind.
The Rites now finished, reverend Priam rose,
And thus expressed a Heart o'ercharg'd with Woes.
Ye Greeks and Trojans, let the Chiefs engage,
But spare the Weakness of my feeble Age:
In yonder Walls that Object let me shun,
Nor view the Danger of so dear a Son.
Whose Arms shall conquer, and what Prince shall fall,
Heaven only knows, for Heaven disposes all.
This said, the hoary King no longer stayed,
But on his Car the slaughtered Victims laid,
Then seized the Reins his gentle Steeds to guide,
And drove to Troy, Antenor at his Side.
Bold Hector and Ulysses now dispose
The Lists of Combat, and the Ground enclose;
Next to decide by sacred Lots prepare,
Who first shall lance his pointed Spear in Air.
The People pray with elevated Hands,
And Words like these are heard through all the Bands.
Immortal Jove! high Heaven's superior Lord,
On lofty Ida's holy Mount adored!
Whoever involved us in this dire Debate,
Oh give that Author of the War to Fate,
And Shades Eternal! Let Division cease,
And joyful Nations join in Leagues of Peace.
With Eyes averted Hector hasts to turn
The Lots of Fight, and shakes the brazen Urn.
Then Paris, thine leaped forth, by fatal Chance
Ordained the first to whirl the weighty Lance.
Both Armies sat, the Combat to survey,
Beside each Chief his Azure Armor lay,
And round the Lists the generous Coursers neigh.
The beauteous Warrior now arrays for Fight,
In gilded Arms magnificently bright:
The Purple Cuishes clasp his Thighs around,
With Flowers adorned, and silver Buckles bound:
Lycaon's Cors'let his fair Body dressed,
Braced in, and fitted to his softer Breast;
A radiant Baldric, over his Shoulder tied,
Sustains the Sword that glitters at his side.
His youthful Face a polished Helm overspread;
The waving Horse-hair nodded on his Head.
His figured Shield, a shining Orb, he takes,
And in his Hand a pointed Javelin shakes.
With equal Speed, and fired by equal Charms,
The Spartan Hero sheaths his Limbs in Arms.
Now round the Lists the admiring Armies stand,
With Jav'lins fixed, the Greek and Trojan Band.
Amidst the dreadful Vale the Chiefs advance,
All pale with Rage, and shake the threatening Lance.
The Trojan first his shining Javelin threw;
Full on Atrides' ringing Shield it flew,
Nor pierced the brazen Orb, but with a Bound
Leaped from the Buckler blunted on the Ground.
Atrides then his massy Lance prepares,
In Act to throw, but first prefers his Prayers.
Give me, great Jove! to punish lawless Lust,
And lay the Trojan gasping in the Dust:
Destroy the Aggressor, aid my righteous Cause,
Avenge the Breach of hospitable Laws!
Let this Example future Times reclaim,
And guard from Wrong fair Friendship's holy Name.
He said, and poised in Air the Javelin sent,
Through Paris' Shield the forceful Weapon went,
His Cors'let pierces, and his Garment rends,
And glancing downward, near his Flank descends.
The wary Trojan, bending from the Blow,
Eludes his Death, and disappoints the Foe:
But fierce Atrides waved his Sword and struck
Full on his Casque; the crested Helmet shook;
The brittle Steel, unfaithful to his Hand,
Broke short: the Fragments glittered on the Sand.
The raging Warrior to the spacious Skies
Raised his upbraiding Voice, and angry Eyes:
Then is it vain in Jove himself to trust?
And is it thus the Gods assist the Just?
When Crimes provoke us, Heaven Success denies;
The Dart falls harmless, and the Faulchion flies.
Furious he said, and towered the Grecian Crew
(Seized by the Crest) the unhappy Warrior drew;
Struggling he followed, while the embroidered Thong
That tied his Helmet, dragged the Chief along.
Then had his Ruin crowned Atrides' Joy,
But Venus trembled for the Price of Troy:
Unseen she came, and burst the golden Band;
And left an empty Helmet in his Hand.
The Casque, enraged, amidst the Greeks he threw;
The Greeks with Smiles the polished Trophy view.
Then, as once more he lifts the deadly Dart,
In Thirst of Vengeance, at his Rival's Heart,
The Queen of Love her favored Champion shrouds
(For Gods can all things) in a Veil of Clouds.
Raised from the Field the panting Youth she led,
And gently laid him on the Bridal Bed,
With pleasing Sweets his fainting Sense renews,
And all the Dome perfumes with Heavenly Dews.
Meantime the brightest of the Female Kind,
The matchless Helen over the Walls reclined:
To her, beset with Trojan Beauties, came
In Groea's Form, the Venus.
Laughter-loving Dame.
( Groea, her Favorite Maid, well-skill'd to cull
The snowie Fleece, and wind the twisted Wool.)
The Goddess softly shook her silken Vest
That shed Perfumes, and whispering thus addressed.
Haste, happy Nymph! for thee thy Paris calls,
Safe from the Fight, in yonder lofty Walls,
Fair as a God with Odours round him spread
He lies, and waits thee on the well-known Bed:
Not like a Warrior parted from the Foe,
But some gay Dancer in the public Show.
She spoke, and Helen's secret Soul was moved;
She scorned the Champion, but the Man she loved.
Fair Venus' Neck, her Eyes that sparkled Fire,
And Breast, revealed the Queen of soft Desire.
Struck with her Presence, strait the lively Red
Forsook her Cheek; and, trembling, thus she said.
Then is it still thy Pleasure to deceive?
And Woman's Frailty always to believe?
Say, to new Nations must I cross the Main,
Or carry Wars to some soft Asian Plain?
For whom must Helen break her second Vow?
What other Paris is thy Darling now?
Left to Atrides, (Victor in the Strife)
An odious Conquest and a Captive Wife,
Hence let me sail: And if thy Paris bear
My Absence ill, let Venus ease his Care.
A Handmaid Goddess at his Side to wait,
Renounce the Glories of thy Heavenly State,
Be fixed for ever to the Trojan Shore,
His Spouse, or Slave; and mount the Skies no more.
For me, to lawless Love no longer led,
I scorn the Coward, and detest his Bed;
Else should I merit everlasting Shame,
And keen Reproach, from every Phrygian Dame:
Ill suits it now the Joys of Love to know,
Too deep my Anguish, and too wild my Woe.
Then thus, incensed, the Paphian Queen replies;
Obey the Power from whom thy Glories rise:
Should Venus leave thee, every Charm must fly,
Fade from thy Cheek, and languish in thy Eye.
Cease to provoke me, lest I make thee more
The World's Aversion, than their Love before;
Now the bright Prize for which Mankind engage,
Then, the sad Victim of the Public Rage.
At this, the Fairest of her Sex obeyed,
And veiled her Blushes in a silken Shade;
Unseen, and silent, from the Train she moves,
Led by the Goddess of the Smiles and Loves.
Arrived, and entered at the Palace Gate,
The Maids officious round their Mistress wait,
Then all dispersing, various Tasks attend;
The Queen and Goddess to the Prince ascend.
Full in her Paris' Sight the Queen of Love
Had placed the beauteous Progeny of Jove;
Where, as he viewed her Charms, she turned away
Her glowing Eyes, and thus began to say.
Is this the Chief, who lost to Sense of Shame
Late fled the Field, and yet survives his Fame?
Oh had thou died beneath the righteous Sword
Of that brave Man whom once I called my Lord!
The Boaster Paris often desired the Day
With Sparta's King to meet in single Fray:
Go now, once more thy Rival's Rage excite,
Provoke Atrides and renew the Fight:
Yet Helen bids thee stay, lest thou unskilled
Should fall an easy Conquest on the Field.
The Prince replies; Ah cease, divinely fair,
Nor add Reproaches to the Wounds I bear,
This Day the Foe prevailed by Pallas' Power;
We yet may vanquish in a happier Hour:
There want not Gods to favor us above;
But let the Business of our Life be Love:
These softer Moments let Delights employ,
And kind Embraces snatch the hasty Joy.
Not thus I loved thee, when from Sparta's Shore
My forced, my willing Heavenly Prize I bore,
When first entranced in Cranae's Isle I lay,
Mixed with thy Soul, and all dissolved away.
Thus having spoke, the enamored Phrygian Boy
Rushed to the Bed, impatient for the Joy.
Him Helen followed slow with bashful Charms,
And clasped the blooming Hero in her Arms.
While these to Love's delicious Rapture yield,
The stern Atrides rages round the Field:
So some fell Lion whom the Woods obey,
Roars through the Desert, and demands his Prey.
Paris he seeks, impatient to destroy,
But seeks in vain along the Troops of Troy;
Even those had yielded to a Foe so brave
The recreant Warrior, hateful as the Grave.
Then speaking thus the King of Kings arose;
Ye Trojans, Dardans, all our generous Foes!
Hear and attest! From Heaven with Conquest crowned,
Our Brother's Arms the just Success have found:
Be therefore now the Spartan Wealth restored,
Let Argive Helen own her lawful Lord,
The appointed Fine let Ilion justly pay,
And Age to Age record this signal Day.
He ceased; His Army's just Applauses rise,
And the long Shout runs ecchoing through the Skies.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Third Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE THIRD BOOK.
OF all the Books of the Iliad, there is scarce any more pleasing than the
Third. It may be divided into five Parts, each of which has a Beauty different
from the other. The first contains what passed before the two Armies, and the
Proposal of the Combat between Paris and Menelaus: The Attention and Suspense
of these mighty Hosts, which were just upon the Point of joining Battle, and
the lofty manner of offering and accepting this important and unexpected
Challenge, have something in them wonderfully pompous and of an amusing
Solemnity. The second Part which describes the Behavior of Helena in this
Juncture, her Conference with the old King and his Counselors, with the Review
of the Heroes from the Battelments, is an Episode entirely of another sort,
which excels in the Natural and Pathetick. The third consists of the Ceremonies
of the Oath on both sides and the Preliminaries to the Combat; with the
beautiful Retreat of Priam, who in the Tenderness of a Parent withdraws from
the sight of the Duel: These Particulars detain the Reader in Expectation, and
heighten his Impatience for the Fight itself. The fourth is the Description of
the Duel, an exact Piece of Painting where we see every Attitude, Motion, and
Action of the Combatants particularly and distinctly, and which concludes with
a surprising Propriety, in the rescue of Paris by Venus. The Machine of that
Goddess which makes the fifth Part, and whose End is to reconcile Paris and
Helena, is admirable in every Circumstance; The Remonstrance she holds with the
Goddess, the Reluctance with which she obeys her, the Reproaches she casts upon
Paris, and the Flattery and Courtship with which he so soon wins her over to
him. Helen (the main Cause of this War) was not to be made an odious Character;
She is drawn by this great Master with the finest Strokes, as a frail, but not
an abandoned Creature. She has perpetual Struggles of Virtue on the one side,
and Softnesses which overcome them on the other. Our Author has been remarkably
careful to tell us this; whenever he but slightly names her in the foregoing
Part of his Work she is represented at the same time as repentant; and it is
thus we see her at large at her first Appearance in the present Book, which is
one of the shortest of the whole Iliad, but in recompense has Beauties almost
in every Line, and most of them so obvious that to acknowledge them we need
only to read them.

I.
VERSE 3. With Shouts the Trojans.] The Book begins with a fine Opposition of
the Noise of the Trojan Army to the Silence of the Graecians. It was but
natural to imagine this, since the former was composed of many different
Nations, of various Languages and Strangers to each other; the latter were more
united in their Neighborhood, and under Leaders of the same Country. But as
this Observation seems particularly insisted upon by our Author (for he uses it
again in the fourth Book,. 430.) so he had a farther Reason for it. Plutarch in
his Treatise of reading the Poets, remarks upon this Distinction, as a
particular Credit to the military Discipline of the Greeks. And several ancient
Authors tell us, it was the Manner of the Barbarians to encounter with Shouts
and Outcries; as it continues to this Day the Custom of the Eastern Nations.
Perhaps these Clamours were only to encourage their Men, instead of martial
Instruments. I think Sir Walter Raleigh says, there never was a People but made
use of some sort of Music in Battle: Homer never mentions any in the Greek or
Trojan Armies, and it is scarce to be imagined he would omit a Circumstance so
poetical without some particular Reason. The Verb (...) which the modern Greeks
have since appropriated to the sound of a Trumpet, is used indifferently in our
Author for other Sounds, as for Thunder in the the 21 st Iliad,. 388. (...) --.
He once names the Trumpet (...) in a Simile, upon which Eustathius and Didymus
observe that the use of it was known in the Poet's Time, but not in that of the
Trojan War. And hence we may infer that Homer was particularly careful not to
confound the Manners of the Times he wrote of, with those of the Times he lived
in.

II.
VERSE 7. The Cranes embodied fly.] If Wit has been truly described to be a
Similitude in Ideas, and is more excellent as that Similitude is more
surprising; there cannot be a truer kind of Wit than what is shown in apt
Comparisons, especially when composed of such Subjects as having the least
Relation to each other in general, have yet some Particular that agrees
exactly. Of this Nature is the Simile of the Cranes to the Trojan Army, where
the Fancy of Homer flew to the remotest Part of the World for an Image which no
Reader could have expected. But it is no less exact than surprising. The
Likeness consists in two Points, the Noise and the Order; the latter is so
observable as to have given some of the Ancients occasion to imagine the
embatteling of an Army was first learned from the close manner of Flight of
these Birds. But this Part of the Simile not being directly expressed by the
Author, has been overlooked by some of the Commentators. It may be remarked
that Homer has generally a wonderful Closeness in all the Particulars of his
Comparisons, notwithstanding he takes a Liberty in his Expression of them. He
seems so secure of the main Likeness, that he makes no scruple to play with the
Circumstances; sometimes by transposing the Order of them, sometimes by
super-adding them, and sometimes (as in this Place) by neglecting them in such
a manner as to leave the Reader to supply them himself. For the present
Comparison, it has been taken by Virgil in the tenth Book, and applied to the
Clamours of Soldiers in the same manner. -- Quales sub nubibus atris
Strymoniae dant signa grues, atque aethera tranant
Cum sonitu, fugiuntque Notos clamore secundo.


III.
VERSE 26. The beauteous Paris came, In Form a God.] This is meant by the
Epithet (...), as has been said in the 24 th Note on the first Book. The
Picture here given of Paris's Air and Dress, is exactly correspondent to his
Character; you see him endeavoring to mix the fine Gentleman with the
Warrior; and this Idea of him Homer takes care to keep up, by describing him
not without the same Regard when he is arming to encounter Menelaus afterward
in a close Fight, as he shows here where he is but preluding and flourishing in
the Gaiety of his Heart. And when he tells us in that Place that he was in
danger of being strangled by the Strap of his Helmet, he takes notice that it
was (...), embroidered.

IV.
VERSE 37. So joys a Lion if the branching Deer, Or Mountain Goat.] The old
Scholiasts refining on this Simile will have it that Paris is compared to a
Goat on account of his Incontinence, and to a Stag for his Cowardice: To this
last they make an Addition which is very ludicrous, that he is also liken'd to
a Deer for his Skill in Music, and cite Aristotle to prove that Animal
delights in Harmony, which Opinion is alluded to by Mr. Waller in these Lines,
Here Love takes stand, and while she charms the Ear
Empties his Quiver on the listening Deer.
But upon the whole, it is whimsical to imagine this Comparison consists in any
thing more, than the Joy which Menelaus conceived at the sight of his Rival, in
the hopes of destroying him. It is equally an Injustice to Paris, to abuse him
for understanding Music, and to represent his Retreat as purely the Effect of
Fear, which proceeded from his Sense of Guilt with respect to the particular
Person of Menelaus. He appeared at the Head of the Army to challenge the
boldest of the Enemy: Nor is his Character elsewhere in the Iliad by any means
that of a Coward. Hector at the end of the sixth Book confesses, that no Man
could justly reproach him as such. Nor is he represented so by Ovid (who copied
Homer very closely) in the end of his Epistle to Helen. The Moral of Homer is
much finer: A brave Mind however blinded with Passion is sensible of Remorse as
soon as the injured Object presents itself; and Paris never behaves himself ill
in War, but when his Spirits are depressed by the Consciousness of an
Injustice. This also will account for the seeming Incongruity of Homer in this
Passage, who (as they would have us think) paints him a shameful Coward, at the
same time that he is perpetually calling him the divine Paris, and Paris like a
God. What he says immediately afterward in answer to Hector's Reproof, will
make this yet more clear.

V.
VERSE 47. As when a Shepherd.] This Comparison of the Serpent is finely
imitated by Virgil in the second Aeneid. Improvisum aspris veluti qui sentibus
anguem
Pressit humi nitens, trepidusque repent refugit
Attollentem iras, and caerula colla tumentem:
Haud secus Androgeus visu tremefaclus abibat.


But it may be said to the Praise of Virgil, that he has applied it upon an
Occasion where it has an additional Beauty. Paris upon the sight of Menelaus's
Approach, is compared to a Traveller who sees a Snake shoot on a sudden toward
him. But the Surprise and Danger of Androgeus is more lively, being just in the
reach of his Enemies before he perceived it; and the Circumstance of the
Serpent's rouzing his Crest, which brightens with Anger, finely images the
shining of their Arms in the Nightime, as they were just lifted up to destroy
him. Scaliger criticizes on the needless Repetition in the Words (...) and
(...), which is avoided in the Translation. But it must be observed in general,
that little Exactnesses are what we should not look for in Homer; the Genius of
his Age was too incorrect, and his own too fiery to regard them.

VI.
VERSE 53. As God-like Hector.] This is the first Place of the Poem where
Hector makes a figure, and here it seems proper to give an Idea of his
Character, since if he is not the chief Hero of the Iliad, he is at least the
most amiable. There are several Reasons which render Hector a favorite
Character with every Reader, some of which shall here be offered. The chief
Moral of Homer was to expose the ill Effects of Discord; the Greeks were to be
shown disunited, and to render that Disunion the more probable, he has
designedly given them mixed Characters. The Trojans on the other hand were to be
represented making all Advantages of the others Disagreement, which they could
not do without a strict Union among themselves. Hector therefore who commanded
them, must be endu'd with all such Qualifications as tended to the Preservation
of it; as Achilles with such as promoted the contrary. The one stands in
Contraste to the other, an accomplished Character of Valor unruffled by Rage
and Anger, and uniting his People by his Prudence and Example. Hector has also
a Foil to set him off in his own Family; we are perpetually opposing in our
Minds the Incontinence of Paris, who exposes his Country, to the Temperance of
Hector who protects it. And indeed it is this Love of his Country which appears
his principal Passion, and the Motive of all his Actions. He has no other
Blemish than that he fights in an unjust Cause, which Homer has yet been
careful to tell us he would not do, if his Opinion were followed. But since he
cannot prevail, the Affection he bears to his Parents and Kindred, and his
desire of defending them, incites him to do his utmost for their Safety. We may
add that Homer having so many Greeks to celebrate, makes them shine in their
turns, and singly in their several Books, one succeeding in the Absence of
another: Whereas Hector appears in every Battle the Life and Soul of his Party,
and the constant Bulwark against every Enemy: He stands against Agamemnon's
Magnanimity, Diomed's Bravery, Ajax's Strength, and Achilles's Fury. There is
besides, an accidental Cause for our liking him from reading the Writers of the
Augustan Age, especially Virgil, whose Favorite he grew more particularly from
the time when the Caesar's fancied to derive their Pedigree from Troy.

VII.
VERSE 55. Unhappy Paris, etc.] It may be observed in Honor of Homer's
Judgment, that the Words which Hector is made to speak here, very strongly mark
his Character. They contain a warm Reproach of Cowardice, and show him to be
touched with so high a Sense of Glory, as to think Life insupportable without
it. His calling to mind the gallant Figure which Paris had made in his Amors
to Helen, and opposing to it the Image of his Flight from her Husband, is a
Sarcasm of the utmost Bitterness and Vivacity. After he has named that Action
of the Rape, the Cause of so many Mischiefs, his insisting upon it in so many
broken Periods, those disjointed Shortnesses of Speech, ((...)
(...))
That hasty manner of Expression without the Connection of Particles, is (as
Eustathius remarks) extremely natural to a Man in Anger, who thinks he can
never vent himself too soon. That Contempt of outward Show, of the Gracefulness
of Person, and of the Accomplishments of a Courtly Life, is what corresponds
very well with the Warlike Temper of Hector; and these Verses have therefore a
Beauty here which they want in Horace, however admirably he has translated
them, in the Ode of Nireus's Prophecy. Nequicquam Veneris praesidio ferox,
Pectes caesariem; grataque foeminis
Imbelli cithara carmina divides, etc.


VIII.
VERSE 72. And both her Warlike Lords.] The Original is (...). The Spouse of
Martial Men. I wonder why Madam Dacier chose to turn it Alliee a tant de braves
guerriers, since it so naturally refers to Theseus and Menelaus, the former
Husbands of Helena.

IX.
VERSE 80. Thy curling Tresses, and thy silver Lyre.] It is ingeniously
remarked by Dacier, that Homer who celebrates the Greeks for their long Hair
[(...)] and Achilles for his Skill on the Harp, makes Hector in this Place
object them both to Paris. The Greeks nourished their Hair to appear more
dreadful to the Enemy, and Paris to please the Eyes of Women. Achilles sung to
his Harp the Acts of Heroes, and Paris the Amors of Lovers. The same reason
which makes Hector here displeased at them, made Alexander afterward refuse to
see this Lyre of Paris when offered to be shown to him, as Plutarch relates the
Story in his Oration of the Fortune of Alexander.

X.
VERSE 83. One avenging Blow.] It is in the Greek, You had been clad in a Coat
of Stone. Giphanius would have it to mean stoned to death on the account of his
Adultery: But this does not appear to have been the Punishment of that Crime
among the Phrygians. It seems rather to signify, destroyed by the Fury of the
People for the War he had brought upon them; or perhaps may imply no more than
being laid in his Grave under a Monument of Stones; but the former being the
stronger Sense is here followed.

XI.
VERSE 86. It Is just, my Brother.] This Speech is a farther opening of the true
Character of Paris. He is a Master of Civility, no less well-bred to his own
Sex than courtly to the other. The Reproof of Hector was of a severe Nature,
yet he receives it as from a Brother and a Friend, with Candor and Modesty.
This Answer is remarkable for its fine Address; he gives the Hero a decent and
agreeable Reproof for having too rashly depreciated the Gifts of Nature. He
allows the Quality of Courage its utmost due, but desires the same Justice to
those softer Accomplishments, which he lets him know are no less the Favor of
Heaven. Then he removes from himself the Charge of want of Valor, by proposing
the single Combat with the very Man he had just declined to engage; which
having shown him void of any Malevolence to his Rival on the one hand, he now
proves himself free from the Imputation of Cowardice on the other. Homer draws
him (as we have seen) soft of Speech, the natural Quality of an amorous Temper;
vainly gay in War as well as Love; with a Spirit that can be surprised and
recollected, that can receive Impressions of Shame or Apprehension on the one
side, or of Generosity and Courage on the other; the usual Disposition of easy
and courteous Minds which are most subject to the Rule of Fancy and Passion.
Upon the whole, this is no worse than the Picture of a gentle Knight, and one
might fancy the Heroes of the modern Romance were formed upon the Model of
Paris.

XII.
VERSE 108. Much famed for generous Steeds, for Beauty more.] The Original is,
(...). Perhaps this Line is translated too close to the Letter, and the
Epithets might have been omitted. But there are some Traits and Particularities
of this Nature, which methinks preserve to the Reader the Air of Homer. At
least the latter of these Circumstances, that Greece was eminent for beautiful
Women, seems not improper to be mentioned by him who had raised a War on the
account of a Grecian Beauty.

XIII.
VERSE 109. The Challenge Hector heard with Joy.] Hector stays not to reply to
his Brother, but runs away with the Challenge immediately. He looks upon all
the Trojans as disgraced by the late Flight of Paris, and thinks not a Moment
is to be lost to regain the Honor of his Country. The Activity he shows in all
this Affair wonderfully agrees with the Spirit of a Soldier.

XIV.
VERSE 123. Hear all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian Bands.] It has been asked how
the different Nations could understand one another in these Conferences, since
we have no mention in Homer of any Interpreter between them? He who was so very
particular in the most minute Points, can hardly be thought to have been
negligent in this. Some Reasons may be offered that they both spoke the same
Language; for the Trojans (as may be seen in Dion. Halic. lib. 1.) were of
Grecian Extraction originally. Dardanus the first of their Kings was born in
Arcadia; and even their Names were generally Greek, as Hector, Anchises,
Andromache, Astyanax, etc. Of the last of these in particular Homer gives us a
Derivation which is purely Greek in Il. 6.. 403. But however it be, this is no
more (as Dacier somewhere observes) than the just Privilege of Poetry. Aeneas
and Turnus understand each other in Virgil, and the Language of the Poet is
supposed to be universally intelligible, not only between different Countries,
but between Earth and Heaven itself.

XV.
VERSE 135. Me too ye Warriors hear, etc.] We may observe what care Homer takes
to give every one his proper Character, and how this Speech of Menelaus is
adapted to the Laconick; which the better to comprehend, we may remember there
are in Homer three Speakers of different Characters, agreeable to the three
different kinds of Eloquence. These we may compare with each other in one
Instance, supposing them all to use the same Heads, and in the same Order.

The Materials of the Speech are, The manifesting his Grief for the War, with
the hopes that it is in his Power to end it; an Acceptance of the proposed
Challenge; an Account of the Ceremonies to be used in the League; and a
Proposal of a proper Caution to secure it.

Now had Nestor these Materials to work upon, he would probably have begun with
a Relation of all the Troubles of the nine Year's Siege which he hoped he might
now bring to an end; he would court their Benevolence and good Wishes for his
Prosperity with all the Figures of Amplification; while he accepted the
Challenge, he would have given an Example to prove that the single Combat was
a wise, gallant, and gentle way of ending the War, practiced by their Fathers;
in the Description of the Rites he would be exceeding particular; and when he
chose to demand the Sanction of Priam rather than of his Sons, he would place
in Opposition on one side the Son's Action which began the War, and on the
other the Impressions of Concern or Repentance which it must by this time have
made in the Father's Mind, whose Wisdom he would undoubtedly extol as the
effect of his Age. All this he would have expatiated upon with Connexions of
the Discourses in the most evident manner, and the most easy, gliding,
undisobliging Transitions. The Effect would be, that the People would hear him
with Pleasure.

Had it been Ulysses who was to make the Speech, he would have mentioned a few
of their most affecting Calamities in a pathetick Air; then have undertaken the
Fight with testifying such a cheerful Joy, as should have won the Hearts of the
Soldiers to follow him to the Field without being desired. He would have been
exceeding cautious in wording the Conditions; and solemn rather than particular
in speaking of the Rites, which he would only insist on as an Opportunity to
exhort both sides to a fear of the Gods, and a strict regard of Justice. He
would have remonstrated the use of sending for Priam; and (because no Caution
could be too much) have demanded his Sons to be bound with him. For a
Conclusion he would have used some noble Sentiment agreeable to a Hero, and
(it may be) have enforced it with some inspirited Action. In all this you would
have known that the Discourse hung together, but its Fire would not always
suffer it to be seen in cooler Transitions, which (when they are too nicely
laid open) may conduct the Reader, but never carry him away. The People would
hear him with Emotion.

These Materials being given to Menelaus, he but just mentions their Troubles,
and his Satisfaction in the Prospect of ending them, shortens the Proposals,
says a Sacrifice is necessary, requires Priam's Presence to confirm the
Conditions, refuses his Sons with a Resentment of that Injury he suffered by
them, and concludes with a Reason for his Choice from the Praise of Age, with a
short Gravity, and the Air of an Apothegm. This he puts in order without any
more Transition than what a single Conjunction affords. And the effect of the
Discourse is, that the People are instructed by it in what is to be done.

XVI.
VERSE 141. Two Lambs devoted.] The Trojans (says the old Scholiast) were
required to sacrifice two Lambs; one Male, of a white Color, to the Sun, and
one Female, and black, to the Earth; as the Sun is Father of Light, and the
Earth the Mother and Nurse of Men. The Greeks were to offer a third to Jupiter,
perhaps to Jupiter Xenius because the Trojans had broken the Laws of
Hospitality: on which account we find Menelaus afterward invoking him in the
Combat with Paris. That these were the Powers to which they sacrificed,
appears by their being attested by Name in the Oath,. 340.

XVII.
VERSE 153. The Nations hear, with rising Hopes possessed.] It seemed no more
than what the Reader would reasonably expect, in the Narration of this long
War, that a Period might have been put to it by the single danger of the
Parties chiefly concerned, Paris and Menelaus. Homer has therefore taken care
toward the beginning of his Poem to obviate that Objection; and contrived such
a Method to render this Combat of no effect, as should naturally make way for
all the ensuing Battles, without any future Prospect of a Determination but by
the Sword. It is farther worth observing, in what manner he has improved into
Poetry the common History of this Action, if (as one may imagine) it was the
same with that we have in the second Book of Dictys Cretensis. When Paris (says
he) being wounded by the Spear of Menelaus fell to the Ground, just as his
Adversary was rushing upon him with his Sword, he was shot by an Arrow from
Pandarus, which prevented his Revenge in the Moment he was going to take it.
Immediately on the sight of this perfidious Action, the Greeks rose in a
Tumult; the Trojans rising at the same time, came on, and rescued Paris from
his Enemy. Homer has with great Art and Invention mingled all this with the
Mavelous, and raised it in the Air of Fable. The Goddess of Love rescues her
Favorite; Jupiter debates whether or no the War shall end by the Defeat of
Paris; Juno is for the Continuance of it; Minerva incites Pandarus to break the
Truce, who thereupon shoots at Menelaus. This heightens the Grandeur of the
Action without destroying the Verisimilitude, diversifies the Poem, and
exhibits a fine Moral; that whatever seems in the World the Effect of common
Causes, is really owing to the Decree and Disposition of the Gods.

XVIII.
VERSE 165. Mean while to beauteous Helen, etc.] The following Part where we
have the first sight of Helena, is what I cannot think inferior to any in the
Poem. The Reader has naturally an Aversion to this pernicious Beauty, and is
apt enough to wonder at the Greeks for endeavoring to recover her at such an
Expense. But her amiable Behavior here, the secret Wishes that rise in favor
of her rightful Lord, her Tenderness for her Parents and Relations, the
Relentings of her Soul for the Mischiefs her Beauty had been the Cause of, the
Confusion she appears in, the veiling her Face and dropping a Tear, are
Particulars so beautifully natural, as to make every Reader no less than
Menelaus himself, inclined to forgive her at least, if not to love her. We are
afterward confirmed in this Partiality by the Sentiment of the old Counselors
upon the sight of her, which one would think Homer put into their Mouths with
that very view: We excuse her no more than Priam does himself, and all those do
who felt the Calamities she occasioned: And this Regard for her is heightened
by all she says herself; in which there is scarce a word that is not big with
Repentance and Goodnature.

XIX.
VERSE 170. The golden Web her own sad Story crowned.] This is a very agreeable
Fiction, to represent Helena weaving in a large Veil, or Piece of Tapestry, the
Story of the Trojan War. One would think that Homer inherited this Veil, and
that his Iliad is only an Explication of that admirable Piece of Art. Dacier.

XX.
VERSE 201. Like Grasshoppers.] This is one of the justest and most natural
Images in the World, though there have been Critics of so little Taste as to
object to it as a mean one. The Garrulity so common to old Men, their Delight
in Associating with each other, the feeble Sound of their Voices, the Pleasure
they take in a Sun-shiny Day, the Effects of Decay in their Chillness,
Leanness, and Scarcity of Blood, are all Circumstances exactly paralleled in
this Comparison. To make it yet more proper to the old Men of Troy, Faistathius
has observed that Homer found a Hint for this Simile in the Trojan Story, where
Tithou was feigned to have been transformed into a Grasshopper in his old Age,
perhaps on account of his being so exhausted by Years as to have nothing left
him but Voice. Spondanus wonders that Homer should apply to Grasshoppers (...),
a sweet Voice, whereas that of these Animals is harsh and untuneful; and he is
contented to come off with a very poor Evasion of Homero fingere quidlibet fas
fuit. But Hesychius rightly observes that (...) signifies (...), tener or
gracilis, as well as suavis. The Sense is certainly much better, and the Simile
more truly preserved by this Interpretation, which is here followed in
translating it feeble. However it may be alleged in Defense of the common
Versions, and of Madam Dacier's (who has turned it Harmonieuse) that though
Virgil gives the Epithet raucae to Cicadae, yet the Greek Poets frequently
describe the Grasshopper as a musical Creature, particularly Anacreon, and
Theocritus Idyl. 1. where a Shepherd praises another's singing by telling him,
(...)
It is remarkable that Mr. Hobbes has omitted this beautiful Simile.

XXI.
VERSE 203. These, when the Spartan Fair approached.] Madam Dacier is of
Opinion there was never a greater Panegyric upon Beauty than what Homer has
found the Art to give it in this Place. An Assembly of venerable old
Counselors, who had suffered all the Calamities of a tedious War, and were
consulting upon the Methods to put a Conclusion to it, seeing the only Cause of
it approaching toward them, are struck with her Charms, and cry out, No
wonder! etc. Nevertheless they afterward recollect themselves, and conclude to
part with her for the public Safety. If Homer had carried these old Men's
Admiration any farther, he had been guilty of outraging Nature, and offending
against Probability. The Old are capable of being touched with Beauty by the
Eye; but Age secures them from the Tyranny of Passion, and the Effect is but
transitory, for Prudence soon regains its Dominion over them. Homer always goes
as far as he should, but constantly stops just where he ought. Dacier.

The same Writer compares to this the Speech of Holosernes's Soldiers on the
sight of Judith, Chapter 10.. 18. But though there be a Resemblance in the Words, the
Beauty is no way parallel; the Grace of this consisting in the Age and
Character of those who speak it. There is something very gallant upon the
Beauty of Helen in one of Lucian's Dialogues. Mercury shows Menippus the Sculls
of several fine Women; and when the Philosopher is moralizing upon that of
Helen, Was it for this a thousand Ships sailed from Greece, so many brave Men
died, and so many Cities were destroyed? My Friend (says Mercury) it is true;
but what you behold is only her Scull, bad you seen her Face you would have
been of their Opinion, and have done the very same thing.

XXII.
VERSE 211. The good old Priam.] The Character of a benevolent old Man is very
well preserved in Priam's Behavior to Helena. Upon the Confusion he observes
her in, he encourages her by attributing the Misfortunes of the War to the Gods
alone, and not to her Fault. This Sentiment is also very agreeable to the
natural Piety of old Age; those who have had the longest Experience of human
Accidents and Events, being most inclined to ascribe the Disposal of all things
to the Will of Heaven. It is this Piety that renders Priam a Favorite of
Jupiter (as we find in the beginning of the fourth Book) which for some time
delays the Destruction of Troy; while his soft Nature and Indulgence for his
Children makes him continue a War which ruins him. These are the two principal
Points of Priam's Character, though there are several lesser Particularities,
among which we may observe the Curiosity and inquisitive Humor of old Age,
which gives occasion to the following Episode.

XXIII.
VERSE 219. And say, what Chief is he?] This View of the Grecian Leaders from
the Walls of Troy, is justly looked upon as an Episode of great Beauty, as well
as a Masterpiece of Conduct in Homer; who by this means acquaints the Readers
with the Figure and Qualifications of each Hero in a more lively and agreeable
manner. Several great Poets have been engaged by the Beauty of this Passage to
an Imitation of it. In the seventh Book of Statius, Phorbas standing with
Antigone on the Tower of Thebes, shows her the Forces as they were drawn up,
and describes their Commanders who were neighboring Princes of Boeotia. It is
also imitated by Tasso in his third Book, where Erminia from the Walls of
Jerusalem points out the chief Warriors to the King; though the latter part is
perhaps copied too closely and minutely; for he describes Godfrey to be of a
Port that bespeaks him a Prince, the next of somewhat a lower Stature, a third
renowned for his Wisdom, and then another is distinguished by the Largeness of
his Chest tnd Breadth of his Shoulders: Which are not only the very
Particulars, but in the very Order of Homer's.

But however this manner of Introduction has been admired, there have not been
wanting some Exceptions to a Particular or two. Scaliger asks, how it happens
that Priam, after nine Years Siege, should be yet unacquainted with the Faces
of the Grecian Leaders? This was an old Cavil, as appears by the Scholia that
pass under the Name of Didymus, where it is very well answered, that Homer has
just before taken care to tell us the Heroes had put off their Armor on this
occasion of the Truce, which had concealed their Persons 'till now. Others have
objected to Priam's not knowing Ulysses, who (as it appears afterward) had
been at Troy on an Embassy. The answer is, that this might happen either from
the Dimness of Priam's Sight, or Defect of his Memory, or from the Change of
Ulysses's Features since that time.

XXIV.
VERSE 227. Before thy Presence.] Helen is so overwhelmed with Grief and Shame,
that she is unable to give a direct Answer to Priam without first humbling
herself before him, acknowledging her Crime, and testifying her Repentance. And
she no sooner answers by naming Agamemnon, but her Sorrows renew at the Name;
He was once my Brother! but I am now a Wretch unworthy to call him so.

XXV.
VERSE 236. Great in the War, and great in Arts of Sway.] This was the Verse
which Alexander the Great preferred to all others in Homer, and which he
proposed as the Pattern of his own Actions, as including whatever can be
desired in a Prince. Plut. Orat. de fort. Alex. 1.

XXVI.
VERSE 240. Extolled the happy Prince.] It was very natural for Priam on this
occasion, to compare the declining Condition of his Kingdom with the
flourishing State of Agamemnon's, and to oppose his own Misery (who had lost
most of his Sons and his bravest Warriors) to the Felicity of the other, in
being yet Master of so gallant an Army. After this the Humor of old Age breaks
out, in the Narration of what Armies he had formerly seen, and bore a Part in
the Command of; as well as what Feats of Valor he had then performed. Besides
which this Praise of the Greeks from the Mouth of an Enemy, was no small
Encomium of Homer's Countrymen.

XXVII.
VERSE 258. From Rank to Rank he moves.] The Vigilance and Inspection of
Ulysses were very proper Marks to distinguish him, and agree with his Character
of a wise Man no less, than the Grandeur and Majesty before described with that
of Agamemnon, as the supreme Ruler; whereas we find Ajax afterward taken
notice of only for his Bulk, as a heavy Hero without Parts or Authority. This
Decorum is observable.

XXVIII.
VERSE 271. I knew their Persons, etc.] In this View of the Leaders of the Army
it had been an Oversight in Homer to have taken no Notice of Menelaus, who was
not only one of the Principal of them, but was immediately to engage the
Observation of the Reader in the single Combat. On the other hand it had been
a high Indecorum to have made Helena speak of him. He has therefore put his
Praises into the Mouth of Antenor; which was also a more artful way than to
have presented him to the Eye of Priam in the same manner with the rest: It
appears from hence what a Regard he has had both to Decency and Variety in the
Conduct of his Poem. This Passage concerning the different Eloquence of
Menelaus and Ulysses is inexpressibly just and beautiful. The close, Laconick
Conciseness of the one, is finely opposite to the copious, vehement, and
penetrating Oratory of the other; which is so exquisitely described in the
Simile of the Snow, falling fast, and sinking deep. For it is in this the
Beauty of the Comparison consists according to Quintilian, l. 12. c. 10. In
Ulysse facundiam and magnitudinem junxit, cui orationem nivibus hybernis copia
verborum atque impetu parem tribuit. We may set in the same Light with these
the Character of Nestor's Eloquence, which consisted in Softness and
Persuasiveness, and is therefore (in Contradistinction to this of Ulysses)
compared to Honey which drops gently and slowly: a manner of Speech extremely
natural to a benevolent old Man, such as Nestor is represented. Ausonius has
elegantly distinguished these three kinds of Oratory in the following Verses.
Dulcem in paucis ut Plisthenidem,
Et torrentem ceu Dulichii
Ningida dicta.

Et mellitae nectare vocis
Dulcia fatu verba canentem
Nestora regem.



XXIX.
VERSE 278. He spoke no more than just the thing he ought.] Chapman in his
Notes on this Place and on the second Book, has described Menelaus as a
Character of Ridicule and Simplicity. He takes advantage from the word (...)
here made use of, to interpret that of the Shrillness of his Voice, which was
applied to the Acuteness of his Sense; He observes that this sort of Voice is a
Mark of a Fool; that Menelaus's coming to his Brother's Feast uninvited in the
second Book has occasioned a Proverb of Folly; that the Excuse Homer himself
makes for it (because his Brother might forget to invite him through much
Business) is purely ironical; that the Epithet (...) which is often applied to
him, should not be translated warlike, but one who had an Affectation of loving
War. In short, that he was a weak Prince, played upon by others, short in
Speech, and of a bad Pronunciation, valiant only by fits, and sometimes
stumbling upon good Matter in his Speeches, as may happen to the most slender
Capacity. This is one of the Mysteries which that Translator boasts to have
found in Homer. But as it is no way consistent with the Art of the Poet, to
draw the Person in whose behalf he engages the World, in such a manner as no
Regard should be conceived for him; we must endeavor to rescue him from this
Misrepresentation. First then, the present Passage is taken by Antiquity in
general to be applied not to his Pronunciation, but his Eloquence. So Ausonius
in the foregoing Citation, and Cicero de claris Oratoribus: Menelaum ipsum
dulcem illum quidem tradit Homerus, sed pauca loquentem. And Quintilian l. 12.
c. 10. Homerus brevem cum animi jucunditate, and propriam ( id enim est non
errare verbis) and carentem supervacuis, Eloquentiam Menelao dedit, etc.
Secondly, though his coming uninvited may have occasioned a jesting Proverb, it
may naturally be accounted for on the Principle of brotherly Love, which so
visibly characterises both him and Agamemnon throughout the Poem. Thirdly,
(...) may import a Love of War, but not an ungrounded Affectation. Upon the
whole, his Character is by no means contemptible, though not of the most shining
Nature. He is called indeed in the 17 th Iliad (...), a soft Warrior, or one
whose Strength is of the second rate, and so his Brother thought him when he
preferred nine before him to fight with Hector in the 7 th Book. But on the
other hand, his Courage gives him a considerable Figure in conquering Paris,
defending the Body of Patroclus, rescuing Ulysses, wounding Helenus, killing
Euphorbus, etc. He is full of Resentment for his private Injuries, which brings
him to the War with a Spirit of Revenge in the second Book, makes him blaspheme
Jupiter in the third, when Paris escapes him, and curse the Grecians in the
seventh when they hesitate to accept Hector's Challenge. But this also is
qualified with a Compassion for those who suffer in his Cause, which he every
where manifests upon proper Occasions; and with an Industry to gratify others,
as when he obeys Ajax in the seventeenth Book, and goes upon his Errand to find
Antilochus, with some other Condescensions of the like nature. Thus his
Character is composed of Qualities which give him no uneasy Superiority over
others while he wants their Assistance, and mingled with such as make him
amiable enough to obtain it.

XXX.
VERSE 280. His modest Eyes, etc.] This Behavior of Ulysses is copied by Ovid,
Met. 13. Astitit, atque oculos parum tellure moratos
Sustulit --.
What follows in the Greek translated word for word runs thus: He seemed like a
Fool, you would have thought him in a Rage, or a Madman. How oddly this would
appear in our Language I appeal to those who have read Ogilby. The whole Period
means no more than to describe that Behavior which is commonly remarkable in a
modest and sensible Man who speaks in public: His Diffidence and Respect gives
him at his first rising a sort of Confusion, which is not indecent, and which
serves but the more to heighten the Surprise and Esteem of those who hear him.

XXXI.
VERSE 309. Perhaps their Swords.] This is another Stroke of Helen's Concern:
The Sense of her Crime is perpetually afflicting her, and awakes upon every
occasion. The Lines that follow wherein Homer gives us to understand that
Castor and Pollux were now dead, are finely introduced and in the Spirit of
Poetry; the Muse is supposed to know every thing, past and to come, and to see
things distant as well as present.

XXXII.
VERSE 315. Mean time the Heralds, etc.] It may not be unpleasing to the Reader
to compare the Description of the Ceremonies of the League in the following
Part, with that of Virgil in the twelfth Book. The Preparations, the Procession
of the Kings, and their Congress, are much more solemn and poetical in the
latter; the Oath and Adjurations are equally noble in both.

XXXIII.
VERSE 342. The curling Hair.] We have here the whole Ceremonial of the solemn
Oath, as it was observed anciently by the Nations our Author describes. I must
take this Occasion of remarking that we might spare our selves the trouble of
reading most Books of Grecian Antiquities, only by being well versed in Homer.
They are generally bare Transcriptions of him, but with this unnecessary
Addition, that after having quoted any thing in Verse, they say the same over
again in Prose. The Antiquitates Homericae of Feithius may serve as an Instance
of this. What my Lord Bacon observes of Authors in general, is particularly
applicable to these of Antiquities, that they write for Ostentation not for
Instruction, and that their Works are perpetual Repetitions.

XXXIV.
VERSE 361. And Age to Age record the signal Day.] (...). This seems the
natural Sense of the Line, and not as Madam Dacier renders it, the Tribute
shall be paid to the Posterity of the Greeks for ever. I think she is single in
that Explication, the Majority of the Interpreters taking it to signify that
the Victory of the Grecians and this Pecuniary Acknowledgment should be
recorded to all Posterity. If it means any more than this, at least it cannot
come up to the Sense Madam Dacier gives it; for a Nation put under perpetual
Tribute is rather enslaved, than received to Friendship and Alliance, which are
the Terms of Agamemnon's Speech. It seems rather to be a Fine demanded as a
Recompense for the Expenses of the War, which being made over to the Greeks
should remain to their Posterity for ever, that is to say, which they should
never be molested for, or which should never be redemanded in any Age as a Case
of Injury. The Phrase is the same we use at this Day, when any Purchase or
Grant is at once made over to a Man and his Heirs for ever. With this will
agree the Scholiast's Note, which tells us the Mulct was reported to have been
half the Goods then in the besieged City.

XXXV.
VERSE 364. The Chief the tender Victims slew.] One of the grand Objections
which the Ignorance of some Moderns has raised against Homer, is what they call
a Defect in the Manners of his Heroes. They are shocked to find his Kings
employed in such Offices as slaughtering of Beasts, etc. But they forget that
sacrificing was the most solemn Act of Religion, and that Kings of old in most
Nations were also Chief-Priests. This, among other Objections of the same kind,
the Reader may see answered in the Preface.

XXXVI.
VERSE 433. Give me, great Jove.] Homer puts a Prayer in the Mouth of Menelaus,
but none in Paris's: Menelaus is the Person injured and innocent, and may
therefore apply to God for Justice; but Paris who is the Criminal, remains
silent. Spondanus.

XXXVII.
VERSE 447. The brittle Steel, unfaithful to his Hand, Broke short -- This
Verse is cut to express the Thing it describes, the snapping short of the
Sword. It Is the Observation of Eustathius on this Line of the Original, that we
do not only see the Action, but imagine we hear the Sound of the breaking Sword
in that of the Words. (...). And that Homer designed it, may appear from his
having twice put in the (...) (which was a Letter unnecessary) to cause this
Harshness in the Verse. As this Beauty could not be preserved in our Language,
it is endeavored in the Translation to supply it with something parallel.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 479. The Goddess softly shook, etc.] Venus having conveyed Paris in
Safety to his Chamber, goes to Helena who had been Spectator of his Defeat, in
order to draw her to his Love. The better to bring this about, she first takes
upon her the most proper Form in the World, that of a favorite Servant-Maid,
and awakens her Passion by representing to her the beautiful Figure of his
Person. Next assuming her own Shape she frightens her into a Compliance,
notwithstanding all the Struggles of Shame, Fear, and Anger, which break out in
her Speech to the Goddess. This Machine is Allegorical, and means no more than
the Power of Love triumphing over all the Considerations of Honor, Ease, and
Safety. It has an excellent Effect as to the Poem, in preserving still in some
degree our good Opinion of Helena, whom we look upon with Compassion as
constrained by a superior Power, and whose Speech tends to justify her in the
Eye of the Reader.

XXXIX.
VERSE 487. She spoke, and Helen 's secret Soul was moved.] Nothing is more
fine than this; the first Thought of Paris's Beauty overcomes (unawares to
herself) the Contempt she had that Moment conceived of him upon his Overthrow.
This Motion is but natural, and before she perceives the Deity. When the
Affections of a Woman have been thoroughly gained, though they may be alienated
for a while, they soon return upon her. Homer knew (says Madam Dacier) what a
Woman is capable of, who had once loved.

XL.
VERSE 507. For me, to lawless Love no longer led, I scorn the Coward.] We have
here another Branch of the Female Character, which is, to be ruled in their
Attaches by Success; Helen finding the Victory belonged to Menelaus, accuses
herself secretly of having forsaken him for the other, and immediately
entertains a high Opinion of the Man she had once despised. One may add that
the Fair Sex are generally Admirers of Courage, and naturally Friends to great
Soldiers. Paris was no Stranger to this Disposition in them, and had formerly
endeavored to give her that Opinion of himself; as appears from her Reproach
to him afterward.

XLI.
VERSE 515. Should Venus leave thee, every Charm must fly.] This was the most
dreadful of all Threats, Loss of Beauty and of Reputation. Helen who had been
Proof to the personal Appearance of the Goddess, and durst even reproach her
with Bitterness just before, yields to this, and obeys all the Dictates of Love.

XLII.
VERSE 531. She turned away Her glowing Eyes.] This Interview of the two
Lovers, placed opposite to each other and overlooked by Venus, Paris gazing on
Helena, she turning away her Eyes shining at once with Anger and Love, are
Particulars finely drawn, and painted up to all the Life of Nature. Eustathius
imagines she looked aside in the Consciousness of her own Weakness, as
apprehending that the Beauty of Paris might cause her to relent. Her bursting
out into Passion and Reproaches while she is in this State of Mind, is no ill
Picture of Frailty: Venus (as Madam Dacier observes) does not leave her, and
Fondness will immediately succeed to these Reproaches.

XLIII.
VERSE 543. Ah cease, divinely fair.] This Answer of Paris is the only one he
could possibly have made with any Success in his Circumstance. There was no
other Method to reconcile her to him but that which is generally most powerful
with the Sex, and which Homer (who was Learned every way) here makes use of.

XLIV.
VERSE 553. When first entranced in Cranae 's Isle.] It is in the Original
(...). The true Sense of which is expressed in the Translation. I cannot but
take notice of a small Piece of Pruderie in Madam Dacier, who is exceeding
careful of Helen's Character. She turns this Passage as if Paris had only her
Consent to be her Husband in this Island. Pausanias explains this Line in
another manner, and tells us it was here that Paris had first the Enjoyment of
her, that in Gratitude for his Happiness he built a Temple of Venus Migonitis,
the Mingler or Coupler, and that the neighboring Coast where it was erected
was called Migonian from (...), a miscendo. Paus. Laconicis.

XLV.
VERSE 551. Not thus I loved thee.] However Homer may be admired for his
Conduct in this Passage, I find a general Outcry against Paris on this
Occasion. Plutarch has led the way in his Treatise of reading Poets, by
remarking it as a most heinous Act of Incontinence in him to go to Bed to his
Lady in the Daytime. Among the Commentators the most violent is the moral
Expositor Spondanus, who will not so much as allow him to say a civil thing to
Helen. Mollis, effoeminatus, and spurcus ille adulter, nihil de libidine sua
imminutum dicit, sed nunc magis ea corripi quam unquam alias, ne quidem cum
primum ea ipsi dedit ( Latini ita recte exprimunt (...) in re venerea) in
Insula Cranae. Cum alioqui homines primi concubitus soleant esse ardentiores. I
could not deny the Reader the Diversion of this Remark, nor Spondauus the Glory
of his Zeal, who was but two and twenty when it was written. Madam Dacier is
also very severe upon Paris, but for a Reason more natural to a Lady. She is of
Opinion that the Passion of the Lover would scarce have been so excessive as he
here describes it, but for fear of losing his Mistress immediately, as
foreseeing the Greeks would demand her. One may answer to this lively Remark,
that Paris having nothing to say for himself, was obliged to testify an
uncommon Ardour for his Lady, at a time when Compliments were to pass instead
of Reasons. I hope to be excused if (in Revenge for her Remark upon our Sex) I
observe upon the Behavior of Helen throughout this Book, which gives a pretty
natural Picture of the Manners of theirs. We see her first in Tears, repentant,
covered with Confusion at the sight of Priam, and secretly inclined to return
to her former Spouse. The Disgrace of Paris increases her Dislike of him; she
rails, she reproaches, she wishes his Death; and after all, is prevailed upon
by one kind Compliment, and yields to his Embraces. Methinks when this Lady's
Observation and mine are laid together, the best that can be made of them is to
conclude, that since both the Sexes have their Frailties, it would be well for
each to forgive the other.

It is worth looking backward, to observe the Allegory here carried on with
respect to Helena, who lives through this whole Book in a Whirl of Passions, and
is agitated by turns with Sentiments of Honor and Love. The Goddesses made use
of to cast the Appearance of Fable over the Story, are Iris and Venus. When
Helen is called to the Tower to behold her former Friends, Iris the Messenger
of Juno (the Goddess of Honor) is sent for her; and when invited to the
Bedchamber of Paris, Venus is to beckon her out of the Company. The Forms they
take to carry on these different Affairs, are properly chosen: the one assuming
the Person of the Daughter of Antenor, who pressed most for her being restored
to Menelaus; the other the Shape of an old Maid, who was privy to the Intrigue
with Paris from the beginning. And in the Consequences, as the one inspires the
Love of her former Empire, Friends and Country; so the other instills the Dread
of being cast off by all if she forsook her second Choice, and causes the
Return of her Tenderness to Paris. But if she has a Struggle for Honor, she is
in a Bondage to Love; which gives the Story its Turn that way, and makes Venus
oftener appear than Iris. There is in one Place a Lover to be protected, in
another a Love-Quarrel to be made up, in both which the Goddess is kindly
officious. She conveys Paris to Troy when he had escaped the Enemy; which may
hint his Love for his Mistress, that hurried him away to justify himself before
her. She softens and terrifies Helen, in order to make up the Breach between
them: And even when that Affair is finished, we do not find the Poet dismisses
her from the Chamber, whatever Privacies the Lovers had a mind to: In which
Circumstance he seems to draw aside the Veil of his Allegory, and to let the
Reader at last into this Meaning of it, that the Goddess of Love has been all
the while nothing more than the Passion of it.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
The ARGUMENT.
The Breach of the Truce, and the first Battle.
THE Gods deliberate in Council concerning the Trojan War: They agree upon the
Continuation of it, and Jupiter sends down Minerva to break the Truce. She
persuades Pandarus to aim an Arrow at Menelaus, who is wounded, but cured by
Machaon. In the mean time some of the Trojan Troops attack the Greeks.
Agamemnon is distinguished in all the Parts of a good General; he reviews the
Troops and exhorts the Leaders, some by Praises and others by Reproofs. Nestor
is particularly celebrated for his military Discipline. The Battle joins, and
great Numbers are slain on both sides.

The same Day continues through this, as through the last Book (as it does also
through the two following, and almost to the end of the seventh Book.) The Scene
is wholly in the Field before Troy.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE ILIAD.
AND now Olympus' shining Gates unfold;
The Gods, with Jove, assume their Thrones of Gold:
Immortal Hebe, fresh with Bloom Divine,
The golden Goblets crowns with Purple Wine:
While the full Bowls flow round, the Powers employ
Their careful Eyes on long-contended Troy.
When Jove, disposed to tempt Saturnia's Spleen,
Thus waked the Fury of his partial Queen.
Two Powers Divine the Son of Atreus aid,
Imperial Juno, and the Martial Maid;
But high in Heaven they sit, and gaze from far,
The tame Spectators of his Deeds of War.
Not thus fair Venus helps her favored Knight,
The Queen of Pleasures shares the Toils of Fight,
Each Danger wards, and constant in her Care
Saves in the Moment of the last Despair.
Her Act has rescued Paris' forfeit Life,
Though great Atrides gained the glorious Strife.
Then say ye Powers! what signal Issue waits
To crown this Deed, and finish all the Fates?
Shall Heaven by Peace the bleeding Kingdoms spare,
Or rowze the Furies and awake the War?
Yet, would the Gods for human Good provide,
Atrides soon might gain his beauteous Bride,
Still Priam's Walls in peaceful Honors grow,
And through his Gates the crowding Nations flow.
Thus while he spoke, the Queen of Heaven enraged
And Queen of War, in close Consult engaged.
Apart they sit, their deep Designs employ,
And meditate the future Woes of Troy.
Though secret Anger swelled Minerva's Breast,
The prudent Goddess yet her Wrath suppressed;
But Juno, impotent of Passion, broke
Her sullen Silence, and with Fury spoke.
Shall then, O Tyrant of the Ethereal Reign!
My Schemes, my Labors, and my Hopes be vain?
Have I, for this, shook Ilion with Alarms,
Assembled Nations, set two Worlds in Arms?
To spread the War, I flew from Shore to Shore;
The Immortal Coursers scarce the Labor bore.
At length, ripe Vengeance over their Heads impends,
But Jove himself the faithless Race defends:
Loath as thou art to punish lawless Lust,
Not all the Gods are partial and unjust.
The Sire whose Thunder shakes the cloudy Skies,
Sighs from his inmost Soul, and thus replies;
Oh lasting Rancour! oh insatiate Hate
To Phrygia's Monarch, and the Phrygian State!
What high Offense has fired the Wife of Jove,
Can wretched Mortals harm the Powers above,
That Troy, and Troy's whole Race thou would confound,
And yon' fair Structures level with the Ground?
Haste, leave the Skies, fulfill thy stern Desire,
Burst all her Gates, and wrap her Walls in Fire!
Let Priam bleed! If yet thou thirst for more,
Bleed all his Sons, and Ilion float with Gore,
To boundless Vengeance the wide Realm be given,
'Till vast Destruction glut the Queen of Heaven!
So let it be, and Jove his Peace enjoy,
When Heaven no longer hears the Name of Troy.
But should this Arm prepare to wreak our Hate
On thy loved Realms whose Guilt demands their Fate,
Presume not thou the lifted Bolt to stay,
Remember Troy, and give the Vengeance way.
For know, of all the numerous Towns that rise
Beneath the rolling Sun, and starry Skies,
Which Gods have raised, or Earth-born Men enjoy;
None stands so dear to Jove as sacred Troy.
No Mortals merit more distinguished Grace
Than Godlike Priam, or than Priam's Race.
Still to our Name their Hecatombs expire,
And Altars blaze with unextinguish'd Fire.
At this the Goddess rolled her radiant Eyes,
Then on the Thund'rer fixed them, and replies.
Three Towns are Juno's on the Grecian Plains,
More dear than all the extended Earth contains,
Mycenae, Argos, and the Spartan Wall;
These thou may raze, nor I forbid their Fall:
It Is not in me the Vengeance to remove;
The Crime's sufficient that they share my Love.
Of Power superior why should I complain?
Resent I may, but must resent in vain.
Yet some Distinction Juno might require,
Sprung, with thy self, from one Celestial Sire,
A Goddess born to share the Realms above,
And styled the Consort of the thundering Jove.
Nor thou a Wife and Sister's Right deny;
Let both consent, and both by turns comply:
So shall the Gods our joint Decrees obey,
And Heaven shall act as we direct the way.
See ready Pallas waits thy high Commands,
To raise in Arms the Greek and Phrygian Bands;
Their sudden Friendship by her Arts may cease,
And the proud Trojans first infringe the Peace.
The Sire of Men and Monarch of the Sky
The Advice approved, and bade Minerva fly,
Dissolve the League, and all her Arts employ
To make the Breach the faithless Act of Troy.
Fired with the Charge, she headlong urged her Flight,
And shot like Lightning from Olympus' Height.
As the red Comet from Saturnius sent
To fright the Nations with a dire Portent,
(A fatal Sign to Armies on the Plain,
Or trembling Sailors on the wintry Main)
With sweeping Glories glides along in Air,
And shakes the Sparkles from its blazing Hair:
Between both Armies thus, in open Sight,
Shot the bright Goddess in a Trial of Light.
With Eyes erect the gazing Hosts admire
The Power descending, and the Heavens on Fire!
The Gods (they cried) the Gods this Signal sent,
And Fate now labors with some vast Event:
Jove seals the League, or bloodier Scenes prepares;
Jove, the great Arbiter of Peace and Wars!
They said, while Pallas through the Trojan Throng
(In Shape a Mortal) passed disguised along.
Like bold Laodocus, her Course she bent,
Who from Antenor traced his high Descent.
Amidst the Ranks Lycaon's Son she found,
The warlike Pandarus, for Strength renowned;
Whose Squadrons, led from black Aesepus' Flood,
With flaming Shields in martial Circle stood.
To him the Goddess: Phrygian! can thou hear
A well-tim'd Counsel with a willing Ear?
What Praise were thine, cou'd'st thou direct thy Dart
Amidst his Triumph to the Spartan's Heart?
What Gifts from Troy, from Paris wou'd'st thou gain,
Thy Country's Foe, the Grecian Glory slain?
Then seize the Occasion, dare the mighty Deed,
Aim at his Breast, and may that Aim succeed!
But first, to speed the Shaft, address thy Vow
To Lycian Phoebus with the Silver Bow,
And swear the Firstlings of thy Flock to pay
On Zelia's Altars, to the God of Day.
He heard, and madly at the Motion pleased,
His polished Bow with hasty Rashness seized.
'Twas formed of Horn, and smoothed with artful Toil;
A Mountain Goat resigned the shining Spoil,
Who pierced long since beneath his Arrows bled;
The stately Quarry on the Cliffs lay dead,
And sixteen Palms his Brows large Honors spread:
The Workman joined, and shaped the bended Horns,
And beaten Gold each taper Point adorns.
This, by the Greeks unseen, the Warrior bends,
Screen'd by the Shields of his surrounding Friends.
There meditates the Mark; and couching low,
Fits the sharp Arrow to the well-strung Bow.
One from a hundred feathered Deaths he chose,
Fated to wound, and Cause of future Woes.
Then offers Vows with Hecatombs to crown
Apollo's Altars in his Native Town.
Now with full Force the yielding Horn he bends,
Drawn to an Arch, and joins the doubling Ends;
Close to his Breast he strains the Nerve below,
'Till the barb'd Point approach the circling Bow;
The impatient Weapon whizzes on the Wing,
Sounds the tough Horn, and twangs the quivering String.
But Thee, Atrides! in that dangerous Hour
The Gods forget not, nor thy Guardian Power.
Pallas assists, and (weakened in its Force)
Diverts the Weapon from the destined Course.
So from her Babe, when Slumber seals his Eye,
The watchful Mother wafts the envenomed Fly.
Just where his Belt with golden Buckles joined,
Where Linen Folds the double Corslet lined,
She turned the Shaft, which hissing from above,
Passed the broad Belt, and through the Corslet drove;
The Folds it pierced, the plaited Linen tore,
And razed the Skin and drew the Purple Gore.
As when some stately Trappings are decreed,
To grace a Monarch on his bounding Steed,
A Nymph in Caria or Meonia bred,
Stains the pure Ivory with a lively Red;
With equal Luster various Colors vie,
The shining Whiteness and the Tyrian Dye.
So, great Atrides! showed thy sacred Blood,
As down thy snowie Thigh distilled the streaming Flood.
With Horror seized, the King of Men descried
The Shaft infix'd, and saw the gushing Tide:
Nor less the Spartan feared, before he found
The shining Barb appear above the Wound.
Then, with a Sigh that heaved his manly Breast,
The Royal Brother thus his Grief expressed,
And grasped his Hand; while all the Greeks around
With answering Sighs returned the plaintive Sound.
Oh dear as Life! did I for this agree
The solemn Truce, a fatal Truce to thee!
Were thou exposed to all the hostile Train,
To fight for Greece, and conquer to be slain?
The Race of Trojans in thy Ruin join,
And Faith is scorned by all the perjured Line.
Not thus our Vows, confirmed with Wine and Gore,
Those Hands we plighted, and those Oaths we swore,
Shall all be vain: When Heaven's Revenge is slow,
Jove but prepares to strike the fiercer Blow.
The Day shall come, that great avenging Day,
Which Troy's proud Glories in the Dust shall lay,
When Priam's Powers and Priam's self shall fall,
And one prodigious Ruin swallow All.
I see the God, already, from the Pole
Bare his red Arm, and bid the Thunder roll;
I see the Eternal all his Fury shed,
And shake his Aegis over their guilty Head.
Such mighty Woes on perjured Princes wait;
But thou, alas! deserve a happier Fate.
Still must I mourn the Period of thy Days,
And only mourn, without my Share of Praise?
Deprived of thee, the heartless Greeks no more
Shall dream of Conquests on the hostile Shore;
Troy seized of Helen, and our Glory lost,
Thy Bones shall moulder on a foreign Coast:
While some proud Trojan thus insulting cries,
(And spurns the Dust where Menelaus lies)
" Such are the Trophies Greece from Ilion brings,
" And such the Conquests of her King of Kings!
" Lo his proud Vessels scattered over the Main,
" And unrevenged, his mighty Brother slain.
Oh! e're that dire Disgrace shall blast my Fame,
Overwhelm me, Earth! and hide a Monarch's Shame.
He said: A Leader's and a Brother's Fears
Possess his Soul, which thus the Spartan chears:
Let not thy Words the Warmth of Greece abate;
The feeble Dart is guiltless of my Fate:
Stiff with the rich embroidered Work around,
My varied Belt repelled the flying Wound.
To whom the King. My Brother and my Friend,
Thus, always thus, may Heaven thy Life defend!
Now seek some skilful Hand whose powerful Art
May stanch the Effusion and extract the Dart.
Herald be swift, and bid Machaon bring
His speedy Succor to the Spartan King;
Pierced with a winged Shaft (the Deed of Troy)
The Grecian's Sorrow, and the Dardan's Joy.
With hasty Zeal the swift Talthybius flies;
Through the thick Files he darts his searching Eyes,
And finds Machaon, where sublime he stands
In Arms encircled with his native Bands.
Then thus: Machaon, to the King repair,
His wounded Brother claims thy timely Care;
Pierced by some Lycian or Dardanian Bow,
A Grief to us, a Triumph to the Foe.
The heavy Tidings grieved the Godlike Man;
Swift to his Succor through the Ranks he ran:
The dauntless King yet standing firm he found,
And all the Chiefs in deep Concern around.
Where to the steely Point the Reed was joined,
The Shaft he drew, but left the Head behind.
Strait the broad Belt with gay Embroid'ry graced
He loosed; the Corslet from his Breast unbrac'd;
Then sucked the Blood, and Sovereign Balm infused,
Which Chiron gave, and Aesculapius used.
While round the Prince the Greeks employ their Care,
The Trojans rush tumultuous to the War;
Once more they glitter in refulgent Arms,
Once more the Fields are filled with dire Alarms.
Nor had you seen the King of Men appear
Confused, unactive, or surpised with Fear;
But fond of Glory, with severe Delight,
His beating Bosom claimed the rising Fight.
No longer with his warlike Steeds he stayed,
Or pressed the Car with polished Brass inlay'd,
But left Eurymedon the Reins to guide;
The fiery Coursers snorted at his side.
On Foot through all the martial Ranks he moves,
And these encourages, and those reproves.
Brave Men! he cries (to such who boldly dare
Urge their swift Steeds to face the coming War)
Your ancient Valor on the Foes approve;
Jove is with Greece, and let us trust in Jove.
It Is not for us, but guilty Troy to dread,
Whose Crimes sit heavy on her perjured Head;
Her Sons and Matrons Greece shall lead in Chains,
And her dead Warriors strew the mournful Plains.
Thus with new Ardour he the Brave inspires,
Or thus the fearful with Reproaches fires.
Shame to your Country, Scandal of your Kind!
Born to the Fate ye well deserve to find!
Why stand ye gazing round the dreadful Plain,
Prepared for Flight, but doomed to fly in vain?
Confused and panting, thus, the hunted Deer
Falls as he flies, a Victim to his Fear.
Still must ye wait the Foes, and still retire,
'Till yon' tall Vessels blaze with Trojan Fire?
Or trust ye, Jove a valiant Foe shall chase,
To save a trembling, heartless, dastard Race?
This said, he stalked with ample Strides along,
To Crete's brave Monarch and his martial Throng;
High at their Head he saw the Chief appear,
And bold Meriones excite the Rear.
At this the King his generous Joy expressed,
And clasped the Warrior to his armed Breast.
Divine Idomeneus! what Thanks we owe
To Worth like thine? what Praise shall we bestow?
To thee the foremost Honors are decreed,
First in the Fight, and every graceful Deed.
For this, in Banquets when the generous Bowls
Restore our Blood, and raise the Warrior's Souls,
Though all the rest with stated Rules we bound,
Unmixed, unmeasured are thy Goblets crowned.
Be still thy self; in Arms a mighty Name;
Maintain thy Honors, and enlarge thy Fame.
To whom the Cretan thus his Speech addressed;
Secure of me, O King! exhort the rest:
Fixed to thy Side, in every Toil I share,
Thy firm Associate in the Day of War.
But let the Signal be this Moment given;
To mix in Fight is all I ask of Heaven.
The Field shall prove how Perjuries succeed,
And Chains or Death avenge their impious Deed.
Charmed with this Heat, the King his Course pursues,
And next the Troops of either Ajax views:
In one firm Orb the Bands were ranged around,
A Cloud of Heroes blackened all the Ground.
Thus from the lofty Promontory's Brow
A Swain surveys the gathering Storm below;
Slow from the Main the heavy Vapors rise,
Spread in dim Streams, and sail along the Skies,
'Till black as Night the swelling Tempest shows,
The Cloud condensing as the West-Wind blows:
He dreads the impending Storm, and drives his Flock
To the close Covert of an arching Rock.
Such, and so thick, the embattel'd Squadrons stood,
With Spears erect, a moving Iron Wood;
A shady Light was shot from glimmering Shields,
And their brown Arms obscured the dusky Fields.
O Heroes! worthy such a dauntless Train,
Whose Godlike Virtue we but urge in vain,
(Exclaimed the King) who raise your eager Bands
With great Examples more than loud Commands.
Ah would the Gods but breathe in all the rest
Such Souls as burn in your exalted Breast!
Soon should our Arms with just Success be crowned,
And Troy's proud Walls lie smoking on the Ground.
Then to the next the General bends his Course;
(His Heart exults, and glories in his Force)
There reverend Nestor ranks his Pylian Bands,
And with inspiring Eloquence commands,
With strictest Order sets his Train in Arms,
The Chiefs advises, and the Soldiers warms.
Alastor, Chromius, Haemon round him wait,
Bias the good, and Pelagon the great.
The Horse and Chariots to the Front assigned,
The Foot (the Strength of War) he ranged behind;
The middle Space suspected Troops supply,
Enclosed by both, nor left the Power to fly:
He gives Command to curb the fiery Steed,
Nor cause Confusion, nor the Ranks exceed;
Before the rest let none too rashly ride;
No Strength or Skill, but just in Time, be tried:
The Charge once made, no Warrior turn the Rein,
But fight, or fall; a firm, embodied Train.
He whom the Fortune of the Field shall cast
From forth his Chariot, mount the next in haste;
Nor seek unpracticed to direct the Car,
Content with Jav'lins to provoke the War.
Our great Forefathers held this prudent Course,
Thus ruled their Ardour, thus preserved their Force,
By Laws like these Immortal Conquests made,
And Earth's proud Tyrants low in Ashes laid.
So spoke the Master of the martial Art,
And touched with Transport great Atrides' Heart.
Oh! had thou Strength to match thy brave Desires,
And Nerves to second what thy Soul inspires!
But wasting Years that wither human Race,
Exhaust thy Spirits, and thy Arms unbrace.
What once thou were, oh ever might thou be!
And Age the Lot of any Chief but thee.
Thus to the experienced Prince Atrides cried;
He shook his hoary Locks, and thus replied.
Well might I wish, could Mortal Wish renew
That Strength which once in boiling Youth I knew;
Such as I was, when Ereuthalion slain
Beneath this Arm fell prostrate on the Plain.
But Heaven its Gifts not all at once bestows,
These Years with Wisdom crowns, with Action those:
The Field of Combat fits the Young and Bold,
The solemn Council best becomes the Old:
To you the glorious Conflict I resign,
Let sage Advice, the Palm of Age, be mine.
He said. With Joy the Monarch marched before,
And found Menestheus on the dusty Shore,
With whom the firm Athenian Phalanx stands;
And next Ulysses, with his Subject Bands.
Remote their Forces lay, nor knew so far
The Peace infringed, nor heard the Sounds of War;
The Tumult late begun, they stood intent
To watch the Motion, dubious of the Event.
The King, who saw their Squadrons yet unmoved,
With hasty Ardour thus the Chiefs reproved.
Can Peteus' Son forget a Warrior's Part,
And fears Ulysses, skilled in every Art?
Why stand you distant, and the rest expect
To mix in Combat which your selves neglect?
From you 'twas hoped among the first to dare
The Shock of Armies, and commence the War.
For this your Names are called, before the rest,
To share the Pleasures of the Genial Feast:
And can you, Chiefs! without a Blush survey
Whole Troops before you laboring in the Fray?
Say, is it thus those Honors you requite?
The first in Banquets, but the last in Fight.
Ulysses heard; The Hero's Warmth overspread
His Cheek with Blushes; and severe, he said.
Take back the unjust Reproach! Behold we stand
Sheathed in bright Arms, and but expect Command.
If glorious Deeds afford thy Soul delight,
Behold me plunging in the thickest Fight.
Then give thy Warrior-Chief a Warrior's Due,
Who dares to act whatever thou dare to view.
Struck with his generous Wrath, the King replies;
Oh great in Action, and in Council wise!
With ours, thy Care and Ardour are the same,
Nor need I to command, nor ought to blame.
Sage as thou art, and learned in Humankind,
Forgive the Transport of a martial Mind.
Haste to the Fight, secure of just Amends;
The Gods that make, shall keep the Worthy, Friends.
He said, and passed where great Tydides lay,
His Steeds and Chariots wedged in firm Array:
(The warlike Sthenelus attends his side)
To whom with stern Reproach the Monarch cried.
Oh Son of Tydeus! (He, whose Strength could tame
The bounding Steed, in Arms a mighty Name)
Can thou, remote, the mingling Hosts descry
With Hands unactive, and a careless Eye?
Not thus thy Sire the fierce Encounter feared;
Still first in Front the matchless Prince appeared:
What glorious Toils, what Wonders they recite,
Who viewed him laboring through the Ranks of Fight!
I saw him once, when gathering martial Powers
A peaceful Guest, he sought Mycenae's Towers;
Armies he asked, and Armies had been given,
Not we denied, but Jove forbad from Heaven;
While dreadful Comets glaring from afar
Forewarned the Horrors of the Theban War.
Next, sent by Greece from where Asopus flows,
A fearless Envoy he approached the Foes;
Thebes' hostile Walls, unguarded and alone,
Dauntless he enters, and demands the Throne.
The Tyrant feasting with his Chiefs he found,
And dared to Combat all those Chiefs around;
Dared and subdued, before their haughty Lord;
For Pallas strung his Arm, and edged his Sword.
Stung with the Shame, within the winding Way,
To bar his Passage fifty Warriors lay;
Two Heroes led the secret Squadron on,
Moeon the fierce, and hardy Lycophon;
Those fifty slaughtered in the gloomy Vale,
He spared but one to bear the dreadful Tale.
Such Tydeus was, and such his martial Fire;
Gods! how the Son degen'rates from the Sire?
No Words the Godlike Diomed returned,
But heard respectful, and in secret burned:
Not so fierce Capaneus' undaunted Son,
Stern as his Sire, the Boaster thus begun.
What needs, O Monarch, this invidious Praise,
Our selves to lessen, while our Sires you raise?
Dare to be just, Atrides! and confess
Our Valor equal, though our Fury less.
With fewer Troops we stormed the Theban Wall,
And happier, saw the Sev'nfold City fall.
In impious Acts the guilty Fathers died;
The Sons subdued, for Heaven was on their side.
Far more than Heirs of all our Parent's Fame,
Our Glories darken their diminished Name.
To him Tydides thus. My Friend forbear,
Suppress thy Passion, and the King revere:
His high Concern may well excuse this Rage,
Whose Cause we follow, and whose War we wage;
His the first Praise were Ilion's Towers overthrown,
And, if we fail, the chief Disgrace his own.
Let him the Greeks to hardy Toils excite,
It Is ours, to labor in the glorious Fight.
He spoke, and ardent, on the trembling Ground
Sprung from his Car; his ringing Arms resound.
Dire was the Clang, and dreadful from afar,
Of armed Tydides rushing to the War.
As when the Winds, ascending by degrees,
First move the whitening Surface of the Seas,
The Billows float in order to the Shore,
The Wave behind rolls on the Wave before;
Till, with the growing Storm, the Deeps arise,
Foam over the Rocks, and thunder to the Skies.
So to the Fight the thick Battalions throng,
Shields urged on Shields, and Men drove Men along.
Sedate and silent move the numerous Bands;
No Sound, no Whisper, but their Chief's Commands,
Those only heard; with Awe the rest obey,
As if some God had snatched their Voice away.
Not so the Trojans, from their Host ascends
A general Shout that all the Region rends.
As when the fleecy Flocks unnumber'd stand
In wealthy Folds, and wait the Milker's Hand,
The hollow Vales incessant Bleating fills,
The Lambs reply from all the neighboring Hills:
Such Clamours rose from various Nations round,
Mixed was the Murmur, and confused the Sound.
Each Host now joins, and each a God inspires,
These Mars incites, and those Minerva fires.
Pale Flight around, and dreadful Terror reign;
And Discord raging bathes the purple Plain:
Discord! dire Sister of the slaught'ring Power,
Small at her Birth, but rising every Hour,
While scarce the Skies her horrid Head can bound,
She stalks on Earth, and shakes the World around;
The Nations bleed, wherever her Steps she turns,
The Groan still deepens, and the Combat burns.
Now Shield with Shield, with Helmet Helmet closed,
To Armor Armor, Lance to Lance opposed,
Host against Host with shadowy Squadrons drew,
The sounding Darts in Iron Tempests flew,
Victors and Vanquished join promiscuous Cries,
And shrilling Shouts and dying Groans arise;
With streaming Blood the slippery Fields are died,
And slaughtered Heroes swell the dreadful Tide.
As Torrents roll, increased by numerous Rills,
With Rage impetuous down their ecchoing Hills;
Rush to the Vales, and poured along the Plain,
Roar through a thousand Channels to the Main;
The distant Shepherd trembling hears the Sound:
So mix both Hosts, and so their Cries rebound.
The bold Antilochus the Slaughter led,
The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead:
At great Echepolus the Lance arrives,
Razed his high Crest, and through his Helmet drives,
Warmed in the Brain the brazen Weapon lies,
And Shades Eternal settle over his Eyes.
So sinks a Tower, that long Assaults had stood
Of Force and Fire; its Walls besmeared with Blood.
Him, the bold Elphenor.
Leader of the Abantian Throng
Seized to despoil, and dragged the Corpse along:
But while he strove to tug the inserted Dart,
Agenor's Javelin reached the Hero's Heart.
His Flank, unguarded by his ample Shield,
Admits the Lance: He falls, and spurns the Field;
The Nerves unbrac'd support his Limbs no more;
The Soul comes floating in a Tide of Gore.
Trojans and Greeks now gather round the Slain;
The War renews, the Warriors bleed again;
As over their Prey rapacious Wolves engage,
Man dies on Man, and all is Blood and Rage.
In blooming Youth fair Simoisius fell,
Sent by great Ajax to the Shades of Hell;
Fair Simoisius, whom his Mother bore
Amid the Flocks on silver Simois' Shore:
The Nymph descending from the Hills of I Would,
To seek her Parents on his flowery Side,
Brought forth the Babe, their common Care and Joy,
And thence from Simois named the lovely Boy.
Short was his Date! by dreadful Ajax slain
He falls, and renders all their Cares in vain!
So falls a Poplar, that in watery Ground
Raised high the Head, with stately Branches crowned,
(Felled by some Artist with his shining Steel,
To shape the Circle of the bending Wheel)
Cut down it lies, tall, smooth, and largely spread,
With all its beauteous Honors on its Head;
There left a Subject to the Wind and Rain
And scorched by Suns, it withers on the Plain.
Thus pierced by Ajax, Simoisius lies
Stretched on the Shore, and thus neglected dies.
At Ajax, Antiphus his Javelin threw;
The pointed Lance with erring Fury flew,
And Leucus, loved by wise Ulysses, slew.
He drops the Corpse of Simoisius slain,
And sinks a breathless Carcass on the Plain.
This saw Ulysses, and with Grief enraged
Strode where the foremost of the Foes engaged;
Armed with his Spear, he meditates the Wound,
In Act to throw; but cautious, looked around.
Struck at his Sight the Trojans backward drew,
And trembling heard the Javelin as it flew.
A Chief stood nigh who from Abydos came,
Old Priam's Son, Democoon was his Name;
The Weapon entered close above his Ear,
Cold through his Temples glides the whizzing Spear;
With piercing Shrieks the Youth resigns his Breath,
His Eye Balls darken with the Shades of Death;
Down sinks the Chief: his clanging Arms resound;
And his broad Buckler rings against the Ground.
Seized with Affright the boldest Foes appear;
Even Godlike Hector seems himself to fear;
Slow he gave way, the rest tumultuous fled;
The Greeks with Shouts press on, and spoil the Dead,
But Phoebus now from Ilion's towering Height
Shines forth revealed, and animates the Fight.
Trojans be bold, and Force with Force oppose;
Your foaming Steeds urge headlong on the Foes!
Nor are their Bodies Rocks, nor ribb'd with Steel;
Your Weapons enter, and your Strokes they feel.
Have ye forgot what seemed your Dread before?
The great, the fierce Achilles fights no more.
Apollo thus from Ilion's lofty Towers
Arrayed in Terrors, rowz'd the Trojan Powers:
While War's fierce Goddess fires the Grecian Foe,
And shouts and thunders in the Fields below.
Then great Diores fell, by Doom Divine,
In vain his Valor, and illustrious Line.
A broken Rock the Force of Pirus threw,
(Who from cold Aenus led the Thracian Crew)
Full on his Ankle dropped the ponderous Stone,
Burst the strong Nerves, and crash'd the solid Bone:
Supine he tumbles on the crimsoned Sands,
Before his helpless Friends, and native Bands,
And spreads for Aid his unavailing Hands.
The Foe rushed furious as he pants for Breath,
And through his Navel drove the pointed Death:
His gushing Entrails smoked upon the Ground,
And the warm Life came issuing from the Wound.
His Lance bold Thoas at the Conqu'ror sent,
Deep in his Breast above the Pap it went,
Amid the Lungs was fixed the winged Wood,
And quivering in his heaving Bosom stood:
'Till from the dying Chief, approaching near,
The Aetolian Warrior tugged his weighty Spear:
Then sudden waved his flaming Faulchion round,
And gash'd his Belly with a ghastly Wound.
The Corpse now breathless on the bloody Plain,
To spoil his Arms the Victor strove in vain;
The Thracian Bands against the Victor pressed;
A Grove of Lances glittered at his Breast.
Stern Thoas, glaring with revengeful Eyes,
In sullen Fury slowly quits the Prize.
Thus fell two Heroes; one the Pride of Thrace,
And one the Leader of the Epeian Race;
Death's sable Shade at once overcast their Eyes,
In Dust the Vanquished, and the Victor lies.
With copious Slaughter all the Fields are red,
And heaped with growing Mountains of the Dead.
Had some brave Chief this martial Scene beheld,
By Pallas guarded through the dreadful Field,
Might Darts be bid to turn their Points away,
And Swords around him innocently play,
The War's whole Art with Wonder had he seen,
And counted Heroes where he counted Men.
So fought each Host, with Thirst of Glory fired,
And Crowds on Crowds triumphantly expired.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Fourth Book.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
I.
IT was from the beginning of this Book that Virgil has taken that of his tenth
Aeneid, as the whole Tenor of the Story in this and the last Book is followed
in his twelfth. The Truce and the solemn Oath, the Breach of it by a Dart
thrown by Tolumnius, Juturna's inciting the Latins to renew the War, the Wound
of Aeneas, his speedy Cure, and the Battle ensuing, all these are manifestly
copied from hence. The Solemnity, Surprise, and Variety of these Circumstances
seemed to him of Importance enough, to build the whole Catastrophe of his Work
upon them; though in Homer they are but Openings to the general Action, and such
as in their Warmth are still exceeded by all that follows them. They are
chosen, we grant, by Virgil with great Judgment, and conclude his Poem with a
becoming Majesty: Yet the finishing his Scheme with that which is but the
coolest Part of Homer's Action, tends in some degree to show the Disparity of
the Poetical Fire in these two Authors.

II.
VERSE 3. Immortal Hebe.] The Goddess of Youth is introduced as an Attendant
upon the Banquets of the Gods, to show that the divine Beings enjoy an eternal
Youth, and that their Life is a Felicity without end. Dacier.

III.
VERSE 9. Two Powers Divine.] Jupiter's reproaching these two Goddesses with
neglecting to assist Menelaus, proceeds (as M. Dacier remarks) from the
Affection he bore to Troy: Since if Menelaus by their help had gained a
complete Victory, the Siege had been raised, and the City delivered. On the
contrary, Juno and Minerva might suffer Paris to escape, as the Method to
continue the War to the total Destruction of Troy. And accordingly a few Lines
after we find them complotting together, and contriving a new Scene of Miseries
to the Trojans.

IV.
VERSE 18. Though great Atrides gained the glorious Strife.] Jupiter here makes
it a Question, Whether the foregoing Combat should determine the Controversy,
or the Peace be broken. His putting it thus, that Paris is not killed, but
Menelaus has the Victory, gives a Hint for a Dispute whether the Conditions of
the Treaty were valid or annulled; that is to say, whether the Controversy was
to be determined by the Victory or by the Death of one of the Combatants.
Accordingly it has been disputed whether the Articles were really binding to
the Trojans or not? Plutarch has treated the Question in his Symposiacks l. 9.
qu. 13. The Substance is this. In the first Proposal of the Challenge Paris
mentions only the Victory, And who his Rival shall in Arms subdue: Nor does
Hector who carries it say any more. However Menelaus understands it of the
Death, by what he replies: Fall he that must beneath his Rival's Arms, And live
the rest -- Iris to Helen speaks only of the former; and Idaeus to Priam
repeats the same Words. But in the solemn Oath Agamemnon specifies the latter,
If by Paris slain -- and If by my Brother's Arms the Trojan bleed. Priam also
understands it of both, saying at his leaving the Field, What Prince shall fall
Heaven only knows -- (I do not cite the Greek because the English has preserved
the same Nicety.) Paris himself confesses he has lost the Victory, in his
Speech to Helen, which he would hardly have done had the whole depended on that
alone: And lastly Menelaus (after the Conquest is clearly his by the Flight of
Paris) is still searching round the Field to kill him, as if all were of no
effect without the Death of his Adversary. It appears from hence that the
Trojans had no ill Pretense to break the Treaty, so that Homer ought not to
have been directly accused of making Jupiter the Author of Perjury in what
follows, which is one of the Chief of Plato's Objections against him.

V.
VERSE 31. Though secret Anger swelled Minerva 's Breast] Spondanus takes notice
that Minerva, who in the first Book had restrained the Anger of Achilles, had
now an Opportunity of exerting the same Conduct in respect to herself. We may
bring the Parallel close, by observing that she had before her in like manner a
Superior, who had provoked her by sharp Expressions, and whose Counsels ran
against her Sentiments. In all which the Poet takes care to preserve her still
in the Practice of that Wisdom of which she was Goddess.

VI.
VERSE 55. Let Priam bleed, etc.] We find in Persius's Satyrs the Name of
Labeo, as an ill Poet who made a miserable Translation of the Iliad; one of
whose Verses is still preserved, and happens to be that of this Place. Crudum
manduces Priamum, Priamique pisinnos. It may seem from this, that his
Translation was servilely literal (as the old Scholiast on Persius observes.)
And one cannot but take notice that Ogilby's and Hobbes's in this Place are not
unlike Labeo's. Both King and People thou would eat alive.
And eat up Priam and his Children all.


VII.
VERSE 61. But should this Arm prepare to wreak our Hate On thy loved Towns --
] Homer in this Place has made Jupiter to prophecy the Destruction of Mycenae
the favored City of Juno, which happened a little before the Time of our
Author. Strab. l. 8. The Trojan War being over, and the Kingdom of Agamemnon
destroyed, Mycenae daily decreased after the Return of the Heraclidae: For
these becoming Masters of Peloponnesus, cast out the old Inhabitants; so that
they who possessed Argos overcame Mycenae also, and contracted both into one
Body. A short time after, Mycenae was destroyed by the Argives, and not the
least Remains of it are now to be found.

VIII.
VERSE 96. The Advice approved.] This is one of the Places for which Homer is
blamed by Plato, who introduces Socrates reprehending it in his Dialogue of the
Republic. And indeed if it were granted that the Trojans had no Right to break
this Treaty, the present Machine where Juno is made to propose Perjury, Jupiter
to allow it, and Minerva to be commissioned to hasten the Execution of it,
would be one of the hardest to be reconciled to reason in the whole Poem.
Unless even then one might imagine, that Homer's Heaven is sometimes no more
than an Ideal World of abstracted Beings; and so every Motion which rises in
the Mind of Man is attributed to the Quality to which it belongs, with the Name
of the Deity who is supposed to preside over that Quality superadded to it. In
this Sense the present Allegory is easy enough. Pandarus thinks it Prudence to
gain Honor and Wealth at the Hands of the Trojans by destroying Menelaus. This
Sentiment is also incited by a Notion of Glory, of which Juno is represented as
Goddess. Jupiter who is supposed to know the Thoughts of Men, permits the
Action which he is not Author of, but sends a Prodigy at the same time to give
warning of a coming Mischief, and accordingly we find both Armies descanting
upon the sight of it in the following Lines.

IX.
VERSE 120. Pandarus for Strength renowned.] Homer, says Plutarch in his
Treatise of the Pythian Oracle, makes not the Gods to use all Persons
indifferently as their second Agents, but each according to the Powers he is
endu'd with by Art or Nature. For a Proof of this, he puts us in Mind how
Minerva when she would persuade the Greeks, seeks for Ulysses; when she would
break the Truce, for Pandarus; and when she would conquer, for Diomed. If we
consult the Scholia upon this Instance, they give several Reasons why Pandarus
was particularly proper for the Occasion. The Goddess went not to the Trojans,
because they hated Paris, and (as we are told in the end of the foregoing Book)
would rather have given him up, than have done an ill Action for him: She
therefore looks among the Allies, and finds Pandarus who was of a Nation noted
for Perfidiousness, and had a Soul avaricious enough to be capable of engaging
in this Treachery for the hopes of a Reward from Paris: as appears by his being
so covetous as not to bring Horses to the Siege for fear of the Expense or Loss
of them; as he tells Aeneas in the fifth Book.

X.
VERSE 141. Sixteen Palms.] Both the Horns together made this Length; and not
each, as Madam Dacier renders it. I do not object it as an Improbability that
the Horns were of sixteen Palms each; but that this would be an extravagant and
unmanageable Size for a Bow, is evident.

XI.
VERSE 144. This, by the Greeks unseen, the Warrior bends.] The Poet having
held us through the foregoing Book in Expectation of a Peace, makes the
Conditions be here broken after such a manner, as should oblige the Greeks to
act through the War with that irreconcilable Fury which affords him the
Opportunity of exerting the full Fire of his own Genius. The Shot of Pandarus
being therefore of such Consequence (and as he calls it, the (...), the
Foundation of future Woes) it was thought fit not to pass it over in a few
Words, like the Flight of every common Arrow, but to give it a Description some
way corresponding to its Importance. For this, he surrounds it with a Train of
Circumstances; the History of the Bow, the bending it, the covering Pandarus
with Shields, the Choice of the Arrow, the Prayer, and Posture of the Shooter,
the Sound of the String, and Flight of the Shaft; all most beautifully, and
livelily painted. It may be observed too, how proper a time it was to expatiate
in these Particulars; when the Armies being unemploy'd, and only one Man
acting, the Poet and his Readers had leisure to be the Spectators of a single
and deliberate Action. I think it will be allowed that the little Circumstances
which are sometimes thought too redundant in Homer, have a wonderful Beauty in
this Place. Virgil has not failed to copy it, and with the greatest Happiness
imaginable. Dixit, and aurata volucrem Threissa sagittam
Deprompsit pharetra, cornuque infensa tetendit,
Et duxit long, donec curvata coirent
Inter se capita, and manibus jam tangeret aequis,
Laeva aciem ferri, dextra nervoque papillam.
Extemplo teli stridorem aurasque sonantes
Audiit una Aruns, haesitque in corpore ferrum.


XII.
VERSE 160. Pallas assists, and weakened in its force Diverts the Weapon -- ]
For she only designed, by all this Action, to increase the Glory of the Greeks
in the taking of Troy: Yet some Commentators have been so stupid as to wonder
that Pallas should be employed first in the wounding of Menelaus, and after in
the protecting him.

XIII.
VERSE 163. Wafts the winged Hornet.] This is one of those humble Comparisons
which Homer sometimes uses to diversify his Subject, but a very exact one in
its kind, and corresponding in all its Parts. The Care of the Goddess, the
unsuspecting Security of Menelaus, the Ease with which she diverts the Danger,
and the Danger itself, are all included in this short Compass. To which it may
be added, that if the Providence of heavenly Powers to their Creatures is
expressed by the Love of a Mother to her Child, if Men in regard to them are but
as heedless sleeping Infants, and if those Dangers which may seem great to us,
are by them as easily warded off as the Simile implies; there will appear
something sublime in this Conception, however little or low the Image may be
thought at first sight in respect to a Hero. A higher Comparison would but
have tended to lessen the Disparity between the Gods and Man, and the Justness
of the Simile had been lost, as well as the Grandeur of the Sentiment.

XIV.
VERSE 170. As when some stately Trappings, etc.] Some have judged the
Circumstances in this Simile to be superfluous, and think it foreign to the
Purpose to take notice that this Ivory was intended for the Bosses of a Bridle,
was laid up for a Prince, or that a Woman of Caria or Meonia died it.
Eustathius was of a different Opinion, who extols this Passage for the Variety
it presents, and the Learning it includes: We learn from hence that the Lydians
and Carians were famous in the first Times for their staining in Purple, and
that the Women excelled in Works of Ivory: As also that there were certain
Ornaments which only Kings and Princes were privileged to wear. But without
having recourse to Antiquities to justify this Particular, it may be alleged,
that the Simile does not consist barely in the Colors; It was but little to
tell us, that the Blood of Menelaus appearing on the Whiteness of his Skin,
vyed with the purpled Ivory; but this implies that the honorable Wounds of a
Hero are the beautiful Dress of War, and become him as much as the most
gallant Ornaments in which he takes the Field. Virgil, it is true, has omitted
the Circumstance in his Imitation of this Comparison, Aen. 12. Indum sanguineo
veluti violaverit ostro
Si quis ebur --
But in this he judges only for himself, and does not condemn Homer. It was by
no means proper that his Ivory should have been a Piece of martial
Accoutrement, when he applied it so differently, transferring it from the
Wounds of a Hero to the Blushes of the fair Lavinia.

XV.
VERSE 177. As down thy snowy Thigh.] Homer is very particular here, in giving
the Picture of the Blood running in a long Trace, lower and lower, as will
appear from the Words themselves. (...)
(...)
The Translator has not thought fit to mention every one of these Parts, first
the Thigh, then the Leg, then the Foot, which might be tedious in English: But
the Author's Design being only to image the streaming of the Blood, it seemed
equivalent to make it trickle through the Length of an Alexandrine Line.

XVI.
VERSE 186. Oh dear as Life, etc.] This Incident of the Wound of Menelaus gives
occasion to Homer to draw a fine Description of fraternal Love in Agamemnon. On
the first sight of it, he is struck with Amaze and Confusion, and now breaks
out in Tenderness and Grief. He first accuses himself as the Cause of this
Misfortune, by having consented to expose his Brother to the single Combat
which had drawn on this fatal Consequence. Next he inveighs against the Trojans
in general for their Perfidiousness, as not yet knowing it was the Act of
Pandarus only. He then comforts himself with the Confidence that the Gods will
revenge him upon Troy; but doubts by what Hands this Punishment may be
inflicted, as fearing the Death of Menelaus will force the Greeks to return
with Shame to their Country. There is no Contradiction in all this, but on the
other side a great deal of Nature, in the confused Sentiments of Agamemnon on
the occasion, as they are very well explained by Spondanus.

XVII.
VERSE 212. While some proud Trojan, etc.] Agamemnon here calls to mind how,
upon the Death of his Brother, the ineffectual Preparations and Actions against
Troy must become a Derision to the World. This is in its own Nature a very
irritating Sentiment, though it were never so carelessly expressed; but the Poet has
found out a peculiar Air of Aggravation, in making him bring all the
Consequences before his Eyes, in a Picture of their Trojan Enemies gathering
round the Tomb of the unhappy Menelaus, elated with Pride, insulting the Dead,
and throwing out disdainful Expressions and Curses against him and his Family.
There is nothing which could more effectually represent a State of Anguish,
than the drawing such an Image as this, which shows a Man increasing his
present Unhappiness by the Prospect of a future Train of Misfortunes.

XVIII.
VERSE 222. Let not thy Words the Warmth of Greece abate.] In Agamemnon, Homer
has shown an Example of a tender Nature and fraternal Affection, and now in
Menelaus he gives us one of a generous warlike Patience and Presence of Mind.
He speaks of his own Case with no other Regard, but as this Accident of his
Wound may tend to the Discouragement of the Soldiers; and exhorts the General
to beware of dejecting their Spirits from the Prosecution of the War. Spondanus.

XIX.
VERSE 253. The Trojans rush tumultuous to the War.] They advanced to the Enemy
in the Belief that the Shot of Pandarus was made by Order of the Generals.
Dacier.

XX.
VERSE 256. Nor had you seen.] The Poet here changes his Narration, and turns
himself to the Reader in an Apostrophe. Longinus in his 22d Chapter commends
this Figure, as causing a Reader to become a Spectator, and keeping his Mind
fixed upon the Action before him. The Apostrophe (says he) renders us more
awakened, more attentive, and more full of the Thing described. Madam Dacier
will have it, that it is the Muse who addresses herself to the Poet in the
second Person: It Is no great matter which, since it has equally its Effect
either way.

XXI.
VERSE 264. Through all the martial Ranks he moves, etc.] In the following Review
of the Army, which takes up a great Part of this Book, we see all the Spirit,
Art, and Industry of a complete General; together with the proper Characters of
those Leaders whom he incites. Agamemnon considers at this sudden Exigence,
that he should first address himself to all in general; he divides his
Discourse to the Brave and the Fearful, using Arguments which arise from
Confidence or Despair, Passions which act upon us most forcibly: To the Brave,
he urges their secure Hopes of Conquest since the Gods must punish Perjury; to
the Timorous, their inevitable Destruction if the Enemy should burn their
Ships. After this he flies from Rank to Rank, applying himself to each Ally
with particular Artifice: He caresses Idomeneus as an old Friend who had
promised not to forsake him; and meets with an Answer in that Hero's true
Character, short, honest, hearty, and Soldier-like. He praises the Ajaxes as
Warriors whose Examples fired the Army; and is received by them without any
Reply, as they were Men who did not profess Speaking. He passes next to Nestor,
whom he finds talking to his Soldiers as he marshaled them; here he was not to
part without a Compliment on both sides; he wishes him the Strength he had once
in his Youth, and is answered with an Account of something which the old Hero
had done in his former Days. From hence he goes to the Troops which lay
farthest from the Place of Action; where he finds Menestheus and Ulysses, not
entirely unprepared nor yet in Motion, as being ignorant of what had happened.
He reproves Ulysses for this, with Words agreeable to the Hurry he is in, and
receives an Answer which suits not ill with the twofold Character of a wise and
a valiant Man: Hereupon Agamemnon appears present to himself, and excuses his
hasty Expressions. The next he meets is Diomed, whom he also rebukes for
Backwardness but after another manner, by setting before him the Example of his
Father. Thus is Agamemnon introduced, praising, terrifying, exhorting, blaming,
excusing himself, and again relapsing into Reproofs; a lively Picture of a
great Mind in the highest Emotion. And at the same time the Variety is so kept
up, with a regard to the different Characters of the Leaders, that our Thoughts
are not tired with running along with him over all his Army.

XXII.
VERSE 296. For this, in Banquets.] The Ancients usually in their Feasts
divided to the Guests by equal Portions, except when they took some particular
occasion to show Distinction and give the Preference to any one Person. It was
then looked upon as the highest Mark of Honor to be allotted the best Portion
of Meat and Wine, and to be allowed an Exemption from the Laws of the Feast, in
drinking Wine unmingled and without Stint. This Custom was much more ancient
than the time of the Trojan War, and we find it practiced in the Banquet given
by Joseph to his Brethren in Egypt, Genesis 43.. ult. And he sent Messes to them
from before him, but Benjamin 's Mess was five times so much as any of theirs.
Dacier.

XXIII.
VERSE 336. There reverend Nestor ranks his Pylian Bands.] This is the Prince
whom Homer chiefly celebrates for martial Discipline, of the rest he is content
to say they were valiant and ready to fight: The Years, long Observation and
Experience of Nestor rendered him the fittest Person to be distinguished on
this account. The Disposition of his Troops in this Place (together with what
he is made to say, that their Forefathers used the same Method) may be a Proof
that the Art of War was well known in Greece before the Time of Homer. Nor
indeed can it be imagined otherwise, in an Age when all the World made their
Acquisitions by Force of Arms only. What is most to be wondered at, is, that
they had not the use of Cavalry, all Men engaging either on Foot, or from
Chariots (a Particular necessary to be known by every Reader of Homer's
Battles.) In these Chariots there were always two Persons, one of whom only
fought, the other was wholly employed in managing the Horses. Madam Dacier in
her excellent Preface to Homer is of Opinion, that there were no Horsemen 'till
near the Time of Saul, threescore Years after the Siege of Troy; so that although
Cavalry were in use in Homer's Days, yet he thought himself obliged to regard
the Customs of the Age of which he writ, rather than those of his own.

XXIV.
VERSE 344. The middle Space suspected Troops supply.] This Artifice, of
placing those Men whose Behavior was most to be doubted, in the middle, (so as
to put them under a necessity of engaging even against their Inclinations) was
followed by Hannibal in the Battle of Zama; as is observed and praised by
Polybius, who quotes this Verse on that occasion in Acknowledgment of Homer's
Skill in military Discipline. That our Author was the first Master of that Art
in Greece is the Opinion of Aelian, Tactic. c. 1. Frontinus gives us another
Example of Pyrrhus King of Epirus's following this Instruction of Homer. Vide
Stratag. lib. 2. c. 3. So Ammianus Marcellinus l. 14. Imperator catervis
peditum infirmis, medium inter acies spacium, secundum Homericam dispositionem,
praestituit.

XXV.
VERSE 353. He whom the Fortune of the Field shall cast
From forth his Chariot, mount the next -- etc.]
The Words in the Original are capable of four different Significations, as
Eustathius observes. The first is, that whoever in fighting upon his Chariot
shall win a Chariot from his Enemy, he shall continue to fight, and not retire
from the Engagement to secure his Prize. The second, that if any one be thrown
out of his Chariot, he who happens to be nearest shall hold forth his Javelin
to help him up into his own. The third is directly the contrary to the last,
that if any one be cast from his Chariot and would mount up into another Man's,
that other shall push him back with his Javelin, and not admit him for fear of
interrupting the Combat. The fourth is the Sense which is followed in the
Translation as seeming much the most natural, that every one should be left to
govern his own Chariot, and the other who is admitted fight only with the
Javelin. The reason of this Advice appears by the Speech of Pandarus to Aeneas
in the next Book: Aeneas having taken him up into his Chariot to go against
Diomed, compliments him with the Choice either to fight, or to manage the
Reins, which was esteemed an Office of Honor. To this Pandarus answers, that
it is more proper for Aeneas to guide his own Horses; lest they not feeling
their accustomed Master, should be ungovernable and bring them into Danger.

Upon occasion of the various and contrary Significations of which these Words
are said to be capable, and which Eustathius and Dacier profess to admire as an
Excellence; Mons. de la Motte in his late Discourse upon Homer very justly
animadverts, that if this be true, it is a grievous Fault in Homer. For what
can be more absurd than to imagine, that the Orders given in a Battle should be
delivered in such ambiguous Terms, as to be capable of many Meanings? These
double Interpretations must proceed not from any design in the Author, but
purely from the Ignorance of the Moderns in the Greek Tongue: It being
impossible for any one to possess the dead Languages to such a degree, as to be
certain of all the Graces and Negligences; or to know precisely how far the
Licenses and Boldnesses of Expression were happy, or forced. But Critics, to
be thought learned, attribute to the Poet all the random Senses that amuse
them, and imagine they see in a single Word a whole heap of Things, which no
modern Language can express; so are oftentimes charmed with nothing but the
Confusion of their own Ideas.

XXVI.
VERSE 385. Remote their Forces lay.] This is a Reason why the Troops of
Ulysses and Menestheus were not yet in Motion. Though another may be added in
respect to the former, that it did not consist with the Wisdom of Ulysses to
fall on with his Forces 'till he was well assured. Though Courage be no
inconsiderable Part of his Character, yet it is always joined with great
Caution. Thus we see him soon after in the very Heat of a Battle, when his
Friend was just slain before his Eyes, first looking carefully about him,
before he would throw his Spear to revenge him.

XXVII.
VERSE 431. I saw him once, when, etc.] This long Narration concerning the
History of Tydeus, is not of the Nature of those for which Homer has been
blamed with some Color of Justice: It is not a cold Story but a warm Reproof,
while the particularising the Actions of the Father is made the highest
Incentive to the Son. Accordingly the Air of this Speech ought to be inspirited
above the common Narrative Style. As for the Story itself, it is finely told by
Statius in the second Book of the Thebais.

XXVIII.
VERSE 453. No Words the Godlike Diomed returned.] "When Diomed is reproved by
Agamemnon, he holds his Peace in respect to his General, but Sthenelus retorts
upon him with Boasting and Insolence. It is here worth observing in what manner
Agamemnon behaves himself; he passes by Sthenelus without affording any Reply;
whereas just before, when Ulysses testified his Resentment, he immediately
returned him an Answer. For as it is a mean and servile thing, and unbecoming
the Majesty of a Prince, to make Apologies to every Man in Justification of
what he has said or done; so to treat all Men with equal Neglect is mere Pride
and Excess of Folly. We also see of Diomed, that though he refrains from speaking
in this Place when the Time demanded Action; he afterward expresses himself in
such a manner, as shows him not to have been insensible of this unjust Rebuke:
( as in the ninth Book) when he tells the King, he was the first who had dared
to reproach him with want of Courage." Plutarch of reading the Poets.

XXIX.
VERSE 461. We stormed the Theban Wall.] The first Theban War, of which
Agamemnon spoke in the preceding Lines, was seven and twenty Years before the
War of Troy. Sthenelus here speaks of the second Theban War, which happened ten
Years after the first: when the Sons of the seven Captains conquered the City,
before which their Fathers were destroyed. Tydeus expired gnawing the Head of
his Enemy, and Capaneus was Thunderstruck while he blasphemed Jupiter. Vid.
Stat. Thebaid.

XXX.
VERSE 479. As when the Winds.] Madam Dacier thinks it may seem something odd,
that an Army going to conquer should be compared to the Waves going to break
themselves against the Shore; and would solve the appearing Absurdity by
imagining the Poet laid not the Stress so much upon this Circumstance, as upon
the same Waves assaulting a Rock, lifting themselves over its Head, and
covering it with Foam as the Trophy of their Victory (as she expresses it.) But
to this it may be answered, that neither did the Greeks get the better in this
Battle, nor will a Comparison be allowed entirely beautiful, which instead of
illustrating its Subject stands itself in need of so much Illustration and
Refinement, to be brought to agree with it. The Passage naturally bears this
Sense. As when, upon the rising of the Wind, the Waves roll after one another
to the Shore; at first there is a distant Motion in the Sea, then they approach
to break with Noise on the Strand, and lastly rise swelling over the Rocks, and
toss their Foam above their Heads: So the Greeks, at first, marched in order
one after another silently to the Fight -- Where the Poet breaks off from
prosecuting the Comparison, and by a Prolepsis, leaves the Reader to carry it
on; and image to himself the future Tumult, Rage, and Force of the Battle, in
Opposition to that Silence in which he describes the Troops at present, in the
Lines immediately ensuing. What confirms this Exposition is, that Virgil has
made use of the Simile in the same Sense in the seventh Aeneid. Fluctus uti
primo coepit cum albescere vento,
Paulatim sese tollit mare, and altius undas
Erigit; inde imo consurgit ad aethera fundo.


XXXI.
VERSE 479. As when the Winds, etc.] This is the first Battle in Homer, and it
is worthy Observation with what Grandeur it is described, and raised by one
Circumstance above another, 'till all is involved in Horror and Tumult: The
foregoing Simile of the Winds, rising by degrees into a general Tempest, is an
Image of the Progress of his own Spirit in this Description. We see first an
innumerable Army moving in order, and are amused with the Pomp and Silence,
then wakened with the Noise and Clamor; next they join, the adverse Gods are
let down among them; the Imaginary Persons of Terror, Flight, Discord succeed
to reinforce them; then all is undistinguished Fury and a Confusion of
Horrors, only that at different Openings we behold the distinct Deaths of
several Heroes, and then are involved again in the same Confusion.

XXXII.
VERSE 503. Discord, dire Sister, etc.] This is the Passage so highly extolled
by Longinus, as one of the most signal Instances of the noble Sublimity of this
Author: where it is said, that the Image here drawn of Discord, whose Head
touched the Heavens, and whose Feet were on Earth, may as justly be applied to
the vast Reach and Elevation of the Genius of Homer. But Mons. Boileau informs
us that neither the Quotation nor these Words were in the Original of Longinus,
but partly inserted by Gabriel de Petra. However the best Encomium is, that
Virgil has taken it word for word, and applied it to the Person of Fame. Parva
metu primo, mox sese attollit in auras,
Ingrediturque solo, and caput inter nubila condit.
Aristides had formerly blamed Homer for admitting Discord into Heaven, and
Scaliger takes up the Criticism to throw him below Virgil. Fame (he says) is
properly feigned to hide her Head in the Clouds, because the Grounds and
Authors of Rumors are commonly unknown. As if the same might not be alleged
for Homer, since the Grounds and Authors of Discord are often no less secret.
Macrobius has put this among the Passages where he thinks Virgil has fallen
short in his Imitation of Homer, and brings these Reasons for his Opinion.
Homer represents Discord to rise from small beginnings, and afterward in her
Increase to reach the Heavens: Virgil has said this of Fame, but not with equal
Propriety; for the Subjects are very different. Discord, though it reaches to War
and Devastation, is still Discord; nor ceases to be what it was at first. But
Fame, when it grows to be universal, is Fame no longer, but becomes Knowledge
and Certainty. For who calls any thing Fame, which is known from Earth to
Heaven? Nor has Virgil equaled the Strength of Homer's Hyperbole, for one
speaks of Heaven, the other only of the Clouds. Macrob. Sat. l. 5. c. 13.
Scaliger is very angry at this last Period, and by mistake blames Gellius for
it, in whom there is no such thing. His Words are so insolently dogmatical,
that barely to quote them is to answer them, and the only Answer which such a
Spirit of Criticism deserves. Clamant quod Maro de Fama dixit eam inter nubila
caput condere, cum tamen Homerus unde ipse accepit, in coelo caput Eridis
constituit. Jam tibi pro me respondeo. Non sum imitatus, nolo imitari: non
placet, non est verum, Contentionem ponere caput in coelo. Ridiculum est,
fatuum est, Homericum est, Graeculum est. Poetic. l. 5. c. 3.

This fine Verse was also criticiz'd by Mons. Perault, who accuses it as a
forced and extravagant Hyperbole. M. Boileau answers, that Hyperboles as strong
are daily used even in common Discourse, and that nothing is in effect more
strictly true than that Discord reigns over all the Earth, and in Heaven
itself, that is to say, among the Gods of Homer. It is not (continues this
excellent Critic) the Description of a Giant, as this Censor would pretend,
but a just Allegory; and as he makes Discord an allegorical Person, she may be
of what Size he pleases without shocking us; since it is what we regard only as
an Idea and Creature of the Fancy, and not as a material Substance that has any
Being in Nature. The Expression in the Psalms, that the impious Man is lifted
up as a Cedar of Libanus, does by no means imply that the impious Man was a
Giant as tall as the Cedar. Thus far Boileau; and upon the whole we may
observe, that it seems not only the Fate of great Genius's to have met with the
most malignant Critics, but of the finest and noblest Passages in them to have
been particularly pitched upon for impertinent Criticisms. These are the divine
Boldnesses which in their very Nature provoke Ignorance and Short-sightedness
to show themselves; and which whoever is capable of attaining, must also
certainly know, that they will be attacked by such as cannot reach them.

XXXIII.
VERSE 509. Now Shield with Shield, etc.] The Verses which follow in the
Original are perhaps excelled by none in Homer; and that he had himself a
particular Fondness for them, may be imagined from his inserting them again in
the same Words in the eighth Book. They are very happily imitated by Statius
lib. 7. Jam clypeus clypeis, umbone repellitur umbo,
Ense minax ensis, pede pes, and cuspide cuspis, etc.


XXXIV.
VERSE 517. As Torrents roll.] This Comparison of Rivers meeting and roaring,
with two Armies mingling in Battle, is an Image of that Nobleness, which (to
say no more) was worthy the Invention of Homer and the Imitation of Virgil. Aut
ubi decursu rapido de montibus altis,
Dant sonitum spumosi amnes, and in aequora currunt,
Quisque suum populatus iter; -- Stupet inscius alto
Accipiens sonitum saxi de vertice Pastor.
The word populatus here has a Beauty which one must be insensible not to
observe. Scaliger prefers Virgil's, and Macrobius Homer's, without any Reasons
on either side, but only one Critick's positive Word against another's. The
Reader may judge between them.

XXXV.
VERSE 523. The bold Antilochus.] Antilochus the Son of Nestor is the first who
begins the Engagement. It seems as if the old Hero having done the greatest
Service he was capable of at his Years, in disposing the Troops in the best
order (as we have seen before) had taken care to set his Son at the head of
them, to give him the Glory of beginning the Battle.

XXXVI.
VERSE 540. As over their Prey rapacious Wolves engage.] This short Comparison
in the Greek consists only of two Words, (...), which Scaliger observes upon as
too abrupt. But may it not be answered that such a Place as this, where all
things are in Confusion, seems not to admit of any Simile, except of one which
scarce exceeds a Metaphor in Length? When two Heroes are engaged, there is a
plain View to be given us of their Actions, and there a long Simile may be of
use, to raise and enliven them by parallel Circumstances; but when the Troops
fall in promiscuously upon one another, the Conclusion excludes distinct or
partiticular Images, and consequently Comparisons of any Length would be less
natural.

XXXVII.
VERSE 542. In bloom of Youth fair Simoisius fell.] This Prince received his
Name from the River Simois on whose Banks he was born. It was the Custom of the
Eastern People to give Names to their Children derived from the most remarkable
Accidents of their Birth. The holy Scripture is full of Examples of this kind.
It is also usual in the Old Testament to compare Princes to Trees, Cedars, etc.
as Simoisius is here resembled to a Poplar. Dacier.

XXXVIII.
VERSE 552. So falls a Poplar.] Eustathius in Macrobius prefers to this Simile
that of Virgil in the second Aeneid. Ac veluti in summis antiquam montibus
ornum,
Cum ferro accisam crebrisque bipennibus instant
Eruere agricolae certatim; illa usque minatur,
Et tremefacta comam concusso vertice nutat;
Vulneribus donec paulatim evicta supremum
Congemuit, traxitque jugis avulsa ruinam.
Mr. Hobbes in the Preface to his Translation of Homer has discoursed upon this
Occasion very judiciously. Homer (says he) intended no more in this Place than
to show how comely the Body of Simoisius appeared as he lay dead upon the Bank
of Scamander, strait and tall, with a fair Head of Hair, like a strait and high
Poplar with the Boughs still on; and not at all to describe the manner of his
falling, which (when a Man is wounded through the Breast as he was with a Spear)
is always sudden. Virgil's is the Description of a great Tree falling when many
Men together hew it down. He meant to compare the manner how Troy after many
Battles, and after the Loss of many Cities, conquered by the many Nations under
Agamemnon in a long War, was thereby weakened and at last overthrown, with a
great Tree hewn round about, and then falling by little and little leisurely.
So that neither these two Descriptions nor the two Comparisons can be compared
together. The Image of a Man lying on the Ground is one thing; the Image of
falling (especially of a Kingdom) is another. This therefore gives no Advantage
to Virgil over Homer. Thus Mr. Hobbes.

XXXIX.
VERSE 585. But Phoebus now.] Homer here introduces Apollo on the side of the
Trojans: He had given them the Assistance of Mars at the beginning of this
Battle; but Mars (which signifies Courage without Conduct) proving too weak to
resist Minerva (or Courage with Conduct) which the Poet represents as
constantly aiding his Greeks; they want some prudent Management to rally them
again: He therefore brings in a Wisdom to assist Mars, under the Appearance of
Apollo.

XL.
VERSE 592. Achilles fights no more.] Homer from time to time puts his Readers
in mind of Achilles, during his Absence from the War; and finds occasions of
celebrating his Valor with the highest Praises. There cannot be a greater
Encomium than this, where Apollo himself tells the Trojans they have nothing to
fear, since Achilles fights no longer against them. Dacier.

XLI.
VERSE 630. Had some brave Chief.] The turning off in this Place from the
Actions of the Field, to represent to us a Man with Security and Calmness
walking through it, without being able to reprehend any thing in the whole
Action; this is not only a fine Praise of the Battle, but as it were a
Breathing-place to the Poetical Spirit of the Author, after having rapidly run
along with the Heat of the Engagement: He seems like one who having got over a
Part of his Journey, stops upon an Eminence to look back upon the Space he has
passed, and concludes the Book with an agreeable Pause or Respite.

The Reader will excuse our taking notice of such a Trifle, as that it was an
old Superstition, that this fourth Book of the Iliads being laid under the
Head, was a Cure for the Quartan Ague. Serenus Sammonicus, a celebrated
Physician in the time of the younger Gordian and Preceptor to that Emperor, has
gravely prescribed it among other Receipts in his medicinal Precepts, Praec.
50. Moeoniae Iliados quartum suppone timenti. I believe it will be found a true
Observation, that there never was any thing so absurd or ridiculous, but has at
one time or other been written even by some Author of Reputation: A Reflection
it may not be improper for Writers to make, as being at once some Mortification
to their Vanity, and some Comfort to their Infirmity.

FINIS.
blazon or coat of arms DIEU ET MON DROIT


GEORGE R.
GEORGE, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas Our Trusty and Well-beloved BERNARD LINTOT of Our City of London,
Bookseller, has humbly represented unto Us that he is now printing a
Translation of the ILIAD of HOMER from the Greek in Six Volumes in Folio by
ALEXANDER POPE Gent. with large Notes upon each Book: And whereas the said
BERNARD LINTOT has informed Us that he has been at a great Expense in carrying
on the said Work: and that the sole Right and Title of the Copy of the said
Work is vested in the said BERNARD LINTOT: He has therefore humbly besought Us
to grant him Our Royal Privilege and License for the sole printing and
publishing thereof for the Term of fourteen Years. WE being graciously pleased
to encourage so Useful a Work, are pleased to condescend to his Request, and do
therefore hereby give and grant unto the said BERNARD LINTOT Our Royal License
and Privilege for the sole printing and publishing the said Six Volumes of the
ILIAD of HOMER translated by the said ALEXANDER POPE for and during the Term of
fourteen Years, to be computed from the Day of the Date hereof; strictly
charging and prohibiting all Our Subjects within Our Kingdoms and Dominions to
reprint or abridge the same either in the like or any other Volume or Volumes
whatsoever, or to import, buy, vend, utter or distribute any Copies of the same
or any part thereof reprinted beyond the Seas within the said Term of fourteen
Years, without the Consent and Approbation of the said BERNARD LINTOT, his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns by Writing under his or their Hands and Seals
first had and obtained, as they and every of them offending herein will answer
the contrary at their Perils, and such other Penalties as by the Laws and
Statutes of this Our Realm may be inflicted: Whereof the Master, Wardens and
Company of Stationers of our City of London, Commissioners and other Officers
of our Customs, and all other our Officers and Ministers whom it may concern,
are to take Notice that due Obedience be given to Our Pleasure herein
signified. Given at Our Court at St. James's the sixth Day of May, 1715. in the
first Year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command, JAMES STANHOPE.


