THE HISTORY OF RELIGION: PARTICULARLY OF THE Principal Denominations of
CHRISTIANS, VIZ. Of the Church of Rome, Of the Church of England, Of the Church
of Scotland, Of the Nonjurors, Of the Lutherans, Of the Presbyterians, Of the
Independents, Of the Baptists in general, Of the Quakers, Of the Antinomians,
Of the Moravians, Of the Methodists in general.


CONTAINING

A succinct and genuine Account of their original and present CONSTITUTION,
DISCIPLINE, DOCTRINES, WORSHIP, and CEREMONIES: With a general Account of the
various Sectaries of less Note, since the first Establishment of Christianity.

Including a general History of the REFORMATION, and so much of Civil and
Ecclesiastical History as is connected with, or necessary to explain and
illustrate the WORK.

TO WHICH IS ADDED,

A DICTIONARY of the principal Religious ORDERS, OFFICES, DAYS, RITES, CUSTOMS,
HABITS, and CHARACTERS; the most important TRANSACTIONS of Ecclesiastical
COUNCILS, SYNODS, etc. explaining all such ambiguous Words and Phrases as have
a proper Connection with the Subjects of this History.

By an IMPARTIAL HAND.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for C. HENDERSON, at the Royal Exchange; W. NICOLL, in St.
Paul's Church Yard; and J. JOHNSON, opposite the Monument.

MDCCLXIV.

THE PREFACE.
TO improve the Understanding in any Branch of useful Knowledge, has ever been
esteemed a laudable Pursuit; and every Attempt to facilitate the Propagation of
Knowledge, in Proportion to the Nature and Importance of the Subject, and the
Propriety of the Method, will, it is presumed, meet with Approbation and
Encouragement.

To obtain a Skill in the Sciences is, indeed, the Business and Profession only
of a few Men of distinguished Abilities; but there are many who have Capacity
and Leisure to improve and enrich their Minds in various Branches of Knowledge;
even the lower Order of Men have particular Callings and Concerns in Life, in
which it behooves them to employ their Reason in the Use of proper Helps for
their Improvement.

The common Duties and Benefits of Society, which interest every Man living, as
he is a social Creature; even our particular and necessary Relations to a
Family, a Neighborhood, or Government, oblige all Persons to exercise their
reasoning Powers in a Variety of Cases, before they can come to a prudent
discreet Determination, and avoid those Errors which would naturally be
attended with unhappy Consequences.

But every Man has a more important Concern in the Affairs of a Life to come;
and therefore it is a Matter of the highest Moment for every one to understand,
to reason, and to determine justly about the Things of Religion: It Is in vain
for Persons in general to say, We have no Leisure or Time; when the daily
Intervals and Vacancies from necessary Labor, together with the One Day in
Seven, in the Christian World, allow a sufficient Time for such Pursuits: And
if Men would but apply themselves hereto, with half as much Zeal and Diligence
as they do to the Trifles and Amusements of this Life, it would turn to
infinitely better Account.

But, besides the right Knowledge of those Principles and Duties which are of
the greatest Concernment, there are some Branches of Study, which have a most
apparent Tendency to entertain as well as to improve; and, of this Kind, some
Subjects of History will claim the Preference; and, perhaps, there is no Part
of History better received than the Account of great Changes and Revolutions in
States and Governments.

Of all Changes, those in Religion which have been sudden and signal, are
enquired into with the most eager Curiosity; and, where the Salvation of Souls
has been chiefly aimed at, and the Credit, Honor and Interest of Churches
promoted and established, the more Pious and Judicious will find their
Satisfaction much more than compensate the seeming Trouble of their Search into
the Reality and Circumstances thereof.

The Alteration that has been made in the established Religion of this Nation
for little more than the two last Centuries, has produced such Effects every
where, that it is no Wonder if all Persons desire to see a clear Account of the
several Steps by which it advanced; of the Councils that directed it, and the
Motives, both religious and political, that inclined Men of all Conditions to
concur in it.

To lay before the Public a particular and impartial Account of the
Constitution and Doctrine of the several Denominations of Christians, is the
principal Intent of this Undertaking; and, upon the most mature Enquiry I have
been able to make, I find the Doctrines and Tenets of all Denominations to have
varied greatly from their original Constitution, and distinguishing Character.

This Observation will appear to be true, even with respect to the Roman
Catholic Church, which has been most of all solicitous to preserve the Catholic
Faith, as they call it, pure and incorrupt. The wiser Part disclaim some of
their most absurd Doctrines, and discard and despise many of their ridiculous
Ceremonies: Some Reformation has been made in these Respects by Churches of
that Persuasion in different Nations of Europe; and it is more than probable
that many of the most serious and judicious Papists would be glad to see a
greater Reformation even in the Fundamentals of their Religion.

Picart, under the Article of adoring the Cross, says, "This Ceremony gives
great Scandal to Heretics, who look upon this solemn Adoration on Good Friday
as manifest Idolatry -- would it not be better to decline some Ceremonies which
Catholics are reduced to Shifts, Disguises, and Evasions to defend, and which
are looked on as Folly to the Libertine, and a Scandal to the Protestant?"
Picart's Edition of the Religious Ceremonies, Vol. II. P. 25.


In the Church of England it is well known great Alterations have taken place
since the Reformation: At that Time the generality of the English Divines,
especially the Majority of the Committee for Compiling the Articles of this
Church, were strict or rigid Calvinists, who, in Spite of all the Opposition
they met with, modelled several of the Articles in Favor of Calvinism, which
now the greatest Part of the English Divines would fain explain contrary to
their literal Sense and Meaning; represent them as, at best, ambiguous and
capable of a Sense more consistent with the general Tenor of the Scriptures,
and the Reason and common Sense of Mankind. -- In like Manner Athanasius's
Creed was then, by Authority, inserted in the Book of Common Prayer, and, with
all the incomprehensible Mysteries and exceptionable Clauses, cordially
received by some, and imposed on others, as the true Catholic Faith; whereas
now, to say no more to explode it, the Church in general "would be glad to be
well rid of it." If the Question were asked, What are the genuine Sentiments of
the Church of England? it would be a very vague, indeterminate and false
Answer, to say they are contained in the XXXIX Articles; when it is well known
that the Majority of our most eminent Prelates and Divines of the established
Church, have embraced and professed, and in their public Preaching and Writings
endeavor to inculcate, Principles more consistent with the Nature of genuine
Christianity.

The same Observation is equally true, with respect to many other
Denominations, namely the Kirk or Church of Scotland, the English
Presbyterians, Baptists, Quakers, etc. as would be no difficult Matter to
particularize in many Instances, were it not unnecessary, as will evidently
appear in the Course of this Work.

This may be one Reason why all the Histories extant, of the several Sectaries
of Christians, differ so widely from each other, and are so very imperfect and
erroneous: I wish this was the only Reason, and that there did not appear some
evident Marks of a malevolent Design to misrepresent Sectaries, in order to
expose them to Censure and Contempt. This I hint with particular Regard to
Ross's View of all Religions, being, of all others, the most scurrilous and
false; and to that voluminous Edition of the Religious Ceremonies of all
Nations, in which the Author appears greatly mistaken in the Constitution and
Principles of several Societies of English Protestant Dissenters; and also to
Bossuet's History of the Variation of Protestant Churches in the Low Countries.

But this Crime of Misrepresentation is not applicable only to a few Histories
of our own or foreign Nations, and those for the most part obsolete: Certain
modern Writers seem to have taken a secret Pleasure in blackening the
Characters of some Societies of Christians, and exposing and censuring such
Doctrines or Rites as they learned not in their Infancy to believe or practice;
forgetting, though ashamed to deny, the Right of private Judgment, and Liberty
of Conscience; and too often ignorant of the genuine Principles of those
Societies they censure, and of the Arguments upon which they are founded.
Indeed I have been often surprised to find Persons of Credit, and otherwise of
good Understanding, so extremely ignorant, not only with respect to the genuine
Sentiments of other Denominations of Christians; but in a very high Degree, of
the distinguishing Tenets or Principles of that Religion they themselves
profess; and consequently of the Arguments on which they rest. This was one
Motive to the Prosecution of the present Work; and another was to suppress
Bigotry, Prejudice, and Censoriousness, too apt to take Possession of narrow
Minds; and, in their Place, to inculcate and improve that mutual Love and
Charity, even for Persons of differing Opinions, which is so agreeable to the
Dignity and Honor of Men and of Christians.

I write for no Party; my Aim is to recommend a free and impartial Enquiry into
the genuine Principles of Christianity, which is the just Foundation of Truth
and Virtue, Liberty and Charity.

That generally-received Maxim, Rome was not built in a Day, is as undoubtedly
true with respect to the Constitution, Doctrine and Ceremonies of the Romish
Church, as of its external Form and stately Edifices; for this Reason I have
judged a brief Account of the principal Revolutions and Variations in the
Government, Worship, etc. of that Church for seventeen Centuries, a proper
Preliminary to the History of its present State.

The Account I have given of the Principles, etc. of the Romish Church, I have
first expressed in the Words of Pope Pius's Creed, which was established by the
Council of Trent, and has been ever since esteemed by the Votaries of that
Church, of the greatest Authority. I have likewise endeavored to explain or
ascertain their true Sense, from Authors of their own, well approved of by that
Church, and whose Books have been licensed by public Authority; disclaiming and
carefully avoiding, as much as possible, the fallacious Glosses, and artful
Disguises of designing Priests on the one Hand, and the Misapprehensions of the
Vulgar on the other. For this Purpose I have consulted the most valuable
Histories of that Church, their Constitution, Doctrine and Ceremonies published
at that remarkable Period, when the Controversy subsisted between many of our
eminent Prelates and of their Priests and Cardinals from the Year 1682 to 1688,
inclusive.

I have also made several Extracts from Dr. Middleton's Letters from Rome,
wherein he has shown, (conformable to several other Authors) that many of the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Romish Church were of Heathen original, and
destitute of superior Authority for their Practice: In these Extracts, I have
not thought it necessary to Change his Language, to avoid the Reprehension of
those Sentiments and Ceremonies; nor have I allowed myself to exclaim or to
detail out such Invectives as are too generally used, but have no proper and
natural Tendency to convince the Papist, or confirm the Protestant. -- If I
have given any Scope to Censure, it is in the Article of Persecution, where it
was impossible, after reading so many tragical Accounts of the horrid Cruelties
of the Inquisition, and other inhuman Executions, to be impartial and honest
without expressing the utmost Abhorrence and Detestation of such Practices, and
the Principles that led to them; a superficial Mention of which, will alarm
every true Protestant who has ever considered the Value of civil and religious
Liberty and knows how to prize them. -- With Respect to other Sentiments and
Practices that are unscriptural and merely of human Invention, I am sorry to
see, in the Defenses of Popery, how much they are founded upon the Authority of
ancient Fathers, and that they are so often shown to be consonant with some
former Practices of our established Church; with certain of the Canons,
Articles, and Liturgy; which may fully convince us, that most of the
Exceptionable Parts of our Articles and Liturgy arose from the undue Veneration
which the Compilers of them paid to the Fathers St. Augustine, St. Cyprian, St.
Ambrose, etc. and likewise sufficiently demonstrate to the impartial Reader,
that Antiquity is a wretched Guide to a Searcher after Truth; and that human
Formularies of Faith are a chief Obstacle to real Knowledge.

As to the political Views, base Artifices, and Exactions of the Romish
Priests, too much of it will appear in the Course of this History: An impartial
Mention of them is in Fact to explode them: Particularly in the History of the
State of Religion in Great Britain, from the first planting of Christianity, at
the latter End of the VIth and Beginning of the VIIth Century, to the Middle of
the XIVth Century, when Wickliffe made some Efforts toward a Reformation. The
Reader will find many remarkable Occurrences, in Respect to the Encroachments
of the Church of Rome on the Prerogatives of the British Kings, and the common
Rights of their Subjects, as well as by the gross Corruptions of the original
Purity and Simplicity of Christianity, as must ever be deemed peculiar
Incentives to the English Nation, to throw off that Yoke if possible, and
pursue a Reformation in earnest -- and at the same Time, he will observe such
Difficulties attending it, as must give us an high Opinion of our principal
Reformers, and lead us to value our Liberties both civil and religious.

In the History of the Reformation abroad and at home, and of the State of
Religion, more especially in the established Church, and from that remarkable
Period to the Revolution, I must own I have much exceeded my intended Limits;
but when I considered, the necessary Connection between the Reformation in the
Low Countries, France, and in England, the many interesting Circumstances that
occurred, in which our principal Reformers were exhibited to View (which indeed
deserve to be ever preserved, and handed down to latest Posterity) and which I
doubt not will be perused by many, with Pleasure and Improvement, I was not
willing to omit them.

Having mentioned Wickliffe as the Morning Star of the Reformation, I have
likewise given a general History of the Period in which he lived, to the Reign
of King Henry the VIIIth, the reputed Time when Protestantism took its Rise: In
this Interval I have found many Circumstances of an interesting Nature relative
to the necessity of a Reformation, the Difficulties attending it, and likewise
of incidental Occurrences contributing thereto, which, at Length, made it rise
superior to Opposition. How far the Reformation was intended or effected by
King Henry VIII, is a Point in which even critical Historians are much divided:
I have therefore sought the Materials of this difficult Part of my History,
from ancient MSS, as well as modern Tracts; and I have been somewhat more
diffuse in this Part, as I have selected from two MSS, his Profession of Faith
wrote in 1536, and Memoirs of his Character, compiled much about the same Time.

My next Province is to give a History of the State of Religion in the
successive Reigns, down to the present Time, in which I have been careful to
introduce whatever has been signal and interesting, either in the
ecclesiastical History of the established Church, or of such remarkable
Transactions and Revolutions, in the civil History of this Nation, as are
connected with it for more than two Hundred Years, and as the prevailing
Opinions and Parties, gave Rise at different Times, to a Variety of
Transactions in Council, in Parliament, and ecclesiastic Convocations, some of
a remarkable interesting Nature, I thought them the proper Subjects of such an
History: But as many of them are peculiar to different Denominations, that Part
of them I have inserted in the respective History of those Sects, and what
properly relate to the ecclesiastical Polity and Government of the Church of
England, comes under that Head.

In the Prosecution of this Part, I have attempted some Account of the Princes,
and most eminent Prelates and Divines, whose Lives and Writings have done
Honor to the Christian Protestant Church, and also of such as have attempted
to sap the Foundation of Truth, Liberty and Virtue.

In treating of the Articles of the Church of England, I have first given them
in the established Form, contained in the Book of Common Prayer; I have then
endeavored to give their true Sense, from sundry of the most approved
Expositions of those Articles, by some distinguished Prelates of our Church,
and other Divines of Note, and generally by Extracts in their own Words; save
where I have thought it might be more properly abridged, and in that Case I
have given an Abstract, with due Regard to the Sense and Meaning of the Author,
and of the Articles in their original Form, in a Sense in which the more
judicious Divines would recommend them to be understood. -- Mr. Welchman, in
his Exposition of these Articles, pays a particular Regard to the Sense of the
ancient Fathers, St. Austin, St. Chrysostom, St. Ignatius, Irenaeus, etc. and
it appears that the Language and Sentiment contained in them, are in great
Measure borrowed from the Writings of those Lights of the primitive Church,
which, by the Way, shows the great Veneration and Esteem our first Compilers
had for Antiquity; and very often to the Neglect of more certain, essential and
important Rules and Principles of Judging, concerning the Truths of the sacred
Scriptures: But this is only a Hint; for I must declare that I have made it a
general Rule, throughout the whole of this Work, to relate Facts and describe
Things as I found them, without attempting to animadvert thereon.

In representing the Constitution and Doctrines of other Denominations of
Christians, I have made it my constant Rule to show that I understood the
Subject, and was under no undue Biass. Impartiality I esteemed essentially
recommendatory of this Work, and the best Apology I could make for whatever
involuntary Errors and Imperfections might attend the Publication.

Throughout the Whole I have aimed at Conciseness, as far as I judged would
comport with the Plan I had in View, its Entertainment and Usefulness; for I
have characterized each Sect and explained their Doctrines, more especially
their peculiar Tenets, where I could, in their own Words. -- This Method will
afford not a barely superficial and partial Account of what may be the
particular Sentiments of here and there a private Person and obscure Society;
but of the genuine Principles of that Body or Community, which is necessary to
forming a just Idea of them; and whenever it has been necessary, I have had
proper Information from Correspondence, or given a personal Attendance at their
Assemblies and taken Minutes, for greater certainty and Satisfaction.

Amongst a Variety of Readers I cannot expect the Approbation of all. Some
there are so extremely indifferent, with respect to the principal Difference of
Sentiment among Christians, as plainly implies they have never made Religion
their Study, or that their own Profession is not the Effect of their Enquiry;
but that they are governed in their Choice, by the Dictates of their Tutors, or
the Sanction of Authority; and to such, Popery would, probably, have been as
agreeable as Protestantism, or Mahomedanism as Christianity, if it had been
their Lot to have been born in the Countries where these are established. I
shall leave them to enjoy their supine Indifference; but not without sincerely
congratulating my Countrymen, on our distinguishing Privilege, that we live in
a Nation and at a Time, when Religion has in great Measure gained the Ascendant
over Superstition; Truth in general prevailed against Darkness and Error, and
Liberty, civil and religious, triumphed over Tyranny and Persecution for
Conscience sake: And for these I hope we shall always find Patrons and
Advocates, amongst the more Learned and Judicious.

By some it has been suggested that this Work will be too dull and serious, and
savor too much of the controverted Points of Religion; to such I beg leave to
observe, I have not often attempted to animadvert or expatiate on particular
Opinions or Practices, that was not my Province; but to give a genuine Relation
of such Facts as appertain to the History, and these are, I presume, as well
calculated to improve the Gentleman, and give Life and Spirit to Conversation,
at proper Intervals, as any other Subjects more commonly introduced; and where
such a Variety of Facts, Circumstances and Characters are introduced, I cannot
apprehend it will be unentertaining or useless.

By attempting such a Compendium of the religious Principles of particular
Denominations, I imagined I might particularly adapt this Work to the perusal
of many young Persons, and other well disposed Christians, who may not have
Leisure or Inclination to read many distinct Treatises, and it may answer a
particular good Purpose, in regard to their Information and Improvement.

As this Work was not entered upon with any party Views, or prosecuted with
Prejudice and Declamation, so it has been no hasty Production; it has been
compiled at different Times, and by slow Degrees, in a Course of several Years;
now and then, indeed, it spread itself into Branches, and Leaves, like a Plant
in April, and sometimes it lay by without Growth like a Vegetable in Winter;
but it still existed, and acquired its present Texture and Bulk according as
Health, Leisure, and other Advantages favored the Undertaking.

Nor do I apprehend the Reader will look upon this as a prolix History, when he
considers not only the Extent of the Plan, but that many of the Histories
necessary to be consulted are very voluminous; as Eusebius's, Dupin's,
Bingham's, and Collier's ecclesiastical Histories; Richer's of Councils, Father
Paul's of that of Trent, Picart's religious Ceremonies, and the Collections of
Tracts for and against Popery, Brandt's History of the Reformation in the Low
Countries, Burnet's and many others, of the Reformation in England, and Laval's
of that in France; Calderwood's, Spotswood's, and diverse others of the Kirk of
Scotland; Sewel's of Quakerism; Neal's of the Puritans, and Crosby's of the
English Baptists: Besides a great Variety of Tracts on Points of Controversy,
Dictionaries, etc. that must be refered to, and consulted, on such a Number of
Subjects; Rapin, Hume, Smollet, and other civil Historians of our own Nation,
necessary for ascertaining and illustrating all such Matters, as have an
immediate Connection with the principal Design of this Work. So that, upon the
Whole, I may venture to say, it has been an arduous Task, the result of much
Reading and Enquiry. But notwithstanding the Assistance I have received, from
so many eminent Historians, I have followed no Author any farther than I
apprehended him to coincide with Truth.

After having been at all this Expense and Trouble to procure Materials and
proper Helps for the Execution of my Plan, it is very probable and almost
unavoidable, that many Things may have escaped my notice, which might have
contributed to illustrate, confirm, or embellish the several Parts of it. I can
only flatter myself that the Reader will find a sufficient Number of Quotations
to ascertain the genuine Principles of the several Societies respectively,
their Rites, Ceremonies, etc. of which I have given the following History. And
I hope the judicious Reader will look on it as no Dimunition of the Value of
this Work, that many of the Ideas, as well as the Language, in which they are
expressed, are borrowed from the Writings of the most eminent Divines of the
established Church, and other Denominations, especially as, in many Instances,
it was necessary for authenticating the Account I gave of the different
Sectaries; and, very often, I found my Sentiments so happily expressed in them,
that I presumed from my own Approbation it would be most agreeable to my
Readers.

I shall not urge as any Motive to this Work, that I apprehended Popery was
gaining Ground in this Nation; but as that Religion is founded in Church
Policy, and propagated with Artifice and Industry by their Priests, and is
suited to captivate weak Minds, it cannot be unseasonable to point out some of
their Evasions, and to give a genuine Account of their Constitution, Doctrines,
Ceremonies, etc. and this I judge will be sufficient, if impartially
represented, and attended to, to guard Protestants against the Corruption,
Superstition, and Cruelty of the Roman Catholic Religion.

Nor am I inclined to think a Spirit of Persecution prevails among Protestants,
or of uncharitably censuring Persons for different Sentiments and Profession: I
wish, indeed, this was more evident; for I find some Authors suggest, that this
Principle is far from being extinguished, and that many rather want Opportunity
than Inclination to persecute, and instance the high Claims of the Church,
which discovered themselves in the Bangorian Controversy; I am,
notwithstanding, willing to hope a Love of Liberty prevails, and to promote it,
I have attempted, in my Introduction, to vindicate the Right of private
Judgment, and show the Duty and the Advantages of free Enquiry, etc.

I rather think what is called Methodism and Enthusiasm prevails, to the
Contempt of rational Religion; and, as I have taken Care to give a fair Account
of their peculiar Tenets, I wish for nothing more than that the just
Representation of their Principles may have a proper Influence on the Minds of
my Readers.

In the Course of this History, I doubt not but it will appear, that the
principal Differences amongst the several Denominations of Protestant Churches,
consists not in any essential and fundamental Points, but in one or other of
these particulars, viz. different Apprehensions, with respect to the original
Constitution and Government of the Christian Church; different Sentiments with
respect to some abstruse Points of Doctrine, in which the Essence of Religion
does not, cannot consist; or else their Difference respects the positive
Institutions, as to their Form and Manner, Importance or Insignificance, or of
certain Rites and Ceremonies of less Importance; and that notwithstanding their
Separation in Communion, and very often reproaching each other, they agree in
the main essential Points of Religion, in "all such Points as are abundantly
sufficient to preserve the Knowledge and Practice of Religion in the World."
Bishop of London's second Pastoral Letter, printed in 1730.


Indeed many Attempts have been made, since the Reformation, and especially
since the Revolution, to reconcile Protestants; a Design which, however
laudable, can never be effected with respect to Uniformity of Sentiment: The
Causes of such differing Principles, respecting Doctrine, Worship and
Ceremonies, are so many and various, that we cannot hope for it, though,
notwithstanding the fond Attachment of many to their own Sects, the most
impartial Enquiry convince us that no Sect of Religion is free from just
Exceptions. There is scarce any Church in Christendom, at this Day, that does
not obtrude many Falsehoods, such as must appear to any free Spirit, pure
Contradictions; though delivered with the same Gravity, Authority and
Importunity that they do the Holy Oracles of GOD. More's Mystery of Godliness,
Lib. 10. C. 2. 6.
And to the same Purpose a late ingenious Author observes, Mr. Hume.


"Every Institution or System of Religion, drawn up and adopted by Men, however
it may claim a divine Original, with regard to the more important and essential
Points, has always something of Weakness and Imperfection that cleave to them,
and will be apt, unless carefully guarded, to degenerate into one Extreme or
the other. -- What Species of Devotion so pure, noble and worthy the supreme
Being, as that which is most spiritual, simple and unadorned, and which
partakes least of the Senses or Imagination; and yet it is found, by
Experience, that Modes of Worship, founded primarily on those very Principles,
do very naturally, among the Vulgar, mount up into Extravagance and Fanaticism;
even many of the first Reformers have given Occasion for this Kind of
Reflection, which has been a real Disparagement of their Zeal, though in the
Event it proved in a very great Degree useful: It partook strongly of the
enthusiastic Genius, which a little more Mixture of Ceremony, Pomp and
Ornament, may seem to correct the Abuse of. -- On the other Hand, a Religion
attended with much of Ceremony and external Grandeur, has a very great Tendency
to degenerate into Superstition. -- The Church of England itself, which is,
perhaps, the best Medium amongst these Extremes, will be allowed, at least
during the Age, or in the Discharge of the public Offices of Religion, under
Archbishop Laud, to have been somewhat tinctured with a Superstition resembling
the Popish, and to have paid a higher Regard to some positive Institutions,
than the Nature of the Things strictly speaking would permit. It is the
Business of an Historian to remark these Abuses of all Kinds; but it belongs
also to a prudent Reader, to confine the Representations to that Age alone of
which the Author treats. -- This would be of excellent Use to regulate our
Ideas of several Sectaries; for it is a real Absurdity to suppose that the
Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, and other Sectaries of the present Age,
partake of all the Extravagancies which we remark in those who bore those
Appellations in the last Century."

It is very common for Historians, or other Writers, in general, to give an
Account of the principal Authors who have treated on the same Subjects; and
where this is done with Judgment and Impartiality, it has an apparent
Usefulness: And this is, in some Measure, necessary on my Part; though I will
not in the least attempt to raise the Credit of the present History, by
detracting from the Merits of others. -- Bishop Burnet has characterized a
Variety of Authors who have given us the History of the Church in general, or
of the Reformation in particular, which I apprehend, without Flattery, may
afford us some Rule of Judging concerning them: Speaking of some foreign
Histories, he says, " Sleidan, Thuanus, and Father Paul, are Authors of Credit
and Impartiality, so far, at least, as may be expected from Persons of their
Profession, as Catholics. -- Sander's History of the Reformation, instead of
doing Honor to it, is replete with such Calumnies and Falsehoods, as have
tended to create Prejudices in the Minds of many, who have been weak enough to
give Credit to it. Fox's History, is principally calculated to discover the
Corruptions and Cruelties of the Romish Church; Lord Herbert's History is
limited to the Reign of Henry VIII. and chiefly relates to civil Matters.
Fuller, indeed, procured some few scarce Papers; but in general neither
entertaining nor improving. -- Dr. Heylin wrote in a much superior Method and
Style, but was ill informed, or too much biassed by Passion and Prejudice
against some Persons and Parties, who agitated Affairs at that Time; and in the
historical Part produces few or no Vouchers for what he asserts. Some other of
our Histories are delivered with so much Alloy and Uncertainty, as has given
Occasion for the Advocates of the Church of Rome to disparage the Reformation,
as begun by Lust and Passion, conducted and carried on by Ambition, and
confirmed by Policy." See Bishop Burnet's Preface to his History of the
Reformation.


To establish these Points, chiefly constitute the Subject of the Prefaces, the
Introductions, or Appendixes, to several of those Summaries and Defenses of the
Roman Catholic Faith, which have been so industriously dispersed, in Great
Britain, to Poison the Minds of Protestants.

Some very remarkable Productions of this Kind have come under my Notice: The
Appendix to the Profession of Catholic Faith contain sundry Reasons for
disavowing Protestantism, or the Reformation; though many of them so often
repeated, and confuted, that one would imagine them too trifling to be
propagated at this Time, when the Necessity of the Reformation, so far as it
was effected, and the Expediency of carrying it much farther, has been so well
defended. It consists of the following Particulars, viz. that Martin Luther,
and other Reformers, were Persons of no Education; that they were Schismatics;
the first Seeds of it sown by the Devil; the Instruments, Men of worthless
Characters, instanced in King Henry VIII; that it was propagated by Lay
Authority, further instanced in the Acts of Queen Elizabeth; the Fruits of it a
Spawn of Heresies, Dissensions, and Variations in Religion: Thence it infers,
their Religion is free from all those miserable Consequences, the safest to
live and to die in; and that all who do not live in it, and abide faithfully in
that Profession, are censured by the Church, and will ever justly be condemned
and anathematized by her Decrees, as forsaking the infallible Guide, and
adhering to that fallible, uncertain Rule of Scripture, according to their own
Interpretation of it. Appendix to Pope Pius's Creed, printed in 1734.
But though these Attempts are not to be wondered at among Persons who profess
themselves Papists; yet, that Protestants themselves should give a Handle to
the Adversaries of Protestantism, to reproach their genuine Principles, and the
zealous Abettors of them, deserves to be mentioned to their Dishonor, and the
Discredit of their Histories.

The Use M. Bossuet makes of his History of the Variations of Religion in the
Protestant Churches in the Low Countries, is principally this, that the only
true universal Catholic Church, under their universal infallible Head, has been
always invariably the same, and consequently a Separation from her heretical
and dangerous; however, in the Course of this History, it will appear that this
wants Proof, and there can be no Impropriety in correcting an Historian, when
we find him mistaken or partial. See Bossuet's Variations of Religion in the
Protestant Churches, 2 vol. 4to, French.


Many of the Historians of our own Nation have blended civil, military and
ecclesiastical Affairs together; some have confined their History to the Church
of England, others to the Church of Scotland; some have treated only of
particular Sects, others have dwelt on mere controverted Points, often in
answer to their Opponents, with more of uncharitable Warmth than Argument. Many
of these Historians have been of Use in this Compilation, though I was from
thence led to construct this Work on what I apprehended, a more eligible Plan.

With respect to Chronology, I have aimed at the greatest Precision and
Accuracy. In many remarkable Events I have followed Blair's Chronology,
presuming it was compiled with great Care, and compared and corrected by former
Chronologies; and I have sometimes given the different Dates. Wherein that did
not satisfy me, I have consulted Dupin, Tillemont, Speed, Stowe, etc. and as to
some Rites, Ceremonies and Customs, I have been obliged to recur to such
Authors as had controverted those Subjects, and produced the best Authority
they could in support of their Point.

In the Dictionary of Sects annexed to this Work, and of ambiguous Words and
Phrases, I have, in general, quoted the Author from whence I have borrowed the
Definition, or received my Information; and where Words have been so
differently understood and applied, as scarce to have a distinct determinate
Meaning, I have given the Sense of more Authors than one, that the Reader may
form a juster Idea thereof.

The WHOLE is most humbly inscribed to every ingenious and impartial Enquirer
after Truth, by

The AUTHOR.

INTRODUCTION.
RELIGION essential to Man; his Duty and Happiness. Natural Religion defined,
its immutable Obligation, etc. Revealed Religion, its Expediency and Utility.
General History of the Old Testament. The superior Excel^ency the New
Testament. Truth, its Nature, and Imp^rtance in general, and of religious
Truths in particular. The principal Source of Uncertainty in our Enquiries
after Truth, the Causes of Corruption in Christianity, and the Difficulties
attending the Understanding the Scriptures, considered. Truth, nevertheless,
attainable in all important and essential Points, with the Means of acquiring
it. The right Privilege and Duty of free and impartial Enquiry, as opposed to
Prejudice and Bigotry, and to a careless Indifference. The abuses of free
enquiry. The Advantages attending the diligent Pursuit of Truth, and the
pernicious Consequences of Ignorance and Error. With some Remarks applicable to
the Subjects of the Work.

RELIGION, Religion essential to Man, his Duty and Happiness.
in its genuine principles and influences, is so sublime and excellent, in its
nature and effects so noble and beneficent, and so admirably suited to the
state and circumstances of reasonable, intelligent and accountable creatures,
that it justly claims to be the matter of our first and principal concern.

Man is a creature formed for religion, (...) Plato in Timaeo.
, is dependent on a supreme Being, capable of knowing on whom be depends; and
has a natural awe of his Creator impressed on his mind. He naturally admires
the grandeur, beauty, and use, that abound all over the world; he has a natural
curiosity to prompt him to enquire after the cause, and has reason to discover
to him a supreme all perfect mind, as the only adequate cause of this infinity
of beauty and good; his passions of veneration, gratitude, fear and hope,
naturally terminate in this Being; as the only object equal to them; and his
natural apprehensions' of eternity, naturally excite him to secure, by goodness
and piety, the favor of that Almighty and eternal Being, who alone can make
him happy during that everlasting state of which he is apprehensive. And now
laying all these properties together, self-love, reason, a social disposition,
and benevolent affections, a strong sense and love of beauty, a natural
dependence on a supreme Being, and a natural awe of him, etc. we have an idea
of human nature, and from this idea of human nature, the natural difference
betwixt virtue and vice, and the excellency of religion, will appear Grove's
Moral Philosophy, p. 139.
.

Religion is generally considered as natural or revealed, and these are
differently defined, and as differently estimated as to their importance.
Natural Religion defined.
Natural religion, Mr. Wollaston tells us, consists in "the pursuit of
happiness, by the practice of reason and truth Wollaston's Religion of Nature
delineated, p. 52.
. Mr. Chambers defines it to be, "whatever we discover to be due and meet by
the mere dictates of natural reason Chambers's Dictionary, Art. Religion.
." This is sometimes called ethics or moral virtue, and includes in it these
duties which, on the principles of reason, a man owes to God, to society, and
to himself; the duties we owe to the Deity resulting from our relation to him,
as our Creator, benefactor, lawgiver, and judge, and as the original fountain
of all goodness, wisdom, beauty and happiness are veneration, gratitude, love,
resignation, dependence, obedience, worship and praise, which, according to the
measure of our finite capacities, ought to maintain some proportion to the
grandeur of the object whom we love, and the greatness of our obligation. The
duties we owe to society of peculiar obligation, are filial or conjugal; but in
general we owe to others, love, justice, sincerity, fidelity, charity, the love
of our country, and universal benevolence. The duties respecting ourselves are
prudence, fortitude, the government of the appetites and passions, humility and
resignation; these constitute the temper of happiness, and are the elements of
our perfection and felicity Martin's Ethics. Wollaston's Religion of Nature,.
vi. N. 19.
. The essence of all religion, says an ingenious writer, is love to God and
love to man Rational Catechism, p. 59. See also Fordyce's Philosophy.
.

Another judicious author says, by natural religion we are to understand all
those things, which intelligent beings, by the right exercise of their
reasonable faculties, can discover to be their duty, without a supernatural
revelation to direct them, and upon that discovery so made, or capable of being
made, which they are obliged to pursue, and practice in their several
circumstances, offices or relations in life. Thus to love and reverence the
Deity, to do justice between man and man, between our neighbors and ourselves,
and to be charitable and benevolent to all proper objects, are all of them
branches of natural religion; which every man's reason may discover to him, and
which the present constitution of things requires from him, and necessarily
subjects him to The eternal obligation of Natural Religion, p. 1, 2.
.

The law of nature, says another ingenious gentleman, is the will of God,
relating to human actions, grounded in the moral differences of things, and
because discoverable by the light of nature, obligatory upon all mankind. It is
called the law of nature, 1. Because of the manner of its promulgation, which
is by natural reason; 2. Because of its source of foundation, this law
resulting from the respective nature of Beings, and things: of Beings, as God
and man, and of things or actions, as morally good or evil, and having
different physical effects; 3. Because it is the law of God. Nature is but a
fictiticus The Stoics often made use of the word Nature, as another name for
God. Senec. de Benef. 47. Grove's Moral Phil. vol. II. p. 130.
person, and all that is said of the wisdom of her designs, and operations of
her power, or of her laws, is to be ascribed to him, who is the author of
nature. The law or religion of nature is so called, says the judicious Dr.
Conybeare Defense of revealed Religion, p. 11, etc.
, either because it is founded in the reason and nature of things, or else
because it is discovered to us, in the use and exercise of those faculties
which we enjoy. The religion of nature, as it is considered in these different
views, will import quite different things; in the former it signifies a perfect
collection of all those moral doctrines and precepts which have a foundation in
the nature and reason of things; but in the latter it is such a collection as
may be discovered by us, in the exercise of our proper faculties, according to
the means and opportunities we enjoy.

Dr. Clarke has been very clear and explicit in the discussion of this point;
he says there is a necessary and immutable difference of things, that
constitute an action morally fit or unfit; that some actions are in themselves
fit and reasonable, and incumbent on men to do, even separate from the
consideration of those rules; being the positive will or command of God, and
abstracted from any views of private and personal advantage here, or reward
hereafter; and vice versa Dr. Samuel Clarke, on the unchangeable Obligations of
natural Religion. p. 5.

Bott's Morality founded on the Nature of Things.


, he adds, page 6, That though these moral obligations are incumbent on all
reasonable creatures, antecedent to any command, or in respect to the reward;
yet that it is certain and necessary that moral good and moral evil will be
attended with reward or punishment; because the same reasons which prove God
himself to be necessarily just and good, and the rules of justice, equity and
goodness, to be his unalterable will, law, and command, to all rational beings,
prove also that he cannot but be pleased with and approve such creatures as
imitate and obey him, by observing these rules, and be displeased with such as
act contrary thereto; and consequently that he cannot, but some way or other,
make a suitable difference in his dealings with them, and manifest his supreme
power and absolute authority, in finally supporting, maintaining and
vindicating, effectually the honor of the divine laws, as becomes the
righteous governor and disposer of all things; and as this does not appear
visible in the administration of providence in this world, it follows, that
there will be a state after this, wherein there will be an impartial
retribution. That this is so apparently founded on truth, that there have been
almost in every age, even among the Heathens, some wise and brave, and good
men, who have by study and application made great discoveries in regard to
these truths, and deduced suitable inferences from them Ibid. pages 8, 9.

See our Account of Deism.


. Thus Cato wisely asserts, if there is a God, he must delight in virtue, and
those whom he delights in must be happy.

Dr. Chandler says Dr. Samuel Chandler on the necessary and immutable
Difference between moral Good and Evil. Protestant System, p. 280.
, there is as certain and immutable difference between moral good and evil,
virtue and vice, as there is between darkness and light, bitter and sweet; a
difference not accidental to, but founded on the things themselves; not merely
the result of the determination and arbitrary will of another, but which the
very ideas of the things themselves do really and necessarily include. In like
manner^ piety to God, gratitude for benefits received, justice and charity,
temperance and chastity, and the like virtues, are as essentially distinct
from, and do convey as opposite and distinct ideas to impiety, ingratitude,
injustice, uncharitableness, intemperance, lust and the like vices; that it is
absolutely possible they can form the same ideas, or raise the same sentiments
or apprehensions in our breast; and though men may disregard these intrinsic
and necessary differences in their practice, through the warmth of passion, or
the powerful influence of corrupt habits; yet they can never destroy that
difference, nor make the ideas of them to coincide, and become indivisibly the
same. P. 295, he adds, This difference between moral good and evil, and the
fitnesses and unfitnesses which they necessarily infer, is as easily and
certainly to be discerned by mankind, as the difference between any natural or
sensible objects whatsoever; and as virtue is, in the consideration and idea of
it, much more lovely and commendable than vice, so the natural consequences
with which they are almost constantly and inseparably connected, plainly show,
which is most reasonable and fit in itself, and enforce the indispensible
obligations of moral virtue Chandler Ibid, p. 295.
. And page 307, But besides this, surely there is a God that governs the world,
who is not wholly inattentive to, and regardless of the moral state and
character of his creatures; a God who, from the purity and rectitude of his
nature, will ever look with the highest complacency on those who resemble him
in his moral perfections; whilst those, whose actions show them to be
degenerated from the principles and rules of moral virtue, will be the objects
of his displeasure.

These apprehensions of moral virtue appear to be interwoven with the nature of
man, and the importance of morality to the human life, and to its main and
principal ends, shows wisdom and design in giving men the sense and knowledge
of it so universally. When a species of intelligent beings are sent into the
world with sentiments of morality, which are so evidently conducive to their
happiness, filling with a variety of rational pleasure, eminently useful to
each other, and advancing their perfection and felicity in proportion to the
practice of moral virtues, it sufficiently demonstrates they were not
originally invented by politicians, and imposed upon credulous mankind as the
dictates of nature. It is hence evident, that morality is a part of the human
constitution, and owes its source to its author: not that we are necessarily
virtuous, as we are sensible or intelligent; for the very notion of it imports
free-agency or choice; but the true meaning is, that the mind of man is so
framed, as, when it attains the full exercise of its rational powers, to be
necessarily sensible of moral obligations, and cannot wilfully and
premeditately act a contrary part, without doing violence to itself, which is
all the necessity which is consistent with the nature of such a Being, and the
nature of morality Abernethy's Sermons on the Being of God, proved from Human
Intelligence and Morality. System, p. 36, 37, 38.
.

One important use which Dr. Chandler Chandler's Immutable Difference System,
p. 286.
, and many other judicious authors, draws from these premises is, that this
difference of things, arising out of their very natures, leads us to form just
conceptions of the perfections and attributes of God. For instance, when we
say, that God does necessarily exist, does not this suppose a natural and fixed
difference between necessary and precarious existence? In like manner, when we
say, that God is eternal, immense, intelligent, all-powerful, and the like; we
mean, that God is not a temporary, limited, inconscious, impotent Being; and of
consequence do suppose, that the distinctions are not arbitrary, but as
necessary and eternal as the Being of God himself. In like manner, with respect
to God's moral perfections, when we say, that God is wise, and just, and good,
and eternally and unalterably so; we mean, at least, that God is not a foolish,
unrighteous, evil, and cruel Being; and therefore must suppose that the
difference between wisdom and folly, justice and injustice, evil and good,
cruelty and mercy, is absolutely eternal and unalterable as God himself, of
whom we affirm the one and deny the other; and therefore is not owing to his
willing that it should be so, nor alterable at his pleasure, nor dependent on
him for its continuance; for if the distinction between these moral entities or
objects was merely arbitrary, and originally the result only of the will of
God, it can never be affirmed of him that he is eternally and immutably the one
and not the other. For upon this supposition he was not true, or just, or good,
till he willed to be so, and might have been weak, unjust, and evil, by a like
determination of his will; if there be no essential immutable difference in the
things themselves. Nor can there be any possible certainty of God's continuing
for the future to be wise, and just, and good, and not the contrary; for if
there be no other difference between the one and the other, but what the will
of God has constituted; that will ceasing, or altering these distinctions, in
consequence must cease or alter, and God may be evil instead of good, or rather
good and evil at the same time; which is an evident absurdity and contradiction.

On these accounts, says our author, I apprehend it plainly appears, that the
very notion of God implies the necessary, essential, immutable, and independent
difference between moral good and evil; and, indeed, without this supposition,
we could have no sure and fixed rule of action to ourselves as reasonable
creatures; for if piety, justice, charity, and the like virtues, are the
creatures of mere power, and the precarious effects of absolute will and
pleasure, power and will may immediately alter them, cancel men's obligations
to regard them; and substitute in the room of them impiety, injustice and
cruelty, as the great obligations and duties of human nature Vid. Cicer. de
Legibus, l. 1. c. 16.

See Dr. Samuel Clarke on the unchangeable Obligation of Natural Religion, p.
50 and seq.


.

Again, moral good and evil are a kind of relative terms, that is, they do
suppose, either in idea or actual existence, certain reasonable beings, and
certain relations in which they stand to each other. Before ever the creation
was formed, God was in and of himself possessed of infinite perfection, of all
that power and wisdom, which could not but exert themselves in all acts of
justice and goodness to his creatures. After their being brought in actual
existence, the original fitness of which conduct toward them was clearly
discerned by God; whilst they were yet only present in idea to his mind, and
arose from those apprehended relations which were actually in time to subsist
between God and them. And as God had nothing to determine him in the formation
of the world, but the direction of his own infinite understanding and wisdom,
he was undoubtedly at liberty to form what systems of beings he thought proper.

When, indeed, God had actually given being to reasonable creatures of such
particular capacities and circumstances, their relations to each other; then,
the fitness and obligations of those duties resulting from them, became certain
and necessary, and were no longer dependent on the will of God, whether they
should carry in them any reasonable obligation or not; and when they became the
matter of an immediate divine command, they were not therefore reasonable only
because commanded, but commanded because naturally and antecedently reasonable.
And the reason of this is evident, because the fitness and unfitness of moral
good and evil, are as necessary and certain, as the natural and original
difference between them. This, therefore, must be the supreme, immutable and
universal rule of action to all reasonable beings whatsoever. It is the one
certain and unerring rule of the Divine conduct, and consequently the most
certain, the most amiable, and worthy rule of action to every reasonable
creature See this more largely treated of in Doctor Chandler's Discourse,
before cited.
.

And the evident tendency of virtue, says another ingenious author, is not only
the private happiness of single persons, but the good of the whole human kind;
an universal benevolence links us together, and interests every one of us in
the affairs of another, so far as to desire and endeavor their safety and
happiness, not inconsistently with our own. There are other particular
determinations of the virtuous kind, such as compassion, natural affection,
gratitude, and the love of our country, so confessedly natural to men, as by
common consent to obtain the name of humanity; but so prevalent in some as to
put them upon the most self-denying and hazardous enterprises for the good of
others, and take the highest pleasure when they see the effect of them promote
a general good Abernethy, on the Unity of God, proved from the apparent Unity
of Design in his Works. System, p. 91.
.

When we consider the constitution of human nature, with all its powers,
affections, and principles of action, as the work of God; then that sense of
right and wrong of moral good and evil, which is the great distinction of
mankind from all the inferior orders, appears to demand particular notice; as
being not only in itself considered, the highest and most important faculty of
the mind, but as what is given us for directing our conduct, and as what
principally points out to man his chief end, and that which is his supreme
good. That the sense of right and wrong must have been intended by the Author
of our beings as a law or rule for directing our conduct, is evident; for it is
impossible to separate a sense of right and a sense of obligation. A thing is
right, therefore it is to be done; a thing is wrong, therefore it is not to be
done; is the original law or language of nature, with which every man is
acquainted; and while the sense of right and wrong remains, the heart
instantly and necessarily approves what appears to be right, and condemns
what it judges to be wrong Duchal on God's Moral Government. System, p. 313.

And Doctor Foster on Natural Religion and Social Virtue, vol. II. p. 12.


.

But it is an inquiry of the utmost moment to virtue and to human happiness,
how the Creator is disposed and affected toward his creatures, as they observe
it, or deviate from it in their actions. It may be imagined, and this appears
plainly to have been the sense of some persons, that though the universe, and
all the creatures in it, are the work of an original intelligent cause,
perfectly wise, powerful, and beneficent; and the whole creation is governed by
the sole superintending providence of this being, and particularly, that all
the instincts and affections planted in the heart of man, are his workmanship;
yet he does not attend at all to the temper or behavior of men, as being
according to the moral quality of them, the objects of his approbation or
displeasure: that, though he has given to his creatures, the sense of good and
evil, of right and wrong, as a means of serving those purposes by them which he
had in view; yet he himself has not that regard to right and wrong, which we
find in our own minds, nor any thing analogous; and therefore he is not
displeased with the transgression of this law of our nature, nor has any
pleasure or complacency in our obedience, and that we are never to expect any
interposition of his, to give us tokens of his favor, for having pursued that
which is right, or of his displeasure, for having done what is wrong: that men
are by the laws of nature thoroughly furnished for serving the purposes of this
life; but that this is all that is to be expected, and that by establishing and
maintaining this constitution of things, the Creator has made provision for
preserving the world in that state which will answer his original design.

Very widely different from this way of thinking is the sense of those who
consider the supreme Being as a lawgiver, and a moral governor, in the proper
sense of the word; believing, that as he has, in the sense of right and wrong,
written a law upon the heart of every man, and has planted in every man a
conscience to approve or disapprove of his actions, as they are good or evil;
so he is himself attentive to the conduct of every individual, is pleased with
the conformity of his temper and actions to the law that he has given him, and
displeased with the transgressors of it, and will interpose to testify his
pleasure or displeasure by such rewards and punishments as perfect wisdom shall
see fit and necessary to answer the end of a moral administration; that though
God does not interpose in the present state of things by any acts of his, so as
fully to answer what reason ultimately expects from a perfect moral ruler, in
rewarding the good, and punishing the bad; yet another state of things is to be
expected, in which the great design of his moral administration shall be
perfected, and he, as judge of the world, will do right to every subject of his
moral kingdom.

I cannot better close the preceding remarks on natural religion, and thereby
introduce the advantages of a revelation, than with the testimony of Dr.
Middleton, in relation to the religious and moral sentiments of Cicero, the
greatest Heathen philosopher, whose ideas were probably the most refined of any
man unassisted by revelation.

The Doctor, having observed that the scheme of morality professed by Cicero
was certainly the most complete that the Gentile world had ever been acquainted
with, the utmost effort that human nature could make toward attaining its
proper end, and taken notice of some considerable deficiencies in it, he adds,
"From this general view of Cicero's religion, one cannot help observing, that
the most exalted state of human reason is so far from superseding the use, that
it demonstrates the benefit of a more explicit revelation; for though the
natural law, in the perfection it was carried by Cicero, might serve as a
sufficient guide to the few, such as himself, of enlarged minds, and happy
dispositions; yet it had been so long depraved and adulterated by the
prevailing errors and vices of mankind, that it was not discoverable even to
those few, without great pains and study, and could not produce in them at last
any thing more than a hope, never a full persuasion; whilst the greatest part
of mankind, even of the virtuous and inquisitive, lived without the knowledge
of a God, or the expectation of a futurity, and the multitude in every country
was left to the gross idolatry of the popular worship."

This gives us abundant reason to reflect on the advantages we enjoy by the
divine light of a revelation, without the pains of searching, or danger of
mistaking, whereby we have not only the hope but the assurance of happiness,
and are not only the believers, but the heirs of immortality.

It must however be acknowledged, that christianity presupposes the truth of
natural religion. Whatsoever subverts natural religion, does consequently much
more subvert christianity, and whatsoever tends to confirm natural religion is
proportionably of service to the true interest of the Christian Dedication to
Clarke, and Leibinitz's Papers.
.

I have dwelt the longer on these particulars, as I apprehend it is of great
importance to direct our enquiries in religion, as well as to regulate our
conduct; and it will probably appear, on the most careful examination, that the
internal evidence of a revelation, We would not be understood to mean, that
revealed religion must be in every respect conformable, but only that it be not
in any contradictory to natural; for it is certain, that there are many
particulars in revealed, which makes no part of natural religion, and which the
purest and most improved reason alone could never have attained the least
conception of.

See Heathcote on Natural Religion, the Foundation of Revealed, page 40.


its conformity to the reason and nature of things, is the strongest proof of
its divine original.

Let what is written in the books of the New Testament be tried by that which
is the touchstone of all religion; I mean, that religion of nature and reason,
which God has written in the hearts of every one of us, from the first
creation Prideaux Letter to the Deists, Sect. 3.
.

But notwithstanding the Creator and Sovereign of the world has given a law to
the whole human race, written on the heart, and arising from the nature of man,
from his relation to the author of his Being, and his connections with mankind;
this law was far from answering the purposes for which it was designed. Though it
was agreeable to the dictates of uncorrupted affections, and to our natural
ideas of the amiableness, truth and propriety of action, it was frequently
perverted by vice, and the powers of reason darkened by superstition, till at
length they became fashionable, and the immoralities of mankind blinding the
understanding to such a degree, Expediency of a Revelation.
as to render the imaginations of the heart habituated to evil. The Almighty
saw fit to extirpate almost the whole human race, and the descendants of the
pious family, that was saved unawed by the deluge that had depopulated the
earth, and running into the vices for which the old world was punished; the
divine Being saw it expedient to interpose, and, by making revelations of his
will, to awaken and fix their attention, in order to recover them from
idolatry, to the knowledge and worship of one living and true God, and to
convince them that the path of virtue is that of happiness.

Revealed Religion is what we learn to be our duty by some supernatural means,
Revealed Religion defined.
as by an express declaration of God himself in the Scriptures Chamber's
article of Religion. Bennet on the Truth, Usefulness and Inspiration of
Scripture.
. The Bible or Scriptures contain the writings of the Old and New Testament; of
whose antiquity, authenticity, expediency and excellency, many learned volumes
have been wrote, by persons properly disposed and qualified, to do justice to
the sacred writings, and contribute to their greater acceptableness and
usefulness to mankind Simpson's Divine Authority of Scripture.

Doctor Conybeare's Defense of Revelation against Tindal.


.

That the several books of the Old Testament, particularly those of Moses, are
of greater antiquity than any other writings, appears very evident from the
language and characters in which they were originally wrote, and the constant
reference made to them by all other writers of antiquity, and from the several
principal matters contained in them Le Clerc's Grotius, p. 23.

Doctor Callamy's Sermon on Inspiration, p. 31.


.

It begins with the creation of the world, and informs us of the origin of our
first parents, Adam and Eve, their state of innocence, perfection, duty and
happiness, and of their sin, defection and consequent punishment Lamy's
Introduction to the Scripture.

Jameson's Introduction to the Pentateuch.


. It opens to our view the propitious intentions of the Deity, for their
recovery and final happiness Doctor Watts on the Ruin and Recovery of Mankind.

Thompson's Mediator.


.

It likewise informs us of the general degeneracy of mankind, and of their
destruction by the universal deluge Lamy's Introduction to the Holy Scriptures,
p. 265 and seq.
. It treats of the character and conduct of Noah, Abraham, Jacob and Israel,
and of many other illustrious persons for our imitation Doctor Watt's Catechism
and Scripture History.
. It gives us a general history of the Jews, of their laws and statutes
prescribed by God, and dispensed by his servants, Moses, Aaron, etc. for their
regulation and government, ceremonial as to their sacrifices, moral as to the
ten commandments, and judicial respecting their economy and discipline, with
the sanctions whereby they were enforced Jameson on the Pentateuch.
.

It affords more clear and ample discoveries of the being and perfections of
God, than was discoverable by the light of nature Doctor Clarke on the
Evidences of Revealed Religion, p. 198.

Doddridge's Family-Expositor, vol. I.


. In many parts of this history, the scenes of the divine providence are
admirably displayed, evidencing that God is the moral governor of mankind, the
lover and rewarder of virtue Bishop Chandler's Defense of Christianity against
Collins.
; but in a peculiar manner it exhibits many great and glorious prophecies and
promises of a Messiah, all making way for and introductory to that far more
glorious dispensation of truth and grace by the gospel of Jesus Christ Doctor
John Newton of Prophecies, 3 vol.
.

It is not my province, neither will it consist with the limits of my
introduction, to attempt a vindication of the divine authority of the
scriptures; but I refer the reader to such judicious authors as have
particularly entered into the merits of the subjects, and obviated the
principal objections to particular passages Waterland's Scripture vindicated,
in answer to Tindal.

Sir Isaac Newton upon Daniel, p. 252.


. I may however observe, that the more diligently the writings of Moses and the
prophets are attended to, their connections with the writings of the New
Testament will be more conspicuous, and their evidence jointly strengthened
Prideaux's Connection of the Old and New Testament, 4 vol.

Millar's History of the Propagation of the Gospel, vol. I. p. 654, 450.


. Upon the whole, however dark and ambiguous some parts of the Old Testament
may appear, we have sufficient reason to conclude from its internal characters,
as well as traditionary evidence, that it is of divine original, adapted by
infinite wisdom to the state of the world at that time Doctor John Newton on
Prophecies.

Doctor Doddridge calls it an invaluable treasure, which demands our daily
delightful and thankful perusal, and such as it is capable of being defended
against its subtlest enemies. Evid. of Christianity briefly stated in the
Protestant System, p. 385.


.

But of the Christian revelation, The Christian Revelation.
the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, we have the highest reason to admire its
superior evidence and transcendent excellency. Evidence may be considered as
internal or external. The internal evidences depends upon the design and
tendency of the history; the probability of the things related; the consistence
of the several parts, and the plainness and simplicity of the naration, etc.
etc.

External evidence, respects such certain signs and matters of fact, as may be
an undeniable evidence of the authors divine commission, by miracles wrought;
by the accomplishment of prophecies, the testimony of many credible witnesses,
agreeing in all material circumstances, etc. etc Doctor Samuel Clark on Natural
and Revealed Religion.
.

And every attentive reader may observe several of those internal characters,
and likewise many of the external proofs apparently applicable to the writings
of the New Testament. This however opens such a wide field to my view, that it
will be impossible for me to do justice to a subject of this nature, within the
intended limits of my introduction; I shall nevertheless introduce some
arguments in favor of the Christian revelation, and refer the reader to many
curious and judicious writers in defense of the Christian system; evincing that
it is indeed a divine relation.

Doctor Lardner has very learnedly and judiciously considered the nature of
evidence, and applied it to the Christian scheme, wherein he has with great
labor, and we hope with proportionable success, obviated the objections of the
most subtle of its opposers Doctor Lardner's Credibility of the Gospel History,
15th vol.

Reverend Mr. Leland's Answer to the principal Deistical Writers.


.

Doctor Clarke Doctor Clarke on the Evidences of Natural and Revealed Religion,
p. 220 and seq.
has likewise considered the several principal arguments in support of the
divine authority and excellency of the Christian institution, in the following
particulars. 1. That the Christian religion, considered in its primitive
simplicity, and as taught in the scriptures, has all the marks and proofs of
its being actually and truly a divine revelation. 2. That the practical duties
it enjoins, are all such as are most agreeable to our natural notions of God,
and most perfective of the nature, and conducive to the happiness and
well-being of men. 3. That the motives by which the Christian religion inforces
the practice of the duties it enjoins, are such as are most suitable to the
wisdom of God, and most answerable to the natural expectations of man. 4. That
the peculiar manner with which the Christian religion enjoins the duties, and
urges the motives beforementioned, are exactly consonant to the dictates of
sound reason, or the unprejudiced light of nature, and most perfective of it.
5. That all the doctrines, which the true, simple and uncorrupted Christian
religion teaches, are, though indeed many of them not discoverable by the light
of nature, yet, when discovered by revelation, most agreeable to found
unprejudiced reason.

The Doctor then applies his postulatums to the following particulars: That it
cannot be thought unreasonable to be believed that God should make a revelation
of his will to mankind; and that in such a revelation, wherein God freely
proclaims the remission of sin and the acceptableness of repentance, he should
nevertheless have appointed such a sacrifice or expiation for sin as might at
the same time be a sufficient testimony of his irreconcilable hatred against
it. That a Mediator should be appointed between God and man, through and by
whom the prayers of sinners may be offered up, so as to be acceptable in his
sight. That the greatest difficulty arises indeed from the dignity of the
person (the only begotten Son of God); but even this, upon due enquiry, will
appear to have nothing in it contrary to the nature of God, or the condition of
things. Or lastly, that there is any just objection to be drawn from the
Christian revelation, not being in fact universal See also Doctor Benson's
Reasonableness of Christianity, in answer to Christianity not founded on
Argument.
. From hence the Doctor endeavors to prove, that the history of the Life of
Christ, contained in the New Testament, is a true revelation of matter of fact;
that God has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world by his Son Jesus
Christ, in order to reward every man according to his works Doctor Sherlock on
the Future Judgment.
. That, in order to this final judgment, not only the soul shall survive the
dissolution of the body; but the body itself also shall be raised again See the
Arguments for the Resurrection of the Body, and Objections answered at the end
of the Religious Philosopher.
. That after the resurrection and the general judgment, wherein every man
shall be judged according to his works, they that have done well, shall go into
everlasting happiness Of the Nature, different Degree, Duration, etc. See
Laurence, Watts, etc.
; and they that have done evil, into everlasting punishment Doctor Samuel
Clarke's Sermons.
.

The Doctor recites two or three of the principal of the preceding
propositions, farther to explain and illustrate them, viz. that all the
doctrines, which the Christian religion teaches, that is not only those plain
ones, which it requires to be believed as fundamental to salvation, but even
all the doctrines it teaches, as a matter of truth, are agreeable to sound and
unprejudiced reason See Lock on the reasonableness of Christianity.
.

Secondly, that every one of these doctrines has a natural tendency, and a
direct and powerful influence, to reform men's lives, and to correct their
manners. This, says he, is the great end and ultimate design of all true
religion N. B. These points which are usually considered as the essential part
of the Christian doctrine, as well as the arguments by which that institution
is supported, I have chose to give from the writings of Doctor Clarke on these
subjects, as I apprehend them best adapted to my present purpose, and agreeable
to the sentiments of our most eminent divines.
.

Lastly, that all the doctrines of the Christian faith do together make up an
infinitely more consistent and rational scheme of belief, than any that the
wisest of the ancient philosophers ever did, or than the cunningest of modern
unbelivers can invent or contrive.

Our author then proceeds to treat of miracles in general, of their nature and
kinds, and how far the miracles wrought by Jesus Christ may be brought in proof
of his doctrines. His life and character is likewise considered as an
accomplishment of the prophecies concerning him. The testimony of our Savior's
disciples he likewise introduces; which in all its circumstances was the most
credible, certain, and convincing, that they neither could be imposed on
themselves, nor could have any design of imposing upon others. That the
apostles left their testimony af the works and doctrine of Christ in their
writings; which writings have been transmitted down to us, by an uninterrupted
succession, through all intermediate ages, without any considerable corruption
or error, such as might in any wise diminish our certainty of the truth of the
whole. In sum, there is no matter of fact in the world, attested in any history
with so many circumstances of credibility, with so many collateral evidences,
and in every respect attended with so many marks of truth, as this concerning
the doctrine and the works of Christ Doctor Samuel Clarke's Evidences of
Natural and Revealed Religion, p. 328.
.

There are indeed many ingenious divines, both of the established church, and
other denomination of Christians, who have wrote with great candor and
accuracy on the holy scriptures, suggesting many rational and useful hints for
reconciling many seeming contradictions, and obviating some of the most
material objections of unbelievers; and this too, by such just and natural
interpretations of the most obscure passages, by comparing the original text
with the author's design, etc. as have afforded much satisfaction Lock's
Reasonableness of Christianity,

Doctor Clarke's Paraphrase on the Evangelists.

Pile's paraphrase on the Epistles. Doctor Tailor on the Romans.


. Others have expatiated on and illustrated the coincidence of scripture with
reason, or shown the real and proper connection there is between natural
religion, and many of the most sublime evangelical truths Chandler's Sermon at
the Ordination of Mr. Wright.

Sykes on the Christian Religion against Collins.


; while others have shown the peculiar transcendent excellency of the gospel
precepts Lawrence of Christian Morals and Christian Prudence, vol. I.

Leechman of the wisdom of God in the Gospel revelation,


; the comparative fitness and obligation of moral and positive duties
Burrough's on positive Institutions.
; and have also explained and applied those divine promises and sanctions by
which our obedience and duty is enforced. A farther reference to some of the
principal authors might suffice in this place; though, as it is on so agreeable
and important a subject, I shall be excused if I am somewhat more particular.

It is not without very good reason, that some ingenious authors have entered
into the views of wh^^ might be reasonably expected as the subject matter (...)
a revelation from God. Doctor Doddridge ^ugg^^s, 1. That the state of mankind
was such as to need a divine revelation; 2. That there is from the light of
nature considerable encouragement to hope that God would favor his creatures
with so needful a blessing as a revelation appears to be; 3. We may early
conclude, that if a revelation were given, it would be introduced and
transmitted in such a manner as Christianity is said to have been; 4. That the
main doctrines contained in the gospel are of such a nature, as we might in
general suppose those of a divine revelation would be, namely, rational,
practical and sublime Doddridge's Summary of the Evidences of Christianity,

Protestant System, p. 376.


; or more particularly, that it coincides with the unbiassed reason of mankind
Doctor Samuel Chandler's Vindication of Christianity.
; gives us more just and enlarged ideas of the perfections of the Deity Doctor
Samuel Clarke on the being and attributes of God.
, and instucts us in the nature of that worship, which ought to be paid to him
Reverend Mr. Bulkley, Nature of Religious Worship, p. 14.
; inculcates and inforces the practice of all relative and social duties Doctor
Foster of Natural Religion and Social Virtues, vol. II.
; extends our ideas of the rewards of virtue, and confirms our hopes in the
divine goodness, beyond what unassisted reason could possibly do; and this is
shown not to be the mere surmise of prepossession and fancy; for it has been
evinced, that when the most accurate schemes of the ancient philosophy was
ineffectual to rectify the sentiments, and reform the conduct of mankind,
christianity produced such an amazing change and reformation in both these
important respects, as showed it to be indeed the power of God unto salvation
to every one that believe Dr. Chandler's Sermon at the Ordination of Mr Wright,
p. 25.

Dr. Leechman on the Wisdom of God in the Gospel Revelation.


. Again, it might farther be supposed, that a divine revelation would contain
some things which could not have been learnt from the highest improvement of
natural light; and that others should be hinted at and referred to, which our
feeble faculties should not be able fully to comprehend; such as the existence
and providence of God, the resurrection of the body, the immortality of the
soul, etc. which the scripture reveals. Let then, says our author, the
evidences of christianity be the subject of your serious reflection, and
frequent converse; especially study your Bible, where there are such marks of
truth and divinity to be found. Above all, make it your care to practice the
rules there laid down, and then you will find your faith growing in a happy
proportion, and will experience the truth of our Savior's declaration, that if
any man will (resolutely and faithfully) do his will, he shall know of the
(christian) doctrine, whether it be of God Dr. Doddridge's Evidences Briefly
Stated, p. 380.
.

But what is observed with so much truth of the Christian religion, must always
be understood of christianity in its primitive purity and simplicity, and as
such recommended to be read with attention, and regarded as the rule of faith
and practice by every Christian, as sufficient to salvation.

Christianity, says Mr. Barker, is plain and simple, and no impure mixtures are
to be made or allowed with it; no Jewish observances; no human inventions; no
old or new traditions: to this singly, or without addition or alteration,
should Christians stick and adhere, keeping to the truth as it is in Jesus, and
preserving the simplicity of the gospel; not mingling it with any thing that is
false and foreign to it; not concealing any part of it, or mixing any falsehood
with it, or wresting and perverting the true sense and meaning of it, to serve
our own ends, the lusts of others, or any worldly purposes whatsoever Rev. Mr.
Barker's Sermon at Salter's Hall against Popery, p. 7.

See also the Bishop of London's second Pastoral Letter, p. 25 to 30.


.

Were this property attended to, we should find the important advantages of a
revelation would be more universally answered in the promotion of truth,
religion, and harmony, and charity even amongst men of different sentiments:
and I sincerely congratulate my countrymen, that, for the last fifty years,
most of our reverend prelates have represented the great doctrines of religion
in a rational and consistent manner; unconditional decrees have been
sufficiently exploded, the important point of justification set in a true
light, and the scriptures recommended as a sufficient rule of faith and
practice, abstracted from an undue attachment to establishment and party; and
that the will of God is the only rule immediately binding to the conscience;
and subjoin this reason for the assertion, that he only can have authority over
the conscience to prescribe to it, who is able to judge the conscience, the
prerogative of God alone.

The ingenious author of the Rational Catechism gives us a very compendious
view of the preceptive and doctrinal part of the New Testament. For, says he,
what are the great duties it recommends, but such as are the most sublime and
important, spiritual adoration, purity, and integrity of heart, of life and
conversation, the keeping a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward
men? This is explained in a most perspicuous manner in numerous instances of
particular duties, the essence of all which is said to be love; intensely
toward God, and extensively toward men: and the advantages we enjoy by
revelation, principally consist in exhibiting the life and character of Jesus
Christ as our example, and in the clear evidence it gives us of a future life,
the resurrection of the body, and a righteous retribution Rational Catechism,
p. 59 and seq.
. And,

In a discourse of the nature, design, and tendency of christianity, a worthy
prelate observes there were none of the doctrines of the gospel calculated for
the gratification of men's idle curiosity and useless speculations, much less
for the exercise of our credulity, or as a trial how far we could bring our
reason to submit to our faith. But as, on the one hand, they were plain and
simple, and such as their agreeableness to the rational faculties of mankind
did recommend to our relief; so, on the other hand, they had an immediate
relation to practice, and were the genuine principles and foundation upon which
all human and divine virtues were naturally to be superstructed Archbishop of
York's Sermon before the Queen, 1704.

Archbishop Usher on the Unity of God, p. 15, 17, 28.


.

And in opposition to superstitious observances on the one hand, and
unbelievers on the other; it is observed, that was the original simplicity and
purity of the gospel attended to, we should find that christianity consists not
in laborious, troublesome, and expensive observances, or in perpetual grimace
and affectation; but in a steadfast faith in the divine mission of Jesus
Christ, and in a steady practice of the duties he requires. And if such who
believe not in Jesus Christ, would but diligently compare his precepts with
those of the greatest lawgivers of antiquity, and his life and actions with the
most celebrated of the philosophers, and weigh the solemn appeals to
acknowledged facts in the apologies for christianity, presented to the Heathen
Emperors; we are of opinion they would consider him, at least, as a divine
person, as one who all along acted by a divine mission and a supernatural power
Laurence, Rector of Yelvertoft, Christian Morals and Christian Prudence, vol. I.
.

With respect to those who plead, that the whole of religion consists in moral
duties, it has been justly answered by Mr. Prior Rev. Mr. Prior's
Reasonableness of the Christian Life, p. 56.
: "But is the Christian religion only a republication of the law of nature, or
merely a refined system of morality; it is surely something more; it is an act
of grace, a stupendous plan of Providence, designed for the recovery of mankind
from a state of degradation and ruin, to the favor of God, and the hopes of an
happy immortality through a mediator. Under this dispensation, true religion
expresses repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, as the
person appointed by the supreme authority of heaven and earth, to reconcile
apostate men to their offended Maker, as a sacrifice for sin, our vital head,
and our governing Lord. This is religion as we are Christians." And the
peculiar excellency of the Christian religion lies in its bringing to light
life and immortality, when wrapped up almost in impenetrable darkness. This
has set the great truths of religion in a clear and strong view, and has
proposed new and powerful motives to influence our minds, and to determine our
conduct: nothing is enjoined to be believed but what is worthy of God; nothing
to be practiced, but what is friendly to man. Some important branches of this
dispensation reason indeed could not discover, nor can it now justly arraign,
as not founded in wisdom and goodness.

Christianity, says the reverend Mr. Milner, is the perfection of all religion;
the design of it is great and noble, namely, to possess our minds with right
apprehensions of the Supreme Being, of moral good and evil, and of an happiness
most worthy our rational nature; and it heightens the idea of its excellence,
to see it interwoven with a particular dispensation of providence and grace,
for rendering it more effectual Rev. Mr. Milner's Preface to Religious Liberty
asserted.
.

The late Dr. Gibson, bishop of London, gives us his sentiments to the same
purpose, viz. Though it is true, that one end of Christ's coming was to correct
the false glosses and interpretations of the moral law, and one end of his
instituting a ministry was to keep up in the minds of men true notions of
natural religion, and a just sense of their obligations to the performance of
moral duties; yet it is also true, that another end of his coming was, to
estalish a new covenant with mankind upon gracious terms, and most engaging
promises, to show us the method of pardon and reconciliation to God, and
eternal happiness, and to prescribe rules of greater purity and holiness, by
way of preparation for greater degrees of happiness and glory; so these are
without doubt the distinguishing excellencies of the Christian religion, and
which it behooves every one to adhere to, as he would be entitled to the
privileges and blessings of the gospel covenant First Charge, p. 19.
.

On the other hand, if some will believe that trusting in Christ is their whole
duty, and so excuse themselves from the observation of the moral law; and
others will affirm, that the observation of the moral law is sufficient, and so
will forego the benefit of Christ's redemption; if some will contend that
Christ has done all, and others that he has done nothing; they err as if they
knew not the scriptures. The gospel account is as full and express as words can
make it; on the one hand, that faith in Christ is the foundation of a
Christian's title to heaven; and on the other hand, that repentance and good
works are the necessary conditions of obtaining it See Second Pastoral Letter,
p. 63, Octavo Edit. See also Bishop Hoadley's Terms of Acceptance, and his
Preservative; and Dr. Chandler's Knowledge and Practice necessary to Happiness.
.

And in illustration and vindication of the divine wisdom in the mediatorial
scheme of man's redemption, and the glorious method of salvation by Jesus
Christ; that it displays the harmony of those perfections of the divine nature,
which seem most opposite in their tendency and aspect against sinners, sets in
the clearest view God's displeasure against sin, and at the same time opening a
way for the most extensive exercise of mercy to sinners; yea, and inhancing
both the justice and the mercy, more than if there was no atonement required;
and also a surprising and affecting demonstration of the inviolable regard God
has to the righteous sanction of his law, and his concern for the honor of
his government; that this is the most effectual means to awaken the sinner to a
just sense of what he has deserved, and does at the same time yield him the
strongest support and encouragement, under the most afflicting sense of his
guilt and danger, and carries with it the most powerful motives to persuade him
to be reconciled unto God, and influence him to a willing obedience for the
time to come Jesus Christ the Mediator, by Tomkins, p. 157. Dr. Chandler's
Sermon at the Ordination of Mr. Wright. And the Essay on the Credibility of the
Gospel annexed, by an unknown Hand.
. Dr. Clarke calls it that wonderful composition of justice and mercy, which
men and angels must for ever adore, but can never sufficiently praise and
celebrate Dr. Clarke's Sermon on the Sufferings of Christ. Leechman's Wisdom of
God in the Gospel-Revelation.
.

With respect to positive institutions, which some have as it were created as
insignificant, and others have laid too great stress on; bishop Hoadley has
given us a plain scriptural account of, viz. That when the great author of our
holy religion publicly declared what were the doctrines upon which he would
build his church and kingdom, he instituted two apt and significant ordinances
to be observed in his church. One was baptism, that rite or ceremony by which
the members thereof should profess their faith in, and discipleship to Christ.
The other injunction was, that his church and people should statedly, in
communion and fellowship with each other, eat bread and drink wine in
remembrance of the author and finisher of their faith; and in this they were to
continue, in order to show forth and keep up the remembrance of his life and
death till he come Bp Hoadley's Plain Account.
.

And when the scriptures are properly regarded as our rule, we shall find they
exhibit to our minds, besides the principles of natural religion, only a few
evangelical doctrines and precepts, which are wisely adapted to improve our
sentiments of God, give us a just idea of his dispensation of grace and truth
by Jesus Christ, and tending to cultivate that rectitude of mind and life,
which may in some measure fit us for the happiness therein promised.

And it is acknowledged by all protestant Christians, that the scriptures, more
especially the writings of the New Testament, contain a plain perfect rule of
faith and practice, in opposition to the necessity of a living infallible
guide, and the authoritative imposition of creeds and articles of faith. Hence
that immemorable prelate beforementioned asserts, Hoadley's Nature of the
Kingd, and Church of Christ, p. 30.
The church of Christ is the kingdom of Christ; he is King in his own kingdom;
he is sole lawgiver to his subjects, and sole judge in matters relating to
salvation; his laws and sanctions are plainly fixed. Their faith was once
delivered by him; the conditions of their happiness was once laid down by him;
the nature of God's worship was once declared by him; and it is easy to judge,
whether of the two is most becoming a subject of the kingdom of Christ, that
is, a member of his church, to seek all those particulars in those plain, short
declarations of their King and lawgiver himself, or to hunt after them through
the infinite contradictions, the numberless perplexities, the endless disputes
of weak men in several ages, till the enquirer himself is lost in the
labyrinth, and perhaps sits down in despair or infidelity. If Christ be our
King, let us show ourselves subjects to him alone, in the great affair of
conscience and eternal salvation, and, without fear of man's judgment, live and
act as becomes those who wait for the appearance of an all-knowing and
impartial judge, even that King whose kingdom is not of this world.

Much to the same purpose, in opposition to the pretended authority and
infallibility of the church of Rome, and her boasted tradition, Dr. Chandler
says, "we have no full and certain account of the doctrine taught by Christ and
his Apostles but from the records of the New Testament; and as these contain
the whole revelation of the gospel, all that we are to believe and practice as
Christians, it is an undeniable consequence, that we can no otherwise
demonstrate our subjection and fidelity to Christ, as Lord and lawgiver in his
church, than by our care in acquainting ourselves with the sacred records of
truth, and religiously adhering to them, as the only rule and standard of our
faith and worship Dr. Chandler's Notes of the Church, p. 13.
; the adhering to which is an essential note of the Christian church 15,
. This therefore is the only true antiquity, to which as Christians we are to
appeal 21.
. The church of God, the true church of Christ, is built entirely upon the
scriptures Dr. Wright on Scripture and Tradition, p. 10.
. The Christian church is properly represented as one body, or a society,
incorporate by the charter of the gospel under Jesus Christ, as supreme head
and governor Mr. Lowman on Schism, p. 26.
. For, as Mr. Leavesly says, Christ and his Apostles, by preaching and
delivering the gospel truth, and by warning us against false and deceitful
workers, call all men every where to adhere to the truth as it is in Jesus
Leavesly on Reformation, p. 36.
. The Bible, then, or the Old and New Testament, is acknowledged by all
Protestants, as the canon, the rule, the only rule of faith and practice.

I shall close the whole with that remarkable paragraph of Chillingworth, which
whoever hears or reads, as the language of one converted from Popery by the
study of the scriptures, cannot help being greatly pleased with it. Addressing
himself to a writer of the Romish church, he thus pleads the Protestant cause,
"Know then, Sir, that when I say the religion of Protestants is in truth to be
preferred before yours; as on the one side, I do not understand by your
religion the doctrine of Bellarmine or Baronius, or any other private man
amongst you; nor the doctrine of the Sorbonne or of the Jesuits, or of the
Dominicans, or of any other particular company or society amongst you; but that
wherein you all agree or profess to agree, the doctrine of the council of
Trent; so accordingly on the other side, by the religion of Protestants, I do
not understand the doctrine of Luther or Calvin, or Melancton, nor the
confession of Augsburg or Geneva, nor the catechism of Heidelberg, nor the
articles of the church of England; no, nor the harmony of Protestant creeds and
confessions; but that wherein they all agree, and which they all subscribe with
one accord, as the undoubted perfect rule of their faith and actions, that is,
the Bible. The Bible, I say the Bible only, is the religion of Protestants,
whatsoever else they believe besides it: and the plain, irrefragable, and
indubitable consequences of it, well may they hold as matters of opinion, but
as matter of faith and religion, neither can they with coherence to their own
grounds believe it themselves, nor require the belief of it of others, without
most high and schismatical presumption. I, for my part, after a long, and (as I
verily believe and hope) impartial search of the true way to eternal happiness,
do profess plainly that I cannot find any rest for the sole of my foot, but
upon this rock only. I see plainly, and with mine own eyes, that there are
Popes against Popes, councils against councils, some fathers against others,
the same fathers against themselves, a consent of fathers of one age against a
consent of fathers of another age, the church of one age against the church of
another age. Traditive interpretations of scripture are pretended; but there
are few or none to be found. No tradition but only of scripture can derive
itself from the fountain, but may be plainly proved to be brought in, in such
an age after Christ, or that such an age it was not: in a word, there is no
sufficient certainty but of scripture only for any considering man to build
upon. This, therefore, and this only, I have reason to believe, this I will
profess, according to this I will live, and for this, if there be occasion, I
will not only willingly, but even gladly, lose my life; though I should be
sorry that Christians should take it from me. Propose me any thing out of this
book, and require whether I believe or no, and seem it never so
incomprehensible to human reason, I will subscribe it with hand and heart, as
knowing no demonstration can be stronger than this, God has said so, therefore
is it true. In other things, I will take no man's liberty of judging from him,
neither shall any man take mine from me. I will think no man the worse man, nor
the worse Christian, I will love no man the less, for differing in opinion from
me; and what measure I mete to others, I expect from them again. I am fully
assured that God does not, and therefore men ought not to require any more of
any man than this: To believe the scripture to be God's word, to endeavor to
find the true sense of it, and to live according to it Quoted by Mr. Wright in
his Sermon at Salter's hall against Popery, page 52.
.

I can see no reason, says a judicious author, for undervaluing revelation, in
order to exalt reason, nor on the other hand to disparage reason, since they
jointly concur in furnishing us with the most noble and unexceptionable
principles of religion. What but revelation gave to Wollaston so much the
superiority over Cicero in his delineation of the religion of nature,
particularly with regard to the unity and moral perfections, and providence of
the Deity, and the duties owing to him?

All this will be readily acknowledged by Protestant Christians of every
denomination, while others perhaps do not easily perceive the reasons upon
which this principle of their faith is founded, and they raise a variety of
objections to the authenticity, perspicuity, reasonableness, and excellency of
the Christian revelation; the most considerable of which will be taken notice
of in a following section. I shall, first, endeavor to ascertain the proper
import of the term Truth, its importance, etc.

Truth is a term used in a variety of senses, Truth defined.
and applied to different sciences and subjects. Logical truth is the
conformity of things with the ideas themselves Martin.
. Moral truth is the conformity of words, gestures, and actions, with the heart
Ibid.
. Mr. Chambers defines logical truth to be in direct opposition to falsehood,
and is applied to the propositions which answer, or accord to the reality of
the thing, whereof something is affirmed or denied Chambers.
. And Mr. Wollaston says, those propositions are true, which express things as
they are, or truth is the conformity of those words or signs by which things
are expressed to the things themselves Wollaston.
. Truth, likewise, signifies veracity, or a conformity of words to thoughts,
pure, or unadulterate; exactness or conformity to rule; reality, as opposed to
fiction; honesty, integrity, etc. Johnson.
It is used for the doctrines of the gospel, Gal. iii. 1. as opposed to Jewish
ceremonies, John, i. 17. and as the genuine or original, as opposed to spurious
Cruden.
. These are some of the principal senses in which it is used; but as the right
use of reason, in the enquiry after truth, is what constitutes the science of
logic, variety of other definitions and distinctions relative to this subject
may be seen in peculiar treatises on that subject.

The different senses in which I have considered truth, or to which this term
is applied, convey to our minds an idea of its nature and importance, and that
there is a real essential and absolute utility and advantage in the possession
of it.

Indeed the pursuit and acquisition of truth is of infinite concernment to
mankind; Importance of Truth.
hereby we become acquainted with the nature of things, both in heaven and
earth, and their various relations to each other. It is by this means we
discover our duty to God and our fellow creatures; by this we arrive at the
knowledge of natural religion, and learn to confirm our faith in divine
revelation, as well as to understand what is revealed. Our wisdom, prudence,
and piety, our present conduct, and our future hopes, are all influenced by the
use of our rational powers in the search after truth Dr. Watts's Logic, p. 2.
.

The love and desire of truth is a principle implanted in the nature of man; it
has generally an easy access to unbiassed minds, and will assume its empire and
triumph over error, even in spite of popularity, interest, and undue influence
from others; and religious truths have been often known to arm the mind with
integrity, superior to the severest persecution. Hence Polybius, the Roman
historian, observes, that truth may be opposed, but it cannot be subdued
Polybius in Excerptis, lib. xii.
: and Cicero, to the same purpose, that truth always carries such a force with
her, that she cannot be overcome, neither by the flattery of art, nor ingenuity
of men; and though she had no advocate or patron in her cause, yet she would be
able to defend herself Cicero Orat. in Vatinium.
.

But this is not universally acknowledged. There are men of a skeptical turn of
mind, who assert there is no possibility of distinguishing truth from
falsehood: and therefore they have abandoned all pretenses to knowledge, and
maintain strenuously that nothing is to be known.

The first men of this humor made themselves famous in Greece by the name of
skeptics, that is, seekers. They taught, that all things are uncertain, though
they allowed that some were more probable than others. After these arose the
sect of the Pyrrhonics, from Pyrrho, their master, who would not allow one
proposition to be more probable than another. But of this sect an ingenious
author observes, that their own doctrine gives their profession the lie;
because they determined concerning every proposition, that it was uncertain,
and believed that as a certain truth, while they professed there was nothing
certain Watts's Logic, p. 172.
.

The most important question then on this subject is this, what is the
criterion or distinguished mark of truth? How shall we know when a proposition
is true or false? There are so many disguises of truth in the world, so many
false appearances of truth, that not only one man differs in his sentiments
from another, but one sectary absolutely deny what another esteem undoubted and
fundamental. Let us therefore enquire what is the general criterion of truth;
and, in order to this, it is proper to consider what is the reason why we
assent to the truth of one proposition, and deny another; and this will be
found to arise from a clear and distinct perception, or full evidence of the
agreement or disagreement of our ideas to one another, or to things; for since
our minds are of such a make, that when the evidence is exceeding plain and
strong, we cannot withold our assent, we should then be necessarily exposed
to believe falsehood, if complete evidence should be found in any propositions
that are not true. But surely the God of perfect wisdom, truth and goodness,
would never oblige his creatures to be thus deceived; and therefore he would
never have constituted us of such a frame as would have rendered it naturally
impossible to guard against error Dr. Watts.
.

There are two desires interwoven in the frame of our beings, the desire of
truth, and the desire of happiness; in both which there is a kind of infinity,
which arises after this manner. By the contemplation of my own soul, I gain the
ideas of several perfections with which I perceive it to be adorned; following
therefore the impulse of my own mind, I enlarge the prospect, and widen my
ideas more and more, till lost in the conception of a being, who possesses all
these perfections, and very probably many more, with the additional
characteristics of infinite and eternal: Now it is the nature of the
understanding, and of the will, to pursue the supreme truth, and the supreme
good; and consequently while I have a being in view, in whose idea is lodged
infinite truth and infinite good, which alone is able to answer that idea of
something like infinity that is in our desires, I shall never rest satisfied in
any allotment among the creatures, though in the finest apartment in the
universe, and accommodated with every good, short of a correspondence and
intercourse with the Deity Grove, vol. I. p. 92.
.

It is true there are some speculative points which God has placed beyond our
reach; and there are others of an abstruse, ambiguous nature, in the various
branches of science, etc. that require much previous learning, strength of
natural abilities, study and application, in the use of proper helps to
understand and explain. These can in no wise be the concern of all, and can
only with any propriety be the subject of enquiry to a few, whose dispositions
and abilities, leisure and profession in life, may render it at all eligible;
and after all, a diversity of sentiments will necessarily arise. Nor can we
reasonably expect the same degree of evidence in all cases or subjects, that
properly concern us to make the subjects of our enquiry. There are many things
in this dark and imperfect state, wherein we must be content with probability,
where our best light and reasoning will reach no further; we must balance
arguments as justly as we can; and when we cannot find weight enough on either
side to determine the scale with sovereign force and assurance, we must content
ourselves perhaps with a small preponderation. This will give us a probable
opinion; and these probabilities are sufficient for the daily determination of
a thousand actions in human life, and many times even in matters of religion.
-- Suppose, for instance, I had been honestly and long searching what religion
I should choose, yet I could not find that the arguments in defense of
christianity arose to complete certainty, but went only so far as to give me a
probable evidence of the truth of it; though many difficulties still remained,
yet I should think myself obliged to receive and practice that religion; for
the God of nature and reason has bound us to assent and act according to the
best evidence we have, even though it be not absolute and complete; and as he
is our supreme Judge, his abounding goodness and equity will approve and acquit
the man, whose conscience honestly and willingly seeks the best light, and
obeys it as far as he can discover it Dr. Watts's Improvement of the Mind, p.
2^8.
.

Here it may be proper to survey the several kinds of evidence, or the
different ways whereby truth is let into the mind, and which produce
accordingly several kinds of knowledge; and these we shall distribute into
these six, Evidences of Truth.
viz. sense, consciousness, intelligence, reason, human and divine testimony.
1. The evidence of sense, is when we form a proposition according to the
evidence of any of our senses; it is upon this evidence that we know and
believe the various occurrences in human life; and almost all the histories of
mankind, that are written by eye and ear-witnesses, are built upon this
principle.

It is a principle of the Epicureans, that the senses are not capable of being
deceived; for besides that the structure of the organs, and the circumstances
of objects considered, they ought not to represent things otherwise than they
do. The senses are purely passive; they receive impressions from surrounding
bodies, but pronounce nothing concerning them; that is the business of the
mind, which delivers its opinion upon the diverse appearances of sense, and too
often not more hastily than wrong. When therefore we talk of the errors of the
senses, the meaning is, that things are many times in themselves quite
different from what they appear to the senses; and that they who take their
measures of judging from the senses, will unavoidably be led into a thousand
mistakes.

The reasons why people trust so much to sense, I believe, are principally
these:

I. If sense may err, why not reason? If one power and faculty may be deceived,
why not all others? At which rate we shall have no criterion of truth, nor be
in possession of certainty; but universal skepticism must bear down all before
it. I answer, that because sense may be imposed upon, it follows not that
reason may; in case sense misleads us, reason may set us right again. So that
here God has provided a higher faculty to correct the errors occasioned by the
faculties below it; and perhaps the fallaciousness of our senses was designed
for this very end, that we might make the more frequent use of our reason. But
should reason be deceived, there is no faculty above this to inform it better;
and are not the wisdom and goodness of God our security, that he would not
frame us with such a constitution of mind, as should naturally lead us into
error? Besides this, we are to consider, that the mistakes of sense (when it
does mistake) are not dangerous; it has little to do with religion, upon which
depends our most important interest. But reason rightly understood, and rightly
managed, is to be the measure of our conduct; and consequently if free from
prejudices, we may be assured that shall never err in matters of moment and
consequence.

II. If sense may be deceived in one or more instances, why not in all? and if
in all, we can be certain of nothing. I answer, this way of arguing is entirely
inconclusive, because the wise Governor has furnished us with reason to find
out our mistake; and this, by comparing things together, it easily does. Upon
the whole, we may conclude with this observation, that our senses were not
given us to inform us so much what things are in themselves, as of the relation
they bear to each other, and to our bodies Grove, v. p. 409.
.

III. As we learn what belongs to the body by the evidence of sense; so we
learn what belongs to the soul by an inward consciousness, which may be called
a sort of internal feeling, or spiritual sensation of what passes in the mind:
Thus it appears that we obtain the knowledge of a multitude of propositions, as
well as single ideas, by these two principles, which Mr. Lock calls sensation
and reflection. One of them is a sort of consciousness of what affects the
body, and the other is a consciousness of what passes in the mind Dr. Watts's
Logic, p. 178.
. Some philosophers define it an inner sentiment of a thing, whereof one may
have a clear and distinct notion: in this sense they say, that we do not know
our own soul, nor are we assured of the existence of our own thoughts,
otherwise than by consciousness Chambers.
.

IV. Intelligence relates chiefly to those abstract propositions, which carry
their own evidence with them, and admit no doubt about them. Our perception of
this self-evidence in any proposition, is called intelligence; it is our
knowledge of those first principles of truth, which are as it were wrought into
the very nature and make of our mind. Accordingly an intelligent being, must
have some immediate object of his understanding, or at least a capacity of
having such: an intelligent being, among the immediate objects of his mind,
must have some that are abstract and general; those ideas or objects that are
immediate, will be adequately and truly known to that mind, whose ideas they
are: these propositions are called axioms or maxims, or first principles; these
are the very foundation of all improved knowledge and reasonings; and such an
immediate view of things in their own nature, is sometimes called intuition.

V. Reasoning is the next sort of evidence, and that is, when one truth is
inferred or drawn from others, by natural and just methods of argument; as,
when I survey the heavens and earth, this gives evidence to my reason, that
there is a God who made them Dr. Watts's.
. Thus, by the help of truths already known, more may be discovered; for those
inferences which arise presently from the application of general truths, to the
particular things and cases contained under them, must be just, and will hold
good, not only in respect of axioms and first truths, but also and equally of
theorems and other general truths. When they are more known, these may be
capable of the like applications, and the truth of such consequences as are
made by virtue of them, will always be as evident as that of the theorems
themselves Wollaston's Religion of Nature, p. 43. 4to Edit.
: in other words, every just consequence is founded on some known truth; by
virtue of which, one thing follows from another, and if the premises are true,
and the inferences are just, they will be so too. That power which any
intelligent being has of surveying his own ideas, and comparing them; of
forming to himself out of those that are immediate and abstract, such general
and fundamental truths as he can be sure of, and of making such inferences and
conclusions as are agreeable to them, or to any other truth after it comes to
be known, in order to find out more truth, prove or disprove some assertion,
resolve some question, determine what is fit to be done upon occasion, etc. the
case or thing under consideration, being first fairly stated and prepared, is
what I mean by the faculty of reason, or what intitles him to the epithet
rational; or, in short, reason is the faculty for making such inferences and
conclusions, as are mentioned under the preceding proposition Ibid. p. 45. Some
useful observations in the seq.
.

"The propositions, which I believe upon this kind of evidence, are called
conclusions or rational truths, and the knowledge we gain this way is properly
science."

It is likewise remarked by the aforecited judicious author, in treating of the
nature and foundations of probability, that the force of it results from reason
and observation together This is objected to by other authors, as those
observations arise from the forementioned springs of knowledge.
. As the one is not sufficient without the other, reason without observation
wants matter to work upon, and observations are neither to be made justly by
ourselves, nor to be rightly chosen out of those made by others; nor to be
aptly applied, without the assistance of reason; both together may support
opinion and practice in the absence of knowledge and certainty; for those
observations upon the nature of men and things, which we have made ourselves,
we know; and our own reasoning concerning them, and deductions from them, we
know; and from hence there cannot but arise in many cases an internal
obligation to give our assent to this, rather than that, or to act one way
rather than another: and as to the observations of others, they may be so
cautiously and skillfully taken under our notice, as to become almost our own,
since our own reason and experience may direct us in the choice and use of them.

VI. Another kind of evidence, is the testimony of others, and this is a large
part of our knowledge. Ten thousand things there are which we believe, merely
upon the authority or credit of those who have spoken or written of them; it is
by this that most of the transactions of human life are managed, we know the
characters and laws of our present governors, as well as things that are at a
vast distance from us, in foreign nations, or in ancient ages: according as the
persons who inform us of any thing, are many, or few, or more or less wise, and
faithful, and credible, so our faith is more or less firm or wavering, and the
proposition believed either certain or doubtful; but in matters of faith an
exceeding great probability is called a moral certainty See Dr. Watts's Logic,
and Ditton on the Resurrection.
. Histories written by faithful and credible authors, and read with judgment,
may supply us with examples, parallel cases, and general remarks, for forming
our manners and principles too; and by the frequent perusal of them, and
meditation upon them, a judicious judgment is formed of many dubious cases, and
of matters of great importance.

To conclude, that we ought to follow probability in this case, as well as the
forementioned, is evident; because where there is no greater certainty to be
had, it becomes our only light and guide; and it must be reasonable to direct
our steps by probability, when we have nothing clearer to walk by; and, if it
be reasonable, we are obliged to do it. When there is nothing in the opposite
scale, or nothing of equal weight, this in the course of nature must turn the
beam Wollaston's Religion of Nature, p. 59.
.

With regard to divine testimony, though it comes under the denomination of the
evidence of testimony, is of a superior nature; and the assent to a proposition
upon this evidence is styled divine faith, and so far as we understand the
meaning of this word it produces a supernatural certainty, or an absolute
infallible assurance.

VII. Inspiration is a sort of evidence distinct from all the former, and that
is when such an overpowering impression of any proposition is made upon the
mind by God himself, that gives a convincing and indubitable evidence of the
truth and divinity of it. But as this is of the highest kind of evidence,
chiefly, if not solely, confined to the prophets, and some of the earliest
apostles and first propagators of christianity, it is not so applicable to our
present purpose, to the nature of those truths it concerns us to know in the
state and circumstances in which Divine Providence has placed us. This kind of
evidence has been so often pretended to, either as working on the outward
senses, or by impressions on the imagination, spiritual feelings, sudden and
powerful impulses on the mind, whereby some persons have fancied a superior or
divine light and power attending them, which they could neither explain or
prove to the satisfaction of rational and judicious persons, that such
pretensions have been often, and, I think, very justly exploded, as the effect
of weakness and enthusiasm.

The various kinds of evidence upon which we believe any proposition, afford us
the following remarks.

I. That there are some propositions that admit of different kinds of evidence,
and of which we have an unquestionable certainty, and consequently may be
considered as fundamental truths, to direct our inquiries and conduct.

II. That, though some of these evidences are superior to others in their
nature, and give a greater ground of certainty in some points, more immediately
those which are the subject of divine revelation; yet that reason in its own
nature will always lead us into truth in matters within its compass, if it were
used aright, or it would require us to suspend our judgment where there is
want of evidence; and it must, at the same time, and with equal certainty, be
admitted, as the proper means to judge of the reality and degrees of other
kinds of evidence, upon which any other proposition may present itself to our
minds, and claim our assent See the Nature of Moral Evidence, illustrated in
fifteen Propositions in Dicton's Discourse of the Resurrection of Christ, from
p. 123 to 164.
. But it will also follow, that if the judgment be corrupted, and the
understanding darkened, with respect to religious principles and moral truths,
which concern the rectitude and just conduct and true happiness of intelligent
and free beings, he is then under as great an incapacity of reasoning, and
incapable to discern the proper difference of actions and characters, as if he
had been formed with a natural incapacity of reasoning.

Religion is wholly founded in reason, and directed by it; and therefore, when
this light, this sacred and divine light, is not attended to; when imagination,
passion, and prejudices and false conceptions, usurp the place, and are allowed
all that authority and influence, which only belong to truth, and the dictates
of a sober well informed judgment, it must unavoidably follow, that the truths
of religion will be obscured by ignorance and prejudices, and its native beauty
sullied by extravagance and enthusiasm.

But as this is a subject of the utmost importance, I shall here take occasion
to inquire into the most considerable and general causes, by which the light of
reason is obscured, and the judgment perverted and enslaved; causes that have
been the most prevailing in all ages, and which, as long as they are allowed to
subsist, will in all future time have the same fatal effect.

I. The first of these that presents itself to a most superficial observer, is
indolence and inattention: every one must acknowledge, that it is not the mere
faculty of reason that illuminates the mind; but the proper exercise and
careful improvement of it, by frequent reflection and impartial inquiry: for a
man of the most strong and extensive natural abilities, who never thinks nor
never examines, cannot be expected to make half the proficiency in divine
knowledge as a more deliberate and ingenious inquirer of a much inferior
understanding; nay his judgment may be as weak and confused, for want of proper
care to inform it aright, and, through a shameful negligence, his reason may be
as grossly fallacious, and his principles as repugnant to common sense, as those
that find admittance where human reason is in a lower and imperfect state; so
that indolence, and, which are the necessary consequences of it, laziness and
superficial examination, are the certain foundation of error and intellectual
darkness.

II. Another common cause of ignorance and mistakes in our inquiries, is
prejudice, which throws a mist before the understanding, and hinders it from
discerning clearly the evidences, and beauties, and advantages of truth. It
gives the judgment a particular and strong bias toward one set of principles,
which of consequence are readily admitted as the best and most rational; and
the contrary truths, though of the most momentous kind, are as naturally
discredited and vilified. The arguments by which they are recommended are
diminished, and considered as mere trifles; but the objections against them
magnified, as decisive and unanswerable. Thus will prejudice, though of the
most gross and malignant kind, engross all the fairness, candor, and skill in
argument to itself, and paint on the side of truth and reason nothing but
superficial knowledge, or narrowness of mind. The prejudices by which mankind
are influenced, are various, but have all the same infatuating and blinding
quality; for whether it be prejudice arising from education or interest, or the
prejudice of implicit veneration for great names, whom we have been taught to
call Rabbi, or an unreserved submission to human authority; which soever of
these bears the principal sway, it has always tended to the same point, and the
effect of it has been this, making men conceited in ignorance, and obstinate in
error.

III. Sensuality is a never-faling means of a darkening and perverting the
judgment; for, by inflaming the passions, it indisposes the mind for the calm
contemplation and pursuit of truth in general. It depresses the very faculty of
reason, and renders it unfit for sublime exercises. It introduces a false
taste, and destroys the relish of mental pleasures; for sense and reason are
such contrary principles, that if the gratification of the first be our
surpreme and most favorite entertainment, we shall regard the latter so much
the less in proportion, and perhaps contract an utter aversion to its
employments and exercises. But in an uncommon degree does sensuality unfit for
an impartial study of religious and moral truth, after which it begets a
prejudice of which it must needs entertain some kind of horror, as of a
reprover, a condemner, an awakener of guilty suspicions, and a scourge of
unlawful excesses. To what a sad condition must that man be reduced, whose
disposition and conduct in a manner force him to dread and fly from thinking,
that he may be the more quietly and serenely miserable?

IV. Next to sensuality, the most universal corrupter of good principles, and
extinguisher of reason's light, is superstition. It alarms with panic terrors,
and makes a man afraid of free inquiry, as if honesty, and ingenuity of mind,
which are the very essence and genuine spirit of an acceptable virtue and
piety, were crimes that deserved damnation; and an abject slavish credulity,
which is a reproach to the character of a man, was however the chief excellence
and duty of religion, and the surest recommendation to the esteem and favor of
the Diety. Superstition always proceeds from weakness of mind; it supposes the
understanding to be disturbed, and fancy or fear, or presumption, to have the
ascendant; and as these prevail farther, the judgment will be more and more
debased, and the intellectual darkness proportionably increased; and when once
a man has brought himself to believe in earnest that the great God of the
universe is a weak, capricious Being, pleased and offended with trifles; that
the dishonouring human reason, by substituting forms, bodily gestures, or
penances, in the room of the reformation of evil habits and inward rectitude,
and practicing ceremonies of devotion, equally absurd and useless, is the way
in which he chooses to be served and worshipped; when once a man has brought
himself really to believe these are great and important points, in which
religion consists, he seems to have lost the common principles of reason. And
it is no wonder to find that superstition, which abounds in infinite instances
in a like kind, is lost in confusion, and goes on from one degree of folly and
extravagance to another, till, in the end, it quite obliterates all rational
sense of God, and of his worship, and the very natural conscience of good and
evil. False notions of God, the basis and support of superstition, are
fundamental errors, which destroy the groundwork of all true judgment about
virtue and piety, and on which no superstructure can be raised suited to the
foundation, that has any thing in it but weakness and falsehood; and therefore,
while such errors are unhappily entertained, it is scarce possible in nature
that any other consequence should follow than this, that, with respect to
religion, the grand concern of human life, the light that is in us will be
total darkness Abstract from Dr. Foster of Revealed Religion, vol. I.
.

These are the principal causes of that ignorance and error that have so much
prevailed in the world; but there are a variety of others, which are either
preventive of inquiry, or impediments that obstruct the acquisition of truth;
which though I would not be tedious in expatiating upon, yet the mention of
some of them may have its use.

First, the want of forming in our minds some proper principles and rules of
judging concerning truths in general or particular. Want of due reflection upon
those ideas we have, or may have, and using words and phrases that have no
fixed determinate ideas, and consequently must be destitute of that knowledge
which might otherwise be gained from the contemplation of them and their
relations. Attempting to judge of things quite above our reach, whereby our
ideas are confused, and assert or deny without being at all able to demonstrate
the truth or falsity of the proposition. Not understanding wherein the force of
an argument or just consequence consists, from whence it comes to pass that
persons assert such a thing to follow from such a position, when it is no
axiom, no theorem, no truth, that we know of. Defect of memory and imagination,
which is often shallow, treacherous, confused, and cannot be depended upon.
Attending too much to sense; for as necessary as our senses are to us, there
are certainly many things which fall not within their notice; many which cannot
be exhibited after the manner of sensible objects, and to which no images
belong. Want of retirement, and the practice of thinking and reasoning by
ourselves: Truth is the offspring of silence, unbroken meditation, and thoughts
often revised and corrected. A fondness for our own opinions, in which we
chanced to be educated, that have been inculcated by parents or tutors, that
have the stamp of antiquity, or the sanction of public authority. For these
reasons, if they may be called such, many have not only shown an indifference
as to true principles, but have refused even to hear any arguments against
their favorite imbibed opinions; though, for the same reason, had they been
born in an idolatrous, Mahommedan, or Popish country, they must have been of
the religion in which they were educated. Lastly, if persons of this turn of
mind have at any time permitted the sound of truth in their ears, and have been
led to think or inquire at all, it has been so superficial, and under the
influence of such prepossession and bigotry, as have proved the hinderance of
their illumination and conviction.

But perhaps it will be asked, are there not many difficulties that obstruct
the acquisition of truth in general, involuntary and unavoidable, arising from
the depravity of human reason? Reason, it is said, which was once the dignity
and glory of human nature, is now depraved, weakened and enfeebled by our
original defection, so that it is at best a very uncertain guide with respect
to truth or happiness. But however depraved and disabled by the fall, he is
still capable of discerning what is right or wrong in every case which properly
concerns him; man is still capable of extending his inquiries very far into
other concerns; can search deep into the recesses of nature, and by steady.
careful inquiry, joined with experience, explain many abstruse points in the
system of the universe, and illustrate the wise laws and wonderful dispositions
of providence; and can it be imagined that our own proper duty as men, and
truths that are of importance for us to know, are placed beyond the reach of
our understanding? This would be rendering the state of man deplorable indeed,
and reflect on the wisdom and care of the Divine Providence. And as to the
doctrines and duties of revelation, they must be capable of arriving at the
true sense of these too, unless it be a revelation unrevealed; taking it for
granted, as it is clearly a doctrine of the New Testament, that whatever
degrees of divine assistance is necessary in aid to our faculties, they are
always afforded to the diligent and well-disposed. If it should be asked, how
can we possibly know that those inward impressions that we feel, are really
divine? The answer must be, from their correspondence with the eternal
revelation, and with the light and dictates of reason. And from hence it will
follow, that, in the present state of our faculties, however impaired and
disordered, we are capable of acquiring a deep and lively impression of moral
and divine truths. For is it out of the power of a man to consider seriously?
Is it beyond his natural abilities, to reflect often on affairs of the utmost
consequence? Can he have a just theory of the Christian religion, and at the
same time not be convinced of its intrinsic excellence, and infinite
importance? Such an insinuation as this redounds as little to the credit of
christianity, as to the honor of human nature.

Should it be said that man, by the original bias of his nature to evil, and
its aversion to what is good, is necessarily disinclined to, and indisposed for
reflection on such subjects as these; I answer, the strongest disinclination
does by no means infer an utter impossibility; nay, the contrary is most
evident: for let the indisposition be equal to what is suggested in the
objection, man must still be a free agent, and have it in his power to be
either virtuous or vicious, or else he is absolutely incapable both of religion
and moral government; and can we imagine that our nature is so odd, and so
defective a composition, as to be capable of forming many good resolutions, and
of rectifying many errors of conduct in civil life, and, at the same time,
indisposed and unable to act the part of a rational, moral and intelligent
being, in matters of a religious nature?

Here it may be proper to take notice of the principal causes of corruptions in
christianity, which are generally urged as another source of difficulty in the
search after religious truth, and in the study and right understanding the
scriptures, in a way of private judgment.

When christianity was first promulgated to the world, it stood upon the
principles of reason and common sense; and happy would it have been for
mankind, if they had but suffered it to remain upon this foundation. But men
were no sooner drawn over to it, than, deserting their natural notions of
things, they began to explain it upon artificial notions. The great misfortune
was, that many of its first converts came from the schools of the philosophers;
and being prepossessed with fantastic opinions and systems of their own, they
began to garnish, and new-model it, according to every man's taste and humor.
A plain, simple religion, such as the Christian, founded upon the principle of
reason and common sense, was too insipid of itself, and wanted seasoning with
philosophy, before it could be relished by those primitive prelates. Here was
the foundation of every heresy, and the source of all that spurious mixture,
which corrupted the purity of the gospel, so soon after its establishment. The
philosophy of Plato was the first in vogue amongst Christians; and this seems
to have happened, not only because this philosophy was imagined to bear some
distant resemblance to christianity; but also because it was the best
calculated to flatter that enthusiastic turn of mind, which unhappily prevailed
in those early times.

If then we would show ourselves wise men and good Christians, let us be
concerned only for truth; and in order to find it, consider calmly, and examine
impartially; let not indolence enervate and stupify our minds, let not
prejudice captivate and enslave us; let not sensuality unfit us for
intellectual exercises, let not superstition make us weak and childish, and
taint all our principles, with respect to the very essentials of religion; but
rather let us cultivate an honest candid temper, and let the evidences of truth
have an unbiassed influence on our minds.

Some general OBJECTIONS to FREE INQUIRY, answered.
Obj. 1. THAT the obscurity in which the fruitful imaginations of men have
buried many truths, especially in christianity, has made divinity so difficult
a science, as to render many parts of it unintelligible to the generality of
Christians.

Ans. Mankind, however depraved and disabled by the fall, which some are very
fond of magnifying, are still capable of extending their inquiries very far in
many intricate cases, respecting their own civil concerns, and those of others;
and consequently can be under no incapacity of investigating truths of
importance, which must necessarily as nearly concern them. "Notwithstanding all
the pretended incapacity, they are capable of descerning what their duty is,
and wherein their true happiness consist; they can search deeply into the
recesses of nature, by study and careful inquiry joined with experience. They
are able to explain many abstruse parts of the system of the universe, and to
illustrate the wise laws and wonderful dispositions of providence; and can it
be imagined, that their own proper duty as men is beyond the reach and
comprehension of their understanding? Can it be conceived that their own
happiness is so perplexed and inscrutable a subject, that they can form no
clear and settled judgment concerning it? Deplorable then is the destiny of
men, and very ungracious seems to be the care and providence of their Creator
Dr. Foster's Sermon, vol. iii. p. 299.
. But this has been already taken notice of. Besides, if truth is liable to
suffer by the disguise and false glosses put upon error, there is the more
reason to bring all propositions to the standard of truth, and to certain
principles and rules of judging concerning them.

Obj. 2. That free inquiry and controversy in religion have a tendency to
divide Christians into sects and parties, and introduce, not only a diversity
of sentiments, but oftentimes uncharitable censures and animosity, even among
the nearest friends.

Ans. As all are bound to think about religion, so it is impossible that all
should think alike; but their thoughts will unavoidably issue in different
sentiments and opinions. This has been manifestly the case in all ages; men
have always had different opinions about religion, such, at least, as have had
the liberty to make use of their reason and judgment in it. This no doubt was
the case of the apostles themselves, in things wherein they were not
immediately inspired or directed. And how manifestly was it the case of others
of the first Christians? Some believed they might eat all things; others, that
were weak, believed that they might eat only herbs. Some esteemed one day above
another, others esteemed every day alike, Romans xiv. 2.5. Some were for Paul,
others for Apollos, etc. and it would be needless to show there was the like
difference amongst Christians in the following ages of the church, whilst we
have the transactions of their synods and councils, and so many volumes of
their controversies, and whatever may be inferred from thence to the prejudice
of free enquiry, men may and do generally agree in all essential points; ^^nd
it cannot be the duty of persons under a state of imperfection, as ours is, to
think alike; for, to say nothing of the different measures of men's faculties,
what a strange turn does education give to their minds, even when there is
something of equality as to natural endowments? Their understandings are not
tutored and brought up, as I may express it, the same way; the different
masters they have sat under, the different books that have been put into their
hands, the different company they have kept, and conversation they have had,
the various subjects their thoughts have been employed upon (which have been
represented to them by their catechists, teachers, tutors, in a very different
light) will necessarily determine them to different judgments and
apprehensions; in short, there is scarce a greater variety in voices and
features, than there is in sentiments and opinions in the mere speculative
points of religion, nor can this be avoided without a miracle, or constant
universal inspiration Bennet's Irenicum.
; and this has led the pious and well-disposed of every denomination, as well
as those eminent in learning, to place the essentials or fundamentals of
religion in a few necessary articles, of which we shall take notice. However,
this is certain, that Jesus Christ has provided no other remedy against
errors, or a diversity of opinions, than reason and argument, offered with
meekness and charity. We may propose truth with all possible advantage,
recommend it by all proper arguments, and thereby endeavor to reclaim the
erroneous; but when we cannot in this way of the gospel prevail with our
mistaken brethren, we must leave them to God and their own conscience Ibid,
.

Obj. 3. But our inquiries, it is urged, are unnecessary; we are to take
knowledge from the priests lips. It is an instance of presumption to pretend to
understand and judge for ourselves in matters of a religious nature, and
thereby call in question the superior judgment and authority of those who are
appointed the ministers of the gospel over us. And does it not favor of pride
to oppose our judgment of any point to the judgment of general councils,
convocations, and all the learned members and decrees of the church?

Ans. This, says Dr. Whitby Sermon IV. p. 96, 97, 98.
, is that pride which those 7000, who would not bow the knee to Ball, were
guilty of, in opposition to the generality of the Israelites, who had agreed so
to do. It was such an instance of presumption, as was practiced by those Jews
who believed in Christ, and acknowledged him to be the Messiah, against the
sentence of the great Sanhedrim, and of those Scribes and Pharisees who sat in
the chair of Moses. The same disposition was also the foundation of the
reformation of the church of England, and of all Protestant churches. The
doctrines and superstitious practices they renounced, being confirmed by many
general councils, as agreeable to scripture, or confirmed and handed down to
them by catholic tradition, and which all Christians have a peculiar obligation
to, as they would not prejudice the purity of the faith, which was once
delivered to the saints, and hold fast the profession of it without wavering.

Many points of the Christian doctrine are not mere matters of speculation, in
which persons of different denominations are divided in their sentiments; but
many of them are equally the concern of all, and will ever remain of such
importance, that, till Christians are well acquainted with and confirmed in
them, no one can be inexcusable that has opportunities to inquire, to remain
ignorant of them. Such in general are the great principles and rules of human
conduct; and what is next to it, are those truths of religion, that have a
proper rational influence on our conduct, to animate us in the practice of
virtue, and deter us from vice. Of this kind are inquiries concerning our own
state and circumstances, as reasonable and accountable beings; that God is the
moral Governor of his rational creatures; and that there will be a state of
futurity, in which will be a righteous retribution, according to men's actions
in this life.

Obj. 4. Is of a very different nature, viz. That faith has no virtue or true
merit in it, because we cannot avoid assenting to particular truths, when the
proofs are clearly discerned, and appear to be strong and conclusive; and that
we must in all cases believe or disbelieve, just as the evidence appears to our
understanding.

A. This is at best a vague superficial objection; for it depends in a great
measure upon ourselves, that things appear to our understandings in a true or a
false light; if this be owing, as it is almost universally on the one hand, to
diligent and mature reflection; and, on the other, to ent^re neglect or partial
inquiry, to criminal prejudices, or strength of corrupt passions; it follows of
course, that in all such cases, where our right belief springs from integrity,
and the due exercise of our rational powers, and our infidelity or errors from
a vicious indulgence and depravity of temper; the one may fitly be rewarded,
and the other righteously punished; as fitly indeed as any instances of moral
rectitude, or of corruption and iniquity, that can be mentioned Dr. Foster of
Incredulity, and the Morality of Faith, vol. III. p. 226 to 230.
.

Some OBJECTIONS to the Study of the SCRIPTURES, particularly c^nsidered.
THE holy scriptures, says St. Gregory, is, as it were, a letter written by God
to man; and we ought therefore to read it with reverence, to weigh it
attentively, and learn the will of God from God himself; to despise or neglect
so extraordinary a blessing, were not only an imprudence, but a crime. The
reading and meditating on the scripture are, says St. Bernard, a character of
our relation to God, Jesus Christ having himself said, He that is of God,
hears God's words. What can we read else that can be more agreeable than this
book? There is no true and salutary joy, says St. Austin, but that which arises
from hope, that hope, most especially, whose object is the kingdom of heaven.
Now, the scriptures show us the way thither, and fill the heart with
innumerable secret delights, whilst we walk in it, agreeably to what St. Paul
says, that through patience and comfort of the scriptures, our hope becomes
more steady and resolved Lamy's Introduction to the Holy Scripture, Pref. p. 1.
.

Now, the doctrines and duties of a revelation men must be capable of
understanding the sense of so much as is necessary, or else it is a revelation
unrevealed; for to suppose that a farther supernatural and inward illumination,
is absolutely necessary to give a right and just idea of scripture doctrines,
is, in effect, to assert that the scriptures are of no use at all; and that the
internal teaching, is the only revelation of the mind of God to mankind. But
here again a considerable difficulty occurs, and that is, how we can possibly
know that this inward teaching is really divine, but from its correspondence
with the external revelation, and with the light and dictates of reason; and
consequently without admitting that the external revelation may be understood
without it, and that reason is the eternal standard of truth.

But there are a variety of difficulties started, that obstruct the knowledge
of the true sense of scripture, which deserve to be taken notice of in this
place.

Obj. 1. It is said the New Testament cannot be well understood without the
Old, which was for the most part wrote in Hebrew, and for the understanding of
which a good knowledge of the oriental language is necessary. That a great part
of the scriptures are wrote in a style extremely figurative; and those figures,
such as this part of the world are very great strangers to; and consequently
the version of books, little understood from their language and style, must be
extremely difficult. And if the knowledge of the Old Testament could be
dispensed with, the language of the New Testament is not to be understood
without much pains. The style indeed, in the historical part, is plain; yet
there are great difficulties in the doctrinal parts. The whole is wrote in the
style adapted to the Jews, and the idiom is Hebrew or Syriac, though the words
be Greek, which renders some knowledge of this language the more necessary. I
might add, that it requires a good knowledge of the Jewish state, at the time
of our Savior's coming; a knowledge of their government, Sanhedrim, synagogue
worship, customs, traditions, opinions, sects, etc. A farther difficulty arises
from the sublimity of some of its peculiar doctrines, and the excellency of
some of its precepts, as appearing incongruous to their ancient maxims,
principles, and prepossessions Abstracts from Bishop Hare's Difficulties, etc.
that attend the study of the scriptures.
.

Ans. As to the difficulties arising from the languages, a common critic will
make some allowances for the deficiencies and redundancies that might be
pointed out in books of such great antiquity, as the books of the Old Testament
confessedly are: and when several of those books treat of the same matters, and
relate the same facts, a candid reader will supply what appears deficient in
one, by what appears complete in the other; and more especially when we can
attain to the general view and design, make the most favorable construction of
such as appears harsh and difficult, and content ourselves with being unable to
account for some seeming contradictions, as in many cases it may be seen to be
an omission in the transcriber. Thus, 2 Samuel xxiv. 1. it is written, The anger
of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them to say,
Go number Israel and Judah. And 1 Chronicles. xxi. 1. it is said, And Satan stood up
against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel; and God was displeased
with the thing; v. 7. therefore he smote Israel. And some of the prophecies of
scripture, with their application, seems to stand in need of the same candid
comparison of scriptures, and other circumstances, to come at the right
knowledge of them. The relation given of some particulars in our Savior's life
and doctrine, are in some minute circumstances differently related by the
Evangelists; but in no material and essential points.

Secondly, It is plain the orthodox faith is not founded on a nice and critical
knowledge of the scripture; many of the primitive Christians were no great
critics, but argued very much in a mystical way. Origin in particular, who was
the greatest scholar christianity had bred to that time, perpetually turns the
letter of scripture into allegory; from whence we may reasonably conclude, that
the knowledge of the pure literal sense was, in the judgment of many, even in
those times, thought to be of little use.

But it is certain, that the original language of the Old Testament was known
to very few for the first six centuries, in which those general councils were
held, wherein all the articles of the orthodox faith were settled; they
governed themselves, and determined all their points by the Greek version. Now,
if an exact and critical knowledge of the scriptures was not necessary to the
settling the faith, it cannot be necessary to the understanding it, or to the
understanding those who have wrote in the explication of it: on the contrary,
such a knowledge tends to lessen our esteem of the fathers of the church, by
discovering their mistakes, and must weaken our regard to the decision of
councils, by exposing the falseness of the ground they seem to be built on. A
man well skilled in the fathers and councils, will often find texts of
scripture are very insufficiently or improperly applied; which suggest to us
another reason why it may seem that such a study can do no good Hare's
Difficulties and Discouragements, p. 9.
.

Our learned author likewise enumerates many other arguments against an exact
and careful study of the scriptures, as, 1. That the substance of the orthodox
faith is comprised in the liturgy and articles of the church of England; which
is a short way as could be wished for, knowing all that is necessary to be
known, especially as this will lead to the knowledge of all useful truths,
without the hazard of falling into any dangerous opinions. 2. As it is a
fundamental principle among Protestants, that whatever is necessary to be
believed is plainly revealed in the scriptures, and consequently what is not
plainly and clearly revealed in them, cannot be necessary: now if what is plain
and clear in scripture, is the only part necessary to be known; then a
laborious search into the obscurer parts may seem unnecessary, to the obtaining
a true orthodox faith. 3. Supposing the study of the scripture to be necessary,
that they have been sufficiently studied already, and if any parts remain
obscure, who can hope to clear up passages, that have puzzled so many great
men, or who will presume to set up his judgment in competition with theirs? 4.
That where persons have attempted a free and impartial search into the literal
sense of the scriptures, above the rest of the Christian world, they have
sometimes purchased their pretended knowledge of the scriptures at the expense
of their reputation; and their study has destroyed their orthodoxy, and you
will be censured as a heretic, a term which there is a strange magic in; though
it has no determinate meaning in the mouth of the people; whilst the orthodox
man lives quiet and at ease, unmolested and unenvied Our author here mentions
two clergymen, and it is natural to conclude he means the reverend Mr. Whiston
and Dr. Clark.
. 5. It is expected that a man should always adhere to the party he has taken,
and that he is all his life bound by the subscriptions made in his first years,
as if a man was as wise at twenty-four, and knew as much of scripture and
antiquity, as at fifty; and yet if he continues the study of the scriptures, he
is not sure he shall continue a year together in the same sentiments. Our
author farther enlarges on the danger of dissenting from the established
doctrines of christianity, even in those times of toleration: and he concludes
with saying, Do not flatter yourself, that temper, prudence and moderation,
can, in religious controversies, get the better of indiscreet zeal, bigotry and
superstition; in short, be not rash in espousing opinions, which can have no
other effect, but to lay the best men at the mercy of the worst. Every mean
person, who has nothing to recommend him but his orthodoxy, and owes that
perhaps wholly to his ignorance, will think he has a right to trample on you
with contempt, and asperse your character with violent reflections, without
your having the least hopes of being heard in your own defense.

Our worthy prelates, after these remarks, and more to the same purpose, by way
of reprehension of those ministers whose conduct have run counter to their duty
and profession, make these candid concessions.

After all that has been said, I am persuaded that many readers will still
think what is here advanced, a strange paradox, or perhaps be scandalized at it
as a very wicked one; and will on no terms allow, that clergymen should lay
aside what ought to be their chief study. And, to be ingenuous, I will confess
I am entirely of the same mind; I am as unwilling as they can be, to admit the
conclusion, that the study of the scriptures should be deserted; and yet cannot
deny, but, humanly speaking, this must be the consequence from the premises.
If therefore we will not allow the conclusion, we must show the premises to be
untrue, and that this study will not be attended with so much danger. But this
we in vain attempt, if we do not our parts at least, that these may not be the
consequences. For as long as they are, the study of the scriptures will
certainly continue to be neglected, as it now is, and all men who contribute to
these consequences in any degree, do so far discourage the study of the
scriptures, whatever they pretend.

In truth, there is nothing more absurd, than to say the glorious things we do
daily of the Scriptures; and, at the same time, make the study of them, to men
of sincere and honest minds, so extremely hazardous and inconvenient. If then
we would not be guilty of discouraging a study, which we acknowledge to be the
great duty of the clergy, as we are Christians; if we would be true to the
fundamental principles of the reformation, as Protestants, that the scriptures
are the only rule of faith; let us use our best endeavors to remove the great
obstacles that lie against the study of them; let us do what we can, that
learned men may have full liberty to study the scriptures freely and
impartially; good encouragement given them to go through the labor and
difficulties of such a study, not slightly and superficially, but with such
application and diligence as the nature of the thing requires; and have leave
to speak their sense with all manner of safety: that their opinions may be
examined fairly and with temper: that their names be not unjustly loaded with
calumny and slander: that their words and actions may be interpreted with the
same candor, as is shown to those that differ from them: that, if what they
advance be right, it may be received; if wrong, their errors may be refuted, as
the mistakes of learned men on other subjects; if doubtful, and the scriptures
say so little, or speak so obscurely, that nothing can certainly be decided
either way, that then no body may be obliged to take either side as necessary:
that, whether their notions be right or wrong, their persons may in all events
be fafe, and their maintenance not affected by it: that, as long as they live
virtuously, and write with all due modesty, good manners, and advance nothing
that breaks in upon morality and government, they be treated in all respects as
those are or ought to be who employ themselves in any other part of useful
learning.

I must add, let them be never so much in the wrong, I can apprehend no danger
from it to the church; or that the errors of a few men, can have any
considerable influence in opposition to a great body of a vigilant and learned
clergy, who will be always able and ready to defend the received notions, if
they can be defended; and if they cannot, it must be allowed they ought not.
But if some inconveniences would arise from the liberty I contend for, they are
nothing in comparison of those that must follow from the want of it.

Till there is such a liberty allowed to clergymen, till there is such a
security for their reputations, fortunes and persons, I fear I must add, till
so difficult a study meets with proportionable encouragement; it is impossible
a sincere, impartial and laborious application to it, should generally prevail:
and till it does, it is as impossible the scriptures should be well understood;
and till they are, they are a rule of faith in name only. For it is not the
word of scripture, but the sense, which is the rule; and so far as that is not
understood, so far the scriptures are not our rule, whatever we pretend, but
the sense that men have put on them; men fallible as ourselves, and who were by
no means so well furnished, as the learned at present are, with the proper
helps to find out the true meaning of scripture. And while we take the sense of
the scriptures in this manner upon content, and see not with our own eyes; we
insensibly relapse into the principle of popery, and give up the only ground on
which we can justify our separation from the church of Rome. It was a right to
study and judge of the scriptures for themselves, that our first reformers
asserted with so good effect; and their successors can defend their adherence
to them on no other principle.

If then we are concerned for the study of the scriptures, further than in
words; if we in earnest think them the only rule of faith; let us act as if we
thought so, let us heartily encourage a free impartial study of them; let us
lay aside that malignant, arbitrary, persecuting, popish spirit; let us put no
fe^ters on men's understandings, nor any other bounds to their inquiries, but
what God and truth have set. Let us, if we would not give up the Protestant
principle, that the scriptures are plain and clear in the necessary articles,
declare nothing to be necessary, but what is clearly revealed in them.

Then may we hope to see the study of these divine books so happily cultivated
by the united labors of the learned, when under no discouragements, that all
may in the main agree in the true meaning of them. Places that can be
understood, they will agree in understanding alike; such at least as are of
consequence to the faith. And for such as are too obscure to be cleared up with
any certainty, those likewise they will agree about, and unanimously confess
they are such as no article of faith can be grounded upon, or proved from. Next
to understanding a text of scripture, is to know it cannot be certainly
understood. When the clear and dark parts of scripture are thus distinguished,
an unity may then reasonably be hoped for among Protestants in necessary
points; and a difference of opinion in such as are not necessary, can have no
manner of ill consequence, nor any way disturb the peace of the church; since
there will then be nothing left in its doctrines, ^o inflame men's passions, or
feed their corrupt interests, when we are all agreed about what is essential to
religion; and what is not essential, is looked on as indifferent; so that a man
may take one side, or the other, or neither, or may change, as he sees reason,
without offense.

Upon the whole, a free and impartial study of the scriptures, either ought to
be encouraged, or it ought not. There is no medium; and therefore those who are
against one side, which ever it be, are necessarily espousers of the other.
Those who think it ought not to be encouraged, will, I hope, think it no injury
to be thought to defend their opinion upon such reasons as have here been
brought for it, till they give better. On the other hand, those who think these
reasons inconclusive, and cannot find better, will find themselves obliged to
confess, that such a study ought to be encouraged; and consequently must take
care how they are accessory to such practices, as in their natural consequence
cannot but tend to its discouragement; lest they come into the condemnation of
those who love darkness rather than light, and for their punishment be finally
adjudged to it. There is in this case no other medium between encouraging, and
discouraging, but what there is between light and darkness. Every degree of
darkness, is a want of so much light, and all want of light, is a certain
degree of darkness. To refuse then a greater degree of light where it can be
had, is in truth to prefer darkness; which, in my humble opinion, can never be
reasonable or excusable. Those who are of another mind, plainly distrust
themselves or their cause. Which if it can bear the light, why should it not be
shown in it? but if it cannot, it is not the cause of God, or of the Son of
God; for God is light, and in him is no darkness; and the Son of God is the
true light, which lights every man that comes into the world Bishop Hare.
.

REMARKS on what are styled FUNDAMENTALS.
This is a point I apprehend incapable of being determined, as it must
necessarily depend on, and will ever vary, according to the circumstances of
persons; and therefore I shall be more concise on this head, and give the
reader the sentiments of some eminent authors thereon.

Bishop Usher says, as for the credenda, or things necessary to be believed,
the Creed, called the Apostles, contained all articles of that kind, as is
manifest from the continual practice of the Catholic church. For when she
prepared her catechumens for baptism, and thereupon received them to that
ordinance, and into the Christian church, we cannot reasonably suppose she
omitted any thing to make them members; and yet all that she required of them
to believe, were the articles of this creed.

As to the agenda, or things necessary to be done, in order to salvation, he
says, among all the great differences we see in the practice of Christians,
there are certain fundamental points in which they all agree; as, a desire to
fear God; repentance for sins past, and a sincere purpose of heart, for the
time to come, to cleave unto the Lord; which whosoever have is under mercy, and
ought not to be excluded the communion of the faithful Christians Archbishop
Usher on the Unity of the Church, p. 15, 28.
.

With this agrees the doctrine of the church of England, for she requires of
those that are to be baptized, only to make confession of this faith Church
Catechism.
.

Hence the judicious Mr. Chillingworth says, the main questions in this
business are, what revelations are simply and absolutely necessary to be
proposed to the belief of Christians, so that that society which does believe
them, has for matter of faith, the essence of a true church. And he quotes,

Mr. Chillingworth's Religion of Protestants, chap. iv. sect. 13 page 196.

See Dr. Potter on the Creed, p. 215.

Bishop of London's second Pastoral Letter, printed in 1730, page 15.


Dr. Potter, who says, that what man or church soever believes the Creed, and
all the evident consequences of it sincerely and heartily, cannot possibly (if
also he believes the scripture) be in any error of simple belief, offensive to
God, nor therefore deserve for any such error to be deprived of his life, or to
be cut off from the communion of the church, and deemed unworthy of salvation.
And the consequence is this, which highly concerns the church of Rome, that
whatsoever man or church does for any error of simple belief, deprive any man
so qualified as above, either of his temporal life, or livelihood, or liberty,
or of the churches communion, and hope of salvation, is for the first, unjust,
cruel and tyrannical, schismatical and presumptuous; and for the second,
uncharitable.

Bishop Gibson has delivered his sentiments on this subject with much
clearness, candor and charity; he says, as long as men are men, and have
different degrees of understanding, and every one a partiality (...) his own
conceptions, it is not to be expected that they should agree in any one entire
scheme, and every part of it, in the circumstances, as well as in the things
themselves.

The question therefore is not in general about a difference in opinion, which
in our present state is unavoidable; but about the very weight and importance
of the things wherein Christians differ, and the things wherein they agree; and
it will appear that the several denominations of Christians agree, both in the
substance of religion, and in the necessary enforcements to the practice of it:
"That the world, and all things in it, were created by God, and are under the
direction and government of his powerful hand and all-seeing eye; that there is
an essential difference between good and evil, virtue and vice; that there will
be a state of future rewards and punishments, according to our behavior in
this life; that Christ was a teacher sent from God, and that the apostles were
divinely inspired; that all Christians are bound to profess themselves to be
his disciples; that not only the exercise of the several virtues, but belief in
Christ, is necessary in order to their obtaining the pardon of sin, the favor
of God, and eternal life; that the worship of God is to be performed chiefly by
the heart in prayers, praises and thanksgiving; and as to all other points,
that they are bound to live by the rules which Christ and his apostles have
left them in the holy scriptures. Here, says this right reverend prelate, is a
fixed, certain uniform rule of faith and practice, containing all the most
necessary points of religion, established by a divine sanction, embraced as
such by all denominations of Christians, and in itself abundantly sufficient to
preserve the knowledge and practice of religion in the world.

Professor Turretin, of Geneva, has laid down the following principles to
distinguish fundamentals,

I. That we are not under a necessary obligation to know, or believe any truth,
but what is clearly revealed unto us, and for the belief of which God has
endowed us with necessary abilities.

II. That he alone who is Lord of life and death, that is, God, has power to
determine what is necessary to be believed, in order to obtain salvation; and
what error shall exclude men from it.

III. Those things likewise which flow from these principles, by plain and
necessary consequence, must be added to the catalogue of fundamentals, or
things necessary to be known.

IV. Fundamentals are plain, adapted to common capacities.

V. They must be few in number.

VI. They must be often and variously expressed in scripture.

VII. They are principles of, or tending to promote piety.

Finally, with respect to ourselves; our safest way is to guard against all
errors, as though they were fundamental, and to make the utmost progress in the
knowledge of divine truths; but with regard to others, we ought to pronounce
nothing indispensibly necessary to salvation, but with the utmost caution,
charity and meekness Turretin's Discourse on Fundamental Art. p. 22 to 30.

See also Bennet's Irenicum, and Reverend Samuel Bold on church power.


.

Dr. Foster, in his definition of fundamentals, says, No article can be
fundamental, but what is so clearly and distinctly revealed, as that an
ordinary Christian, sincere in his inquiries, cannot miss of the knowledge of
it.

Secondly, that it is not sufficient that a proposition be clearly revealed to
make it a fundamental, but the belief of it must also be made an express term
of happiness in the sacred writings Dr. Foster's Discourse of Fundamentals, p.
4.
.

1. No doctrine is a fundamental, but what is so plainly and distinctly
revealed, as that an ordinary Christian, sincere in his inquiries, cannot miss
of the knowledge of it. This may be argued from the perfections of God, and the
relations he stands in to mankind: for certainly their kind Creator and
Preserver cannot but delight in, and sincerely desire their happiness; and
therefore it is not to be doubted but that he has done every thing to promote
it, which is consistent with his illustrious excellence and perfection, and
with the wisdom of his government over free creatures. He cannot have fixed it
upon such infinite uncertainties, as that they may fail of obtaining it after
the most sincere and diligent use of all the means they are capable of using,
but must have made it certainly and infallibly attainable by every one who
seeks it in the integrity of his heart. What can induce us to think the most
good-natured Being in the universe to be such a hard master? Has there been any
want of goodness in his dispensations toward mankind, which might tempt us to
entertain such unworthy and injurious thoughts of him? Again, can he who has
been at such amazing expense to redeem the human race from that destruction
which their sins had merited, and to raise our nature to its highest perfection
of excellence and happiness; who, that he might be just to his being and
attributes, and yet justify and save us, delivered up his Son to death for us
all; can he, I say, have left it so absolutely precarious, whether poor,
illiterate men, (who are the far greatest part of the world) to whom especially
the gospel was preached, and consequently to whose capacities it ought to have
been peculiarly adapted, shall, doing their best, be happy or miserable? How
then can the grand end of the life, death, resurrection, and gospel of his Son
be answered? Or finally, has he ever been found false to his word, or failed of
the accomplishment of his promises, that his most solemn and sacred
declarations of his willingness, that all men should be saved and come to the
knowledge of the truth, should be looked upon as insincere, and he be
represented as having promised happiness to the greatest part of mankind, if
not upon absolutely impossible conditions, upon conditions next to impossible?

2. It is not sufficient that a doctrine be clearly revealed to make it a
fundamental; but an explicit belief of it must be made an express term of
happiness in the sacred writings. For, without doubt, there are a great many
clear propositions, which many sincere, honest Christians have no explicit
belief of: nor is it necessary they should, since they are purely incidental,
and occasional; and either do not at all affect christianity in any important
points of doctrine, or practice; or if they are of consequence, it is only as
they serve to illustrate the essential, fundamental parts of it, which yet may
be believed, though they are never observed, or attended to. I grant indeed,
that whenever a Christian sees them to be clearly revealed, he is obliged to
believe them: but then it is not because the points of doctrine are in
themselves so important, as that men's salvation, or damnation, will be
determined absolutely by their knowledge, or ignorance of them; but because
they are (as he thinks) in the word of God, who is omniscient, and so cannot be
deceived himself, just and faithful, and so cannot impose upon his creatures;
and there is still this difference between any of these propositions, and those
which are, in the sense abovementioned, fundamental, that a man may be saved
without explicit and particular belief of these; whereas the others are
indispensably necessary to be explicitly believed, as being the essential,
constitutive parts of the new covenant.

And now, methinks, it should be past dispute, not only that Christ alone, as
sole king of his church, has a right to settle, upon what terms those who are
willing to become his subjects, must expect to be protected and rewarded by
him; but that these terms are expressly determined; and particularly, that our
Lord, out of his gracious and kind concern for his church, which he has
purchased with his own blood, Acts xx. 28. has fully and clearly revealed what
those truths are, which are of such vast importance, as that the happiness of
immortal souls depends upon an explicit belief of them, and which therefore it
so nearly concerns all the members of it to be apprized of. So that we may rest
satisfied, that whenever this is not expressly said, with relation to any
particular doctrine of christianity, misapprehensions of that part of the
revelations, which contains it, (if we have examined it with sincerity) will
never be brought into the account against us at the day of judgment; but if we
can be charged with nothing else, we shall be able to lift up our heads with
joy and confidence in that solemn and awful day of trial, and shall be found
perfect and entire, in a gospel-sense wanting nothing.

The Right of FREE INQUIRY and PRIVATE JUDGMENT.
Religion is a voluntary thing* and a matter of choice; for mankind are beings
endowed with reason and liberty; and this alone makes them capable of religion
and virtue. This must be the right of every man who has the free exercise of
his reason, the only faculty which God has given them by which to judge of
truth and falsehood, and to discern betwixt good and evil.

What just foundation for praise is there in a man's being of the true
religion? a Christian, suppose by chance, without knowing the grounds of his
religion, and the reason of his hope, merely because his ancestors were
Christians, and christianity is the established religion; upon the same foot he
might have been of a false religion, a Mahommedan, or an Idolater.

Religion therefore is only so far praiseworthy as it is the matter of our
choice; and since religion is the means of procuring us acceptance with God, it
necessarily follows, that every man has an undoubted right to judge for himself
Dr. Foster.
.

Every man must have a right to judge of the true meaning, and the obligation
of those laws that come under his notice; and where the laws of an inferior
clashes with those of a superior, reason and consciousness will point out the
proper deference to the laws of a superior. This alone justifies the separation
from any establishment, and destroys the principle of force.

Religious truths, says Bishop Hoadley, is what concerns every one. Religion
there can be none, without inquiry; for what is contrary to the first notions
of God, established upon the evidences of reason, cannot be admitted by any one
who believes a God upon this evidence, because it destroys all those principles
of reason itself. What is contrary to the plain design or declaration of the
gospel, cannot be received by any one who believes the gospel, because it
destroys the authority of the gospel in which he believes. And what is contrary
to the fundamental principles of the reformation, without which it could never
have been at first, and now cannot consistently be, defended, will not, cannot
be received by any true Protestant, because it destroys his very title to that
name, and in the very thing which, as a Protestant, he receives Bishop
Hoadley's Desence of his Sermon against the Censures of the Committee.

See the Old Whig, or Consistent Protestant, in two volumes, published in 1735.


.

None therefore can have any right to impose their particular sense of, or
authoritatively explain those articles of faith and terms of salvation, which
Christ himself has made. Our inquiries are to determine our assent to what
appears truth, or to be founded upon rational and scripture evidence. This is
the Christian's rule, in opposition to the receiving or admitting doctrines
upon the foot of human authority; in which respect we are to call no man master
upon earth, since he is our master, even Christ. This will evidently appear,

1. From its being inconsistent with the dignity of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
head of his church. As such he has given us laws, and reserved to himself a
right of judging our behavior under them. There is one lawgiver, who is able
to save or destroy; who art thou that usurpest this authority, and judge
another?

2. It is destructive to the nature of religion, as religion ought to be the
result of such conceptions as we are able to form of God, and his laws in our
minds. An action indeed may look specious; but if it does not flow from a real
conviction of its excellence, if it be not governed by right motives, it loses
both the nature and reward of a religious action. All the expressions of our
piety, of our reverence, and gratitude to God, unless they spring from an
inward sense of our obligation, could signify nothing in a right estimation.
They could not amount to a reasonable service, because not directed by reason
and understanding: to submit blindfold therefore to the dictates of others,
will not consist with the nature of religion. Under this direction it must vary
with customs and climates, with prevailing factions, and other incidents of
life, i. e. will be just nothing besides a fashionable dress, and an outward
form. Neither can we well expect that a religion taken up in such a careless
manner should be lasting, when it has no other foundation than that of human
authority; it will be liable to be shaken by every objection, and to be given
up with as little reason as it was at first received: every little difficulty
thrown in the way will be apt to bias an indolent mind to resign it, and the
apprehension of one error shall be taken for a presumption of more, till an
indifference comes on to all religion. This will, I apprehend, be the case when
a profession of religion is founded upon any thing but a full conviction of its
truth and importance. When we have examined impartially, and embraced religion
upon proper principles, we are most likely to remain steadfast, and hold fast
that which is good.

3. An absolute submission of our understanding to the sense, which others put
upon the words of Christ, is such a voluntary neglect of those powers and
capacities, with which we are endowed, as must incur some degree of guilt^ to
what purpose have we understanding, reason, and a capacity of distinguishing
truth from error, unless it be to direct our choice? Why should we be qualified
for moral agency, if we are not allowed to exert it in the most interesting
affairs of life, viz. our religion? How much soever we may please men, by being
so obsequious and resigned, surely we cannot please God, who will expect us to
be and do what he has fitted us for. The account we must render at last to our
judge, will be a personal one; for every man must give an account of himself to
God: there is no pleasing God then by another man's faith and piety, no
appearing at our last tribunal by our deputies, we must answer for ourselves,
and consequently have a right to direct those measures we are so strictly
accountable for. It is an unalienable right, resulting from the very frame of
our nature and religion. The apostles, though they enjoyed extraordinary gifts,
assumed no such power over the consciences of men; they left them to the free
exercises of their own faculties, and commended the Bereans for searching the
scriptures, to see what foundation their doctrine had in it Acts xvii. 12.
. And St. Paul, in the case of symbolizing with idolaters, appeals to the
Corinthians themselves, as capable judges, of what (he said) I speak as to wise
men, judge ye what I say 1 Cor. x. 15.
; and expressly blames the Colossians, for being subject to ordinances after
the commandments and doctrines of men Col. ii. 20.22.
. The same liberty they allowed to others, they claimed for themselves; they
refused to comply with the injunctions of the council, not to preach any more
in the name of Jesus, and herein governed themselves by that important and
immutable principle, that they ought to obey God rather than man Acts v. 29.
. In this they went upon a principle, which wise men and philosophers have
always acknowledged. Socrates declares to his judges, that if they would give
him his life, on this condition, that he should teach philosophy no more, he
would refuse it: "I love and honor you, O Athenians; but in this I choose
rather to obey God than you Plat. Apol. Soc. p. 364
." And Cicero, to the same purpose, says Cic. Off. 3.11. Milner's Religious
Liberty afferted, p. 18.
, when our friends expect from us what is not consistent with honor and
virtue, we should let them see that we bear a greater regard to religion than
to friendship." It is an avowed maxim, amongst Protestants especially, that a
law issuing from an inferior authority obliges not, when it clashes with a
superior. This alone can justify a separation from the established church, when
it is done upon principles of better information. For since there is a divine
law, importing that every man is to take the best care he can of his own soul,
and must give an account of himself to God; whoever is verily persuaded that he
best answers this end, by worshipping God in a Protestant dissenting
congregation, not only may, but is obliged to follow that course, which upon
trial he finds most for his spiritual advantage. Again, this condemns those who
make the civil law, or the law of the country where they live, the rule of
their conscience in matters of right and wrong; for the thing to be considered
is not what the law of men permit; but what the law of God, natural or
revealed, determines in any case Grove's System, vol. II. p. 112.
. So likewise we find that in lawful things St. Paul claimed a right to judge
of their expediency in respect to time, or the effect his conduct might have
upon others: wherein he declares he would submit himself to the direction and
judgment of no man but himself; all things are lawful but one, but all things
are not expedient; all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought
under the power of any 1 Cor. vi. 12.
. This was the principle he went upon both with regard to himself and others;
let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind Romans xiv. 5.
. Thus the apostles considered the religion of Jesus, as the cause of God and
of truth, that needed no coloring to heighten its beauty, no mean arts and
disguise to support its influence; they went forth to propagate the gospel,
armed with truth, integrity and patience; and preached the gospel with such an
open freedom, as showed they feared no inquiry and examination, that was fair
and impartial; and ever since we see that christianity has stood the test, and
preserved its credit against all the attempts of art and violence.

Again, an implicit regard to the interpretations and dictates of others is not
consistent with that veneration and esteem we ought to have for the holy
scriptures. Nothing appears more evident than that they were designed for
common use and instruction. This particularity appears from their being written
in their then vulgar tongue; from their address to the common people, and the
express acknowledgment of the persons concerned in them. With respect to the
Old Testament, our Savior encouraged the reading of them, and imputed the
errors of the Sadducees about the resurrection to their ignorance of the
scriptures Mat. xxii. 29.
. St. Paul asserts, that what were written aforetime were written for our
learning Romans xv. 4.
. With respect to the New Testament, St. John declares, that he wrote his
gospel, that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ John, xx. 31.
; St. Luke his for the instruction of Theophilus Luke i. 34.
. St. Paul inscribes his epistles to whole churches, and directs that his
epistles be read to all the brethren; and injoins the Colossians, that the
epistles he wrote to them and the Laodiceans might be communicated to one
another for their mutual comfort 1 These. v. 17.
: and St. Peter informs us, that his design in writing his epistles was to stir
up the minds of Christians, by way of remembrance, that they might be mindful
of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the
commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Savior 2 Peter, iii. 12.
. And it is evident from the epistles themselves, that they contain such
doctrines as are expressly mentioned in the gospels, or fairly consistent with
them, i. e. such as we might expect from those who were designed by our Savior
to give a fuller account of his religion. From hence it appears, that the
scriptures were designed for common use; and this evidently implies, that God
has revealed his will there with sufficient plainness in all important points,
or believe what is more absurd, that he has given us a revelation that wants
another to explain it; and of consequence it must be every man's right to have
the free use of the scriptures, and a liberty of judging of the true meaning of
them, and of receiving the doctrines and principles or Christianity from an
inward conviction and full persuasion of their truth, reasonableness, and
excellency, and not received as the effect of chance, custom, interest,
implicit faith, or any other motive beneath the dignity of the Christian
religion Consult on this subject Dr. Watts's Logic, p. 225. and seq.
.

From hence we may reasonably draw some arguments in favor of free and candid
debate on matters of inquiry on religion. The great author of nature having
given us certain powers and faculties, whereby we are enabled to judge between
truth and error, we conceive it is a duty incumbent on us to apply these powers
to that generous purpose for which they were designed, especially as we may
reasonably expect that this very inquiry after truth should be of some service
to us, in order to our advancement in virtue, as it has a most apparent
tendency to promote a spirit of integrity and impartiality, and, above all, a
spirit of charity. For it should be observed, that there is not only a natural
inquisitiveness in mankind, but also a natural sanguineness to support their
respective tenets; and hence, for want of attending to that common right, which
every one has of thinking for himself, infinite uncharitableness, harsh
censure, morose or shy behavior, have unhappily prevailed. Now, whatever tends
to banish this narrow and unsocial spirit out of the world, must be allowed
greatly beneficial to mankind in common. And since the same reasons that prove
inquiry reasonable, implies that we ought to use all the means within our power
for information, I am inclined to think every unbiassed reader will admit a
free friendly debate is one proper expedient for the acquisition of truth;
especially as oftentimes it affords an opportunity of hearing such objections
advanced by our opponents, as we were not only ignorant of before, but often
furnish us with the proper answer to those objections, by another hand, which
our then present superficial inquiry into that point had not suggested to us. A
person, in his ordinary connections and intercourse with others, will sometimes
unhappily fall into the company of persons, where he may have his faith perhaps
defrauded of its proper supports, by means of some subtle reflections, and
probably be hardly able to stand the shock; whilst the diligent inquirer after
truth, from the advantages he has reaped from conversation with the judicious,
and frequent debate on the subject of inquiry, will be able to vindicate the
cause of truth, and not only answer the subtle objections of his adversaries,
but silence, and perhaps convince his opponent. This may be illustrated by an
application of it to the right of private judgment, the establishing rational
religion in the room of superstition and enthusiasm, but will be found of equal
use to ascertain and enforce the genuine principles and duties of our holy
religion against skeptics and deists. This will be farther considered under the
advantages of free inquiry Watts's Improvement of the Mind, p. 124.
.

The reason of man is as little able to stand by itself, or proceed alone
through the several branches of useful science, as his personal strength is to
defend himself against the violence of every invader: for both these ends he
stands in need of the counsel and assistance of others. The commerce of science
and learning is as naturally advantageous for defense, ornament or improvement,
as any of the common conveniences of life. Nature seems to point out to us the
necessity of such a communication of knowledge, by distributing to different
persons, tastes and capacities for different inquiries and science, which
through the imperfect nature of man cannot be completed at once, owes its
progression to these very causes, that not being obliged continually to renew
the labor of invention, we improve upon the stock of others, and daily
increase the precious deposit. This is the only patrimony which can descend
from one mind to another; and which, whatever it is that we derive from our
ancestors, if we are not unjust or idle managers, we shall transmit with fresh
improvements to posterity. It is likewise what we impart to others without
envy, and grow richer by an exchange of thoughts and conceptions. This
communication of our sentiments with each other's, and freely canvassing the
various subjects of religion, philosophy and letters, whether by conversation
or writing, I call debate and controversy; and affirm it to be the most natural
and useful instrument of knowledge Library 467.
.

Here it may be proper first to take notice of some of the principal ABUSES of
FREE ENQUIRY.
It is the observation of Dr. Foster, that there is not a more valuable
blessing in human life than liberty. Civil liberty is the basis of all social
happiness; and liberty of conscience, the only foundation of a rational
religion. When the latter is restrained, we are treated rather like brutes than
men, i. e. creatures endowed with moral powers, and accountable for actions:
and therefore, it is one of the chief excellencies of the Christian religion,
and very far from the air and spirit of an imposture, that it preserves the
rights of conscience sacred and inviolable. But, because the world is apt to
run into extremes, the writers of the New Testament, like persons who had a
thorough knowledge of human nature, have taken care in this respect, as well as
in all others, to guard against excess and irregularity. Thus St. Paul advises
the Galatians not to mistake licentiousness for Christian liberty; or in other
words, not to imagine, that because they were freed from the expensive and
burdensome observances of the Mosaic institution, which are elegantly
described as a state of servitude, they were discharged likewise from moral
obligations, which are an eternal and immutable law to all rational beings. I
shall enquire into some of the chief abuses of free-thinking, by which it
happens, that what is really the peculiar honor and greatest advantage of our
intelligent nature, becomes a reproach to it, and is attended with most
injurious consequences. And,

1. Embracing the principle of liberty, has ended with many in infidelity, or a
disbelief of all religion. It is most evident, that infidelity never more
abounded than in this age of free inquiry: and those who are most loose in
their sentiments with respect to the obligations of religion in general, and of
Christianity in particular, are, in profession at least, enemies to bigotry and
implicit faith. Nay, it may be allowed further, that it is likely they would
never have gone such a length as to throw off all religion, if they had
continued in a blind attachment to the principles of their education, and to
established and popular opinions. Whence now can this arise? We who believe,
that religion, in all the parts of it, is strictly rational, can never allow
that it is the natural consequence of a free and impartial examination of it;
but must suppose, on the contrary, that the more thoroughly it is considered,
and the more nicely weighed in the balance of true and unbiassed reason, it
will be the more heartily believed and submitted to. This melancholy event may
however be sufficiently accounted for from other causes; and that it not only
may, but oftentimes does proceed, not from a superior understanding, or more
adequate and enlarged views of things, but from ignorance, superficial inquiry,
and even from that prejudice and implicit faith, which the monopolizers of
reason and freethinking so loudly disclaim. I would not be thought, by any
thing I am now advancing, to discourage the most rational and free examination
of all religious principles, be they ever so sacred and venerable, and
transmitted down with ever so much awe and solemnity by our forefathers; nor
would I be thought to assert, that any man is obliged to receive a revelation,
which, upon mature deliberation, appears to be unworthy of God, and repugnant
to the reason and nature of things: for my only design is to point out some
false principles, which are all an abuse of the true principle of liberty; and
by which it is highly probable, many of the professed admirers, and zealous
espousers of it, have been led to a disregard both of revealed and natural
religion.

2. Another abuse of the principle of liberty is this, that some men seem to
think, that because they have a right to reject all pretended principles of
religion, which are contrary to reason, to the perfections of the supreme
Being, and the eternal laws of piety and virtue, they may likewise throw off
the belief of every thing that they cannot fully account for; and are no more
obliged, for example, to believe a Providence, because the visible course of
things is perplexed and intricate, full of disorder and seeming injustice, and
not such as they imagine it would be, if the universe was governed by an
absolutely wise and good Being; than they are to receive such doctrines as
assert that God is a rigorous, severe, and inexorable Sovereign, one that
delights in the misery of his creatures, and destroys the necessary and
unalterable distinction between moral good and evil. This, I say, is another
too common abuse of the principle of liberty, leading to a disbelief even of
the first principles of natural religion; an abuse that argues great narrowness
of mind, and is what persons of any compass and freedom of thought cannot be
guilty of Dr. Foster of the Abuses of Free-thinking, vol. I. p. 127 and seq.
.

3. Some again seem to mistake liberty for a right to dispute every thing, and
cavil at all religious principles, which are commonly received, merely to show
that they are free-thinkers; the great delight of these people, who are often
to be met with, is to puzzle a controversy, and start objections against some
point or other of revealed religion; not from a desire of having them
considered and solved, but either to show their parts, or for the sake of
embarrassing and distressing weak minds, who having, perhaps, neither capacity
nor leisure for close thinking, cannot see through the sophistry of their
pretended arguments. Such persons are, generally speaking, the furthest that
can be from freedom and largeness of mind: for either they will not stay to
hear their objections confuted, which is the least that can be expected from a
candid and ingenious spirit; or, if they are gravelled and confounded, make a
shift to forget it soon, and repeat the same empty cavils over again to the
next company they meet, with as much unconcernedness and assurance as if they
had never received any answer to them. Whether these men are really in
sentiment against religion, or whether they dispute only for their diversion,
or from a talkative humor, or an odd affectation of an uncommon spirit of
liberty, I will not take upon me to determine. However this be, they cannot
take it amiss, if they are ranked on the side of infidelity, because they are
always talking against religion, but never defending it.

4. It is an abuse of liberty to prostitute it to the mean and narrow view of a
party-spirit. If the right of judging for ourselves was the only concern, why
could not men be content to use it for themselves, and encourage the impartial
exercise of it in others? But to urge it only with a view to procure attention,
and thereby gain an opportunity of starting difficulties, and of recommending a
particular set of writers; to urge it on purpose to unsettle men's principles,
disturb society, or secure some private ends, this is to act a low ungenerous
part. If any thing honorable was aimed at, why could this not be done without
abuse? Is it not perfectly absurd to contend for the right of judging for
ourselves, and at the same time to reproach those who use that right (and
happen to differ from us) with weakness, impartiality, and implicit faith; as
if nobody was free, but in a particular way of thinking, and no other evidence
could be given of it, but the cavilling at received opinions, and renouncing
the principles of Christianity; as if every one was enslaved by priests, who
reasoned in favor of the mediatorial scheme, or deserved to be ridiculed, who
adhered to his Bible? This is not reasoning, but raving, the true spirit of
faction, and the very essence of bigotry. To contend for liberty in this manner
is quite to mistake it, and make the plea for it an introduction only to a new
and worse servitude Milner's Religious Liberty asserted.
.

5. Another abuse of the principle of liberty is this, that it has led many who
have not proceeded so far as a downright disbelief of all religion, to pay no
regard, or at most but a slight and trifling regard to instrumental and
positive duties. But from hence it has been inferred, that the instrumental
duties of piety are not only unnecessary, but hurtful; and that an inward
veneration and esteem of the Deity, improved by frequent and serious
meditation, is sufficient, without any outward stated acts of worship, and all
that is fit for us to peform, or our Maker to expect: but how does this follow,
is it a just conclusion, that because superstition and enthusiasm are
mischievous things, therefore a rational devotion, that is allowed to have no
goodness in it, but as it is subservient to moral purposes, cannot be helpful
to us in pursuit of virtue. By no means: To preserve a sense of God and his
providence in the world, is a design that I should think ought to be approved
by all wise and good men. The giving those public honors to the Deity, has a
direct tendency this way, and is as really the concern of natural as revealed
religion: to neglect these public testimonies of our reverence and gratitude,
on a pretense of liberty, does not imply an exemption from the obligations of
the divine authority and law. We then act freely, in every sense of the word,
when we act on the side of reason and piety. When we adore the Author of our
beings, and aspire in the offices of religion, to a resemblance of his perfect
purity and happiness: if this conduct proceeds from an opinion of our superior
knowledge and goodness, we must certainly forget what is the present condition
of human nature. The best furnished mind, I apprehend, is not so equally
attentive in all seasons, as to want no admonition; nor the strongest virtue so
perfect as to be above advice and encouragement. We may therefore infer, that
the right of judging for ourselves is not inconsistent with the use of any help
or assistance; nor is instruction imposition, but a suitable means of improving
our faculties in the acquisition of truth.

Again, freedom of thought, and impartial inquiry into the principles of
religion, have been abused and perverted, in the present age, by degenerating
into a light, trifling frame of mind, and a humor of treating sacred things
with ridicule. With people who affect this way, liberty is nothing else but a
free, bold manner of treating all subjects ludicrously, and turning them into a
jest. They have a great inclination to show their wit, especially upon points
that afford the least room for it: for this discovers an uncommon genius; and
therefore because religion is the gravest thing in the world, they resolve to
be merry with it; and think it a most meritorious action to laugh at what the
generality of the world esteem and reverence, and endeavor to put all the wise
and virtuous part of mankind out of countenan^e. But such empty triflers ought
to know, that there can be no true wit which has not reason for the foundation
of it; that ridiculing what is in itself good, useful and venerable, fixes a
certain reproach upon him that attempts it, either upon his understanding or
his morals; that jesting with things of the highest consequence is folly and
madness; that it is an easy matter, by misrepresenting, to make any thing
appear ridiculous; and consequently, that this talent is so far from being a
demonstration that the person who possesses it is a wit, as it is from being an
evidence of his good-breeding, that, in violation of all the rules of decency,
he banters and treats with scurrility the established religion of his country,
and that which all around him have a high value for.

Lastly, the greatest abuse of free inquiry, is when it degenerates into
licentiousness, or is the occasion of sin. Brethren, ye have been called unto
liberty, only use not your liberty for an occasion to the flesh, Gal. v. ver.
13. The apostle had asserted the Gentiles right to the blessings of the gospel,
without being under any obligation to submit to circumcision. But when he
declared their liberty in one point, he would not have them extend it to every
other; that because they were free from ritual laws, they should presently
conclude themselves free from moral obligations, and under that pretense run
themselves into licentiousness and immorality. No more ought the liberty we
claim against the impositions of men, weaken our regards for the commandments
for God: no notion of liberty should ever tempt us to break through the
obligations of virtue, and the restraint of divine fear: no pretense of
reasoning for ourselves, should be carried so far as to reason ourselves out of
our religion. This would be a sad case indeed, as it would plunge us into the
worst of slaveries, that of sin; and while they promise themselves liberty,
they themselves are the servants of corruption, 2 Pet. ii. 19 Milner before
cited.
.

We shall now take a view of some advantages of free inquiry.

The duty and advantage of free inquiry is necessarily implied in the nature of
consciousness, and must be allowed in order to establish to every man the
religious privilege of following his own persuasion.

If I have powers and faculties, which render me capable of consideration and
reflection, it is an instance or duty of moral virtue, that I should employ my
power and faculties for this end and purpose; and the fitness of this instance
of moral virtue, consists in this, viz. the certain and evident relation that
the having reasonable powers bears to the regular and proper use of them Dr.
Samuel Chandler's immutable Difference, p. 291.
. And such a faith as is built only on proper and sufficient evidence, must
require a greater share of reflection and deliberate inquiry, than where the
proofs are such as render conviction and belief necessary; that it argues
greater ingenuity and probity of mind; that it has more difficulties to
surmount, and stronger prejudices to conquer; that it is in a great measure
voluntary, and depends upon our care and application; all which circumstances
contribute to render faith a moral virtue Dr. Foster's Morality of Faith, vol.
III. p. 228.
.

The knowledge of religion is without dispute and comparison the most useful
knowledge, both with respect to society in general, and to every particular
member thereof, as conducing most to the happiness of every individual, as well
as the public good; and consequently the study of this knowledge must be of the
most importance. Nor can religious truth be at all injured by submitting it to
a free and open impartial inquiry See Dr. Lowth's Visitation Sermon at Durham,
1758.
, even those which are most difficult and abstruse in their nature; but inquiry
will enable us to discover and detect the cunning and sophistry by which they
are misrepresented.

It is a natural consequence of inquiry, that it opens the mind, and prepares
it for the impressions of truth; for it often happens that it discovers the
springs and means of right judgment, and produces a conviction of truths, new,
interesting and sublime; he only that seeks and searches after truth sincerely,
can with any good reason hope to find it, and that faith which results from
inquiry will be the most consistent and stable, as well as the most
satisfactory and influencing. The scriptures always represent it as the duty of
every reasonable being, even with respect to points of faith, which are the
subject of divine revelation, the most sublime in their nature, and the most
important as to their end, an employment honorable in the sight of God, and
worthy the Christian character.

There is a secret mental pleasure in researches after truth, and establishing
our faith upon a solid foundation. This is a sanction which God has annexed to
his laws, arising from the very constitution of his nature, so much the more
powerful, because it is immediate and constant: this thirst after knowledge,
like other appetites increases by being gratified, but with this happy
difference, that it increases by being indulged, and the pleasure it leaves
behind, is as grateful as the appetite was eager before.

The field of knowledge is large and spacions; there is room enough for every
genius to exert itself upon objects suitable to its taste; it helps us to spend
our time agreeably, and sweetens the cares of life with many pleasing thoughts
and reflections; it is the increase of knowledge that feeds the mind with new
and agreeable repasts, and furnishes it with such infinite variety of pleasing
views, that time never seems burdensome or tedious; hence it was that Africanus
said, he was never less alone, than when alone.

The pursuit and acquisition of truth is a natural and proper means of
regulating our passions, and of avoiding those discomposures which are too apt
to ruffle and perplex the soul; it tends to introduce a calm serenity of mind,
which is itself one of the greatest enjoyments of life, and gives a grateful
relish and stability to all our other enjoyments.

A man of an extensive knowledge, the natural result of inquiry, is best
qualified to be useful and beneficent to his fellow creatures, to assist them
under doubts and difficulties, to set them right with regard to points of real
importance, and to inspire them with sentiments of equity, probity, generosity,
and love of their country.

Again, the pleasures of conversation, which is one principal means for the
acquisition of knowledge, where it is conducted with freedom, friendship, ease,
and improvement, is one of the greatest social amusements of which human nature
is capable; but which ever receive an additional satisfaction, as it partakes
of all these advantages, which seldom fail to unite, where our own abilities
qualify us for imbibing the mental satisfactions, and we are so happy as to
converse with those whose dispositions and talents form them for communicating
their superior ideas with clearness and perspicuity.

It was a free and candid inquiry that at first introduced the reformation, and
gave it such remarkable success, progress, and establishment, freed us from
many of the gross errors and ridiculous ceremonies of the church of Rome; and
hence the duty and advantages of free inquiry was always recommended by the
first reformers as the basis and support of liberty and truth; judging very
rightly, that ignorance can never be the mother of devotion in any religion,
which is a reasonable service.

Error, superstition, and bigotry, can never be rooted out but by persuading
men to look upon themselves as rational creatures, and to implant in their
minds rational notions of religion. Religion there can be none without a moral
difference of things, a moral difference of things there cannot be where there
is no place for action, and action there can be none without liberty Dr.
Clarke's remarks on the Phil. Inquiry concerning Human Liberty, p. 45.
.

A free and impartial inquiry after truth, wherever it is to be found, is
indeed a noble and most commendable disposition; which every man ought himself
to labor after, and to the utmost of his power encourage in all others. It is
the great foundation of all useful knowledge, of all true virtue, and of all
sincere religion. But when a man in his searches into the nature of things find
his inquiries leading him into such notions as, if they should prove true,
would manifestly subvert the very essences of good and evil, the least that a
sober minded man can in such a case be supposed to owe to God, to virtue, to
the dignity of a rational nature, is, that he ought to be in the highest degree
fearful and suspicious of himself, lest he be led away by any prejudice, lest
he be deceived by any erroneous argument, lest he suffer himself to be imposed
upon by any wrong inclination.

Our author concludes, that all sincere lovers of truth, and liberty of free
and impartial examination, are under the highest obligations, in reason and
conscience, always to make use of that freedom which we so greatly esteem, and
so justly boast of, in such a manner only as may give no occasion for
superstitious men, and lovers of darkness, to endeavor to retrench that
liberty of inquiring after truth, upon which all valuable knowledge, and all
true religion, essentially depend.

Of the Disadvantages of IGNORANCE and ERROR.
It is the opinion of a late philosopher, and I think pretty generally
received, that the mind of man is at first but a fair unwritten paper, till it
has received some impressions from without, and improved upon them by its
faculties of reflection; and consequently that it is only wisdom and
instruction that fills it with fair and excellent characters; that write things
upon it in their natural shape and order; that draw them to the life in their
true colors and posture; and describe upon it the greatest concerns that are
or have been in the world; and, by their means, it becomes a delightful
storehouse of the richest truths and most valuable knowledge.

Reason is the great perfection of human nature; but, like a diamond, it is
naturally rough till education polishes it, and sets it well; and as nothing is
so perfective of our beings, so much worth our care and endeavors, as a wise
and well-improved mind; so a defect of reason and understanding is looked upon
as one of the greatest blemishes of human nature. Nay, many had rather you
impeach their morals than their wisdom and understanding; and what is wisdom
and understanding, but a mind with true conceptions and lively ideas, stored
and enriched with the knowledge of the best things, the opening it to the
noblest truths? in letting it see and behold all things that God and nature
has set around it, and making useful improvement by proper reflections upon
them?

Errors may be considered as more or less criminal, as they are in a higher or
lower degree voluntary; and all error is voluntary where the causes of it are
voluntary; as, in the first place, imperfect and superficial inquiry, which is
evidently unbecoming reasonable creatures, who ought in all points of
importance, in which their highest interest are concerned, to proceed with the
utmost caution, or not to act with rashness and presumption; or, 2dly, Absolute
indifference and inattention, which directly opposes the original design of our
peculiar and more noble faculties. But, 3dly, The causes of religious error may
sometimes be pride, prejudice, obstinacy, or sensual passions, darkening and
controuling the judgment, and often biassing the will to evil.

But this is to be understood with much restriction and limitation. I am
sensible the causes of error are frequently involuntary. Many are under great
disadvantages for want of abilities, leisure, or opportunity, and other proper
and necessary helps for the acquisition of knowledge; and many, I am well
satisfied, have made very considerable improvements under great discouragements
and difficulties, which, wherever it happens, redounds much to their
reputation.

There are a great number of other persons, who readily acknowledge a fitness
and propriety in being acquainted with religious subjects; but perhaps they
have more darling studies that engage their thoughts, ingross their affections,
and employ their time. Perhaps the ear has been captivated with music, or the
mathematics better suited to their genius; or, they have made choice of some
other learned professions, upon which to employ their future studies: and they
have for this reason bid adieu to whatever is not in their nature subservient
to them.

I would by no means undervalue other sciences, or speak of them in diminutive
terms; but then an inquiry after truth, and judging for ourselves in matters of
religion, may certainly throw in its claim, and support its right to a part of
our time, upon all the principles of solid reason, and the most substantial
interest. For, as an ingenious author observes Employment of Time, p. 64.
, "If by the faculties we enjoy, we are so greatly advanced above the brute
creation, our ideas, our pursuits, ought to bear proportion to those superior
capacities with which we are distinguished from them; and how industrious
should we be to improve every opportunity, is evident from their uncertainty.
What trifles are apt to divert us, in comparison of those pursuits, so
infinitely preferable. To employ our time therefore as mere humor or fancy
suggest, without a regard to a rational improvement, is an imputation of folly,
as it prefers an imaginary to a real pleasure and advantage. In how many
particulars may we be of service to ourselves? how much depends upon our
endeavors? and therefore nothing less than the employment of our time, and our
opportunities, in making seize thus desirable, can be consistent with a
sense of its real benefit and lasting importance.

Some proper Rules to direct our INQUIRIES after TRUTH.
We have seen that there are truths of different natures, and evidences of
different kinds and degrees; and it is no small proof of the dignity of human
nature, that, by the use of those faculties with which we are endowed, we are
enabled to compare propositions that differ, and investigate many truths which
do not appear obvious at first sight.

This naturally suggests to us, that there are different methods to be pursued
for the attainment of truth, according to their different natures, and the
evidences of which they are capable With respect to the matter of Divine
Revelation, as well as Human Testimony, consult Dr. Watts's Logic.
. And though the evidence of our senses is the most natural, and in some cases
incontestible, yet it is also certain, that there are many propositions, of
which there is a reasonable and sufficient moral evidence of their truth Ditton
on the Resurrection of Christ, from page 123 to 194 of Moral Evidence in
general.
.

Some of the rules and directions necessary to direct our inquiries, are as
follow:

1. An humble and sincere address to the great Author of your being, for his
favorable assistance and concurrence with you.

2. Propose to yourself as the only design of all your reasonings and
inquiries, to find out truth.

3. Examine all the circumstances of the case proposed, in the most careful and
deliberate manner that you can. Rash conclusions, without duly weighing the
reasons upon which they are founded, and what evidence there may be on the
opposite side, is the reproach of intelligent nature.

4. Make such inferences from them as your sober reason, without any art or
management, does itself freely prompt you to make.

5. Never drop the inquiry till you have brought it to some determinate issue.

6. Let your persuasion be unprejudiced, free as possible from prepossession,
and an undue attachment to the sentiments of others, though under the sanction of
public authority. Nothing ought to be the governing predominant principle to
direct our inquiries, but the evidence of its being the mind and will of God:
and in judging of points of faith, that depends on the authority of the
inspired books, the expressions taken from the scriptures should be made the
measure of interpreting such as are not taken from the scripture, and not the
contrary.

7. Though you are not to pay an implicit regard to the opinions and sentiments
of others, we may in many cases lawfully and prudently consult men of wisdom
and years, observation and experience, in order to assist our inquiries, both
in points of a civil, moral, and religious nature Dr. Watts's Logic, p. 231,
and seq. See likewise Grove's Moral Philos. vol. II. p. 59 and seq.
.

There are, says Dr. Watts Improvement of the Mind, p. 30. illustrated by a
variety of Rules and Directions, from p. 60 to 211.
, five eminent means or methods, whereby the mind is improved in the knowledge
of things; and these are, observation, reading, instruction by lectures,
conversation and meditation.

Observation is the notice that we take of all occurrences and concerns of
human life, whether they are sensible or intellectual, whether relating to
persons or things, to ourselves, or others: all things which we see, which we
hear, or feel, which we perceive by sense or consciousness, or which we know in
a direct manner, with scarce any exercise of our reasoning powers, may be
included under the general name of observation.

Reading is another and very considerable means or method of knowledge, whereby
we acquaint ourselves with what other men have written or published to the
world in their writings; by this means we partake of the sentiments,
reasonings, and improvements of all the learned world, in the most remote
nations, and in former ages, almost from the beginning of mankind.

Conversation is another method of improving our minds; wherein, by mutual
discourse and inquiry, we learn the sentiments of others, as well as
communicate our sentiments to them in the same manner, sometimes between a
teacher and learner; but the profit is frequently mutual. Under this head we
may also rank disputes of various kinds.

Public or private lectures, are such verbal instructions as are given by a
teacher, while the learner attends in silence. Thus religion is learnt from the
pulpit-philosophy, or theology from the professor's chair, mathematics by a
teacher, etc.

Meditation, or study, includes all those exercises of the mind, whereby we
render all the former methods useful for our increase in true knowledge and
wisdom. It is by meditation we come to confirm our memories of things that pass
through our thoughts in the occurrences of life, in our own experiences, and in
the observations we make. It is by meditation that we draw various inferences,
and establish in our minds general principles of knowledge. It is by meditation
that we compare the various ideas which we derive from our senses, or from the
operations of our souls, and join them in propositions. It is by meditation,
that we fix in our memory whatsoever we learn, and form our own judgment of the
truth or falsehood, the strength or weakness of what others write. It is
meditation or study that draws out long chains of argument, and searches and
finds deep and difficult truths, which before lay ^^ncealed in darkness.

It would be a needless thing to prove, that our own solitary meditations,
together with the few observations that the most part of mankind are capable of
making, are not sufficient of themselves to lead us to the attainment of any
considerable proportion of knowledge, at least in an age so much improved as
ours is, without the assistance of conversation and reading, and other proper
instructions that are to be attained in our days; yet each of these five
methods have their peculiar advantages, whereby they assist each other, and
contribute to increase our knowledge.

But it is time to apply the preceding remarks to the subsequent history.

As Protestants and Dissenters from the church of Rome, we are obliged to admit
the right of private judgment, in opposition to our receiving any thing for
true on the credit of the Pope as infallible judge, or (as others of that
communion express themselves) on the judgment of the Pope, in conjunction with
a council of bishops; and if this is not admitted, how can we justify the
conduct of our principal reformers? Did they dissent without inquiring? and, if
they made free to examine for themselves, did they not, by necessary
consequence, assert the right of every man to do the same for himself? And if
this be done with care and sincere veneration for truth, if we honestly
endeavor to avoid every error, we may be assured, whatever may be the result
of our inquiry, we shall not at the bar of God stand chargeable with voluntary
ignorance and criminal mistake.

One principal part of our inquiry, as Protestants, is, how we shall strip
Popery of its strongest bulwark, the pretended infallibility and authority of
the church, explode their pretended miracles, and vindicate the principles of
Protestantism against all their attempts to blacken and vilify it; vindicate
the authority of Scripture as the rule of a Christian's faith and worship, in
opposition to tradition; point out their various inventions and superstitions
in worship and discipline; show the novelty and absurdity of many of their
ceremonies; display the absurdity of their pretended doctrines of
transubstantiation, the gross presumption of absolution, and the immoral
tendency of indulgences; and, above all, convince them of the repugnancy of
persecution to the spirit and practice of genuine Christianity: and, to do this
the more effectually, acquaint yourself with the most authentic proofs of their
gross corruptions; the commencement and confirmation of them from the best
historians of their church; the decrees of councils and synods; and be able to
prove the hypotheses you advance by unquestionable authorities: for they will
roundly deny, or artfully evade, whatever they are not qualified to vindicate;
and despise the proofs brought by Protestants, however well supported. It Is,
methinks, a laudable acquisition to be able well to defend and support the
Christian religion against the subtilty and artifice of those enemies of our
holy religion; and though I cannot point out in what part of England it is at
present prevailing, Ireland abounds with them; and I am well informed, that in
some counties of England their numbers are very considerable, which should
animate Protestants to be upon their guard against the delusive spirit of
popery.

A late worthy prelate observes Estimate of the Manners and Principles of the
Times.
, "That popish superstition is a more active principle, with regard to
conquest, than rational protestantism. The first piques itself on destroying
and extirpating the enemies of God; the latter, regarding none as the enemies
of God on account of error, aims only at a rational defense. While
protestantism therefore retains its proper influence in the minds of men, it
may be a match for popish superstition; what it wants in fury, it makes up in
steadiness. This truth our forefathers have twice experienced in our own
country." However, he concludes, upon the whole of such arguments, that
protestantism calmly presents herself to the reason, while popery seizes the
passions of men; and hence modern popery, set against modern protestantism, is
in danger of overwhelming it.

With regard to our own country, the same author remarks, that the principles
of protestantism have lost their influence or ruling-power; insomuch that it is
no injustice to the higher ranks of this kingdom to say, that the main security
of the church arises from its alliance with the state. There is now among the
Great such a general indifference and supineness in, not to say contempt of,
every thing that regards religion only, as may well alarm those few who look
forward to posterity. How different a state of religion is this from that which
prevailed in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, when, as Bolingbroke observes, the
reformation was established, not only in the outward form, but in the hearts of
men! -- How different from that which prevailed at the grand period of the
abdication of James II. when protestant principles took the lead even of the
spirit of civil liberty, and effected the most glorious revolution that history
has yet recorded; a revolution that might justly be styled religious rather
than political. That great religious spirit, which at those illustrious periods
shone so bright, is now, as it were, quenched in darkness!

Popery advances with dreadful strides in America, while protestantism lies as
it were indolent and inactive; and he asserts, that on the continent of Europe,
the Protestant crowns are divided one against each other. The popish crowns
unite in open and secret confederacy. The Empress Queen has thrown off the
mask, and basely deserted those who had long and often saved her from
destruction. France is pursuing its old game, and following its established
plan of power, and is as tenacious of the popish doctrines and practices, as is
subservient to it; and, if Voltaire may be credited, theism is generally
prevailing Voltaire's Discourse on Theism.
. Their sentiments are dispersed through all religions, both abroad and at home,
looking on the law of nature only as religion, and regarding the external form
of religion, however it may be agreeable to the prescribed rules of the
Christian revelation, as insignificant. The manifest inference is this, as it
appears that the genius of popery is active, insinuating, furious, permanent,
and unalterable; the genius of protestanism, calm, rational, indolent,
fluctuating; at the same time the enemies of Christianity are artful,
insinuating, and vigilant, to oppose its genuine doctrines; Protestants ought
to be more watchful in the preservation of the invaluable privileges they
enjoy, and be active in the support of them, by endeavoring to support those
whom, next to God, are its bulwark and defense. It was observed by the late
bishop of London, in his sermon on the last rebellion, that we are apt to boast
of the purity of our religion, and our reformation from the errors and
corruptions of the church of Rome, and to flatter ourselves we are the peculiar
people of God, and set up by providence to be the bulwark of the Protestant
religion. "But remember still, says his lordship, that we are chosen to profess
the truth of God's holy gospel, and to bear our testimony against the
corruptions which have prevailed over great part of the Christian world. Let us
therefore set a true value upon the blessings that are bestowed on us, and walk
worthy of the light of the gospel, which has shone upon us, that our conduct
and behavior may bear testimony to the truth we profess."

Another great point of our inquiry should be, the defense of the Christian
religion against the bold attacks or secret insinuations of DEISTS; and it is
now pretty well known, that their chief strength lies not so much in opposing
the scripture-doctrine, as those misconstructions which some professors of
christianity themselves have put upon it. And in this point it behooves us to
call off unbelievers from their false ideas, and give them to understand the
true state of the controversy between them and us, which is too often
overlooked by the professed writers on that side of the question. And in proof
of this I need only refer my reader to Christianity as old as the creation, and
to a later book, called Christianity not founded on argument.

It is a truth that I believe few will deny, however to be regretted (in a land
of so much learning, and where the Christian religion has been so well
defended) that infidelity or deism has become fashionable; and this is by no
means owing to the cogency of their arguments, but rather to the pains they
take in making proselytes; for which they trust not to books alone for
propagation of their opinions, but that in conversation they will (and actually
do) endeavor to seduce others; the success of which if possible should be
prevented by the abilities and assiduity of professed Christians; and whilst
they cavil at revealed religion, it is our business to put them to the proofs,
that mere natural religion contain more essential, fixed, and permanent
principles, and as such a wiser and better system; call upon them likewise to
show that they have more substantial motives to virtue, supported upon better
evidence. Many of them at least hesitate about a future state; others discard
the notion of it, and many of those who profess to believe in a future state,
are in great perplexity and uncertainty about the nature and duration of the
happiness or misery which will be assigned to the virtuous or the wicked. We
may easily demonstate to them, that the evidences of the sanctions of the
Christian religion are not so precarious and uncertain; that we have a more
sure word of prophecy, whereunto we shall do well if we take heed, as unto a
light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. i. 19.

I have occasionally mentioned many of our eminent prelates and divines, whose
defenses of christianity have done honor to their names, their country and
their religion, and sufficient, a Christian would readily imagine, to satisfy
every unprejudiced opponent. But if this is not so, something more becomes our
duty; we are not to give up with indifferency the great articles of our holy
religion; but, as far as in us lies, show ourselves always ready, and always
able to confute their strongest arguments, and explode their ludicrous cavils.

But it would be no difficult matter, if we would give ourselves time to
deliberate on the natural consequences of some of their tenets, such as the
doctrine of materiality, that God is nature, nature God, etc. to show that
deism, of which this is one of their favorite sentiments, has a direct tendency
to sap the foundation of our happy constitution, both in church and state, and
directly repugnant to the established and tolerated religion, and municipal
laws of this kingdom, and particularly in the teeth of an act of parliament,
now in force against profaneness and immorality, made not only since the
reformation, but also since the revolution, and toleration of liberty of
conscience, by confessedly a number of as wise men, and great abilities as ever
graced a senate. See 9 and 10 of K. William III. Sess. 20. cap. 32 P. S. We
shall have occasion to treat of the different sentitiments of deists in another
place.
.

But besides those peculiar obligations to acquaint ourselves with the
principal arguments, in defense of the Christian religion, against the
objections of modern deists, and on every proper occasion to vindicate the
excellency and authority of the Christian revelation, the scripture not only
requires that every man be fully persuaded in own mind, but that he is able to
give an account of the faith that is in him, with meekness and fear, and reason
coincide with it, as it is not only the just foundation of our stability in the
Christian principles, but a conscious evidence of our having embraced them upon
suitable authority.

Those who make profession of the religion established by law, ought at all
times, not only to be acquainted with the principles of that religion, but at
the same time be able to offer something pertinent, and convincing that they
have not undertaken that profession in complaisance to established articles
only; but from their appearing to be founded on arguments more substantial and
influencing, such as to them appear agreeable to the sacred scriptures, which
is allowed the standard of truth to all protestants, according to the sixth
article of the church of England, and many of the canons of that church. This
may be applied to the principal doctrines contained in their articles,
discipline, mode of worship, ceremonies, etc.

To such as profess to differ from the established religion, it behooves them in
a particular manner to show the reasonableness of their separation, that no
false bias, no contempt of the authority of the legislator, a love of
singularity or novelty, but a thorough conviction that the tenets they profess
are more agreeable to Scripture and reason; that the worship they engage in is
more simple, spiritual, and edifying; that the discipline practiced in those
churches is more conducive to the purity of faith, the regularity of conduct,
and the peace and good order of society. If the tenets or principles of that
society of which they profess themselves members, though few in number, are the
peculiar characteristics of that society or denomination, it becomes them more
especially to be able to show their significance and importance, as having
their immediate foundation in the sacred writings, and therein declared to be
of indispensible obligation See Remarks on Fundamentals.
.

I shall leave the reader to make the most candid application of these
particulars, according to his own abilities and circumstances, and shall
conclude with an Address to the British Youth of both Sexes.

You are favored with great advantages and opportunities for the attainment of
Christian knowledge, and enjoy the glorious privilege of religious liberty.
Beware of a trifling indifference with respect to religion; and as your minds
are susceptible of many impressions, let them be stored with religious truths,
founded on just and rational principles; trace the great doctrines of the
Christian institution in their genuine nature, tendency, and effects, as
contained in the New Testament, and with that candor and impartiality as
becomes a diligent inquirer in matters of the most momentous concern; and when
the evidences of the truth of evangelical doctrines are maturely weighed, I
persuade myself they will appear worthy of all acceptance, and the preceptive
part be approved as the most perfect scheme of religion that was ever afforded
to mankind, and enforced by the most excellent motives. In fine, religion will
appear your highest wisdom, your truest, and most lasting interest; which, that
I may recommend in the most elegant and persuasive manner, I shall close with
the words of Dr. Clarke Dr. Clarke's Sermons, vol. II. ser. vii. p. 146.
.

"If wisdom consists in studying those things which are of the greatest use and
necessity for us to know; if it be wise for us to employ our thoughts about
things in their own nature the most excellent, and in their relation to us of
the utmost importance; if it be wise to pursue the noblest ends, and in the
pursuit thereof to use the best and properest means; if it be wise to consult
our own real happiness, and to be more concerned for the improvement of our
minds in practical knowledge, than for amusing them with vain and empty
speculations; if eternity be of more importance than time, and a never-ceasing
duration than a transitory moment; if the favor of God be infinitely more
valuable than the friendship of the world; if joy and safaction of mind be
truly more desirable th^n doubt and anxiety; if it be wiser to promote the
happiness of society, by encouraging peace, charity and universal good will;
then that men should make each other miserable without cause, and without end,
if wisdom consists in knowing and distinguishing, in choosing and adhering to
whatever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, pure, and of good report;
things that make our present enjoyments easy, and the remembrance of what is
past comfortable, and the hopes and expectations of what is to come secure;
then is religion man's truest wisdom, for where are these things to be found,
but in the practice of virtue and true religion?"

THE HISTORY OF RELIGION.
CHAP. I. Of the promulgation of Christianity. The establishment of churches,
particularly of the church of Rome: containing the most remarkable transactions
of that church, and the variations in the constitution, doctrine, worship, and
ceremonies thereof, for seventeen centuries.
CENTURY THE FIRST.
WHEN man was sunk into ignorance and superstition, and there were scarce any
remains of the incorrupt religion of nature; when the powers of reason and
philosophy were either not employed, or their efforts proved ineffectual to
recover mankind to the knowledge of the one true God, the maker and governor of
the universe, and to give them just and worthy notions of his perfections and
providence, and the worship due to him. To restore religion to its native
purity and luster; to settle morality and the social virtues upon their true
and native foundation, and to give divine laws a proper sanction and influence,
the supreme God and Father of all, who, at sundry times, and by diverse methods
of divine revelation, spoke unto the fathers by the mouth of his holy prophets,
did, in the fullness of time, and in the riches of his grace, speak unto us with
peculiar authority and excellence by his own Son.

This great event was predicted by many ancient prophecies, and ushered in with
seraphic joy; an angel proclaiming his advent with repeated Hallelujah! Glory
to God in the highest! on earth, peace and good will toward men!

This event came to pass in the reign of the emperor Augustus, which, with the
consequent fall of heathenish idolatry, and the conversion of the Gentiles by
the preaching of the gospel, was as amazing a revolution as ever happened in
the world, and is with propriety styled the Christian Era or Epoch.

When the kingdom of the Messiah approached, John the Baptist was appointed and
sent by God, to preach and exhort his hearers to repentance, and to forsake
every course of vice, and thereby to prepare their minds for the reception of
that dispensation, and the fit subjects of that kingdom, in which eternal and
immutable righteousness should be chiefly and ultimately recommended.

And when, in divine wisdom, our Lord was baptized and entered on his public
ministry, we find his doctrines suitable to the dignity of his character and
mission, and to the excellent and important end of his coming; of which it may
be necessary to give a general account.

Jesus Christ, the great author and founder of the Christian faith, not only
explained and inculcated the great principles and duties of natural religion,
Natural religion.
spiritual adoration, purity and integrity of heart, unblameableness of life
and conversation: The essence of all which he declares to be love intensely
toward God, and extensively toward men, included in living soberly,
righteously, and godlily. Rational Catechism, p. 59.
But he lays open, by his public ministry, his divine character and mission,
confirmed by incontestable proofs, in order to awaken the attention of mankind,
and engage them upon a rational conviction to become his disciples and
followers Rational Catechism, p. 59.
; in order to which he taught and instructed his audience, what were the great
principles and duties of his gospel -- repentance toward God, Gospel doctrines.
and faith in him, as the Son of God, and the only mediator between God and man
-- strictly enjoining an unfeigned, impartial, uniform, and persevering
obedience, an entire submission to his laws, as necessary to constitute us
christians, the subjects of his kingdom, and entitle us to the privileges and
rewards promised in his gospel. This is called, the doctrine according to
godliness 1 Timothy vi. 3. See also Tillotson's Sermons, Loc^^e's Reasonableness
of Christianity, Lawrences's Christian Morals and Christian Prudence, Dr.
Chandler's and Dr. Foster's Defense of the Christian Revelation.
.

Jesus Christ having thus begun to establish his kingdom, and prescribe rules
to his subjects and votaries, in order the better to answer the important
purposes of religion, recommended, and enjoined, their uniting together in
communities for public worship, and the increase of their knowledge and virtue.
He likewise instituted two rites, P^sitive Institutions.
commonly called Positive institutions, to be observed, viz. baptism and the
Lord's supper; the former as a rite whereby they were publicly to profess their
discipleship to him See Foster's Truth of the Christian Revelation, p. 310.
Hoadly's Plain Account. Whitby's Paraphrase on Romans vi. 4.
; the latter, as a memorial of his death Lawrence's Christian Morals, vol. 1.
Dr. Clark's Essay on Baptism.
, which he was shortly to submit to, in obedience to the divine will, for their
salvation Grotius' Annot. on Matt. xix. 14.
; and that he should rise again as the pledge and assurance of the resurrection
of all men, and of the infallible accomplishment of the promises of reward, or
denunciation of future punishment, which were the sanction of his gospel
Fisher's Christianismus Redivivus.
.

It was Christ's appointment, that people should first be proselyted and gained
to profess themselves his disciples; Church members.
then to be admitted to outward communion; and then were further taught and
required, to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded, these constituted
the members of Christ's church. And without a supplement to the New Testament,
proof will be wanting, that Jesus Christ has vested any with authority to
alter or make void his original institution The Rev. Mr. Samuel Bolde's
Thoughts on Church Authority, p. 96.
.

And if we examine the writings of the New Testament, we shall find that one
end and design of our Lord, in laying a foundation for those friendly
societies, Nature and design of the Christian Church.
was, that his disciples being united, and living under the power and influence
of his gospel, might be actuated by a friendly and brotherly affection, to
encourage, support and comfort each other under every difficulty, and, by a
good example, to provoke one another to love and to good works.

Another valuable purpose intended to be answered hereby, was, that those
societies might be lights to the world, become public examples of virtue, and
thereby recommend the gospel to more general acceptance. Christian societies
are intended to be like a city set on a hill, that cannot be hid; that is, they
are intended to be a collection of persons, who for their plainness and
simplicity, their justice, honesty, and integrity; their modesty, temperance,
and sobriety; their peaceable, and quiet, their loving, friendly, and
benevolent behavior, may be an evidence of the blessed effects of the gospel
of Christ.

This is indisputably evident from the general tenor of our Lord's discourse
in his excellent sermon on the mount; True Nature of faith in Christ.
and from thence we find what our Lord means, by believing in him; not a bare
assent to the truth of this proposition, that Jesus is the Christ; but he means
by it, the attending to that message which he was sent to deliver to the world,
and the conforming our minds and lives according to it: and having thus shown
what temper and behavior his disciples and followers ought to put on, he
represents to them the mighty consequence of such temper and actions. Mat. vii.
21, 22, 23. Not every one that says unto me, Lord! Lord! shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will of my Father, which is in Heaven.
And our Lord, ver. 24, 25, says, Therefore, whoever hears these sayings of
mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man who built his house upon a
rock; hereby intimating, that it was the Christians best security in times of
trial, not merely professing Christ, or giving him the highest appellation, nor
even prophesying in his name, would recommend them to the rewards promised in
his gospel, without a temper of mind and course of life conformable thereto.

To believe in, and submit to be governed by the laws of Christ, are what
denominate a Christian, and contract the relation betwixt him and them, and
which constitute him the head, and they the members of his body; so that
Christians, as Christians, have no other head, that is, they have no other
authoritative power or governor over them, but their one common head or
governor, viz. Christ Jesus, our Lord; they have no other law, considered as
christians, but the laws of Christ to direct their behavior by.

From hence we see what is to be understood by the term universal or catholic
church, Catholic Church defined.
viz. that it includes all those who, throughout the face of the whole earth,
profess faith in Christ, and acknowledge him to be head and lord of all, and
submit to him as such King's Primitive Church. p. 2.
. Thus Irenaeus speaks of the church dispersed throughout the whole world.

The church of Christ, or the kingdom of Christ, is the number of men, whether
small or great, whether dispersed or united, who truly and sincerely are
subjects to Jesus Christ alone, as their lawgiver and judge, in matters
relating to the favor of God, and their eternal salvation Hoadly's Nature of
the Kingdom of Christ, p. 7.
. From hence it is plain wherein the unity of faith, at this time, did consist.
Not in an uniformity of rites and customs, in which the eastern and western
churches greatly differed; but in an harmonious assent to the essential and
fundamental doctrines See King's Primitive Church, p. 158.
.

Christ is therefore represented as the Christian's pattern, an excellent and
worthy example of every good word and work. Christ the Christian's Pattern.
Christ preached his own life, and lived his own doctrine, and thereby he was
at once a standing monument of the practicableness of virtue, and of the
present peace and happiness that flows from it; in him we have an example of a
quiet and peaceable spirit of modesty and uprightness, of benevolence and
charity toward men, and of devotion and piety toward God, in which, so far as
his disciples are careful to imitate their lord and master, they would
recommend his doctrines to the world.

Christ did not lay a foundation by his doctrine, or encourage by his example,
that, among his Disciples and followers, some should be singled out from their
brethren, to be possessed of great revenues, live in stately palaces, wallow in
luxury and ease, and lord it over those by whose labors they are maintained;
placed on thrones, or garnished stalls, and seats of honor, assuming and
exercising dominion over their brethren; and that others should be subject to
them, bow down to them, and call them Rabbi! Rabbi! as though they were
invested with divine authority and infallibility, that, on the contrary, he has
strictly forbid it, Matt. xx. 25, 26, 27, 28. But Jesus called them (viz. his
disciples) unto him, and said, Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles
exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon
them; but it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you,
let him be your minister, and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be
your servant; even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, chap. xxiii. 8, 9, 10. But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your
master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren. And call no man your father, upon
the earth; for one is your father, which is in heaven: neither be ye called
master, for one is your master, even Christ See Dr. John Gale's Sermons (vol.
1.) on this Text, Mr. Samuel Bolde's Thoughts on Church Power, and Hoadl^'s
Answer to the Committee.
.

As Christ proposed his own example for his followers to imitate; so, in a
particular and special manner, he recommended humility, and gave them an
example of his own great condescension, in performing the meanest office to his
disciples, in the instance of washing their feet, which is related at large,
and with the plainest injunction to his disciples, to go and do likewise, John
xiii. 4, 5, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

But as our Lord foresaw, from the most probable circumstances, that there
would be some difference of sentiment, some whose principles and conduct would
contradict the genuine simplicity of his gospel, Persecution unchristian.
he left some farther directions, by which his disciples should regulate their
conduct toward each other, under those circumstances; and in the strongest
terms recommends love to one another, as the criterion, or characteristic of
their discipleship to him, John xiii. 35. and forbids rash judging and
censuring one another, as inconsistent with that character, and enjoins them to
be at peace among themselves, as they had professed to acknowledge but one
master, and to be united by that profession as brethren, Matt. vii. 1. Mark ix.
5. and Matt. xxiii. 8.

And as if our Lord had particularly intended to guard all those who called
themselves his disciples, against persecution for conscience sake, and of
destroying men's lives under the pretense of promoting the cause and interest of
his gospel, he strictly commands that the tares and the wheat grow together
till the harvest.

Jesus Christ has likewise given Christian societies some cautions and
directions, with respect to their devotions, Matt. vi. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. But
when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathens do, Prescribed prayer.
for they think they shall be heard for their much speaking; be not ye
therefore like unto them; for your Father knows what things ye have need of
before ye ask him. After this manner therefore, pray ye. Our Father which art
in heaven, etc. Whether we consider this as a form of prayer, or only as a
guide and a direction to Christian societies, with respect to the object and
the subject of their prayers; the dispositions and qualifications of the
persons praying, and the grounds of their acceptance with God, it comes to the
same, because the same useful instructions are held forth in either case. Here
Christians are taught to direct their prayers to God the Father, whose paternal
kindness disposes him to do more abundantly for his dutiful children than they
can ask or think. -- Another encouraging motive to prayer, which our Lord gave
to his disciples, was, that they should ask the Father in his name, John xvi.
23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you; hereby
assuring them that God the Father had dignified his own Son, Christ the alone
mediator.
by the acceptance of him, as the alone mediator between himself and his
creatures.

Another encouraging motive which our Lord gave to his professed disciples, was
the promise of divine assistance, in aid to the weakness of human nature, to
cooperate with their sincere endeavors after virtue. I will pray the Father,
says our Lord, and he will give you another comforter, which will abide with
you for ever, John xiv. 15, 16, 17 See Doctor Foster, of the Influences and
Fruits of the Spirit, vol. II. p. 110.

Lawrence's Christian Morals, etc. vol. I. p. 184, 185.

Bishop of Gloucester's Three Discourses on the Influences of the Spirit.


.

Thus we see the foundation of the Christian church, as it was laid by Jesus
Christ himself: what were the qualifications requisite to constitute the
members of it; what were the ends to be proposed and answered by such
societies; and what were the benefits that would arise from thence; namely,
that his voluntary and faithful persevering followers, should enter into the
kingdom of heaven, and enjoy eternal life.

And that the gospel might be preached to all nations, and that the Gentiles,
as well as the Jews, might be brought under its influence, and consequently
might share in its benefits, The apostles commissioned.
Christ chose twelve men, (of which one proved a traitor to him, and to fill up
whose place Matthias was chosen) to be with him in his preaching and ministry
among the Jews, to be witnesses of what he both taught and did, and whom he
intended to appoint and qualify to preach the same gospel to the rest of
mankind. And accordingly Christ, after he was put to death by the Jews and
Romans, rose again from the dead, on purpose that he might strictly charge and
command, and that he might excite and enable these his apostles to preach his
gospel as aforesaid, and thereby pursue the great end and purpose of his
coming. Luke xxiv. 26, 27, 28, 29. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, and arise from the dead the third day, and that repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations,
beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these things; and behold I send
the promise of my Father unto you, but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem until
ye shall be endued with power from on high. This promise of the Father, or the
enduing them with power from on high, was made good to them at the feast of
Pentecost. Matt. xxviii. 18, 19. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying,
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: go ye therefore and teach
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. To
the persons beforementioned were afterward added two more, viz. Paul and
Barnabas, that in the exercise of their ministry, up and down the world, these
fourteen apostles might offer to all, without distinction, the gospel of
Christ, and by their preaching and example encourage others voluntarily to
become Christians.

The publication of the gospel being ordained as the means to call, and engage,
and prevail with sinners, in consideration of the proofs thereby given, and the
benefits therein offered, to believe in Christ as the promised Messiah, and to
take him with their whole hearts to be their sole teacher, lawgiver, and judge;
to make open profession of that faith and self-dedication to him, and to love
unfeignedly all his disciples, as they would be the members of Christ's church
or kingdom: Rev. Mr. Samuel Bold on Church Power, p. 51.
the banner of a Christian is not the picture of a cross hung upon a pole, or
made upon his forehead; but it is a virtuous and unblameable conversation, or a
mind and life conformed to the gospel of Christ.

And accordingly we find that, pursuant to the commission which our Lord gave
to the apostles, saying, As my Father has sent me, so send I you, (which, by
the way, shows the extent of the apostolic commission) they went forth to
different parts to establish the kingdom of the Messiah, and to preach the
gospel to all, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether Barbarian, Scythian, bond or
free. Thus St. Andrew principally preached the gospel in Scythia, St.
Bartholomew in India, St. Matthew in Parthia, St. John in the Lesser Asia, etc
King's Primitive Church.
.

It may here be proper, though it may seem a digression, to take notice of the
peculiar as well as supernatural qualifications of the apostles to their
special office and dignity; for besides their extraordinary call and
commission, of which we have already taken notice, these were more especially
styled the ambassadors of God to men, for which they were qualified by the
communication of spiritual gifts, and of miraculous powers. They had, indeed,
seen our Lord, and were sufficiently qualified to be witnesses of the truth and
reality of his resurrection from the dead, upon which grand fact they were to
found the evidence of the Christian doctrines, which they had, in great
measure, learnt from him, as eye and ear witnesses of his doctrines, life, and
miracles. But besides this, they had the effusion of the spirit, whereby they
were qualified to preach the gospel in the different parts of the world, and to
work miracles in attestation of their mission and doctrine. These spiritual
gifts and powers are mentioned, 1 Cor. xii. 8, 9, 10, 28, 29, 30. To them was
committed, by the same spirit, the word of wisdom -- the word of knowledge --
the gift of discerning spirits Some judicious writers understand this to relate
to their discernment and prudence in the recommendation and appointment of
proper persons to the ministry.
-- and in consequence of this, of binding or loosing, remitting or retaining
the sins of men The assuming power of the Romish church, or the pope, is in no
instance more remarkable, than in claiming the power of absolution and
indulgences, founded on those words, John xx. 23. Whose sins soever ye remit,
they are remitted, and whose sins so ever ye retain, they are retained,
addressed to the apostles; but evidently relate to, and must be understood of,
such conditions whereon God has promised pardon. And the form of absolution,
made use of in the three first centuries, was this -- Almighty God, be merciful
unto thee, and forgive thee thy sins (a) Ordo Romanus in the pontifical of the
Latin church, p. 567.
. And in the Greek church, this prayer of Damascen is still cited: "O Lord
Jesus Christ, our God, who has power to forgive sins, in thy goodness and
loving kindness pass by all offenses of thy servants; for thou art the God of
mercies, and able to forgive sins." -- In this sense, the office of the priest
is to declare and pronounce to his people, being penitent, the absolution and
remission of their sins; and, surely, what they are to declare and pronounce,
must actually be done before they can really declare and pronounce it to be
done.

Here it is objected, that, if this be the import of the words, and they were
spoken to the apostles in that sense, that they cannot, in the same sense,
belong to any of their successors, Why do we, in our ordination, retain this
form of words? "Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted, and whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained." -- No more is
intended by it than this: "Receive ye the Holy Ghost for the office of a
bishop, or receive ye the Holy Ghost for the office of a presbyter, declaring
the remission of sins upon the terms of the gospel." And this sense, says
Whitby, corresponds with the several previous declarations made on the part of
the bishop or presbyter (b) See Bishop Whit^y's Sermons, X. p, 264, 26^.
. The sense, therefore, of the protestant church, stands evidently opposed to
the claims of the Romish church; though it were much to be wished, that the
compilers of the offices of ordination had been more explicit with respect to
the true scriptural and rational sense, in which they were therein appointed to
be used.


-- They had also the gift of prophecy -- -- the gift of tongues -- the gift of
interpretation of tongues, and the gift of fortitude is generally reckoned with
the former. By these, and the like supernatural gifts, with which they were
endued, by the effusion of the spirit, on the day of Pentecost, or communicated
to them sometimes instantaneously, they were enabled to give such proofs of
their mission and doctrine, as might tend to the furtherance of the gospel.

Thus St. Peter and St. John cured a man who was forty years old, and had been
lame from his birth, Acts ii.4. And St. Peter raised Dorcas from the dead, and
St. Paul raised Eutychus, which power did not extend to other apostles.

And we no where find, that this power was inherent in, or capable of being
wantonly exerted by them; but absolutely dependent on the power and pleasure of
the Supreme Giver.

It is likewise observable that, though pursuant to our Lord's promise,
infinite wisdom saw fit to add supernatural qualifications, for the great ends
and purposes of their office, besides the privilege of being cotemporaries with
Christ, and learning from him the great doctrines and duties of the Christian
religion; yet our Lord cautions his apostles against an absolute dependence on
such extraordinary communications. Behold, says he, I send you forth as sheep
among wolves; be ye therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves,
intimating that, notwithstanding their special call and commission, and the
extraordinary assistance they should receive, they were, nevertheless, to
remember they were dependent on the divine energies, and had no claim to
infallibility, as they were men, and should therefore conduct themselves with
care, prudence, and circumspection.

One of the most distinguishing miraculous powers communicated to the apostles,
was the ability of conferring on others some spiritual gifts; and it has been
often asserted, that they did this to some of the adult converts wherever they
came; though what particular gifts or powers those converts should receive, in
consequence of their prayer and imposition of their hands, was not solely at
their choice, but dependent on the will and direction of the Divine Spirit, who
knew best what was proper, both for particular persons, and for the common
interest of Christianity See Dr. Benson of the Propagation of Christianity.
. This extraordinary manifestation of the spirit, which attended the public
ministration of the gospel, is sometimes represented as a plenteous and visible
effusion of the divine spirit Act iv.13. viii.39. Acts x.44.
, and at other times, in a lesser degree, conferred by the laying on of the
hands of the apostles. These peculiar and extraordinary gifts and powers of the
apostles, plainly show how well qualified they were for their important
undertaking, by demolishing the false religion, which had so long prevailed in
the world, and establishing the principles of Christianity with all its genuine
effects, knowledge, righteousness, and happiness, in the world.

The learned are indeed much divided with respect to the miraculous powers
residing in the apostles, and communicated by them to their successors, or
subsisting in the Christian church since their time. These are points I shall
not attempt to determine, but refer the readers to some of the most learned and
judicious writers on the subject Millar's Propagation of the Gospel, vol. I. p.
273, and sequel. Doctor Benson's History of the first Planting the Christian
Religion, vol. I. from p. 38 to 66. Doctor Middleton's Introductory Discourse
concerning the Miraculous Powers. Jackson's Remarks, etc.
.

The apostles, in consequence of their office and commission, were likewise to
erect or establish churches in every place; and to appoint pastors or elders,
Particular Churches established.
whose office and business it should be to watch over the particular societies
of Christians for their good, by teaching and instructing, by reproving and
admonishing, and by performing every good office for the establishing of their
faith and virtue, and it was their method to constitute the first or ablest
converts, in every city or place, to that office Clemens Romanus ad Corinth. p.
54.
, by and with the consent of that society.

And the Apostles, we are informed, were not only indefatigable, but very
successful in their apostolical office, planting the churches of Jerusalem, of
Samaria, Caesarea, Antioch, Philipi, Thessalonica, Berea, Corinth, Ephesus,
Colosse, Troas, Ptolemais, Damascus, besides many others in Asia, as Smyrna,
Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, etc For the time when these
churches were planted, see Dr. Benson's Account of the first Planting of the
Christian Churches, vol. 1. Christianismus Primitivus, b. ii. chapter 1. p. 6. Rev.
Mr. Whiston's Primitive Christianity, in four books.
.

Mr. Whiston has given us the following catalogue of the first thirty bishops
ordained by the apostles.
A.D. I. Jerusalem, 1 James, the Lord's brother, by the apostles, 30 2 Simeon,
the son of Cleophas, by the apostles, 71 3 Judas, the son of James, by the
apostles, 74 II. Caesarea, 1 Zacchaeus, the Publican, 64 2 Cornelius, the
Centurion, 67 3 Theophilus by Luke, 86 III. Antioch, 1 Euodius, Peter 50 2
Ignatius, Paul 67 IV. Alexandria, 1 Annianus, Mark 62 V. Rome, 1 Linus, the son
of Claudia, Paul 55 2 Anencletus, Peter 67 3 Clements, Peter 67 VI. Ephesus, 1
Timothy, Paul 57 2 John, John 70 VII. Smyrna, 1 Aristo I. John 64 2 Strataeus,
the son of Lois, John 70 3 Aristo II. John 78 VIII. Pergamus, 1 Gaius, John 67
IX. Philadelphia, 1 Demetrius, John 67 X. Cenchrea, 1 Lucius, Paul 67 XI.
Crete, 1 Titus, Paul 67 XII. Athens, 1 Dionysius, Paul 67 XIII. Tripoli, 1
Marathones, Paul 67 XIV. Laodicea, 1 Archippus, Paul 67 XV. Colossae, 1
Philemon, Paul 67 XVI. Berea, 1 Onesimus, Paul 67 XVII. Galatia, 1 Crescens,
Paul 67 2 Acquila, Paul 67 XVIII. Asia, 1 Niceras, Paul 67 XIX. Aegina, 1
Crispus, Paul 67

Each of these comes under the denomination of a particular church, that is of
a company of believers at one time, and at the same place, associating
themselves together, and concurring in the participation of all the
institutions and ordinances of Jesus Christ, with their proper pastors or
ministers King's Primitive Church, p. 3.
.

At first the numbers in such churches were very few: Tertullian says, that
three were sufficient to make a church; probably in allusion to our Lord's
promise, that where two or three were gathered together in his name, he would
be in the midst of them. Their number, however, was indefinite, but their
character is that of the elect, called and sanctified by the will of God. They
were first called Christians at Antioch, and, in innumerable places, they are
called the brethren, because of their brotherly love and affection; and the
faithful, in opposition to those who did not believe in the Lord Jesus, or his
gospel Ibid. p. 8.
.

HISTORY of the CHURCH of ROME.
It is evident from the New Testament, that soon after Christianity was
promulged by the apostles, there was a Christian church established at Rome, a
community called of God to be saints, Church of Rome, A. D. 55.
such as had by baptism been planted together in the likeness of Christ's
death, and professed to walk in newness of life; who are said to have obeyed
from the heart the form of doctrine delivered unto them -- to stand in the
Christian church by faith -- and that their faith was celebrated throughout the
world. Romans i. 7, 8. Romans vi. 4, 5 Christianismus Primativus, b. II. chapter 1.
p. 12. See Dr. Benson's Account of St. Paul's Visit to Rome, A. D. 58, and
fourth of Nero, in his History of the first planting of Christanity, vol. II.
p. 184.
.

The general doctrine of the church of Rome is, that Peter was not only
appointed by our Savior the chief of the apostles; but that he was constituted
the first bishop of Rome, and head of the universal church, and that after
having been seven years bishop of Antioch, he was, in the modern phrase,
translated to Rome, and continued to be bishop there twenty-five years, and
then suffered martyrdom under the emperor Nero. A. D. 64, according to Blair,
68; according to Whiston.

But it is not certain which of the apostles first preached the gospel at Rome;
some assert, that St. Peter came to Rome only occasionally to visit that
church, and was, by order of the Emperor Nero, crucified with St. Paul, who was
charged with having made many proselytes to Christianity there.

But that Peter never was bishop of Rome, is demonstrated by many credible
historians and divines The Papists indeed say, that St. Peter was the first
named an apostle by Christ to begin the gospel church, that he wrought the
first miracle after Christ's ascension, and preached the first sermon, and that
this apostle received the first commission to begin the Gentile Christian
church, etc. but this is by no means a proof of his being bishop of Rome.
First, from the silence of St. Luke, who records many things concerning Peter:
he written of his journey to Lydda, Joppa, Caesarea, Jerusalem, and Antioch; but
not one word of his going to Rome to sound the papal chair.

Secondly, When the apostle Paul, in his epistle to the Romans, salutes the
Christians and his fellow laborers by name, he says not one word of Peter; and
when even commending the faith of the Church, he never mentions one word of the
supposed founder of it.

Thirdly, St. Peter himself speaks not one word of what the Papists assert or
allege in this matter. If he had founded the Roman church, why does he no
where mention it? why does he, when writing to the dispersed Jews, no where
assert his claim and prerogative?

Fourthly, The assertion of his being bishop of Rome twenty-five years, is
inconsistent with the sacred chronology of those times; for from the time of
Christ's death, which was in the 18th year of Tiberius, to the 13th year of
Nero, when Peter was crucified, was only thirty-six years, viz. five in
Tiberius's reign, four in Caligula's, fourteen in Claudius's, and thirteen in
Nero's. Now Peter did not go out of Judea till twelve years after our Lord's
death; then he was cast into prison by Herod, Acts, c. xii. which was the
fourth year of the Emperor Claudius, and the last of King Agrippa; six years
after that, or the eighteenth year after Christ's crucifixion, we find him
present at a synod at Jerusalem, Acts xv. and according to the catholic church,
he was seven years at Antioch; so there remains only eleven years in which he
could possibly be at Rome, and indeed there is no evidence of his ever being
there in that capacity.

Fifthly, Peter being an apostle of the circumcision, Gal. ii. 7, 8. we have
reason to believe, that when Paul was carried to Rome, Peter visited the Jews,
who were dispersed in Greece, Thracia, the Lesser Asia, Babylon, and the East,
and reaped a good harvest amongst them, till he went to visit the church of
Rome near the close of his life. When therefore the apostle, 1 Peter, v. 13.
says, The church that is at Babylon saluteth you, he plainly writes of Babylon
in the east, once the head of the Assyrian empire, where there was so great a
concourse of Jews: and if it be granted that Peter had been at Rome, or resided
there some time, or suffered martyrdom there, this is no reason for asserting
his primacy or episcopacy in that city more than at Joppa, Antioch, or Babylon.


, partiularly Budaeus de Eccles. Apostolic.

That Christ ever established a monarchy in his church, or appointed Peter his
viceroy, who invested the bishops of Rome, as his successors, with dominion
over the whole church of Christ, are points so solidly confuted, that we may
safely pass them over as things utterly unknown in the most primitive and pure
ages. On the contrary, it is undeniable, that when, toward the end of this
century, Origin of the title of bishops.
the first and eldest of the presbyters at Rome, as in other churches, was
distinguished by the title of bishop; that appellation imported no more than
chief among the elders, who were otherwise all equal in office, duty, and
privilege History of the Popes, translated from the German original of C. W. F.
Walch, c. ii. p. 4.
; from hence the title of bishop took its rise.

The church of Rome was then subject to no other, and no other church subject
to it, the bishop having no superintendence over other churches.

As for the word diocese, by which the bishop's charge is now usually
expressed, as including many churches in it, I do not remember, says Sir Peter
King King's Primitive Church, p. 66. where he quotes Eusebius.

Apud lib. v. c. xiv. p. 193.


, that ever I found it used in this sense by any of the ancients; Diocese, its
primitive import.
but there is another word still retained by us, by which they frequently
denominated the bishop's cure, that is, parish: so in the synodical epistles of
Irenaeus, the bishoprics of Asia are called parishes. Eusebius has given a
variety of instances to confirm this reading, viz. the bishop of the parish of
Athens, the bishop of the parish of Corinth, etc. denoting the same as we now
call a parish, wherein a competent number of Christians, dwelling near
together, having one bishop, pastor, or minister, set over them, with whom they
all met at one time, to worship and serve God. The word signifies a dwelling
one by another; thus, according to Eusebius, lib. iv. c. xv. p. 228. the church
of Smyrna writ to the church that parished in Philomelium; and the epistle of
Clemens Romanus is, to the church of God parishing at Corinth. Hitherto we find
there were no superintendents over many churches but the apostles; none
appointed by them as patriarchs, or metropolitan bishops; no prelates over many
churches, or over other presbyters; no one claiming rule, and the other subject
to him,

There are, indeed, some authors have made a distinction between bishops and
presbyters, and they quote Ignatius, Bishop's office distinguished from a
presbyter.
who lived at the beginning of the second century, as appropriating the title
of bishop, (...), or overseer, to that minister who was the more immediate
overseer or governor of his parish; and that of elder or presbyter, to him who
had no particular care or inspection of a parish, but was only an assistant or
curate to a person that had; the word (...), or bishop, denoting a relation to
a flock, or cure; (...), or presbyter, signifying only a power or ability to
take the charge of such flocks or cure; the former implying an actual discharge
of the office, the latter a power so to do. This distinction was sometimes
followed by the succeeding fathers; but oftimes, according to primitive usage,
they indifferently apply those terms to each of those persons King's Primitive
Church, p. 66. who quotes Eusebius apud lib. v. cap. xiv. p. 193.
: so that it is evident that the superiority of the bishop, in office and
character, was, to this time, at best precarious, destitute of divine
institution, or direction of the apostles, but was introduced in the next
century, as we shall show in its proper place.

For these reasons probably the Rev. Mr. Bold has asserted, that episcopacy
was not essential to a particular Christian church; or that a visible society
of creditably professing Christians should have a special relation to, or
dependence on, one man, of a dignified character, who shall claim a right to
preside over, and govern many assemblies of Christians; I speak only of a
particular Christian church, and not concerning particular churches established
by civil governments Bold on Church Power, occasioned by the Bangorian
Controersy, p. 59.
. He adds, It is likewise agreeable to primitive practice, that a particular
Christian church, subsisting agreeably to Christ's institution, derived a power
to appoint a person, or persons, so qualified as he directs, to officiate
amongst and unto them Ibid. p. 60.
. But they were first to become, as it were, candidates for the ministry; must
be approved of by the majority; and separated, or set apart to this office, by
the laying on of the hands of the bishop, or presbytery; and when the bishop of
a church was dead, all the people of that church met together in one place, to
choose a new bishop. Thus Sabinus was elected bishop of Emerita, by the
suffrage of all the brotherhood; and Fabianus was chosen bishop of Rome Apud
Cyp. Epist. lxviii. s. vi. p. 102. Apud Eusebius. lib. vi. cap. xxviii. p. 229.
.

And this order of admitting none to any ecclesiastical function but by an
election of the faithful, in a general assembly, was inviolably observed in the
church for more than 200 years Father Paul of Beneficial Matters, p. 56.
.

As the apostles office and business was to propagate the gospel, and to ordain
the elected bishops or elders, for the care of particular churches; The office
of Deacons.
and the most important charge of preaching, explaining, and inculcating the
great doctrines and duties of the Christian religion; whose business it should
be to administer the sacraments of baptism, and the Lord's supper, to the
people or church over whom they were appointed; so the apostles, as the
occasion and circumstances of things required, and the better to answer the
purposes of Christian, societies, did, by and with the advice and approbation
of their fellow Christians, appoint the office of Deacons. Those, at their
first appointment and institution, were six in number, who occasionally
baptized, but generally only assisted at the administration of baptism, at the
Lord's supper, in the care of the poor, and the visitation of the sick: hence
the offices of bishops and deacons in the Christian church, to answer the
purposes beforementioned, were always esteemed of apostolical institution.

The particular ceremony by which any bishop, pastor, or deacon, was set apart
after the choice of the people, was by the laying on of hands of a bishop, or
presbyter, and prayer. By these solemn acts, Of ordination.
many of the ordained elders were not only set apart, but it pleased God, as
an eternal evidence of their mission, to confer extraordinary gifts and graces,
whereby they were qualified, in an extraordinary manner, for the discharge of
their important office Hence the pope and bishops of the catholic church do, as
the vicar of Christ, and successors of the apostles, assert, that by their
ordination of priests they are thereby consecrated to their respective
functions, and also receive grace to discharge them (a) Profession of Catholic
Faith, p. 5. compared with the Definition of Holy Orders, p. 23.
. And in this particular likewise the modesty and good sense of our church is
conspicuous: for neither the bishop pretends, nor the person receiving orders
is taught to believe, that any sanctity, dignity, or privilege, with respect to
the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit, are conveyed by the imposition of the
bishop's hands at this ordination; and that nothing more is intended by the
bishop, in this part of the service, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, than his solemn
wish, directed to heaven, that he might receive the Holy Ghost for the office
and work of a priest, to which he is set apart by the imposition of his hands
(a) Bishop Whithy's Sermons, with which corresponds Doctor Benson's account of
this matter before cited.
.
, and even to their successors. It is generally allowed, some supernatural and
extraordinary gifts and powers were communicated for planting Christian
churches, and their greater edification: but how long this continued in the
Christian church, the learned are not agreed.

The ordinance of laying on of hands by the bishop or presbyter, was likewise
performed on the newlybaptised. Confirmation.
and this was some times attended with extraordinary gifts, such as might tend
to the furtherance of the gospel; but was not in general performed with any
such promise, or followed with such wonderful effects, but was then used as a
rite of the Christian church, by which was signified their being separated and
dedicated to the service of God.

Thus we have not only taken a view of the foundation of the Christian church,
as it was laid by Jesus Christ himself, but likewise of the peculiar
qualifications, duty, and business of the apostles, for propagating the gospel
and establishing Christian churches throughout the world, in the first century
of the Christian church; and hitherto the apostles, notwithstanding their
dignity, did not pretend to infallibility, did not assume authority over the
consciences of their fellow Christians, but gave many instances of their zeal,
diligence, and faithfulness; the more venerable and praiseworthy, as it was
always accompanied with modesty and humility. As the apostles received this
commission from Christ, they were bound to confine themselves wholely to it,
and not to exceed the limits of it: they were his servants who sent them, and
the message they received from him, that, and that only, were they to deliver
to the world. Thus St. Paul says of himself, that God had committed to him the
word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. v. 20. and that he was an ambassador for Christ,
that he preached not himself, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and himself the
servant of others for Jesus sake; that he had no dominion over others faith, 2
Cor. i. 24. no power to impose upon them arbitrary things or articles of faith,
which he had not received from Christ; and that this was the principal matter
of his comfort, that he had not shunned to declare all the council of God. Acts
xx. 27.

The apostles recommends a free and impartial enquiry after truth, and enjoins
it on his fellow Christians to search the scriptures; and it is evident, by
comparing some passages of the evangelists with their epistles, that the canon
of the books of the Old Testament was ascertained by them Doctor Cousin of the
Canon of Scripture, p. 22.
: and St. Paul directs his epistles to the Corinthians, to all that in every
place call upon the Lord Jesus; and the other epistles of the apostles in
general, are inscribed, with equal latitude, and were, with the other parts of
the New Testament, made the criterion of truth to all Christians.

Indeed we have no full and certain account of the doctrine taught by Christ
and his apostles, but from the records of the New Testament; Scripture the rule
of faith.
and as these contain the whole revelation of the gospel, all that we are to
believe and practice as Christians, it is an undeniable consequence, that
Christians can no better demonstrate their subjection and fidelity to Christ,
as Lord and lawgiver in his church, than by acquainting themselves with the
sacred records of truth, and religiously adhering to them, as the only rule and
standard of their faith and worship Doctor Chandler's Notes of the Church, p.
13, 15.
.

If you ask, what form of worship took place in this early age of the Christian
church, Tertullian informs us, the scriptures were first read, then psalms
sung, then a sermon preached, and prayers presented De Anima, c. iii. p. 530.
. Thus Justin Martyr writes: they first begun their public worship with reading
the writings of the prophets; and as soon as they had them in M. S. the
epistles of the apostles; afterward they sung psalms, then they preached the
word, which was a commentary on the lessons read, and then concluded with
prayer and intercession Apology ii. p. 98.
.

The discipline they observed was no other than the execution of those laws
prescribed by the apostles, for the correction and prevention of such offenses
as were incident to the members of the church of Christ, in which great regard
was had to the nature of the offense, and, except in the most criminal
instances, was always exercised with much lenity and gentleness, in the
consciousness of their own imperfection and liability to err.

It is indeed observable, that notwithstanding the simplicity of doctrines,
worship, and ceremonies, that was preserved in the apostolic age, there were
some different apprehensions amongst the Jewish proselytes to Christianity,
touching some of the Jewish rites; and, for the sake of truth and peace, we
find the apostles thought it requisite to consult together, and accordingly
assembled at Jerusalem, A. C. 53. in which the apostles dispensed with an
observation of the ceremonial law, seeing that the Christian dispensation was
sufficient to the salvation of its votaries. Acts xv. 11.

They likewise held another council at Jerusalem, A. D. 60. in which they
tolerated some legal observances for a time, that by such condescension the
weaker part, both of Jews and Gentiles, might be gained to the belief and
profession of Christianity, Acts xxi. 1^ -- 22.

There is no mention made in the New Testament, nor any other authentic proof
in this century, that any council was called to compile canons for the order
and government, or creeds and summaries of says, for uniformity of sentiments
in the Christian churches. Decrees of this kind much better suit with the
ambition and authority assumed by some ecclesiastics in later time: though I am
sensible a work of this kind has long since made its appearance in the world
under that specious character This book is said to be compiled by Clement,
bishop of Rome, who was chosen to that office in the year 67, and died in 88:
it is entitled Apostolical Constitutions, digested in eight books; consisting
of 70 canons relating to the laity, and 85 with respect to the dignity, office,
and duty of ecclesiastics: and the late Rev. and learned Mr. Whiston has, with
much pains, endeavored to establish their authenticity; in which he has
likewise pointed out the order and method of the several matters therein
contained, respecting doctrine, worship, discipline, and manners; in which is
likewise inserted the canon of scripture, approved and recommended by the
apostles, which were extant before the year 63, together with the Baptismal
Creed, and one other formulary or creed, chiefly calculated to promote the
doctrine of Arius with regard to the subordination of the Son to the Father.

Then follows an Essay on the Apostolical Constitutions, wherein our author
endeavors to show their consistency with the doctrines taught by Christ and
his apostles; quotes a variety of testimonies from the fathers and historians
of several succeeding centuries, in proof of some or other of those
constitutions, or whose sentiments coincided with them. That they are of great
antiquity, will not be denied; but that they have no just claim to the
authority contended for, will, I presume, be readily admitted by any one who
compares the contents of them with the doctrines contained in the New Testament.

For besides the entire silence of the New Testament concerning them, which, to
me, is no small proof that they are spurious, several of those canons carry
with them apparent marks of mere modern invention. The dignity and power of the
clergy is here, like the hierarchy of the church of Rome, stretched to such an
exorbitant height, as could hardly be consistent with Christian liberty, or
with the safety of Christians, especially under heathen governors. -- To them
was to be committed the care of the ecclesiastical revenue, for which they were
accountable to none but God. -- Moreover, the titles given the priests, in some
places, are impious: they are not only styled prophets, rulers, kings, and
governors, but also mediators between God and his faithful people, and in chap.
xxvi. and chap. xxix. styled gods. -- They mention the using holy oil for
anointing the candidates before, and of ointments for sealing them after,
baptism -- of using water with the wine in the Lord's supper. -- They recommend
pecuniary fines for sin, prayers, or offerings and festivals for the dead --
esteem and honor for the relics of saints, and other ceremonies equally
superstitious and unscriptural: for which me must refer the reader to Mr.
Whiston's Primitive Christianity Revived, book iii. to which is added his
defense.

But so incongruous did the general tenor of them appear to the New Testament,
and so unsatisfactory his defense, that they were censured by the convocation
at Canterbury, A. D. 1711. The form of which is as follows:

Whereas the said William Whiston, the better to support his heretical
opinions, speaking of a book commonly called the Apostolical Constitutions,
has these words: "I have, I think, certainly found, that those Apostolical
Constitutions, which the Antichristian church has so long laid aside as
spurious and heretical, are no other than the original laws and doctrines of
the gospel, the new covenant, or most sacred standard of Christianity, equal in
their authority to the four gospels themselves, and superior in authority to
the epistles of single apostles; some parts of them being our Savior's own
original laws, delivered to the apostles; and the other parts the public acts
of the apostles themselves, met in council at Cesarea and Jerusalem, a little
before their death; and that this was the constant opinion and testimony of the
earliest ages of the gospel:" We cannot but declare these assertions concerning
a book, which was never yet acknowledged as part of the canon of scripture by
any general council, nor received as such in any Christian church, to be highly
absurd and impious, tending to create in the minds of Christians great
uncertainties, as to their rule of faith, and to subvert that faith which was
once delivered to the saints, and which is preserved in the books of the New
Testament, received in our church.


: but we have many testimonies of the primitive Christians invariable regard to
the doctrines and examples of our Lord and his apostles; and by the
Steadfastness of their faith, simplicity of their worship and behavior, were
an honor to their profession as Christians; but notwithstanding these
exemplary lives, there was such an opposition in the principles of
Christianity, to the practices and views of the heathen Emperors, that they
persecuted the Christians with the greatest severity.

The first persecution of the Christians began at Rome, First persecution.
A. D. 64. Among others St. Peter and St. Paul suffered martyrdom Blair.
.

That called the second persecution of the Christians, began in the reign of
Domitian, A. D. 95 Ibid.
.

This, however, as it was a trial of their faith, their patience, their
sincerity, their fortitude, and magnanimity, those virtues shone so conspicuous
in their lives, even unto death, as render them amiable and illustrious
examples to future generations.

CENTURY THE SECOND.
Century the second affords us some instances, in which the church of Rome
varied from her primitive state It has been already observed, that it is very
unlikely, that Peter was ever bishop of the particular society or congregation
of Christians at Rome; because he could not execute such an office without
quitting his apostleship, and thereby betraying that trust which Christ had
reposed in him: but if this were granted, nothing can justly be inferred from
thence in favor of any apostolical power or jurisdiction, which might be
supposed to descend from him to his successors the bishops of Rome, or to any
other bishop; because the bishop of Rome did not succed St. Peter in his
apostolical, but in his episcopal character only (a) See Barrow on the Pope's
Supremacy, Chubb's True Gospel.
.... Most vain it must therefore be, for the late bishops of Rome, or any other
bishop, to lay claim to the power of the keys, let that power be what it will,
or any other apostolical power or jurisdiction whatever, seeing no such power
has, or could be descended, to them. For the apostolical commission extended no
farther than the fourteen apostles, and therefore, when the apostles died, the
apostolic office, and consequently all apostolic power, died with them.

It is likewise observable, how vain the pretense is, that the bishops and
clergy of the church of Rome have been continued by a regular uninterrupted
succession from the apostles down to the present time; whereas, according to
the account of father Paul (b) Father Paul's Account of Beneficiary Matters, p.
5, 6.
, the succession of bishops and clergy has been greatly interrupted: thus, not
only in the apostles time, but down to the end of this century, those,
appointed to any offices in Christian societies, were elected, or set apart, to
their respective offices by the body of Christians; that is, by that society
they were appointed to serve. And though the using, or applying the outward
sign of such election, by laying on of hands, and of praying for God's
blessing, was performed by the bishop; yet that did not affect the act of the
society or congregation, whose minister he was, or the independency of one
church on another; but was a mere appendix to it.


.

The union of different churches in succeeding times, however salutary in
itself, was attended with many abuses, especially the union of those churches
which had before, either by their situation, or by new congregations, been
connected, furnished a spacious opportunity for one church to acquire more
authority than others; and this was chiefly the case of those churches, as were
most considerable in number, or could claim aposto^^^^ foundation, or in the
capital of a province.

All these circumstances contributed to raise the credit and dignity of the
church of Rome: her bishop gradually distinguished himself more and more from
the (...). We meet with encomiums upon that church so early as in the second
century: but these, by no means, prove that other churches submitted to her;
the contrary manifestly appears from the instances of the Asiatic churches in
that early dispute, concerning the fitness, expediency, and duty of observing
Easter, commonly called the celebration of Easter See Irenaeus Advers. Haeres.
and Walch's Hist. Eccles. chapter i. sects. ii. v. and viii.
.

The first considerable invasion on the church liberties was made by Victor,
bishop of Rome, about the year 195, relating to the time of celebrating Easter
day. The Christians of Asia the Less kept it on the 14 day after the first new
moon that followed the vernal equinox, on what day soever it happened. On the
contrary, the churches of Rome, France, Corinth, etc. held, that Easter day
ought always to be on a Sunday. Victor, who could not easily decide the
controversy, without more a-do excommunicated all the Christian churches of
Asia -- at least so far as to withdraw from, and refuse communion, with the
Asiatic churches on that account, according to Eusebius, to whom we refer the
reader.

The office of a bishop was now held superior to that of Presbyters; but it is
not demonstrable, that the bishops of Rome had titles of honor superior to
other bishops, or a right to control the conduct of other churches Concerning
the names of Papa* Episcopus, Episcoparum, and Pontifax Maximus, said to have
been given by Justin Martyr and Ter^ullian, to the bishop of Rome, see Walch's
Hist. Eccles.

Chillingworth, the protestant champion, besides many other divines, has wrote
largely in defense of episcopacy; and all, in general, agree in this point,
that it was not introduced in the first century, or by the apostles, though
they unquestionably prove, that this office, or superior dignity in the church,
was instituted, or generally in use, as early as the second century.

Mr. Chillingworth defines episcopacy, to be the choice of one man of eminent
sanctity and sufficiency to have the care of all the churches within a certain
precinct or diocese, and furnishing him with authority, not absolute or
^^bitrary; but under the regulation of laws, to the intent, that all churches
under him may be provided with good and able pastors. This he apprehends, 1st,
is not repugnant to the government settled in, and for the church, by the
apostles; 2d, That it is as well calculated for the reformation of any evil in
the church, or the introduction of any good which we desire to introduce, as
any other form of government; and 3d, That there is no law upon record of our
Savior against it. He quotes Petrus Molinaeus, who, in his Defense of
Presbyteri^l Government, acknowledges, that presently after the apostles
times, it was ordained, that in every city, one of the presbytery should be
called a bishop, who should have preeminence over his colleagues, to avoid that
confusion which ofttimes arises out of equality, etc. He likewise quotes
Theodorus Beza, to the same purport (a) Chilingworth of Episcopacy, annexed to
his other works, (...) p. 1, to 5, inclusive.
.




The late bishop Hoadly (b) Hoadly's Reasonableness of Conformity, p. 3.
says, We think we can demonstrate, that in the primitive times, the
administration of ecclesiastical affairs was in the hands of bishops, who had
presbyters subject to them, that as the apostles maintained a superiority over
the presbyters of the churches they constituted, so, upon occasion of their
absence, they settled others in this superiority; that as these, thus
succeeding the apostles, had the power of ordination committed to them, so
their successors, in the following ages, claimed this power as their right, and
looked upon ordination to be their office in the regular course of things.

Bingham (c) Bingham's Antiquities of the Christian Church abridged, from p. 50
to 100.
treats more largely of the antiquity, authority, and dignity of episcopacy,
their honorary titles, and venerable character.

Again the personal characters of the bishops and fathers in this century, give
them no superiority or advantage over other churches, or their successors,
since it is apparent they were less learned and more credulous, and in many
respects more defective, than some of later time; for there was never any
period of time in all ecclesiastical history, in which so many rank heresies
were publicly professed, nor in which so many spurious books were published
under the names of Christ and his apostles, and apostolic writers Archbishop
Wake, in his Preliminary Discourse to the Genuine Epistles of the Apostolic
Fathers, p. 89, Where he has given us a list of a great part of those spurious
pieces, with a short account of each -- In which he tells us it would be
endless, to insist on all the spurious pieces, which were only attributed to
St. Paul; but that the superstitious books ascribed to St. Peter his Acts, his
Gospel, his Revelation, were in much greater authority, even to the time of
Eusebius, (sect. xviii. xix.); he observes also, that the book called the
Recognitions of St. Clement, which he takes to be the most learned, as well as
the most ancient of any of those pieces, was not set forth till about the
middle of the second century, and is rejected by Eusebius as one of those many
impostures, which were even then published under the name of that saint, sect.
xxviii.
.

However, a variety of opinions prevailed in this century, Apostles creed first
introduced.
insomuch that the bishops began to compose formularies or creeds for their
respective churches, or in opposition to some principal errors; and this seems
to be the earliest period when part of what is called the apostles creed was
introduced Having mentioned the apostles creed, it may be proper to give a
general account thereof. The learned author of the Critical History of this
creed very justly acknowledges, that this creed was not the work of one man, or
of a day, (he might have said, nor of one century). The ancient fathers never
indeed called it by the name of the apostles creed, but say it was agreeable to
what they taught. Most of the articles are indisputably so; some of them are
said to be derived from Philip's requiring of the eunuch a profession of his
faith in Christ, as the Son of God, as a pre-requisite to his being baptized:
and, for a considerable time, the christian bishops contented themselves with
some such general form of words, without any particular explication of the
nature and action of God, or the state of the Son. The reason of the additional
articles seems to be this: not long after the apostles time, several heresies
sprung up in the church, subsersive of the fundamentals of Christianity, and
even of all religion. Thus the first article, I believe in God the Father, was
introduced in opposition to the Manichaeans, who asserted two independent
deities, A. D. 276. The word Almighty was also added to this article, against
some Manichaeans, who asserted, that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were but
one person. The second article, and in Jesus Christ our Lord, was introduced
about the same time, in opposition to Sabellianism, who made the Son and Holy
Spirit to be only virtues or emanations of the deity. The words, he descended
into hell, were neither in the Roman nor oriental creeds. The phrase, communion
of saints, was not in any creed till above 400 years after Christ, and then not
immediately received in all. The clause of life everlasting was omitted in
several; and whoever shall compare the Grecian or the French creed, recorded by
Iraeneus, those of Carthage cited by Tertullian, that of Aquila, Hippo,
Ravenna, or Turin, will find them all to vary; which, with other
considerations, sufficiently evidence the apostles could not be the authors of
the creed that passes in their name (b) Ibid. p. 29.
. The repetition of the creed at every assembly was appointed in the eastern
church by Timothy, archbishop of Constantinople, about the year 500 (c) Ibid.
p. 42, 43.
; about which time the bishop of Antioch likewise prescribed the reading of it
at the public administration of divine service. In the western churches, at a
synod of thirty-five bishops, it was appointed to be read and explained to the
Catechumens, who were afterward to be admitted to baptism; but the general and
constant reading thereof seems not to have prevailed in the western churches,
till five hundred years after Christ: by the decree of the third council of
Toledo, it was enjoined to be read throughout all the chorches of Spain and
Gallicia (d) Theodor. Lector. Eccles. Hist. l. ii. p. 563.
.


Mr. Whiston asserts, that the Eusebian or Arian doctrine was, for the main,
the doctrine of the church for the two first centuries (e) Memoirs of Dr.
Clarke, p. 10.
. This doctrine was differently understood and represented at that time by
Alexander; and, in like manner, the doctrine of Alexander misrepresented by
Arius. Arius expressly asserts, in a letter to Eusebius, his intimate friend,
"This is what we have and do profess, that the Son is not unbegotten, nor in
any manner a part of the unbegotten God, nor from any part of the material
world; but that, by the will and council of the Father, he existed before all
time and ages, perfect God, the Only-begotten and Unchangeable; and that,
therefore, before he was begotten or formed, he was not; but that there never
was a time when he was not (f) Theod. C. H. l. i. c. 5, cited by Dr. Chandler
in his Introduction to Limberch's Hist. of the Inquisition, p. 24.
.

A superstitious veneration for utensils and vessels belonging to the church
took place, so that none but the (a) Critical History, p. 32, 33.
priests were permitted to handle them History of Popery, vol. II. p. 100.
. Laws were made for fasting on particular days, and followed with many
superstitious observances Ibid.
. Great controversies arose about the lawfulness of baptizing infants, which
have ever since continued a dispute in the Christian church See Dr. Wall's
History of Infant Baptism, and Dr. Gale's Answer.
. Others were for limiting baptism to the time of Easter and Whitsuntide, while
others held that all times were alike Cave's Primitive Christianity, p. 307.
. Others practiced a trine immersion, and Tertullian mentions it as a common
practice Tertullian adv. Marcion, lib. iii. p. 226.
. But others immersed the body only once, and adult believers made up the main
body of the baptized Cave's Primitive Christianity, p. 305. Compare Cave, Wall,
Toogood, with Grantham, Gale, Gill, etc.
. Baptism was then accompanied with the imposition of hands, which was looked
upon as the completion of baptism, generally performed by a trine immersion of
the Catechumen, at the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost * See
Lawrence R. of Yelvertoft's Christian Morals, p. 192 to 196.
.

The third persecution of the Christians, under Trajan the emperor, commenced
A. D. 107. The fourth began under the emperor Adrian, 125; the fifth under
Marcus Aurelius, A. C. 160.

CENTURY THE THIRD.
In the third century the bishops exalted themselves highly above other
pastors, and drew many dangerous consequences from the doctrine of one catholic
church. Some bishops even claimed a superiority to others, but they were at the
same time jealous of each other, and the doctrine of the equality of bishops
admitted of no superiority See the Translation of Walch's History, p. 42.
; they considered the bishop of Rome as one of their brethren, and were
offended at Stephen for pretending to prescribe laws to them, though they
willingly allowed the Roman church to be one of the principal.

It is therefore impossible that the other bishops should acknowledge him as
their judge. Advice given in friendship and confidence implies no jurisdiction.
It is admitted, however, that in the third century, a more immediate foundation
was laid for that authority and pre-eminence which was afterward assumed; but
that neither the bishops of Rome pretended to be infallible, nor others thought
them so, is the more clear and demonstrable: they themselves giving proof of
the contrary, both by their example, and by the stress they laid on councils.

The church of Rome consisted at first of teachers and hearers; the first were
either elders or deacons, but so early as this century their offices were
greatly increased, viz. bishops, presbyters, deacons, subdeacons, acolothist,
readers, etc. but no mention was then made of the office or privilege of
cardinals. In the most important concerns, the assent of the people was
required, and the usual circular letters were sent to them See Cornelius's
Letter to Fabius, Bishop of Ant^och, in Constant. Epistol. Pontific.
.

The bishop usually obtained his office by election, in which the laity also
voted. The imposition of hands was occasionally performed by bishops in
different places, of whom some attended on that occasion.

The priests, deacons, and other clergy, says father Paul, were also presented
by the people, and ordained by the bishop; or else nominated by the bishop,
and, with the consent of the people, ordained by him. No person that was
unknown was admitted, nor did the bishop ordain any but such as were approved,
or indeed proposed by the people, whose concurrence was thought so necessary,
that the Pope St. Leo, as he was surnamed, proves at large the invalidity of a
bishop's ordination without. In this all the fathers of the church in those
times agree; and Constance, being chosen bishop of Milan by the clergy, St.
Gregory thought he could not be consecrated without the consent of the
inhabitants, who being at that time retired to Genoa to avoid the ravages of
the barbarous nations, a message was sent to them at his instance, to know
their pleasure concerning it Father Paul of Beneficiary Matters, p. 20.
. Historians differ in characterising the Christians at this time. St. Cyprian,
in his account of the state of the church just before the Decian persecution,
about the year 250, tells us, that the body of Christians chiefly aimed at
increasing their patrimony; that there was no sound faith or true devotion in
the priest, no benevolence in their works, no discipline in their manners; that
it was common to contract marriage with unbelievers, and that Christians were
prostituted to the Gentiles; that bishops, neglecting their divine stewardship,
and the relief of the necessitous brethren in the church, became stewards in
secular affairs, and in consequence many errors and irregularities prevailed
Abstract from Dr. Middleton's Introductory Discourse. p. 38, 39.
. The learned have reckoned ninety different heresies, which all sprang up
within the three first centuries See Archb. Wake on the Fathers, quoted p. 30.
.

But, perhaps, these accounts will be thought partial, and unfavourable to the
state of religion at the close of this century, when the christian church is so
generally represented as retaining her primeval purity till after this period.
I shall therefore give an abstract from Dupin's History of the Church:

He says, that "the fathers of the church to this time taught, that the
principles of faith were the holy scriptures and tradition; that mysteries were
to be believed, though they could not be comprehended; they spoke of the nature
of God, and his attributes, in a most excellent manner; they opposed, with
great success, the false divinities of the heathens, and the errors of those
who admitted of more gods than one; but they owned the Trinity of three persons
in one only God; acknowledged the divinity and eternity of the Word, and of the
Holy Ghost, and in general all the articles of the apostles creed Dupin's
History of the three first Centuries.
."

There are extant some creeds or summaries of the Christian faith, drawn up at
the close of this century, intended for the unity of faith in particular
churches, as those of Jerusalem, Caesarea, Antioch, Alexandria, and Rome; by
comparing which together, the reader will perceive how the unity of the faith
was preserved, with a diversity of expression; and is an evident proof, that
one universal form had not been pitched upon and prescribed to the whole
church: every bishop was at liberty to draw up a creed for the use of his own
church, only keeping to the analogy of faith and sound doctrine Cyptian's Ep.
lxix. ad magnum Constit. Apost. lib. vii. c. xli.
.

Sir Peter King gives us the following account of the worship and ceremonies of
the primitive church, viz. that they began their service with reading the
scriptures. Then every one sang a hymn or psalm out of the Bible, or of their
own composing -- that they sometimes sang alternately, and sometimes
conjointly. Then began their sermon by way of exposition of the lesson and
exhortation, generally by the bishop of the parish. Afterward all the
congregation rose up to prayers, which were offered through Christ. They used
the Lord's prayer at the beginning of their devotions; yet they did not use
that only, but such other supplications to God, as the variety of their
circumstances required. They usually prayed standing with their hands and eyes
lifted up to heaven, the minister exercising his gifts in suitable matter and
apt expression. Baptism, he says, was performed by the bishop or pastor of the
respective parish to Catechumens, who had given a firm assent to the articles
of the Christian faith, and likewise some proof of their resolution to lead a
good life. He also admits, that infants were baptized in this century, and
immediately received the sacrament; that this was generally called the Lord's
supper, which was eating bread and drinking wine, first set apart by prayer and
thanksgiving, in commemoration of Jesus Christ. They partook of it, says
Socrates, in a table gesture, eating as at their love feasts See Justin
Martyr's Apology ii. p. 98. Socrates, lib. v. Tertullian de Oratione, p. 659.
Delaun's Plea, p. 35. King's Primitive Church, P. II. p. 6, 9, 10, 12, 18, 26,
31, 37, 40, 54.
.

Pliny the younger, the heathen, confesses to the emperor Trajan, that the
cause of the Christians was a matter worthy of deliberation, by reason of their
number and character -- that they usually, on their solemn days, met together
before sunrising, and sang hymns to God and Christ, whom they worshipped, and
obliged themselves, by an oath, not to commit any wickedness Plinii lib. x. ep.
xevii. p. 1387.
.

Mr. Cave gives us a large and most amiable account of the primitive
Christians: he says, their piety was active and zealous: afflicted innocence
triumphant, their patience unconquerable under the greatest trials and
persecutions: in short, down to this period we shall see the divine and holy
precepts drawn into action, and the most excellent spirit of the gospel
breathing in the hearts and lives of those primitive Christians Cave's
Primitive Christianity, part III. p. 205 to 389.
.

Nevertheless, they were greatly persecuted, insomuch that some were put to
cruel deaths, and others driven from their habitations. That called the sixth
persecution of the Christians commenced under Septimus Severus, A. D. 202. The
seventh persecution began in the reign of Maximus Severus, A. D. 235. The
eighth in the reign of Decius, A. D. 250. The ninth under Gallineus and
Valerianus, A. D. 257 Eusebius ix. 8,
. But, about the close of this century, there was a dreadful famine in the
eastern part of the empire, where Maximinus reigned, and a fore plague, which
affected the sight of persons; upon which the Christians could not help
observing, that Maximinus had inflicted the punishment of depriving some
Christians of their eyes; but that nevertheless they signalized themselves for
their piety and charity toward all persons in this public calamity, and forced
even the pagan adversaries to admire and commend their behavior Jortin's
Remarks, v. III. p. 268.
.

CENTURY THE FOURTH.
The fourth century furnishes us with many transactions of an interesting
nature. Though hitherto Christianity appears to have been propagated with
toletable simplicity, and the Christian church retained much of its primeval
purity, especially with respect to manners, and in a great regard for the
scriptures, the canon of which was settled about this time; and by these means
the darkness of paganism was in a good measure banished from a great part of
the known world. We are nevertheless informed, that "soon after, the Christian
world fell into endless schisms and contentions, and had destroyed, in great
measure, that peace, love and charity, which the gospel was intended to
promote; and, instead thereof, provoked one another to malice. They lost, in a
great degree, the substance of their religion, while they eagerly contended for
their own imaginations concerning it; and that by this means many of the
superstitions and corruptions we now complain of in the church of Rome, were
not only broached but established Sale's Preliminary Discourse to the Koran.
."

For more than three hundred years Christianity lived and flourished under
discouragement and frequent persecution. After the Roman empire became
Christian it was greatly corrupted, till the empire fell, and made way for the
dominion and grandeur of the bishop of Rome, under whom the corruption arose to
an amazing height, and true Christianity was almost lost for several ages Dr.
Benson's History of the first planting of Christianity, p. 6.
.

Early in this century, in which the fathers Cyril, Basil, Gregory, and
Ambrose, flourished, was instituted the monastic life; but, notwithstanding
this institution, and the pretense of sanctity to countenance it, the love of
power and riches appears from the consequences to be predominant, or that it
was at best founded in superstition.

From this time the church became modelled by assuming priests; the divines
attempted to explain the mysteries of religion by the rules of logic, and
imposing articles of faith by authority, rather than convincing by argument.

In this century, the popes of Rome laid the foundation of that monarchical
power and grandeur to which they afterward rose.

One of the first and most essential steps was the erection of the dignity of
patriarch, afterward confirmed by the Nicene council; and thus the hierarchy
or government of the church became modelled; according to the constitution of
the Roman empire. This being the design of their measures, another fundamental
principle was added to it, viz. that the precedence and authority of bishops
over others, should be determined by the rank of the cities where they resided;
and of consequence, in process of time, as it could be effected, the bishop of
Rome must have the supremacy; and this was managed with so much art, as to be
confirmed in the next council, without appearing to have previously made a
point of it Walch's History of the Popes.
.

Constantine, who, for his gallant acts, was surnamed the Great, was the first
emperor that declared himself a Christian, A. D. 312, and constituted the cross
his banner: he restored peace and tranquillity to the Christians, he built many
noble churches and oratories, wherein he suffered no Gentile altars or images
to be placed, nor any heathenish festivals to be solemnized See Spanhemius and
the Theodosian Cedex.
. He also wrote a large pathetic epistle to the provincial governors of the
east; where, with great wisdom and piety, he exhorts all his subjects to
embrace Christianity: but, when he had used many gentle methods to reclaim the
Gentile world, he proceeded by more severe methods to quell the pagan idolatry;
uncovered their temples, and exposed their idols; and at the same time took
great care, that bishops or pastors were settled every where in the Christian
churches. Though this great prince was not baptized till a little before his
death, which was May 22, A. D. 338.'

But when the church, under Constantine and his successors, enjoyed the
protection of the civil powers, the Christians compared their present with
their past condition, and called to mind the sufferings of their predecessors,
and the patience and fortitude which they had exerted, particularly in the last
and severest persecution. These considerations raised in them an high, and
indeed, in some measure, a just veneration for the martyrs. But it did not stop
here, it ran into excess, and produced bad effects. Every rumor concerning the
behavior of those saints was received without examination, and represented as
meritorious, insomuch that certain monks found their account in going about,
under the pretense of selling their bones and relics.

The fathers of those times, as Athanasius, Gregory, Nazianzen, but
particularly Chrysostom, with his popular eloquence, contributed to the utmost
of their power to encourage the superstitious veneration and invocation of
saints, the love of monkery, and the belief of miracles, wrought by monks and
relics. Some of those fathers, particularly Gregory, were in other respects
valuable men: but this was the distemper of those times, and they were not free
from it See Chrysostom, l. i. Orat. xl. p. 485.
.

Thence arose religious addresses to the martyrs, who were considered as
patrons and intercessors, which tended to lessen the reliance and gratitude due
to Christ, and to substitute new expedients in the room of rational piety and
strict morality.

Some instances during Constantine's reign are an undeniable proof where the
government of the church was vested, and how the bishops of Rome were esteemed
as to their authority in those days.

When Donatus stood condemned as a heretic by the churches of Afric,
Constantine left him not to be judged by the bishop of Rome, at that time
Miltiades, but appointed the bishops of Colen, Anthun, and Arles, to hear his
cause; who not agreeing, he joined with them the said Miltiades; and after
that, upon an appeal from their order, the emperor heard and determined it
himself, pronouncing the bishop of Carthage innocent, and his adversaries
deserving censure Augustine's Epistles, clxii. and clxvi.
.

The sentiments of Arius, commonly called the Arian heresy, (which we have
before explained) began to prevail. Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, opposed
himself against him, and sent epistles to all the churches, and among the rest
to Rome; but, without waiting for advice from them, excommunicated Arius. This
kindling a great fire, Constantine was applied to, and the famous council of
Nice was assembled by the immediate command or precept of Constantine; and by
this and other instances it appears by whose authority councils were convened,
at that time, and for some hundreds of years afterward, but, if you ask
Bellarmine, he says only by the pope, not by the emperor, unless his holiness
first approve of it Lib. i. de Conc. c. xii. See Hist. of Popery, vol. I. p. 25.
. And when this council were convened, observe their style, viz. "We, here
assembled by the grace of God and favor of Constantine our prince, beloved of
God Vid. Act. Council. Nic. vol. i.
". When this council was called by the sole order of Constantine, he also sat
amongst them as president; the bishop of Rome was not there, but sent two
deputies, styled presbyters. But so far was he, by his deputies, chief there,
that the first bishop, who opened the matter and gave his opinion, was
Eustathius bishop of Antioch; and in the sixth canon of that council for
ranking and ordering of bishops in their places, no mention is made of the
pre-eminence of Rome to any other city, but this general phrase used, That
every church shall retain her due honor Theodoret, lib. i. 7.
.

The number of bishops in this council were 318, besides vast numbers of
presbyters, deacons, acolothists, etc. Eusebius tells us, that some came to the
council with worldly views of gain; and Theodoret, that others were subtle and
crafty, and of a quarrelsome, malicious temper, which appeared immediately upon
the opening of the council; for, notwithstanding the emperor was present, who
admonished them to lay aside all their differences, and to enter into measures
of union and peace, they fell to gross reflections on each other, and raised
great disturbances, insomuch that he was obliged to interpose his authority,
and with much persuasion silenced them.

When the emperor had brought them to some temper, they fell in good earnest to
creed-making, and drew up and subscribed that which, from the place where they
were assembled, was called the Nicene This creed was composed at this first
general council of Nice, A. D. 325, but it received many additions and
alterations at the second general council, at Constantinople, A. D. 381, and
therefore might be more properly styled the Constantinopolitan creed: and as
the Arian or orthodox party prevailed, this creed was censured or confirmed in
some of the succeeding councils for several centuries* The third council of
Toledo, which was held in the seventh century, held this creed in great
veneration, as more largely condemning all heresies than the apostles, and
ordered that it should be always recited by the people before the sacrament, to
show that they are free from heresy, and in strict union with the Catholic
church. This creed has been usually read at the beginning of all the general
council^ since (a) Broughton's Article, Nicen^ creed.
.
. By the accounts of the transactions in this assembly, given by Athanasius
himself in his letter to the African bishops, it appears, that they were
determined to insert in the creed such words as were most obnoxious to the
Arians, and thus to force them to a public separation from the church Theod. E.
H. l. I. c. viii.
: and when those of the Arian party proposed in writing to the synod the form
of faith they had drawn up, the bishops of the orthodox side no sooner read it
than they gravely tore it in pieces, and called it a spurious and false
confession, and after they had filled the place with noise and confusion,
universally accused them of betraying the doctrine according to godliness; and
when the Arians would have consented to forms of expression that were general
and least exceptionable, the orthodox party would admit of no other phrases
than, That the Son was consubstantial and of the same substance with the
Father; and notwithstanding the Arians urged, that this expression was
unscriptural, the orthodox would not admit of any alteration; and all the
council subscribed the creed, (except five bishops, who, beside other
objections, were displeased with the word Consubstantial;) and the orthodox
even proceeded so far as to cut off from communion all who would not agree to,
and subscribe this creed. In this public manner did the bishops assert a
dominion over the faith and consciences of others, and assumed a power not only
to dictate to them what they should believe, but even to anathematize and expel
from the Christian church all who refused to submit to their decisions, and own
their authority; for after they had carried their creed, they proceeded to
excommunicate Arius, and his followers, and banished Arius from Alexandria.
They also condemned his book, called Thalia, which contained his explication of
his own doctrine. After this they sent letters to Alexandria, and to the
brethren in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, to acquaint them with their decrees;
and to inform them, that the holy synod had condemned the opinions of Arius,
and exhort them to rejoice for the good deeds they had done, in cutting off all
manner of heresy. Constantine, after this, dismissed the council, (not without
some donations to gratify their avarice) recommended to them peace and harmony,
and to avoid ammosity against such as might excel, or be inferior to them: he
likewise wrote to several churches, recommending and enjoining an universal
conformity to the council's decrees, both in doctrine and ceremonies, using
this, among other arguments, that what they had decreed was the will of God,
and that the agreement of so great a number of bishops was by inspiration of
the Holy Ghost. But it is very natural to remark, after the anathemas and
depositions agreed on by this council, which were the beginning of all the
persecutions that afterward raged, with how little propriety the dignity of
inspiration was applied to them.

Many unhappy consequences very soon took place; for when the Emperor's
recommending to the churches a submission to their decrees was not effectual,
more violent measures were made use of; for out of his great zeal to extinguish
heresy, he put forth public edicts against the authors and maintainers of it;
against the Novatians, Valentinians, Marcionites, and others; ordained that the
books written by any of them should be burnt; and if any kept them in their
possession, or endeavored to counteract his edict, they should, on conviction
thereof, suffer death.

Thus the orthodox first brought in the punishment of heresy with death, and
persuaded the emperor to destroy those whom they could not easily convert. The
scriptures were now no longer the rule and standard of the Christian faith;
orthodoxy and heresy were from henceforward to be determined by the decisions
of councils and fathers, and religion to be propagated no longer by the
apostolic methods of persuasion, forbearance, and the virtues of an holy life,
but by imperial edicts and decrees; and heretical gainsayers not to be
convinced, that they may be brought to the acknowledgement of the truth and be
saved, but to be persecuted and destroyed. It is no wonder, that after this
there should be a continual fluctuation of the public faith, just as the
prevailing parties had the imperial authority to support them; or that we
should meet with little else in ecclesiastical history but violence and
cruelties, committed by men, who had left the simplicity of the Christian faith
and profession, enslaved themselves to ambition and avarice, and had before
them the ensnaring views of tomporal grandeur, high preferments, and large
revenues.

If one reads the complaints of the orthodox writers against the Arians, one
would think the Arians the most execrable set of men that ever lived: but
Socrates tells us, this was the practice of the bishops toward all they
deposed, to accuse and pronounce them impious, but not to tell others the
reasons why they accused them as such E. H. l. 1. c. xiv.
.

Soon after these transactions, Arius died; and the manner of his death, as it
was reported by the orthodox, Athanasius thinks of itself sufficient, fully to
condemn the Arian heresy, and an evident proof that it was hateful to God. The
Christians, however, being blessed with Christian emperors, were of opinion,
that the divine providence had, in a signal manner, raised up and protected
Constantine, for destroying the enemies of the church; but there is usually
much of rashness and presumption, in supposing the calamities of finners in
this world are particular judgments of God. Nor did Constantine himself long
survive him. He was succeeded by his three sons, Constantine, Constantius, and
Constans. Constantine, the eldest, recalled Athanasius from banishment, and
restored him to his bishopric; upon which account there arose most grievous
quarrels and seditions, many being killed, and several publicly whipped, by
Athanasius's order, according to the accusations of his enemies. Constantius,
after his elder brother's death, convened a synod at Antioch in Syria, where
Athanasius was again deposed for these crimes, and Gregory put into the sea of
Alexandria. In this council a new creed was drawn up, in which the word
Consubstantial was wholely omitted, and the expressions made use of so general,
as that they might have been equally agreed to by the orthodox and Arians. In
the close of it several anathema's were added, and particularly upon all who
should teach, or preach, otherwise than what this council had received,
because, as they themselves say, They did really believe and follow all things
delivered by the holy scriptures, both prophets and apostles. So that now the
whole Christian world was under a synodical curse, the opposite councils having
damned one another, and all that differed from them; and if councils, as such,
have any authority to anathematize all who will not submit to them, this
authority equally belongs to every council; and therefore it was but a natural
piece of revenge, that as the council of Nice had sent all the Arians to the
devil, the Arians, in their turn, should take the orthodox along with them for
company, and thus repay one anathema with another.

Constantius II. was warmly on the Arian side, and favored the bishops of that
party only, and ejected Paul, the orthodox bishop, from the sea of
Constantinople, as a person altogether unworthy of it. Macedonius being
substituted in his room, who was in a different scheme, or at least expressed
himself in different words, both from the orthodox and Arians, asserting that
the Son was not consubstantial, not of the same, but of a like substance with
the Father, and openly propogated this opinion after he had thrust himself into
the bishopric of Paul; this the orthodox party highly resented, and persecuted
those who favored that opinion.

The truth is, that the Christian clergy were now become the chief incendiaries
and disturbers of the empire; and the pride of the bishops, and the fury of the
people on each side, were now grown to such a height, as that there scarce ever
was an election or restoration of a bishop in the larger cities, but it was
attended with slaughter and blood, as it is evident from the accounts given by
the ecclesiastical historians of Athanasius, Macedonius, and others, that they
treated one another with the same implacable bitterness and severity as ever
their common enemies, the heathens, treated them, as though they thought that
persecution for conscience sake had been the distinguishing precept of the
Christian religion Doctor Chandler's Hist. of Persecution, p. 36.
.

This was the unhappy state of the church in the reign of Constantius, which
affords us little more than the history of councils and creeds differing from,
and contrary to, each other; bishops deposing, censuring, and anathematising
their adversaries; and the Christian people, divided into factions under their
respective leaders, for the sake of words they understood nothing of the sense
of, and striving for victory, even unto bloodshed and death.

This occasioned much debate about the authority of councils and their
liability to err in their decisions. It was suggested, that in a council
convened by a Christian emperor, wherein some hundreds of prelates are
assembled to deside a theological dispute, many are liable to be influenced by
fear or dread of superiors of greater jurisdiction, either of falling under
their displeasure of being reviled as heretics, or perhaps beggared and ruined
by their refusing to be influenced by some active and domineering spirits; by a
deference to the majority; by a love of applause and respect; by vanity and
ambition; by a total ignorance of the question in dispute, or a total
indifference about it; by private friendship; by enmity and resentment; by an
indolent disposition; by an aversion to disputes, or love of peace and
quietness, etc. which whoever considers will be ready to conclude, there is no
great deference to be paid to the authority of councils. Even the authority of
councils themselves were zealously asserted by the council of Constance and
Basil, and condemned by the Lateran; nevertheless the dispute turned in favor
of councils, and it was in general deemed heretical to speak against their
authority. They who disclaim private judgment, and believe the infallibility
of the church, act consistently in holding the infallibility of councils; but
they who take their faith from the scriptures, and not from the church, should
be careful not to require nor to yield too much regard to such assemblies
Jortin's Remark on Eccles. Hist. vol. iii. p. 55.
.

We have a rule, by which we may with safety, and with satisfaction, judge of
their authority; a rule given us by our Master, By their fruits ye shall know
them. We need only survey their acts and monuments, their behavior, doctrines,
decrees, and censures, and compare them impartially with the morality, the
simplicity, the prudence, the charity of the gospel; and by this we may judge
of the authority of councils and fathers.

The forming of creeds or summary accounts of the Christian faith, till this
century, were but few, and those concise, expressive only of the principal
articles, and those not imposed on the churches; but in process of time, when
the empire became Christian, and the decisions of assembled bishops were made
under the influence of the court, and then enforced by the secular arm, the
creeds they drew up were no longer mere accounts of the principal doctrines for
preserving a unity of faith, etc. but obtained the nature of decrees and laws,
henceforth precluding all private judgment, and under one shape or other
binding the main body of the clergy, if not the whole Christian world. And
indeed, what St. Gregory Nazianzen thought of the councils held in his time,
that is to say, in the latter half of the fourth century, appears sufficiently
from his letter to Procopius -- that he never saw a good ending of any synod --
the spirit of contention, or the spirit of ambition, and love of rule, still
gaining the ascendancy over reason: nor does he except that council to which we
are so far indebted for the Nicene creed, and at which he himself, to his
sorrow, was present. They fall, says he, into factions, and fight for the sake
of thrones, i. e. of episcopal fees, and divide the whole world in a lawless or
irreligious manner Greg. Naz. Epist. ad Procop.
.

In the beginning of Julian's reign, A. D. 361. he behaved himself with great
moderation toward the Christians; yet his hatred to them soon afterward
appeared so, that they were not permitted the education of their children, nor
to be instructed in the Grecian language and learning. He taxed them very
heavily, and exacted fines from such as would not sacrifice; and when the
governors of the provinces took occasion, from thence, to increase the
oppression, insomuch that persons of all ranks could not but complain of their
cruelty, Julian answered, with a sneer, Your God has commanded you to suffer
persecution. And one of the reasons assigned for his severity was, that the
Christian bishops showed such a turbulent spirit, that he was obliged to have a
jealous eye over them, and bear a strict hand toward them. But the effects of
his aversion to the Christians did not last long, for he was killed in the
Persian wars, and reigned scarce two years.

Jovian succeeded him, who was a Christian both by principle and profession.
But the bishops were soon for tampering with him: Athanasius writes to him in
favor of the Nicene creed, and endeavored to prevail upon him to persecute
the Arians. A synod also of certain bishops met at Antioch, who, though they
had before opposed the Nicene doctrine, finding that Jovian favored it, with
great obsequiousness readily subscribed it, and in a very complaisant letter
represented that this true orthodox faith was the center of unity, while the
followers of Macedonius, who rejected the word Consubstantial, sought to
recommend themselves to his favor by the best representation they could give
of their tenets. Jovian, who saw through the craft of those temporising
bishops, answers, "I hate contention, and love those that study for peace;"
declaring, he would trouble none on account of their faith, but would favor
and esteem those who contributed to restore and preserve peace in the church.
Themistius, the philosopher, very justly commended him on that account, and for
despising the insinuations of those who would have persuaded him to violent
methods in favor of a party, concerning whom, he said, they worshipped not
God, but the purple Theod. lib. iv. c. iv.
.

Valentinian and Valens, who succeeded him, embraced different parties in
religion: the former, of the orthodox side, the latter, of the Arians. However,
they both declared for liberty; but Valens soon suffered himself to be
prevailed upon, by Eudoxus, bishop of Constantinople, to forsake both his
opinion and his moderation. They obtained leave from him to hold a synod at
Lampsacus, where the orthodox carried their point, and deposed all the bishops
of the Arian party Sozimus, lib. vi. c. vii.
. This was so contrary to the moderation of Valens, that he was highly
exasperated, who thereupon called a council of Arian bishops, and commanded
those, who formed the council of Lampsacus, to embrace the opinions of Eudoxus
the Arian, and upon their refusal sent them into banishment, and gave their
churches to their enemies, sparing only Paulinus for the remarkable sanctity of
his life. After this he entered into more violent measures, which the Arian
bishops were accessory to.

In the mean time great disturbances happened at Rome upon Liberius's dying,
who was bishop of that city. Ursinus, a Dean of that church, and Damasus, were
nominated to succeed him; the party of Damasus prevailed, and got him chosen
and ordained: Ursinus being enraged at it set up a separate meeting, got
himself ordained by some other bishops; and this occasioned great disputes
among the citizens for the episcopal dignity, and the matter was carried to
such a height, that great numbers were murdered in the quarrel on both sides,
no less than 137 persons being destroyed in the church itself, according to
Ammianus Lib. xxvii. c. iii.
, who adds, "That it was no wonder to see those, who were ambitious of human
greatness, contending with so much heat and animosity for that, because, when
they had obtained it, they were sure to be enriched by the offerings of the
matrons; of appearing abroad in great splendour; of being admired for their
costly coaches; sumptuous in their feasts, outdoing sovereign princes in the
expenses of their tables, etc." This is said to be the first quarrel for the sea of Rome, A. D. 366.

Gratian, who succeeded Valens, was of the orthodox party, and recalled those
bishops he had banished, and particularly favored and promoted the orthodox
faith.

Theodosius, who succeeded him, was a zealous abettor of the orthodox party,
and wrote a letter from Thessalonica to Constantinople, wherein he tells them
that it was his pleasure that all his subjects should worship the Trinity as
equal in divine honor: and where he could not persuade, he endeavored to
compel the bishops to assent to, and declare their faith in the Nicene creed,
under the threats of expulsion frem their churches: and the more effectually to
extinguish the heresy, he summoned a council of bishops, in A. D. 383, to
confirm that creed, and also made an addition to it, viz. after the words Holy
Ghost they inserted, The Lord the quickner proceeding from the Father, whom
with the Father and the Son we worship and glorify, and who spoke by the
Prophets An abstract from Dr. Chandler's History of Persecution.
.

The laws against heretics, collected in the Theodosian code, stand as a
shameful monument of the perfecuting Antichristian spirit, which broke out in
this century, and grew more and more violent in the following times, the
Christians themselves imitating the cruelties of the Pagans Jortin's Remarks on
Eccles. Hist. p. 245.
.

Arcadius and Honorius, who were the sons and successors of Theodosius,
embraced the orthodox religion and party, and confirmed the decrees of the
former emperor. Chrysostom, who was bishop of Constantinople, perfecuted the
Arians. The Donatists in Africa persecuted the orthodox, and thus persecution
seemed to know no end.

Thus we find the Arian doctrine was alternately (according to the disposition
of the court) approved and condemned by many different councils. In this
century, in the council of Alexandria, in the year 322, Arian and his followers
were excommunicated in the council of Bythinia; two years afterward they were
declared orthodox; two years afterward condemned and anathematized in the
council of Nice; and in the year 359 their sentiments were again approved and
justified in the council of Seleucia; and about 400 Western bishops in the
council of Rimini, who first, indeed, condemned the Arians with great rigor,
afterward, in contradiction to their own former judgment, subscribed the
Arian confession of faith Gale's Sermons, vol. i. p. 71t
.

The doctrine of an absolute unconditional predestination of all events
prevailed much in the Eastern church. Some authors conceive it was much more
primitive, and would fain make it to commence from the apostolic age; but as it
is inconsistent with the principal doctrines of the Romish church, we think
there is not sufficient authority to charge them with it. The reader may see
the arguments in support of it In Calvin's Institutes, or in Dr. Gill's Cause
of God and Truth, vol. iii. latter end.
.

Many superstitious customs debased the purity of the Christian church in this
century. -- The making crosses of wood, metal, and in painting, were brought in
by the emperor Constantine, who caused a cross to be made and displayed as his
imperial banner, and from thence it became a fashionable ornament in a house, a
token of loyalty, and of the orthodox or true catholic church Chamier, tom. ii.
lib. ii. cap. iv.
. -- Pilgrimages and visits paid under pretenses of devotion to certain places
called holy, such as the temple at Jerusalem and the Viaticum at Rome, took
place in this century, but they did not carry it to such height as to imagine
there was any real merit in it, as appears from the confession of St. Jerome --
Giving the eucharist to children became a custom about the close of this
century in the Bohemian and other Western churches, and did soon after prevail
in the Eastern or Greek churches. The custom of baptizing infants had been
founded on the interpretation of John iii. 3, 5, and this practice of giving
the sacrament to children was founded on an explication of John vi. 53. Thus
were baptism and the sacrament thought indispensible to salvation: the practice
of giving the eucharist continued in the Western churches till the eleventh or
twelfth century, when it was laid aside upon the new doctrine of
transubstantiation: and in many of the Greek churches the eucharist is still
given to children See Wall's Hist. and Peirce's Essay on giving the Eucharist
to Children, p. 6. and Aeneas Sylvius's Epistle, cxxx.
. But, on the other hand, some were of opinion, that to defer baptism, till
there was an apparent danger of death, was most safe, under an apprehension
that sins, committed after baptism, would scarcely be forgiven.

The tenth persecution of the Christians began at Nicomedia, Feb. 13, 303, and
continued for ten years, ending June 13, 313, by an edict of Constantine and
Licenius Blair.
.

CENTURY THE FIFTH.
In the fifth century we find the church of Rome made very considerable efforts
to enlarge her power. Till about the year 432 the history of the popes was
merely ecclesiastical, but from hence the affairs of the church were so
interwoven with those of the state, that their history is both ecclesiastical
and civil. The popes soon made a different figure from that which they had
hitherto made: no longer mere bishops, but bishops and princes, and the bishop
almost entirely lost in the prince; no longer contending only with their
colleagues for spiritual power and jurisdiction, but at the same time with the
greatest monarchs for dominion; nay, employing the sword as well as the keys,
and heading, as directed by their ambition or interest, both councils and
armies Bower's Hist. of the Pope's, vol. i. p. 411.
.

However, it is not only true that the patriarchs were hitherto looked upon or
considered as equal; that the bishop of Rome held the other bishops to be his
brethren and colleagues; but the name and idea of an universal bishop was deemed
a contradiction and a mark of Antichrist Walch's Hist. of the Popes.
.

Infallibility was not yet assumed as the prerogative of the pope; and if it
had, one would think several remarkable occurrences and facts in this century
might be sufficient to convince the most prejudiced in favor of papal power,
of its absurdity.

Innocent, who was bishop of Rome, 402, grievously persecuted the Novatians,
and, as Socrates observes Lib. vii. c. ix.
, was the first bishop of that see, who disturbed them. -- Celestine, one of
his successors, imitated his injustice, and deprived the Novatians of the
remainder of their churches, and not content with depriving them of their
churches, prevented their private assembling, and even plundered them of all
their substance. -- Nestorius, bishop of Constantinople, showed himself a
violent persecutor soon after his election: addressing himself to the emperor
before the whole congregation, he said, Purge me, O emperor, the earth from
heretics, and I will give thee the kingdom of heaven; conquer with me the
heretics, and I will conquer with thee the Persians; and agreeable to his
declaration, in five days after his consecration, attempted to set fire to the
church of the Arians when they were assembled in it for prayer. Abstract from
Dr. Chandler's Hist. of Persecution, p. 44.
-- Few of the bishops were free from this wicked spirit. Socrates, indeed,
excepts Atticus, bishop of Constantinople, who behaved much more mildly and
gently; and Proclus also, who was brought up under Atticus, who was gentle
toward all men, from a persuasion, that this was a much more proper method
than violence to reduce heretics to the true faith: and in this he imitated
Theodosius the emperor, sometimes called Theodosius II. who was not at all
displeased that any should differ from him in sentiments. But under the reign
of this emperor the Arians also, in their turn, used the orthodox with no
greater moderation, burnt churches, put orthodox bishops to death, seized their
books, and committed a variety of outrages for suppression of the orthodox
faith Socrates, chapter ii. p. 41.
.

During these transactions, Nestorius the persecuted bishop of Constantinople,
though tolerably sound in the doctrine of the real Deity of the Logos, yet
excepted against the Virgin Mary being called the Mother of God. This
occasioned a council to be convened at Ephesus, A. D. 434, of which Cyril was
president, and, as he hated Nestorius, he persuaded the bishops of his party to
decree, that the Virgin was, and should be the Mother, and to anathematize all
who should not confess her in this character.

Marcian, the successor of Theodosius in the empire, embraced the orthodox
party and opinions, and was very desirous to bring about an entire uniformity
in the worship of God. Agreeably to this his temper, Eusebius, bishop of
Nicomedia, addressed him, soon after his promotion, in these words; God has
justly given you the empire that you should govern all for the universal
welfare, and for the peace of his holy church. The legates of Leo, bishop of
Rome, presented him their accusations against Dioscorus, as did also Eusebius,
beseeching the emperor that what he had advanced might be judged of, and
determined by a synod. Marcian consented, and ordered the bishops to meet first
at Nice, and afterward at Chalcedon. This was the fourth general council, A.
D. 454, consisting of near 600 prelates: the principal cause of their
assembling was the Eutychian heresy, viz. That Jesus Christ consisted of two
natures hefore his incarnation, but that after this he had one nature only: he
also denied that the body of Christ was of the same substance with ours. This
council condemned his opinions as heretical, and expelled him from the
bishopric of Alexandria, and proceeded to settle the faith according to the
Nicene creed, the opinions of the fathers, and the doctrine of Athanasius,
Cyril, Celestine, Hilarious, Basil, Gregory, and Leo; and decreed that Christ
was truly God and truly man, consubstantial to the Father as to his deity, and
consubstantial to us as to his humanity; and that it should not be lawful for
any persons to utter or write, or compose, or think, or teach, any other faith
whatsoever.

Leo succeeded Marcian, and zealously endeavored to promote the orthodox
faith. -- But, under Zeno, the son-in-law and successor to Leo, notwithstanding
his uniting and pacifying edict, great differences arose, and persecutions were
commenced against the orthodox.

Anastasius, who succeeded Zeno, was himself a great lover of peace, and
endeavored to promote it both amongst the clergy and laity, and therefore
ordered that there should be no innovation in the church whatsoever. But this
moderation was by no means pleasing to the monks and bishops: some of them were
great sticklers for the council of Chalcedon, and would not allow a single word
of their decrees to be altered, nor communicate with those who did not receive
them: others were so far from submitting to this synod, that they anathematized
it; whilst others adhered to the pacific edict, and maintained peace with one
another, even though they were of different judgment concerning the nature of
Christ. Hence the church was divided into factions, so that the bishops would
not communicate with each other: not only the Eastern bishops separated from
the Western, but those of the same province had schisms among themselves. The
emperor, to prevent as much as possible these quarrels, banished those who were
most remarkably troublesome from their sees: but the monks and bishops
frustrated all his attempts for peace, by forcing one another to make new
confessions and subscriptions, and by anathematizing all who differed from
them, as heretics: they also treated the emperor himself with great insolence,
and excommunicated him as an enemy to the synod of Chalcedon An abstract from
Dr. Chandler's Hist. of Persecution, p. 51.
.

The Athanasian creed, as it is called, we shall just mention in this place, as
the consubstantial doctrine, that is to say, that the substance or essence of
the Son and Spirit were the same in kind, or rather species, with that of God
the Father, so generaly prevailed about this time; though the creed now called
Athanasian had not then acquired that name, but was simply styled the Catholic
faith, and did not consist of the same articles as at present Vossius and other
learned writers have sufficiently proved that it was none of his; -- that it
was originally a Latin composition, and by a Latin author; -- that it cannot be
carried higher than the very close of the sixth century. Many writers of
credit, especially Pascasius Quesnel, an eminent French divine, ascribe it to
Virgilius Tapsensis in this century, who was famous for his forging many books
under the names of the fathers. Dupin favors this supposition, and says all
the world knows it was not Athanasius's (a) Dupin's Eccles. Hist. tom. II. p.
34.
. Bishop Burnet, in his Exposition of the Thirty-nine Articles, p. 107, says,
as it was none of his, so it was never established by any general council till
1123. Dr. Scott says, some part of it is inconsistent with the most genuine
writings of Athanasius. Dr. Cudworth says, as this creed asserts the three
persons not specifically, but numerically the same, it seems not to be owned by
any public authority, save that of the Lateran council in 1123. Dr. Waterland,
in his Critical History of this creed, attributes the composing of it to
Hillary, bishop of Arles; and that before A. D. 670, the name of Athanasius was
not given to it. -- As to the reception of this creed, it was received in
France in the time of Hinemar, A. D. 850, -- at Spain about A. D. 950, and in
Germany much about the same time -- in England likewise in the tenth century --
at Verona, in Italy, 1014; and as to the Greek and Oriental churches, it is not
certain that any of them ever received it (b) See Athanasian Forgeries.
.

The history of Czar Peter the Great mentions, it was introduced into some of
the churches of Russia the last century, as a novelty picked up in his travels
to France.


.

Under the emperor Anastafius, Symmachus, bishop of Rome, expelled the
Manichees from the city, and ordered their books to be publicly burnt before
the doors of the church; and other persecutions were practiced against them.

The Pelagian heresy (as it was called) sprung up in this century, and made no
small progress; it consisted principally in asserting the absolute freedom of
the human will; which occasioned a council to be held at Carthage in 412 and
417, and at Mileva and at Rome in 416.

Platina tells us, that amongst many other ceremonies introduced by pope Sixtus
III. in this century, they beautified and adorned the churches, and placed upon
the altar of St. Peter a golden image of our Savior, enriched with jewels.

The prohibiting priests to marry, was instituted by pope Innocent, A. D. 410.

And the baptizing with sureties, or godfathers and godmothers, became a custom
in this century Madg. cent. 5, chapter iv. p. 656, quoted by Delaune.
.

The sign of the cross in baptism was likewise introduced into the church of
Rome, the beginning of this century.

Giving the eucharist to children, introduced at the close of the last, was a
matter of dispute all this century: it occasioned the first council at Toledo,
438, who left the matter undetermined: the second council, held in 675,
determined in favor of it, and attempted to explain what had been before
ambiguously delivered concerning it Pierce's, Essay, p. 9.
.

Christianity was propagated in Scotland the latter end of this century, by the
direction of pope Celestine 415 Camden.
.

CENTURY THE SIXTH.
In the sixth century, the church never considered the pope as head of all the
churches in the world: he was a patriarch, and had the chief place among his
brethren, because he resided at Rome; and hitherto they seemed to desire no
more; and though he arrogated to himself that pre-eminence, he was ingenuous
enough to acknowledge, that the privilege was of human origin (...) and they
were not wanting to preserve this authority among the people by a pomp and
splendour, as indecent as the arogant style, which some of them affected St.
Jerome records a memorable saying of Pretextatus, a pagan, at this time: "Make
me a bishop of Rome, and I will immediately become a Christian."
.

The infallibility of the pope of Rome was unknown as yet, amidst the
enormities, errors, and contradictions, of several of them: it would, indeed,
have been a ridiculous inconsistency, to give oracular authority to the
sentences of such men.

The superiority of councils to the pope was therefore a point hitherto not
disputed: the popes themselves defired such assemblies, and declared, that so
far from having a power of altering their decrees, that on the contrary, their
own opinions and doctrines were to be subjected to the examination of councils.
It was, indeed, a rule, that the bishop obtained his office by election; but
the corruption of the times was such, that money had frequently a great share
in it. The bishop was then subject to the civil magist ates of Rome, and
acknowledged, as his sovereign, the emperor of Rome, and afterward the kings
o^ Italy. It also appears from the canon law, that the usages of the Roman
church, and the letters and epistles of the popes, gradually acquired the
authority of laws Walch's History of the Popes.
.

Very early in this century, the notion of the popes independency on councils
was first broached: the occasion of which was, that some crimes were laid to
the charge of Symmachus, then bishop of Rome. His friends in the council
pretended, " That no assembly of bishops had a power to judge the pope, and
that he was accountable for his actions to God alone," which was unanswerably
confuted as soon as broached. One of the council immediately observed, they
were convened for that purpose, and he was for that end summoned to appear
before them.

Justin, who ascended the imperial throne, A. D. 518, revived the persecutions,
as a mark of his greater zeal for orthodoxy than his predecessor: Anastasius
Severus, bishop of Antioch, being warm against the council of Chalcedon, the
emperor ordered his tongue to be cut out. Platina also tells us, that he
banished the Arians, and gave their churches to the orthodox. Hormisda also,
bishop of Rome, after the example of Symmachus, banished the remainder of the
Manichees, and caused their writings to be burnt.

Justinian, his successor, succeeded him also in his zeal for the council of
Chalcedon, and banished the bishops of Constantinople and Antioch, because they
would not obey his orders. -- He published a law, that there should be no pagan
or heretic in his empire, allowing three months only for their conversion: by
another, he rendered them incapable of being witnesses in any trial against
Christians: he likewise prohibited the transcribing any heretical book, upon
the punishment of losing both their hands. These laws were principally enacted
at the instigation of the orthodox bishops. Thus Agapetus, bishop of Rome, who
had condemned Anthimus, and deposed him from his see of Constantinople,
persuaded Justinian to banish all those whom he had condemned for heresy. But
notwithstanding all his zeal for orthodoxy, and the cruel edicts he published
for the extirpation of heresy, he was infamously covetous; sold the provinces
of the empire to plunderers and oppressors, stripped the wealthy of their
estates upon false accusations. Evagrius Evagrius, lib. iv. chapter xxxii. Platina.
Dr. Chandler's History of Persecution, p. 52.
likewise charges him with a variety of other unheard of cruelties, and
unnatural vices.

During the reign of Justinian, in the 24th year of it, was held the fifth
general council at Constantinople, A. D. 553, consisting of about 165 fathers.
The occasion of their meeting was the opposition that was made to the four
former general councils, and particularly the writings of Origin, which
Eustochius, bishop of Jerusalem, accused, as full of many dangerous errors. In
the first sessions it was debated, whether those, who were dead, were to be
anathematized? One Eutychius looked with contempt on the fathers for their
hesitation in so plain a matter, and told them, that there needed no
deliberation about it; for that king Josias formerly did not only destroy the
idolatrous priests who were living, but dug also those, who had been dead long
before, out of their graves. So clear a determination of the point, who could
resist? The fathers were immediately convinced, and Justinian caused him to be
consecrated bishop of Constantinople, in the room of Menas, just deceased, for
this his skill in scripture and casuistry. The consequence was, that the
decrees of the four preceding councils were all confirmed; those who were
condemned by them, re-condemned and anathematized; particularly Theodorus,
bishop of Mopsuestia, and Ibas, with their writings, as favoring the impieties
of Nestorius; and finally, Origin, with all his detestable and execrable
principles, and all persons whatsoever, who should think or speak of them, or
dare to defend them. After these transactions the synod sent an account of them
to Justinian, whom they complimented with the title of the Most Christian King,
and with having a soul partaker of the heavenly nobility; and yet soon after
these flatteries, his most christian majesty turned heretic himself, and
endeavored, with as much zeal, to propagate heresy, as he had done orthodoxy
before: he published an edict, by which he ordained, That the body of Christ
was incorruptible, and incapable even of natural and innocent passions; that
before his death he eat in the same manner as he did after his resurrection,
receiving no conversion or change from his very formation in the womb, neither
in his voluntary or natural affections, nor after his resurrection. But as he
was endeavoring to force the bishops to receive his creed, God was pleased, as
Evagrius observes, to cut him off.

But after the year 560, the bishops being become the absolute dispensers of
the fourth part of the goods of the church, they began to employ more of their
care in their temporal affairs, and to make parties in the cities; so that
elections were no longer carried on with a view to the service of God, but
managed by faction and intrigues, which often proceeded to open violence. This
gave the first alarm to princes, who had hitherto little concerned themselves
in the choice of the ministry. Moved, therefore, partly by religious
considerations, and partly by reasons of state, they now began not to suffer
the clergy and people to determine elections by themselves, and according to
their own passions: for seeing men no longer avoiding and flying from
bishoprics, but even making interest for them by all the courtship and skilful
solicitations they could use, so great a contest opened the way to seditions.
These proceedings produced an edict, that no person elected should be
consecrated without the approbation of the prince, reserving to themselves the
right of confirming the great bishoprics, such as those in Italy, of Rome,
Ravenna, and Milan. In this manner, that is, with the imperial sanction, the
popes and bishops continued to be chosen. Through all the history of Gregory of
Tours, from the time of Clowis, the first Christian king of France, until the
year 590, we find no instance of any one bishop being made in any other manner,
than by the nomination or consent of the king. It was easy for those bishops,
when once they were made without the authority of the people, to exclude the
people also from the choice of priests and deacons, and other ecclesiastical
ministers, and to transfer that right to the emperor or prince alone: and thus
the succession of bishops and clergy became greatly irregular; and, instead of
being chosen and set apart to their respective offices by the people, whom they
were appointed to watch over and minister unto, according to reason and ancient
usage, they were set apart by those invested with civil power.

And notwithstanding this order and method was broke through in aftertimes by
arbitrary measures, it appears that, so late as the year 590, the pope was not
deemed lawful pope till his election was confirmed by the emperor: hence
Gregory the Great, being chosen by a great majority, but desirous to decline
that dignity, wrote to the emperor Mauritius, entreating him to refuse his
consent, that the electors might thereby be obliged to choose another. The
person chosen was also styled Elect, not Bishop, and yielded the first place in
the church to the arch priest Bower's History of the Popes, vol. II. p. 265.
.

Under Mauritius, John, bishop of Constantinople, in a council held in that
city, styled himself Ecumenical Bishop, by the consent of the fathers there
assembled; and the emperor himself ordered Gregory to acknowledge him in that
character. Gregory absolutely refused it, and replied, that the power of
binding and loosing was delivered to Peter and his successors, and not to the
bishops of Constantinople; admonishing him to take care, that he did not
provoke the anger of God against himself, by raising tumults in his church.
This pope was the first who styled himself, Servus Servorum Dei, Servant of the
Servants of God; and had such an abhorrence of the title of Universal Bishop,
that he said, "I confidently affirm, than whosoever calls himself Universal
Priest, is the forerunner of Antichrist, by thus proudly exalting himself
above others."

But however modest Gregory was in refusing and condemning this arrogant title,
Boniface III. thought better of the matter; and, after great struggles,
prevailed with Phocas, who murdered Mauritius, the emperor, to declare, that
the sea of the blessed apostle Peter, which is the head of all churches, should
be so called and accounted by all, and the bishop of it Ecumenical or
Universal Bishop. The church of Constantinople had claimed this precedence and
dignity, and was sometimes favored herein by the emperors, who declared, that
the first see ought to be in that place which was the head of the empire. The
Roman pontiffs, on the other hand, affirmed that Rome, of which Constantinople
was but a colony, ought to be esteemed the head of the empire; because the
Greeks themselves, in their writings, style the emperor, Roman Emperor, and the
inhabitants of Constantinople are called Romans, and not Greeks; not to mention
that Peter, the prince of the apostles, gave the keys of the kingdom of heaven
to his successors, the popes of Rome. On this foundation was the superiority of
the church of Rome, to that of all other churches, built: and Phocas, who was
guilty of all villainies, was one of the fittest persons that could be found to
gratify Boniface in this request. Boniface also called a council at Rome, where
this supremacy was confirmed, and by whom it was decreed, that bishops should
be chosen by the clergy and people, approved by the prince of the city, and
ratified by the pope with these words, volumus et jubemus, for this is our will
and command. To reward Phocas for the grant of the primacy, he approved the
murder of Mauritius, and very honorably received his images, which he sent to
Rome; and, having thus wickedly possessed themselves of this unrighteous power,
the popes as wickedly used it, soon brought almost the whole Christian world
into subjection to them, and became the persecutors general of the church of
God, proceeding from one usurpation to another, till at last they brought
emperors, kings, and princes, into subjection, forcing them to ratify their
unjust decrees, and to punish, in the severest manner, all that should presume
to oppose and contradict them, till she became drunken with the blood of the
saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus; Babylon the great, the
mother of harlots and abominations of the earth Chandler's History of
Persecution, p. 55.
. Pretty early in this century persecutions recommenced at Rome against the
Manichees.

The custom of anathematizing persons after death was introduced from
apresumption, that all those whom they anathematized, and condemned as
heretics, their sentence would be confirmed by the Supreme Being; but others
more modestly pleaded only for its being their duty to show their
disapprobation of heretics, as well dead as living.

This was one part of the contest called the Three Chapters, which occasioned
the meeting of several councils in this century. The second was concerning the
writings of Theodoret against Cyril; and the third was concerning the letter of
Ibas to the pope, whether orthodox or not Bower's History of the Popes, vol.
II. p. 401.
.

The dignity of the clergy of all ranks was a point much insisted on. Pope
Felix, A. D. 528, asserted, that the clergy were by divine right exempted from
the power of the civil magistrate, and their misconduct only cognizable by, and
liable to, the censure of the church, and the synods of each diocese and
province Bower's History of the Popes, vol. II. p. 325.
.

It likewise became a dispute, whether a pope, who is not true (that is,
rightly elected and constituted) can be infallible. This was occasioned by two
popes being chosen at the same time, viz. Boniface II. and Dioscorus, A. D.
5^0; but the great quarrel was terminated by the death of Dioscorus Ibid. 327.
.

Praying to the virgin Mary was received as a laudable practice by the Romish
church, and many attributes ascribed to her Hist. Popery, vol. I. p. 87. See
also The Blessed Virgin's Psalter, as it is called, composed by Bonaventure, a
cardinal of the Romish church.
.

Purgatory was a device of St. Austin's in this century; but he both said and
unsaid it, and at last, like a wise schoolman, left it doubtful. The papists
were greatly divided about it; and it is more properly said to be a new
doctrine started by him, than received as an article of faith in the Romish
church in this century.

Praying for the dead was a practice that prevailed at the latter end of this
century: a novelty of pope Gregory I. who likewise introduced the procession of
the host, A. D. 592. Indulgences were also granted by him in the year 600, but
not in the manner or for the purposes as they were soon after, and now in
general, understood, being then occasionally granted to Christians, when they
had fallen into any heinous crime, either in denying their faith, or
sacrificing to idols, through the fear of, or actual suffering, perfection; and
for which, being enjoined a long penance, the pope had power to mitigate, which
power of mitigation was called indulgence Dupin.
.

The author of the History of Popery In two vol. 4 to. printed in 1735, vol. I.
p. 134.
, speaking of the progress of popish doctrines and ceremonies, says, "that
hitherto papal indulgences, as now understood, were not so much as heard of --
purgatory fire was unkindled -- their mass was yet unmoulded --
transubstantiation unthought of -- the doctrine of merits untaught -- the cup
in the sacrament not denied to the laity; and not till long after that prayers
were made with the people in an unknown tongue: but from hence we behold the
church in her declining state; knowledge decayed, superstition usurped the
place of zeal, and both princes and prelates were more busied in ornamenting
churches, or building nunneries, etc. than in raising up living stones, and
edifying God's spiritual temple."

CENTURY THE SEVENTH.
In this century we meet with many remarkable occurrences. -- At the beginning
of it, Mellitus, the first bishop of London, in consequence of the high dignity
to which he was advanced, went to Rome, as Bede informs us, to consult with the
pope concerning the affairs of the English church; on which occasion Boniface
called a council of the Italian bishops, at which the bishop of London attended
or assisted, and when it broke up, returned to London with the decrees of that
court.

Pope Boniface showed no small zeal in propagating the Christian religion in
Great Britain; but, at the same time, he took care to introduce an undue
veneration for the papal robes, for the authority and dignity of the sovereign
pontiff, and for a variety of ceremonies which defaced the simplicity of the
gospel. This pope's pall was first sent into England to Justus, who, in the
year 624, succeeded Mellitus in the sea of Canterbury; and the number of
bishops were greatly increased, as well as of inferior clergy, who received
their ordination from the bishop of Canterbury, by virtue of that great dignity
which had been delegated to him by the pope.

Another point aimed at was, to increase a veneration for the clergy, insomuch
that pretty early in this century the clergy acquired a very great ascendancy
over the people, and they voluntarily imparted a considerable share of their
worldly substance, especially in some of the capital cities, as well as Rome,
which in each city made one capital stock; and this was not divided between
them and the poor, but was appropriated to the priest, and other collections
were made for the poor: these capital stocks were called Patrimonies; a name
not denoting any dominion or jurisdiction belonging to the Roman church, or the
pope, but to signify the estate of every church, and was distinguished from the
patrimonies of private men, as we find in many places of the 12th book of the
Code Father Paul of Beneficiary Matters, p.
.

And to create a greater respect for the estates belonging to the church, it
was usual to annex the name of some favorite saint which that church held in
great veneration; so the estates of the church of Ravenna were called the
patrimony of St. Apollinare; that of Milan, the patrimony of St. Ambrose; and
the estates of the Roman church, the patrimony of St. Peter in Ambruzzo.

The bulk of ecclesiastical historians fix the year 606 for the title of
universal bishop, being conferred by way of pre-eminence on the pontiff of
Rome; a dignity which had been assumed by the bishop of Constantinople, and by
others in the last century, but was now confirmed to pope Boniface III. who,
being elected pope, prevailed on the emperor Phocas to take the title of
universal bishop from the bishop of Constantinople, and to grant it to him, and
his successors, by his absolute decree, which passed for that purpose. His
taking upon him this authority, or dignity, was thought the more extraordinary,
as his immediate predecessor but one, and probably, the best and the greatest,
so often condemned it in any bishop whatsoever, and rejected it with
indignation, when offered to himself, as vain, proud, impious, blasphemous and
antichristian, But no sooner had they brought that ecclesiastical power to its
highest pitch, than they began to extend their views, to join insensibly the
temporal and the spiritual power; nor did their boundless ambition allow them,
or the world, any rest, till they got themselves acknowledged for universal
monarchs, as well as universal bishops, over all where they had any
jurisdiction Bower's History of the Popes, v. ii. p. 550.
.

The church of Scotland were much divided in their sentiments concerning the
time of keeping Easter, and were with much difficulty reduced to the
celebration of it according to the practice of the church of Rome.

About the year 634 commenced that grand dispute, which made so much noise in
the East, whether there were in Christ two operating wills, the one human, the
other divine, or only one will and one operation: this occasioned a general
dissension, and the convention of several councils, and in the fifth and last
session of the Lateran, A. D. 637, under the more immediate direction of pope
Honorius, it was concluded in favor of one will. But this did not terminate
the dispute.

However, about the year 646 another dispute intervened in regard to the titles
and authority of the pope, the African bishop having addressed Theodore the
pope in a very high style, calling him father of fathers and the supreme
pontiff of all bishops: the new primate of Constantinople wrote to him as his
brother, and concluded with saying, the apostles had all an equal share of
power and of honor. This dispute subsided for a time, and gave place to the
revival of the former.

In 649 a council was called by Martin, bishop of Rome, concerning the two
natures and two operations in Christ, and the doctrine of one will and one
operation condemned and anathematized Ibid. vol. iii. p. 49.
. The form as follows: -- "I Martin, by the mercy of God, bishop of the holy
catholic and apostolic church of the city of Rome, have signed as judge this
definition, confirming the orthodox faith, and condemning Theodorus, formerly
bishop of Pharan, Cyrus of Alexandria, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paul of
Constantinople, and their heretical writings, with the impious ecthesis and the
impious type."

This authoritative definition and decree gave great umbrage, and did not soon
subside; for it appears, that the authority of the pope, so late as the year
669, was a matter of dispute: it was not acknowledged in Italy itself without
the limits of the Suburbicarian provinces, the ancient limits of the
jurisdiction of the bishop of Rome. Maurus, bishop of Ravenna, being soon after
summoned by Vitalianus, to Rome, to give an account of his faith and his
conduct, not only refused to obey the summons, but let the pope know, that he
had no authority over him or his see. This unexpected answer provoked
Vitalianus to such a degree, that he immediately thundered against Maurus the
sentence of excommunication; but of his excommunication he made no more account
than he made of his summons; nay, thinking he had as good a right to
excommunicate the pope as the pope had to excommunicate him, he retorted the
sentence, and excommunicated him in his turn, which was thought a crime of so
atrocious a nature, that he was stripped of his priesthood and reduced to the
state of a layman: but the bishop of Ravenna being supported by the exarch, he
continued, in spite of the pope to exercise all the functions of his office
till his death, and then left it in charge with his last breath, never to
submit to the undue power assumed by the pope, which was strictly adhered to by
his successor Bowers's History of the Popes, vol. iii. p. 87.
.

In 680, when Agatho was bishop of Rome, another council was held at
Constantinople on the errors of the Monothelites, in a spacious (...) of the
imperial palace, called from the form of the building Trulla, that is, C^pola,
from whence it has sometimes that name: it consisted of 166 bishops. It was
moved at their first session, that the opinions of the fathers should be
carefully and diligently consulted, in order to determine this point with
greater certainty; and accordingly the ten first sessions were spent in
examining passages out of the fathers and approved councils; and in the 18th
session was read, and approved, and signed, the definition and decree of the
council, first acknowledging they received the five general councils; then they
anathematized the impious and execrable doctrine of one will, and the abettors
of it, among whom was Honorius, bishop of Rome, Cyrus of Alexandria, Macarius
of Antioch, and others; and in the conclusion the imperial edict was read,
requiring all the subjects of the empire to conform in their belief to the
present edict, on pain of being deposed, if ecclesiastics; forfeiting their
honor and estates, if laymen of rank and distinction; and if private persons,
to be banished the city of Constantinople and all other cities in the empire.
This severe edict was founded on that doctrine being repugnant to the faith of
the holy catholic and apostolic church, and the opinion of the fathers.

Such was the conduct and conclusion of the sixth general council, declared to
be of equal authority with the council of Nice, or any other council, and their
decrees; according to pope Gregory the Great, equal with the gospels
themselves; but by this council the infallibility of the pope is irreconcilable
with that of the council, Honorius the pope being thereby condemned as a
heretic, his books ordered to be burnt, and he over and over anathematized.
Hence it is observed by some authors, that one would think the papal
infallibility would be given up by all who pretend to acknowledge the authority
and infallibility of this council.

It is also remarked, as the conclusions of this council were principally
founded on the authority of the fathers, this introduced such a veneration for
them, that their authority was almost universally asserted to be the rule of
faith and doctrine, anathematizing all who do not from the heart believe, and
with the mouth profess, every thing delivered by the fathers Bower's History of
the Popes, vol. iii. p. 15. Baille, concerning the Right Use of the Fathers,
lib. ii. chap. iv. -- An Essay on Scripture Prophecy, Prin. 1724 (a) Mead's
Apostasy of Later Times.
.
; notwithstanding, as our author asserts, they must then believe the most
absurd and contradictory doctrines, doctrines even repugnant to scripture, to
reason, and common sense St. Austin prayed for the dead, for the soul of his
mother Menica, and held, that prayers for the good were thanksgivings -- for
those not very bad, propitiations; for those very bad, though of no use to the
dead, a comfort to the living. -- St. Ambrose prayed for the soul of
Theodosius; -- St. Gregory for the soul of Trajan; -- St. Chrysostom joined to
his prayers for the dead, alms and oblations; -- St. Austin introduced the
veneration of the relics of saints, affirming miracles had been wrought by
them; -- St. Jerome defended the adoration of them. To omit many others, St.
Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, St.
Austin, St. Theodoret, St. Fulgentius, St. Gregory the Great, St. Leo, and more
have prayed to the saints (b) See Thorndyke, in Epil. Part iii. p. 358.
. St. Cyprian, and a whole council with him condemned the baptism administered
by such as they deemed heretics. -- Origin, through too much compassion of the
wicked, asserted that the devils themselves, after a severe punishment, should
at length be saved. -- And none exceeded Tertullian in an undue veneration for
the church. "If thou fear heaven will be shut against thee, says he,
remember that Christ gave the keys to Peter and by him to the church (c) Sir
Peter King, p. 114, who cites his Scorphiac, p. 612.
.
. For the primitive fathers went very far in superstition, even so as to
imitate the gentiles in their worship of demons; for they canonized saints,
and honored their relics; they varied the mode of baptism by suffusion, trine
immersion; introduced exorcism; Chrism gave milk and honey to the new baptized,
and in the eucharist they mingled water with wine, gave the sacrament to
children, and this continued to be the practice of the church to the twelfth
century See Delaun's Plea for the Nonconformists, and his Authorities, p. 33,
and Dr. Mead before quoted.
.

Pope Gregory I. who was so remarkable for superstition and invention, as to be
surnamed the Great, introduced the doctrine of purgatory; and amongst other
devices of the church of Rome in this century, the bishops of Rome were first
honored with the triple crown. -- It was required that the traditions of the
Romish church should be deemed as sacred, as if delivered by the mouth of St.
Peter himself. -- The heathen temples (sacred to God) were dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, and to other nominal saints, and it was decreed that the church
should be an asylum to all who fled to it, though guilty of the greatest
crimes. -- No man was to marry a woman to whom his father had been godfather in
baptism: -- abstinence from certain meats and drinks on certain days was deemed
meritorious: -- all saints-day instituted by Boniface IV. A. D. 610 Dupin,
Picart, History of Popery, 2 vols. 4to.
, and the number of feasts greatly augmented: -- the feast of the circumcision:
-- the feast of the purification: -- the annunciation of the Virgin Mary: --
and the feast of the deposition or sleep of the Virgin Mary fixed to the 15th
of August, and the practice of fasting on Saturdays forbidden on pain of
excommunication for the laity, and deposition of the clergy Bower's History of
the Popes, vol. iii. p. 153.
. -- But amongst other things, the Lord's prayer was decreed to be read in
their public worship at Rome, and was, soon after, injoined on all the churches
618 History of Popery, vol. i.
; and organs were first brought into the Christian church by pope Vitalianus,
about the year 660 Norman on Church Music, p. 37.
.

The sixth general council, held at Constantinople in 680, decreed, that Jesus
Christ should be painted in a human form upon the cross, which picture of him
should be put up in churches to represent, in the most lively manner imaginable
to all Christians, the death and passion of our Blessed Savior: at other times
he was delineated in the form of a lamb, and the Holy Ghost by that of a dove *
Picart's Ceremonies, vol. i. p. 347.
. Private masses became more frequent, and they gave the communion in both
kinds with leavened bread. Another council was held in 692 at Trullo; they made
102 canons, most of them of a trifling nature, others very severe and opressive
to such as differed in points of faith or discipline Dupin, seventh Century.
.

Theodore, as he expresses it, had the satisfaction, before he died, of seeing
most if not all the novel doctrines and Romish ceremonies established all over
England, and the churches of the Scotch establishment, in this century Bower's
History of the Popes, vol. iii. p. 156.
.

CENTURY THE EIGHTH.
In the Eighth century we have many melancholy instances of the great
corruption in the Christian church.

The number of church officers was, indeed, in some measure fixed, and the
several orders of archbishops, bishops, deans, canons, curates, etc. etc. in a
manner pretty near to what subsists at present in the Romish church Rolt's
Introduction to the Lives of the Reformers, p. vii.
.

The pope now assumed to himself the power of disposing of the pall
independently of the emperors, and declared by repeated decrees, it was
unlawful for a metropolitan archbishop or primate to exercise any branch of his
power till he had received his pall from Rome; and in several decrees the
metropolitical jurisdiction and power were said to be conferred by the pall
Bower's History of the Popes, vol. iii. p. 7.
.

Gregory III. in 734, by a solemn sentence, deprived the emperor Leo, both of
his empire and the communion of the faithful, because he would not admit of the
worship of images History of Popery, vol. I, p. 138.
Pope Leo III. set the imperial crown on the head of Charlemaign, all the
people crying out, To Charles Augustus, crowned of God great and peaceable
emperor of the Romans, long life and victorious (after which salutations the
emperor adored the pope himself by kissing his feet). The pope gladly approved
the acclamations and homage paid by the people, especially as he saw by his
being instrumental in investing the emperor with such dignity, he thereby
insured to himself greater power, dignity, and influence.

This is the latest date of the commencement of the Antichristian reign, 756;
the papal see having then established its temporal jurisdiction by being
invested with the exarchate of Ravenna See Lowman's Paraphrase on the
Revelations, p. 142.
.

In Italy, where the wealth of the monasteries had not made them considerable
before the year 750, they had passed unregarded by the Gothic kings, the
emperors and the kings of Lombardy, so that the election remained still in the
monks, only with the superintendence of the bishops. -- But the bishops being
become uneasy to the monasteries, by their aspiring to too much power, the
abbots and monks, to deliver themselves from this subjection, betook themselves
to the popes beseeching him to exempt them from the bishop's jurisdiction.

This was gladly embraced by the popes who saw their interest in creating, by
this means, an immediate dependence on themselves in cities belonging to other
governments, and in enlarging their authority over other bishops; besides that
it imported extremely, that so great a body as that of the monks, who in those
times were almost the only persons who addicted themselves to learning should
depend entirely on the sea of Rome, and this exemption quickly extended itself
to all the monasteries, which, by this means, became more closely united to
that see, and separated from the bishops. But St. Bernard, detesting this
innovation, remonstrates to pope Eugene II. on the great abuse of an abbots
refusing to obey his bishop, and the bishop his metropolitan; that the church
militant ought to govern itself after the example of the church triumphant,
where an angel never says, I will not submit to an archangel. But what would
this saint have said, if he had lived in one of the following ages? St. Bernard
says, Mezeray loudly condemns those exemptions, for, says he, to exempt
abbots from the jurisdiction of bishops, what is it other than commanding them
to rebel? And is it not as monstrous a deformity in the body of the church, to
unite immediately a chapter or an abbey to the holy see, as in a human body to
join a finger to a head? But it is observable by the way, that the exemption
from temporal rights, which the bishops themselves had granted them, opened the
door to this spiritual exemption Father Paul of Beneficiary Matters, p. 34.
.

The kissing the pope's toe was first submitted to by the emperor Justinian in
711. Laymen excluded as not eligible for bishops, priest or deacons, 768. The
worship of images was first made a law to the church, by the second council of
Nice, in the year 789, which council was afterward opposed by that of
Frankfort in 794 Laval's History of the Reformation in France, Dedication.
.

The dispute between the eastern and western bishops, whether the Holy Ghost
proceeded from the Father and the Son, or from the Father only, was decided,
both in Spain and France, in favor of the former opinion; and whether Jesus
Christ may be styled the adopted Son of God, was decided in the negative, and
the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father asserted.

CENTURY THE NINTH.
In the ninth century, the papal dignity received a remarkable increase, with
respect to the church. The pope of Rome assumed the title of universal bishop,
or head of the church; and strenuously labored to improve this at first
unmeaning title into something more substantial.

Though the eastern patriarchs were not wanting in a vigorous opposition, yet
the bishops of Rome were very successful in subjecting most of the western
churches to themselves. The means made use of for this purpose, and the
principal causes of it, were the superstitious veneration for the pretended
chair of St. Peter; -- the divisions amongst the clergy, which produced the
custom of appealing to the popes -- the obligation laid on the missionaries
employed for preaching the gospel among the pagans, to instruct them in the
authority and dignity of the pope -- their zeal likewise in asserting and
vindicating his pre-eminence to those of all other ecclesiastics, which was
confirmed by grant of privileges, and particularly by sending the pallium --
the fantastical desire of some prelates to be consecrated by the pope himself
-- the separation from the eastern churches, which was always decried as
heretical -- the strict care taken to attach the body of the monks to the
service of the sea of Rome -- the collections of the papal decretals, and of
the canon laws of Rome, etc. were compiled for the direction of churches in
general.

The extent of this authority cannot be precisely determined: it appears to be
much larger in churches newly planted, than those of earlier date Walch.
.

Infallibility could not be admitted against the evidence of the fall of
Honorius, and of the manifestly-wicked lives of some popes; nor does it appear
to have been a point fixed, since it was thought necessary, that the pope
should not only transmit his confession of faith, but also at his elevation
take the solemn oath of religion: besides, the decrees of councils were
preferred to the sentences of the popes. Some churches (...) Africa and Aquilia
asserted their freedom; some b^ shops did not allow the pope to be their judge;
an^ the emperor and kings of Spain, France and England still exercised their
supreme power in ecclesiastical matters; and it is a ridiculous pretense, that
the pope at this time had a right of creating and deposing kings: for, on the
other hand, the sovereigns of the city of Rome, who were first the Greek
emperors, then Charlemagne looked on the popes as their subjects, and did
summon them judicially to appear before them.

Nevertheless, in this century, the bishops of Rome became possessed of
territories and subjects, which at first proceeded from the princes and kings
of France of the Carlovingeian line, who, in a great measure owing their
promotion to the friendship of the pope, in the warmth of their gratitude,
bestowed possessions in Italy on the sea of Rome: but, then, they conveyed to
the pope no more than an usufructuary enjoyment of certain territories, still
retaining the sovereignty. In like manner the popes were invested with certain
prerogatives, yet were subject to Charlemagne, as they had been before to the
Greek emperors.

But the posterity of Charlemagne having been driven out of Italy in the year
884, pope Hadrian III. ordained, that the popes should, for the future, be
consecrated without applying to the emperor at all Father Paul of Beneficiary
Matters, p. 88.
. The emperor being yet young, and Germany all in commotions, this juncture
invited the pope to exclude him entirely from the election of the bishops and
abbots, and to that end sent him a monitory, whereby the emperor was forbid to
concern himself any more with those dispositions Ibid. 106.
.

However, we may, in the last place, mention that, about the close of this
century, the kissing of the foot of the pope took place, as a token of respect,
which had before been paid to the high priest among the pagans.

From this time, to about the middle of the next century, wherein Italy
labored under the extremest confusions, as well in the civil government as
ecclesiastical, especially in the papacy, we must not expect to find any traces
or forms of good government in the church, but a mere chaos of impieties, and a
general preparative and forerunner of the miserable revolutions and disorders
which followed.

Popes were then excommunicated by their successors, and their acts cancelled
and annulled, not excepting the very administration of the sacraments. Six
popes were driven out, and dethroned, by those who aspired to their places.

Romanus I. did the same to Stephen VI. which Stephen had done to Formosus; and
Theodorus II. authorized all the acts of Formosus; and John X. who succeeded
Theodorus, confirmed the acts of Formosus, and condemned the judgment of
Stephen VI. Two popes were put to death, Leo V. by Christophorus, and
afterward Christophorus in the next century. In short, such a series of wild
disorders gave occasion to historians to say, that those times produced
monsters instead of popes. Fra. Paola makes a very judicious reflection on the
disorders in those times: "I have not found (says he) reasons sufficient to
prove the history of pope Joan, no more than I have met with any to convince me
of the contrary; however, to speak sincerely, I incline to the opinion of its
being false; but not for its absurdity, that age producing things as
extraordinary as a lady's being papess Father Paul of Beneficiary Matters, p.
62.
."

The Greek church which had held many disputes with the western bishops,
especially since the sixth century entirely separated from the sea of Rome,
with respect to some doctrines and ceremonies which will hereafter be specified.

The custom of observing Lent was first introduced into England by Ercumbert,
the seventh king of Kent: at the beginning of this century several monasteries
of nuns were established, the Roman ritual introduced into most churches, the
number of solemn and particular festivals was increased, fasting in the vigils
commanded, and the feast of the presentation of the Virgin in the temple was
observed by the Latins.

The consecrating of churches and altars was most regularly observed, and the
custom of burying in churches introduced.

CENTURY THE TENTH.
In the tenth century the election of the pope still remained in the clergy,
the senate, and the people, the soldiery not excepted; but the freedom of their
election was corrupted by bribery and violence. Theodora, a famous courtezan,
got her professed lover chosen pope, who was called John X. A. D. 915; and John
XI. was chosen pope at the age of twenty.

Nor is there any century in which the Roman chair was disgraced by so many
profligate popes as in this. The power of the popes being enlarged, and
confirmed, they were considered as bishops of the world; and their jurisdiction
was admitted in all matters, at least which are styled ecclesiastical. Princes
now began to seek their friendship, and found their account in it too; and then
it was no wonder if the authority of St. Peter's successors should be readily
acknowledged, and their vanity foothed and flattered. Hence we find, that about
this period the popes began to change their Christian names for others, and the
bishop of Rome claimed the appellation of Pope in contradistinction from other
bishops It is observed by Muratoir, in the History of Italy, that the
appellation of pope was not in those days peculiar to the bishops of Rome, but
also borne by other considerable bishops.
; and even asserted, that the bishops of Rome, as successors of St. Peter, and
vicegerents of Christ, have all power, both in heaven and earth. In order to
establish this, a power was asserted of making articles of faith; and great
zeal was used to subject all ecclesiastical persons immediately to the sea of
Rome.

In A. D. 963, Otho of Saxony entered Italy, and subdued it by arms; and in
order to settle some form of government there, he assembled a little council of
bishops, wherein he deposed pope John XII. but he had been made pope at the age
of eighteen, and had dishonored the pontificate by adulteries and perjuries,
and and the rest of his character was unsuitable to his office Father Paul of
Beneficiary Matters, p. 80.
.

Otho obliged the Roman people, and pope Leo VIII. who had been put in the
place of pope John, to give up to the emperors the right of electing popes for
thirty-six years, and within that space, out of twelve two were elected
peaceably, but the others not without tumult and disorder, which occasioned
Benedict V. to be carried prisoner by Otho I. Benedict VI. by Otho II. John
XIII. was strangled by one who aspired to the dignity; Boniface VII. robbed the
treasury of St. Peter, and fled; Joannes XVII. or rather XVI. went into
voluntary banishment; so that Baronicus observes, though these are placed in
the catalogue to make up the number, the church had then in effect no other
head than Jesus Christ himself, and we may justly enquire after the
infallibility.

In the midst of the confusions, the archbishop of Rheims took upon him the
care of the French church. -- In Germany, the emperor being no less pious than
brave, and several of their bishops religiously disposed, they applied
themselves to the prevention of disorders, and to promoting a reformation;
insomuch, that the German churches are said to flourish at this time Dupins's
History of the Church, vol. iii. p. 80.
. -- In England, as king Alfred had restored the study of literature in the
latter end of the last century, the kings, his successors, took some care about
the reformation and ecclesiastical discipline: but we find the laws were
enacted, and several regulations made, evidently show their undue attachments
to the sea of Rome; such particularly as related to the payment of tithes,
Peter Pence, and some others.

There was but little controversy about points of doctrine in this century, but
in relation to the consecrated elements. -- The translation of bishops was now
frequent -- Marriage was forbid to be celebrated on any Sunday, or in Lent --
Bells were first consecrated -- and the solemn canonization of a saint by the
pope was introduced.

The general commemoration of all deceased saints was instituted at the end of
this century.

And till toward the end of this century, the holy scriptures were read, and
divine service celebrated, in the vulgar tongue Preface to Laval's History of
the Reformation in France.
.

Octavianus was the first who changed his Name for the sake of obtaining the
dignity of bishop of Rome, A. D. 956.

CENTURY THE ELEVENTH.
In the Eleventh Century we find the bishops of Rome were by no means content
with confining their jurisdiction to matters which may be styled
ecclesiastical; they were not satisfied with depriving princes of the right of
investiture, and arrogating to themselves the confirmation of the newly-elected
bishops, as indispensibly requisite; but they assumed the disposal of the most
profitable bebenefices, as the surest means of providing for their creatures;
and pope Alexander, in 1062, sold several bishoprics, which gave occasion to
many bitter complaints both in Germany and England Walch's History translated,
p. 182. See the Histoir. du Droit Public. Eccles. Franc. and Mosheim. Instit.
Histoir. Eccles. p. 506.
.

The appellation of pope, which originally signifies papa, was first
appropriated to the bishop of Rome by Gregory VII. A. D. 1050.

The cardinals had the red hat now given them as an ensign of their dignity,
and the election of the popes was limited to the cardinals, besides other
singular privileges which they now enjoy.

Pope Gregory VII. forced the bishops to take an oath of fealty to the popes,
and by a decree enacted, that none should dare to condemn any one who had
appealed to the pope. -- Having first openly avowed, that as pope, he had an
inherent and absolute power over all sovereigns, he took upon him to cite the
emperor Henry to appear and answer for his conduct at Rome. Henry despised
those citations, for which he was excommunicated by Gregory, who threatened the
same to Philip I. of France, and issued his fulminations against most of the
princes of Europe. He governed all the Western churches with an absolute
authority, and did all that was in his power to get himself made the sovereign
monarch of the universe. -- The dictatus papae, which contains twenty-seven
propositions in behalf of the highest pretensions of the court of Rome, was
wrote by this pope. The papists confess they are ashamed of those propositions;
and particularly the twenty-third, which declares, that the Roman pontiff being
canonically ordained, becomes undoubtedly holy by the merits of St. Peter
Gregory's Life by Anonymous.
.

Pope Gregory VII. besides his repeated excommunications, and the frequent
rebellions which he stirred up and fomented, prevailed even with the emperor's
eldest son to join in rebellion against his father, who, by this means, was
almost driven out of Italy; and the succeeding pope, Victor III. pursued the
same methods in carrying on the war, poured out his excommunications afresh
upon the Emperor, plied him with frequent rebellions, urged his son Henry
against him, and at length induced him to take arms; so that at last, after
great vicissitudes of fortune, he came to an accommodation, but was deceived in
the conditions, and in the end reduced to a private life, by a resignation of
his empire to his son, whom he caused to be crowned king.

This unnatural son, when his father came to the diet, held at Mentz, with a
numerous army, not long after, went to meet him, and casting himself at his
feet, begged pardon with all the outward marks of a sincere repentance: the
emperor was wrought upon by this feigned submission, and they both went
together to Bingen, where the son deluded the father, raising a jealousy in
him, that the archbishop of Mentz might keep him prisoner, if he entered that
city before he was absolved from his excommunication: therefore, advising him
to stay at Bingen, while he went to dispose the princes of the adverse party,
at that diet, to a reconciliation, the emperor swallowed the bait. The son went
to the diet without him, and by the instigation of the pope, got himself
proclaimed emperor.

Pascal II. the fourth pope from Gregory VII. took up the spiritual arms of
excommunication, to wrest the investiture of bishops and abbots out of the
hands of the emperors, held a council at Guastalla in Mantua, and another at
Troyes in France, and renewed the decrees of Gregory VII. that no laick should
intermeddle with the collation of benefices. Violent quarrels, contests, and
wars, ensued, which extended to the next century Father Paul, p. 92.
. But the emperor came to Italy with a powerful army, and obtained a revocation
of that decree.

Some fathers of the council made use of this dilemma. "If the decree, by which
the pope consented to yield up the investitures to the emperor, was lawful, it
ought to be observed: but if it be unjust, and, as some say, heretical, the
pope, as the author of it, is therefore unjust and heretical also Here our
author adds, by way of comment, that a concession of a thing, just and due in
itself, is valid, though made through fear; and on the other side, an act is
never justifiable, if against the law of God, by the strongest impressions of
fear that can be pleaded: because the natural divine law is, of itself, good
and immutable, and commands things in their nature important; and that
therefore the commands of God bind absolutely, and not the commands of the
church.
."

Indulgences, as they are now understood, and the office of the Virgin Mary, as
it is now used, by the church of Rome, had the sanction of a decree by the
council of Clermont, A. D. 1095 Laval's History of the Reformation in France.
. About the end of this century the practice of disciplining one's self was
introduced; -- the custom of doing penance for others took place; -- the feasts
of the four seasons were observed; -- several councils enjoined abstinence on
Fridays and Saturdays; mass for the living was to be celebrated but once a day,
a second permitted for the dead; the priests were enjoined penance, who,
through negligence, should let fall the hostia; -- all the faithful were
obliged to communicate at Easter; -- the communion was hitherto received under
both kinds Dupin's Church History, vol. iii. p. 121.
; -- a decree was made in England against the marriage of priests, by Lanfranc,
bishop of Canterbury, in a synod held at Winchester Laval's Dedication to the
History of the Reformation in France,
.

CENTURY THE TWELFTH.
In this century the pope of Rome and other ecclesiastics attempted with great
vigor to subject to themselves princes, and their kingdoms and states, urging,
that the splendour of their dignity was to that of the majesty of emperors and
kings as the effulgence of the sun to the borrowed light of the moon; and
therefore they demanded from crowned heads the most extravagant marks of
respect: -- they then claimed the right of conferring royal dignity, and
particularly presumed to consider the imperial crown as absolutely at their
disposal, and by the pretenders they set up, disposed of entire kingdoms,
provinces, and countries: they excommunicated emperors, kings, and princes, on
the slightest occasions; laid their dominions under an interdict; discharged
their subjects from their fidelity, and even dissolved the sacred bonds of
marriage Walck's History of the Popes.
.

And Dupin Dupin, Century XII.
, much to the same purpose, tells us, that the church of Rome was disturbed by
obstinate schisms; the popes at war with the emperors; the kings and bishops
disputing about their temporal rights; the immunities of the church, and of
ecclesiastical persons, strenuously opposed, and in consequence, were as
vigorously supported by the bishops, and maintained by the decrees of councils;
the church over-stocked with monastic and other orders of monks; scholastic
divinity made the common study of the clergy; and the dignity of the
sacraments, and the external worship, were greatly affected by many prevailing
heresies. The struggles and contentions betwixt the pope and the emperor were
not confined to Italy and Germany alone, which were the kingdoms and dominions
of the emperor; but several bishops in France took occasion to oppose the king;
but, as they were not enough united to enter all into the same league with the
pope, the king generally carried his point Dupin's Preface to the twelfth
Century, folio edit.
.

In England, where the king had hitherto conferred the bishoprics and abbeys,
Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1102, in obedience to the pope's
decrees, began to refuse to consecrate bishops nominated by the king. This
contest held for many years, the king, viz. Henry I. maintaining his right, and
the archbishop, supported by the pope, opposing it: the king, in hopes to bring
the pope to hear reason, sent an ambassador to Rome, who, provoked by the rough
answers and menaces of the pope, declared, that his master would never yield up
his authority, though he lost his kingdom in its defense; to which the pope,
with no less boldness, replied, he would never suffer the king to nominate to
the benefices if he lost his head. The king, on the ambassador's return,
exerted his authority; and Anselm, the archbishop, was obliged to quit the
kingdom; nor could he return without complying with the king's pleasure. -- But
this prince dying, and a civil war ensuing, it was easy for the clergy to
introduce into England what the pope had done in his empire.

In that space of time, between the years 1122, wherein Henry renounced the
investiture by the pope, and 1145, it became a rule almost every where in
Germany, that, upon the death of a bishop, his successor should be chosen by
the chapter, and confirmed by the metropolitan; that the abbots should be
chosen by the monks, and then confirmed by the bishop, if the monastery were
not exempted and if it were, then the pope was to be applied to for his
confirmation; that the other benefices, which were de jure patronatus, should
be conferred by the bishops upon the presentation of the patron; and that all
the rest should be at the entire disposal of the bishop. -- Nevertheless, the
election of the popedom came under no new regulation Father Paul of Beneficiary
Matters, p. 106.
.

However, the emperor held a right with respect to some churches; and the pope,
unwilling to revive the old quarrel, as it were, shared snacks with him under
various pretenses.

France, however, retained the royal prerogative (called the Regale) of
conferring all simple benefices vacant upon the bishops death, until a
successor was appointed. -- But near the close of the next century we find
Boniface VIII. had a sharp contest with Philip of France, and ruined the
kingdom, in great measure, by the excommunications, interdicts, etc. and, at
length, deprived the king of his throne, and for some time gave it to the
emperor Albert, depriving those of their benefices, who held them under the
king Abstract from Father Paul of Beneficiary Matters, ibid.
. This proved one considerable means of enlarging the power of the pope.

Another considerable means of increasing the papal power was the business of
tithes, first fruits, etc. which was made to extend to fisheries, hay, wool,
bees, etc. which were exacted under the severest censures. -- And in order the
better to promote their wealth and power, they revoked a law that had been
made, that the church should reject the donations and legacies of public
sinners; but this obstacle was removed, and the pope and clergy endeavored to
prove those donations a kind of extenuations where they could not be pronounced
meritorious.

The large opportunities which the court of Rome had in their hands, of
obliging by the disposal of so many benefices, drew thither a concourse of the
clergy of all sorts; of those who had no beneficies, to obtain them; and those
who had, to get them exchanged for better: and this occasioned frequent
absence, they were obliged to purchase indulgence or absence of leave from
their cures. -- Commendams was also another pretty device: when an elective
benefice became vacant such as a bishopric abbey, -- the care of it was
recommended by the superior to some person of merit, or of interest, till
another was chose: afterward it was given for a certain time This is farther
considered in the State of Religion in England, introductory to the Necessity
of a Reformation.
.

But among other measures that contributed to render the pope supreme governor
of all Christendom, and to center the riches of the world in the treasury of
the church, were the crusades or martial expeditions against infidels,
especially as the clergy were fond of preaching against heretics, as they
called them and their protectors. "This device," says Mezeray, "was a very
successful means to aggrandize the pope; for they ordered princes to enroll
themselves in those expeditions; they retained the sovereign command of those
armies by their legates; and they became, in some sort, lords in chief of all
who went to the crusade, not only because the pope exacted obedience from them,
but because they took the other under their protection till their return, which
was like letters of state, and suspended all civil and criminal proceedings
Mezeray's Life of Philip Augustus.
."

But the greatest support of all this usurpation was the establishment of the
inquisition in Italy, and the confirmation of Gratian's collection of canon
laws. -- Add to this the practice of canonization as an excellent means to
secure constancy in the faith of the Romish church; to enrich the papal
treasury; and to extend that power not only to the disposal of temporal crowns
and kingdoms, but even of celestial crowns too, when it was subservient to
their ambition or interest.

Pope Celestine III. was a remarkable instance of this boundless ambition, who
having been formerly obliged by Henry with several favors, was more inclinable
to crown him, in order to which the young emperor hastened to Rome with his
empress, and they were both crowned by this holy father in an unprecidented and
most remarkable manner. The ceremony is thus related History of Popery, vol. i.
p. iii. p. 417, who cites Hoveden, Vignier, Baronius, Ranulphus in
Polychronico, lib. vii. c. xxvi.
: after the emperor had taken his oath to defend the church, and the patrimony
of St. Peter, etc. the emperor and empress were brought into the church and
placed by the pope; and mass being solemnly celebrated by him, he anointed
first the emperor, using certain solemn words, and afterward the empress; then
sitting down in his pontifical chair, he held the imperial crown between his
feet, and the emperor kneeling and bowing down his head, and likewise the
empress did respectively receive the crown from his feet, which was no sooner
on each of their heads, but the pope, with his foot, spurned it off to the
ground, in token that he had power to depose them at his pleasure: after which,
the cardinals standing round received the said crown, and reverently put it
upon the head, first of the emperor and then of the empress, and then concluded
the coronation with pomp and magnificence unheard of till that time. Indeed the
court of Rome was amazingly splendid by the great number of officers belonging
to it, and the many rites and ceremonies that were observed in all their public
acts of religion.

The ninth general council was held at Lateran, A. D 1123, wherein they granted
remission of sins to such who went a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, or in aid to
the catholic Christians against infidels, and excommunicated such as, having
been crossed by the pope for that purpose, relinquished their pilgrimage Dupin,
Century XII.
. And the tenth general council, 1139, was only, or principally, to declare the
decrees of pope Peter of Leon null and void.

In this century several institutions took place: two military orders of monks
were appointed, viz. those of St. John of Jerusalem, who were to take care of
the pilgrims who went to that city: -- the other were the templers, whose
office it was to provide for the safety of pilgrims, by fighting in their
defense against such as opposed or molested them Dupin.
. -- The Benedictine order of monks, which had been introduced in the East,
prevailed in the West, and were, by permission of the pope, become almost
independent of their bishops. -- The bishops had in almost all churches their
officials to perform divine service for them: -- academies were generally
established throughout Italy and France to qualify for the office of the
priesthood: -- the canonization of saints was appropriated to the pope by
Alexander III. 1160, and the remission of certain sins reserved to the pope:
others were pardonable by the bishops in general: communion in both kinds was
yet retained: -- baptism was chiefly administered on solemn days: but what is
more remarkable, the holy inquisition, as it is impiously called, with all the
train of the most arbitrary and tyrannical persecutions and torture, generally
followed by the most inhuman and cruel deaths, was erected, A. D. 1198 Blair.
, but according to others, it did not commence, or be put in full force till
the year 1204, against the Albigenses.

CENTURY THE THIRTEENTH.
In the Thirteenth Century we see the power of the popish prelates at its
greatest height; but withal so strained, that it was natural for the cords to
break. That summit of power seems to terminate with pope Boniface the VIIIth,
toward the close of this century, who arrogated to himself the power of
deposing princes by divine right -- published a bull, by which he forbid all
princes to exact any thing out of the ecclesiastical revenues. -- He likewise
instituted a jubilee, whereby he granted plenary indulgences to all who should
visit the church of St. Peter and St. Paul at Rome, and ordained the same
should be observed every century. The opening of this jubilee brought vast
numbers to Rome, and pope Boniface, to show his sovereign authority in
temporals as well as spirituals, appeared at the public solemnities, sometimes
in his pontificals, and at others in an imperial dress, with this motto, Ecce
duo Gladii. Indeed, in respect to the pope of Rome's supremacy over the whole
church, the ancient maxims were still retained, and instances are not wanting
of their putting them in practice when they had opportunity Walch's History.
.

Father Paul gives us a compendium of these matters: he says, "By various
methods the popes drew to themselves a great part of the collation of benefices
in all the Christian kingdoms in the west; but, in the eastern churches, they
were not allowed to dispose of one benefice. In Italy, indeed, they met with
such great success, that they flattered themselves they should impose on all
Europe.

In England, where the benefices are very rich, the Roman courtiers made such
mighty acquisitions, that, in the year 1232, the clergy and military men of the
kingdom formed a confederacy or association, and pillaged all the goods and
revenues of the beneficed Roman clergy throughout the island. The pope
commanded the king, under pain of excommunication, to chastise them with his
temporal arms, and the bishops to excommunicate them; but the confederacy was
too strong, either for the king to punish, or the bishops to excommunicate them.

Pope Innocent IV. somewhat incensed at it, sent one Martin, a kinsman of his,
to renew the pretensions of the court of Rome. The English complained to the
king, that the Italians had got possession of all the benefices, and the king
drove Martin out of the kingdom; and, making a computation of the revenues,
which the pope drew out of the kingdom, found that they were equal to his own
revenues, which amounted to 60,000 marks: and, upon his laying these grievances
before the pope, in the council of Lions, where he presided, he was answered,
that the council was not assembled for that affair, nor was that the season to
remedy it. He had called it, he pretended, to give succors to the Holy Land;
but his true motive was, to excommunicate the emperor Frederic Matt. Paris,
anno 1245. i.
.

Nevertheless, the court ceased not to make new attempts in the year 1253,
requiring the bishop of Lincoln to confer a benefice upon a Genoese; which he
rejected, at it was against the canons of the church: but he was nevertheless
excommunicated by the pope. However, this good man died before the sentence
could be executed, and the pope was so malevolent, that he ordered a process
against him, to take him out of his grave, and sent it to the king to execute.

In the year 1258, Alexander IV. his successor, on the like occasion,
excommunicated the archbishop of York Father Paul of Beneficiary Matters, p.
147.
, who withstood the prosecution with great fortitude; and, drawing near his
end, wrote a very pious letter to the pope, exhorting him to suppress these
innovations so injurious to the church, and so dangerous to the safety of his
own soul.

As for cardinals, nothing can be surprising that is said of them, when one
considers the style of the court of Rome, regibus aequi parantur Vide Nicol. de
Clemangis corrupto Ecclesiae Statu, c. xi.
: whence they conclude, says he, that no revenue is too great for them, that
is not super-abounding for kings themselves; and it is for this reason, that
popes have granted them the privilege of being capable of holding all sorts of
benefices, either secular or regular. But is there any thing in this that
exceeds the ordinary terms of speaking on this subject, seeing it is the tenet
of every canonist, that the pope can grant dispensations for holding as many
benefices as he pleases? and this was sometimes done contrary to the letter of
the law, and therefore, in some parts of Europe, treated with marks of
detestation.

But, at length, this supremacy became greatly curtailed by some of those
advocates and champions for truth, who, notwithstanding any or all the
discouragements, dared to assert the scriptures as the only rule of faith See
Rolt's History of the Reformers.
.

The popes themselves gave many flagrant instances of their fallibility, even
in doctrine, crowned heads opposed their insolence, and publicly declared them
heretics, and that too with the approbation of many eminent divines. But the
great blow to this supremacy was the maxim first reduced to practice, by the
councils of Pisa, Constance, and Basil, and by the two last established as an
article of faith. That the pope is subject to a general council, and bound to
obey their decrees; and that, in case of necessity, he is even obliged to apply
to them for their judgment and protection. Which doctrine proved the more fatal
at Rome, as it has been received by the Gallican church, who have ever since
strictly adhered to the two following maxims, always looked upon in France as
indisputable.

The first is, that the pope has no authority or right to command or order any
thing, either in general or particular, in which the temporalities or civil
rights of the kingdom are concerned.

The second is, that, notwithstanding the pope's supremacy is owned in matters
purely spiritual, this is to be understood as under the regulation, and
subordinate to, the decrees of councils, canons, etc. and the ancient and
present privileges of that nation The particulars of those privileges, etc.
included in twenty articles, may be seen in Broughton's Dictionary.
. This was further ratified in the fifteenth century.

But we nevertheless find, that they retained a veneration for the holy
catholic father, and adhered to as many of his favorite tenets and customs, as
consisted with their civil establishment.

CENTURY THE FOURTEENTH.
This century affords many dreadful examples of the popes and bishops exciting
and inflaming catholic princes against the Albigenses, and all others, whom
they stigmatized with the name of heretics, either by public crusades, or
private tribunals before inquisitors, to destroy them. Accordingly several
religious orders were instituted in this century, viz. of the preaching
brothers, whose office and business was to be zealous declaimers against the
Albigenses. They had a monastery at Paris, in St. James's house, thence called
Jacobins -- another order of minims -- of Augustine hermits -- Carmelites --
the order of Maria de la Merci -- of servites and celestins: these grew so
numerous, that Gregory X. at the general council, forbid establishing any new
ones Dupin's History of the Church, vol. IV. p. 319.
. Bowing at the name of Jesus was introduced into the church, by the decree of
the second council of Lions, 1212; kneeling at the communion, by pope Honorius,
1214 Decretal, lib. iii. chap. 10.
. That called the feast of the holy sacrament was likewise instituted in the
church of Rome, but not universally received till the next century. Auricular
confession was made necessary to salvation by the council of Lateran, the
twelfth general council, 1215; and transubstantiation, after a dispute of four
hundred years, concerning the nature of the sacrament of our Lord's supper,
pope Innocent III. determined the matter, and procured a decree for making it
an article of the catholic faith in the Lateran council, 1215 Laval's Preface
to the History of the Reformation in France.
.

The thirteenth general council was held at Lions, 1245, as well for civil as
ecclesiastical affairs. Three points were aimed at by the pope, viz. to relieve
the empire of Constantinople against the Greeks, the empire of Germany against
the Tartars, and the Holy Land against the Saracens: for these purposes, they
decreed the twentieth part of the revenues of all ecclesiastical benefices, and
the tenth of the revenues of the pope; but exempted the croisado priest from
any contributions in this council. The pope excommunicated the emperor
Frederic, and dispossessed him of his empire, on suspicion of his having been
dilatory in supply of the papal chair, and, to show his own great authority
now, he possessed it Henault's History of France.
.

The fourteenth general council was held at Lions, A. D. 1274, for the relief
of the Holy Land, for the reunion of the Greek church, and for the reforming
the church discipline. In the fourth session, the union of the Greek church was
attempted, but on such points of faith as were of an indeterminate nature,
particularly relating to the Trinity, and the union proposed could not be
effected.

The fourteenth century further evinces, that the popes could not longer enjoy
that vast degree of grandeur to which they had aspired, nor support their
intolerable usurpation in quiet: their authority was often called in question,
till they were obliged to desist in part from their pretensions. Philip, king
of France, gave several great blows to the papal authority; and from the
ensuing schisms of double elections, when the opposite factions chose different
popes at the same time, an occasion was taken to bridle the popes authority, by
calling councils, which often proceeded so far as to depose the holy fathers.
To this may be added, that the translation of the papal chair, by Clement V.
from Rome to Avignon, where the popes constantly resided for seventy years
together, carried along with it several inconveniences, which proved greatly
prejudicial to the ecclesiastical monarchy. Among others, the popes authority
being founded upon this belief, that St. Peter had been at Rome, and by his
presence had communicated a particular prerogative and holiness to that chair,
it was very much questioned whether the same could be transferred to Avignon
Puffendorff's Introduction to the History of Europe.
.

Boniface IX. was the first who exacted annates, i. e. one year's revenue of
every bishopric and abbey, at each installment Dupin's Hist. chapter v. 4. p. 265.
; had published a bull, and declared himself to be sovereign lord, both in
temporals and spirituals. King Philip of France burnt this bull, and sent the
following answer to the pope: Philip, by the grace of God, king of the Franks,
to Boniface, who sets up for sovereign pontiff, little or no health. Be it
known to your great extravagance, that we are not subject to any person
whatsoever as to what regards temporals; that the collation of churches and
prebendships belongs to us by a royal right, and that we have a power to
appropriate the fruits of it to ourselves.

After the popes had assumed great part of the power to themselves, of which
they had stripped the emperor, John XXII. in the year 1316, made a decree, that
for three years, whoever obtained a benefice of more that twenty-four ducats of
yearly rent, should pay one year's value, for the expedition of his bull.

Some few years after the institution, or reservation of annates, king Edward,
in the year 1373, sent an ambassador to pope Gregory XI. then at Avignon, to
press him to annul the reservations entirely, which, after it had been in
agitation, were the next year totally abolished by this pope.

But a great schism arising in the church upon his death, which happened in the
year 1378, and produced two popes, and confequently two courts, the necessary
expenses to support them were also doubled. Thus all inventions for fleecing
the people were set on work with fresh vigor. Simony appeared no where so
barefaced, the two courts holding an open market for benefices; and every essay
was made that was possible to strip the ordinary collators of the right of
presenting.

Hitherto the court of Rome had not taken off the mask, nor had so avowedly
owned that passion she had for money; but pope Urban VI. left it no longer to
conjecture, why he concerned himself with the collation of benefices, when he
declared, that no presentation should be good, where the value was not
expressed Father Paul.
.

By these methods the apostolic chamber came to a juster knowledge of the value
of the annates. This was thought by some to be no better than putting up the
benefices to auction: but on the other hand, it was insinuated, that it was
only to prevent the holy chamber being defrauded of their right.

No body can deny, but that the disorders were notorious in the Roman courts on
this occasion; and that many neighboring kingdoms were so greatly alarmed and
disgusted at the variety of tricks and shifts they saw practiced, that they
came at last to acknowledge neither of the competitors for pope. Germany
refused to submit to the reservations. Innocent VII. sent his legate into
Germany, to grant new bulls for certain sums to such as had come in by
episcopal collation, and to compound for the first fruits. But the emperor
Charles IV. forbad the levying them, saying it was necessary to reform the
manners of the clergy, but not their purses.

These confusions received a considerable increase by the addition of a third
pope, which, with the king of France's measures, will be related in the history
of the next century.

Moreover, the Greek church, says Dupin, was disturbed by frivolous questions;
the order of franciscan monks torn in pieces by odd opinions, and extravagant
practices; diverse errors taught by divines, condemned by the bishops, or
universities; and several disorders suppressed by the institutions of councils
and bishops. The divines which flourished in this age, followed the methods of
the schools, as their predecessors had done. The commentators upon holy
scripture produced nothing great nor excellent; and the historians, nothing
exact or perfect. But the study of the civil law, and the languages, acquired a
great degree of perfection; and the love of certain profitable sciences must be
acknowledged to have prevailed in this century Preface to Century XIV. Fol.
Edit.
. But it is likewise notorious, that the catholics have castrated many valuable
books, and suppressed every thing that might serve for the defense of the
temporal authority; and made such alterations and additions to several books
reprinted, as might best serve to promote the doctrines and practices of the
church of Rome: an evident proof of their degeneracy and corruption See Father
Paul of Benefices, p. 179.
.

This century is also remarkable for the opposition made in England to the
grosser errors of popery, by Wickliffe, and his adherents, of which we shall
have occasion to treat in another part of this work.

Father Paul, p. 184.
The fifteenth general council was held at Vienna, 1311, for condemning the
templars, and the extinction of their order.

With respect to offices and ceremonies, the plurality of benefices was
commonly practiced; the commendams of abbeys became very frequent;
excommunications, and other ecclesiastical censures, were made use of to
enforce the payment of tithes or tenth from the people, and to maintain the
clergy in their immunities Dupin's Hist. Chapter iv. p. 265.
, and the office of churchwardens first appointed.

Notwithstanding the prohibition of the Lateran council, some new religious
orders were established, as the order of Jesuits, afterward confirmed by Urban
V. 1367; the order of St. Savior; the order of St. Ambrose.

CENTURY THE FIFTEENTH.
The Fifteenth Century of the church is full of great transactions: the schism
of the popes, which appeared at the beginning of it, was, for many years, the
great care and business of the prelates and Christian princes of the west;
besides this, the difference between the council of Basil and pope Eugenius IV.
and the project of the reunion of the Greeks to the Latin church, were the
great concerns of Christendom: but the former had not those mischievous
consequences which were feared, nor the latter the success which was hoped for.
Among many other remarkable events, the opposition made in several parts of
Germany to the errors and enormities of the church of Rome had this tendency,
to put men upon the study of useful learning, upon searching the scripture and
tradition; and it obliged the prelates to labor after a reformation of the
clergy, so generally and so justly complained of; as also to make many
regulations in the discipline of the church; in which the church of France more
particularly distinguished itself, and furnishes us with the best part of the
history of this century Abs. from the Preface of Mons. Dupin, to Century XV.
.

This schism is generally considered with regard to the measures they had
taken, and the effects of them; the business of collation, of benefices, the
reservation of annates, etc. had very much incensed some of the neighboring
princes, who were jealous of their subjects property. One of the first steps
taken by the king of France was, his letters of subtraction, as they were
called, which is a declaration of withdrawing from his obedience, published in
the year 1408, which had a very good effect. But in the year 1409, a third pope
was elected, to whom, though France paid obedience, yet she stood firm in
maintaining the king's edict by which all reservations, annates, and other
exactions of the court of Rome, were forbid, until they were settled by a
lawful general council; and it happened at that time, that the parliament of
Paris were in part composed of counselors that were well established in the
ecclesiastical laws; and those made a noble stand against the encroachments
attempted to be made by the pope's ecclesiastical judges.

In the sixteenth general council, held at Constance, the schism of the popes
was extinguished, by one of the popes having renounced, after he had fled from
the council and been brought back again and deposed, viz. John XXIII. And the
two others having been deposed, viz. Gregory XII. and Benedict XIII. in the
year 1417. Martin V. was elected pope at the general council.

Great hopes were entertained, that the council and the pope together, the two
most powerful concurrents upon earth, would set themselves to reform the many
abuses that had crept into the church; and, indeed, the council recommended it
to the pope: but from their desire of returning home, and some difficulties
which they found attended it, it was put off for a more convenient season,
under the direction of a future council; so that council terminated April 12,
1418 Father Paul of Benesices and Revenue, p. 196.
.

But they first condemned the errors of John Huss and Wickliffe, and in which
John Huss was condemned to be burnt.

The French not being willing to stay so long, a decree was made in the
parliament of Paris, that no obedience should be paid to the pope, unless he
first admitted, and acknowledged the king's edict Conserence of Ordinances,
lib. I. tit. iiii. p. 283.
, which suppressed the reservations and exactions of money in France.

The pope, being apprized of this by his nuncios, agrees to it for that time;
but having gained some members of the university to his party, in the year
1422, he again attempted to make the reservations: however, he failed in the
attempt, and they proceeded to the imprisonment of all his adherents, the
rector of the university, and diverse others of the members and fellows; and
upon the pope's putting the city of Lions under interdiction, because that city
obeyed the king's edict, the parliament strictly forbad their obedience to it.

This dispute lasted till the year 1424, when matters were compromized betwixt
them; they had, as it were, divided the power, and the advantages: but it did
not prove to the satisfaction of either parties, so it lasted but a little
while. However, at the end of about seven years, Martin died, to whom succeeded
Eugene IV. during whose popedom, in 1431, the council of Basil took in hand the
reformation so necessary. All reservations were prohibited, except of those
benefices which were vacant in curia, the annates, and many other exactions
peculiar to that court.

The pope finding such a check given to his power, after many attempts to
obtain an alteration, came to an open rupture with them. The pope dissolved the
council -- the council deprived the pope, and chose another. -- This bred
another schism in the church. -- France and Germany received the decrees of
this council; and in the year 1438, the famous Pragmatic Sanction, which
Mezeray calls the bulwark of the Gallican church, was published in France,
which restored the elections to the chapters, the collations to the ordinaries,
and abolished the reservations.

In this century, viz. at the council of Bourges, 1438, their decrees were
principally taken out of those of the council of Basil: for when pope Eugenius
used his utmost endeavors to dissolve the council of Basil, and to destroy its
authority, the fathers of the council sent their deputies into France to
present the decrees and constitutions which they had made for the reformation
of, ecclesiastical, discipline to Charles VII. and the church of France. The
king, not willing to do any thing in a matter of that importance, immediately
convened a council of bishops to examine those decrees. The result was, giving
a blow to the supremacy, by that maxim, first reduced to practice by the
councils of Pisa, Constance, and Basil, and by the two last established, as an
article of faith, "That the pope is subject to a general council;" which
doctrine proved the more fatal at Rome, as it has been received by the Gallican
church as a mark of distinction.

But all the regulations made by them against those innovations in their
dominion, served but to sharpen the industry of the court of Rome, to find out
other expedients which might prove effectual for these ends, under other
pretexts, as well as to supply, by a multiplication of new rights, their defect
of power in matters wherein the interposition of princes had restrained them.

It was about this time resignations took place, it being never before allowed
to churchmen to quit the cure that had been assigned them; and till now it was
thought incumbent on the minister, who had undertaken a charge, and received a
recompense for it, that he should continue to perform it to the end of his
life: but however, this being permitted and encouraged, it turned to the
advantage of the court of Rome, as it made the more frequent, and enlarged the
sum arising from annates.

When the resources of this kind began to dry up, indulgences and remission of
sins were thought of in their room, to be bestowed on such persons who should
contribute money for the holy war, or any other pious uses: and this matter was
carried so high, that every one knows, that the changes, that were made in
consequence of those indulgences, in Germany and many other parts of Europe,
and which commenced pretty early in the next century, make no small part of
ecclesiastical history.

In Italy, where the council of Basil never was received, and the adherence to
the pope was more strong, the reservations had taken deeper root, every pope
renewing them with ease, and introducing new pretensions and impositions, and
showing no instance of mitigation in the rigor of any of them, except where
some expedient had been found to work the same effect an easier way.

In Germany, where the council of Basil was by some admitted, by others not,
there was great diversity in the decisions concerning beneficiary causes. To
provide against and reconcile these differences, Nich. V. and the emperor
Frederic III. in the year 1448, made a concordat, concluded in the pope's name,
to the following tenor: -- That the benefices vacant in court should be
reserved to the pope, and that the rest of the elective benefices should go by
election Father Paul of Beneficiary Matters, p. 206.
.

In France there were warm disputes subsisting for a considerable time,
sometimes the pope seeming to get the better in the controversy, and sometimes
the king of France.

At length Leo X. framed a concordat with king Francis I. of France, that the
pragmatic sanction should be abolished, and the election of bishops and abbots
should be taken from the cathedral and collegiate churches, and given to the
king, who was to name a fit person, and the pope to confer the benefice; it was
farther concluded, that the pope could not give expectatives, nor make any
reservations, general or special: though there was great difficulty in getting
this concordat to be received, the university appealing to a general council
lawfully convened, yet the king's authority and interest prevailed, and it was
put in execution throughout.

Thus, after several popes, had between 1076 and 1150, thundered out so many
excommunications, and occasioned much rebellion and bloodshed, in order to
wrest from princes the collation of bishoprics, and to give the election to the
chapters: on the contrary, the quarrel seems now inverted, and Pius II. and
five of his successors have, with the same zeal and constancy, been struggling
to take the election from the chapter, and give it to the king, which Leo the
Tenth at last accomplished: so true it is, that a change in interests draws
along with it both a change, and even a contradiction, in doctrines.

In a council held at Rouen, 1445, we have forty constitutions chiefly relating
to the discipline of that church: there is one of them against the superstion
of those who gave particular names to the images of the Virgin, such as our
lady of recovery, our lady of pity, consolation and grace: -- they forbid the
carrying about the relics of saints in order to get money: clandestine
marriages were likewise prohibited: others related to the morals and habits of
ecclesiastics, the celebration of holy days, the payment of tenths, ornaments
of churches, etc. These regulations are taken from the councils of Basil,
Lateran, the pragmatic sanction, decretals, and other provincial councils
Dupin's History of the Church, vol. iii. p. 300.
.

The feasts of the Virgin's conception and of our Lord's transfiguration were
instituted by Calixtus III. 1456 Dupin.
: -- the taking away the chalice was done by the council of Constance, A. D.
1420 Laval's History of the Reformation in France.
: -- the sacraments fixed to the number of seven in the council of Florence,
1439 Freeman.
, -- and the order of templars abolished Dupin.
.

CENTURY THE SIXTEENTH.
M. Dupin in (the preface to) his history of the sixteenth century observes,
that the ecclesiastical history of this age deserves the particular attention
of all who have any concern for religion, there being no century in which there
have been greater revolutions in the church. -- The pope of Rome saw, with
grief, a great part of Europe forsake their allegiance to his holiness; several
provinces of Germany, England, and Scotland, and several kingdoms of the North,
were departed from his authority; and France, which till then had been free
from such monsters, as he calls them Allowance must here be made for the
religious tenets of this author. I have therefore made some variations.
, produced some who were not less hurtful to the state than to the church: --
"But, says he," "if the church catholic lost a good deal of its extent this
way, it endeavored to recompense the loss in some sort, by the reformation of
manners and discipline, putting a stop to the licensing clandestine marriages,
and by punishing scandalous crimes, according to the rights of the
ecclesiastical laws. For this purpose so many decrees and regulations were made
in ecclesiastical assemblies, and especially in the council of Trent, which,
Dupin likewise, tells us, were to condemn errors to preserve the purity of the
faith, and to labor after the reformation of discipline.

Father Walch has given us a more particular, and I presume impartial, view of
this remarkable period. -- He says, That in the first part of it, the internal
corruption of the church of Rome was become such, as to exclude all external
order and decency: -- in the middle it received such a shock, as it had never
before felt, by the amazing progress of the reformation; and the latter part of
this period was employed in preserving the wreck, and restoring, or recovering,
what had been lost. This has been attended with many remarkable consequences,
some of which follow.

As to the spiritual monarchy of the pope, it was at first greatly endangered
by those who bore testimony to the truth, in spite of the base example of pope
Pius II. and particularly by the proceedings of king Lewis XII. of France, and
of the council of Pisa against pope Julius II.

But the advantage became irreparable, when gradually a considerable part of
Germany, France, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Hungary, and Poland, besides all
England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, and Prussia, received the doctrine of the
reformation, and withdrew entirely from their obedience to the sea of Rome. --
Besides this, those nations, which still adhered to the doctrine of the church
of Rome, not only admitted principles quite irreconcilable with the doctrine of
an infallible head of the whole church, but also particularly, by the frequent
complaints against the sea of Rome, and their earnest solicitations for a
council, threatened it with no small danger; and Charles V. was even actually
employed, at least in Germany, in decideing religious points judicially.

Adrian VI. in 1522, sent a letter to the duke of Saxony and other princes, to
extirpate the heretics, the Lutherans, by fire and sword, notwithstanding he
confessed to them, that there were great abuses in the church of Rome, and that
the ecclesiastics themselves stood greatly in need of reformation: and even
while the council of Trent were convened 1546, and denouncing their anathemas
against the protestants, the pope and emperor prepared another sort of arms
against them, in order to destroy their lives, as the surest means to suppress
heresy: but in this the emperor was too politic for the pope, for he took care
to sell some of the churches patrimony to defray the expense.

All this incited the sea of Rome to study expedients for the better support of
the Roman catholic religion, and more especially of the authority of the pope,
and to secure it from further declension. About this time the order of Jesuits,
by the approbation and confirmation of the pope, received its entire
establishment, and became a pillar, of which the papacy stood greatly in need,
in 1540.

The council of Trent was very artfully made use of to answer these ends, quite
contrary to its original design. The Roman legates were suffered to preside in
it, and they had not the liberty of agreeing to the opinions, or resolutions,
of the fathers, without the previous consent of the pope. All the doctrines,
which contradicted the Romish errors, were condemned without hearing the
protestants; and all the doctrines, peculiar to the church of Rome, were
solemnly confirmed; a majority of votes was influenced to suppress the
doctrines assented to by the greatest part of the doctors then present, or they
were decided by an authoritative sentence from Rome, if they had the least
tendency to the prejudice of the papal court: those questions, for instance, so
fruitful in altercation, whether episcopacy be of divine original, and whether
the pope was to be accounted the head of all churches, or of the universal
church, were concluded in the affirmative without debate; and the papal court
reserved and confirmed to itself, the amendment of its own abuses; and in the
last place, it was deemed the prerogative of the pope to interpret all the
decrees; and it must be owned, that these methods had their Walch's History of
the Popes, p. 272. See Remarks on the twenty-fourth Article of Pope Pius IV's
Creed, by Buroughs.
desired effect in those provinces where the decrees of this council were
accepted without limitation: but the pope had the mortification to find that
whole nations, especially France, Spain, and Hungary, either absolutely refused
their compliance, or by their exceptions, or reservations, plainly showed, that
their opposition arose from the very doctrine therein contained of the
supremacy of the pope: and hence, that very important distinction betwixt the
perfectly and partially obedient sons of the holy father.

As we shall have further occasion to treat of the authority, the decisions,
and decrees, Council of Trent, 1545, Paul III. Pope.
of this great assembly, relating to points of doctrine, discipline, and
ceremonies of the Roman church; a short account of the several sessions will be
sufficient in this place An abstract from Dr. Jurieu's History of the Council
of Trent, and Father Paul's History in folio.
.

The pattern or method of proceeding in the council of Trent was taken from the
latter occidental councils, and especially from the last council of Lateran, by
having the several matters and things laid before several persons appointed,
which were denominated particular congregations; and then it was reported to
the general assembly of bishops: and this was done with great ceremony, and the
decrees read at the conclusion by one of them, each of the other signifying his
sentiments, by saying placet, or non placet. -- We likewise find, that many of
the bishops met with a design to establish the superiority of the church, and
general councils over the pope; to promote a reformation in the church; and
likewise with moderate dispositions toward such as might differ from them in
sentiments, and recommended to their colleagues humility and charity: but this
will not hold true of the majority: the pope's legates were present, and had an
undue influence, as will appear in the sequel. -- One instance appeared even in
the second session, when many of the council were for opening that session,
with some proposals for a general reformation; but the pope's legates opposed
it, and after some debate, cardinal Pool obtained, as a proper expedient, that
the symbol of the Nicene, or creed of the church of Rome, should be confirmed;
some made a jest of that, as it had been received in the church for twelve
hundred years; however, the more penetrating saw through the policy of that
scheme, viz. that nothing might afterward be proposed in opposition to it. --
The third session was principally taken up with the progress that the
reformation made in Germany; the elector Palatine having re-established the
communion under both kinds, the marriage of priests, and the service in the
vulgar tongue; which gave great offense to the pope's legates. -- In the fourth
session, pursuant to the order given by the pope, they proceeded to take under
their consideration the scriptures. This was reduced to four heads, chiefly
relative to such points as were intended to be condemned in the protestants,
viz. the sufficiency of holy scripture, and the necessity of traditions; the
second, of the canonical books and their number; the third was about the
authority of the vulgar translation, and the necessity of having recourse to
the originals; and the fourth related to the proper interpreters of scripture:
and it was concluded, that all matters and things condemned should be by
Anathema.

In the fourth session they also entered upon the doctrine of original sin, to
which there was a great opposition: they discussed some of the subtleties of
that question, as, How Adam's sin, which consisted in the transgression of a
law, could be conveyed or transmitted to his posterity? and nine articles of
the Zuinglans were condemned as not expressive, or consistent, with the
doctrine of original sin, though they admitted a depravity or corruption of
nature. The prelates dispute much, but appear to be ignorant of the point, or
the arguments, of the Zuinglans. This introduced a dispute concerning the
immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin. -- The fifth session related to
preachers, in which the mendicant monks took possession of the pulpits, but
residencies enjoined upon them. -- In the sixth session the subjects of grace
and justification, in which the point of absolute predestination, final
perseverance, and the imputed righteousness of Christ, were taken into their
consideration; and at length the decrees were made with great ambiguity, and
with such provisoes, as permitted the pope, or the church, finally to determine
it. -- In the seventh session the council discussed the points of baptism and
extreme unction: their ordinances on these points were merely trifling,
notwithstanding they bestowed anathema's on such who did not deem them sacred;
some abuses from plurality of benefices were mentioned, but it terminated in
the authority of dispensations. -- The eighth session was concerning the
removal of the council to Bologna, which passed in the affirmative.

The ninth session, and first of Bologna, settled only the formularies of the
assembly. In 1547, a diet at Augsburg was held, in which they promised to
submit to that council; nevertheless, when the council did not coincide with
their principles, they acted in opposition it, more from policy than regard to
truth, and though much in favor of protestants, and liberty of conscience, was
not regarded by many of them as substantial and lasting.

In 1549 pope Paul died. Julius III. succeeded him, who was prevailed on, by
the emperor, to re-establish the council at Trent, wherein the emperor was to
preside, and the protestants of Augsbug have free liberty to be heard
concerning the points of faith in which they differed from the church of Rome:
but we meet with no such happy consequences arising from it, neither in the
eleventh nor twelfth session. However, in the thirteenth session, the council
enters upon business, chooses the point of the eucharist for doctrine, and the
jurisdiction of bishops for reformation; the first of these was debated for
some time: at length, decreed, that communion in one kind was sufficient, and
pronounced anathema's against such as denied the real presence,
transubstantiation, the adoration, of the host, etc.

In 1521 was held the congregation, consisting only of doctors of the canon
law, for handling the matter of discipline, which is the original of the
jurisdiction of the tribunals of the church. This congregation was held at
Trent, but did not interfere with the council of prelates. Gropper votes for
the abolishing an ecclesiastical tribunal, and wrote against it. This
introduced the original of degradations, etc.

The thirteenth session of the council of Trent confirmed the decrees and
anathemas of the council, in the former session, against those who denied the
communion in one kind, the real presence, etc. Penance, extreme unction, and
the reformation in favor of the episcopal jurisdiction, were points
determined; but they could not agree with respect to decrees, which were
therefore referred to some future time; afterward was reassumed in the third
convocation of the council under pope Pius IV.

The fourteenth session, the council refuse to hear the protestants,
notwithstanding the emperor's promise; however, a new, safe conduct was
obtained for some of the protestants of Wirtenberg and Bohemia, and audience
was given to the ambassadors of Saxony, which principally engaged the attention
of the council the fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth sessions:
however. in August, 1552, the landgrave of Hesse was enlarged, liberty of
conscience granted under certain restrictions, and banished ministers recalled.

In 1553, another remarkable event intervened. Edward VI. king of England died,
July 6, and Mary, his sister, succeeded to the throne, who pretended at first,
that she would alter nothing in religion, though she was a Roman catholic; but
this promise was soon counteracted by her attempts to introduce the Roman
catholic religion into these kingdoms.

In 1555, a diet was called at Augsburg, for composing the troubles in
religion, during which the pope died. Paul IV. succeeded him, whose character
was that of proud and insolent. The diet made a decree in favor of liberty of
conscience, which so displeased the pope, that he listened to the persuasions
of some, to support his authority by the sword; but party quarrels with princes
seem to have diverted him from the intention he had formed.

In 1558, Mary, queen of England, died, and her sister, Elizabeth. succeeded,
which was looked upon as a mortal blow to the sea of Rome. She thought it to no
purpose to dissemble, with respect to her principles; and therefore sent advice
to her sisters ambassador at Rome, and ordered him to acquaint the pope of her
advancement to the throne. The pope answered, that she had been very bold to
take the crown and name of queen without his leave.

In 1561, the pope, by his bull, invites not only catholic but protestant
princes to the council of Trent, and dispatches the abbot Martimengo to the
queen of England; but, as soon as it was known to her, she forbad him to enter
her dominions. A conference was likewise appointed at Poissy, between the Roman
catholics and the protestants. The council at Trent met in 1562, called the
seventeenth session, or the first of the third convocation, in which the books
written in support of heresy, as they termed it, were ordered to be suppressed,
and an edict published for the safe conduct of the German protestants. In the
eighteenth session, they enter upon the point of the residence of bishops, and
the question, If it be of divine right? was started and argued with great
warmth, which lasted the nineteenth session. In the twentieth, they reassumed
the dispute of communion in both kinds, and concluded it again in the negative;
and it was confirmed in the twenty-first session, then the matter of the
sacrafice of the mass was chosen for their deliberation. This head was divided
into thirteen articles, wherein were comprehended all the controversies about
that subject, which are at this day argued between the church of Rome and the
protestants, viz. Whether the mass be a propitiatory sacrifice? Whether it
derogates from the sacrifice of Jesus Christ? Whether Jesus Christ, by saying,
Do this, has appointed the sacrifice of his body? Whether private masses be
lawful and good? Whether it be lawful to celebrate masses in honor of saints?
Whether the ceremonies of the mass are good and holy? Whether there be errors
in the canon of the mass? Whether the words of consecration ought to be
pronounced with a low voice? with other questions of little importance.

The French stayed at the council with very little satisfaction; for they saw
that matters of the highest moment were determined with very little regard to
the prelates of their nation, and by the Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian
bishops, and that all proposals to a reformation were overruled by a number of
pensionary bishops, asserting, that the court of Rome was mistress of all
deliberations, as well as propositions: so that the giving or withholding the
cup from the laity was referred to the decision of the pope.

The twenty-second session affords us further proof, that the bishops were ill
satisfied of the infallibility of the council; and the ambassadors of France
received new orders from their court, for asserting their disapprobation of the
measures taken by the council. The sacrament of orders was handled, and whether
the Holy Ghost be given in ordination; which was determined in the affirmative.
The Germans question the divine right of episcopacy, which occasioned very warm
debates.

The French begin the new year, 1563, with thirty-four new demands, relating to
abuses, which greatly alarmed the pope when communicated to him. A decree is
sent from Rome concerning the pope's authority, which met with much
contradiction. They likewise debated the subject of marriages and divorce, and
of the celibacy of priests; wherein it was concluded, that it could not be
said, without heresy, that a priest could marry notwithstanding their vow. The
pope, much dissatisfied with the conduct of some of the French, ordered the
tribunal of the inquisition to proceed against them.

The twenty-third and twenty-fourth session turned upon some difference that
had arisen between the pope and the king of France, and with the queen of
Navarre, on the suspicion of heresy.

The twenty-fifth and last session of this council, held Dec. 3, 1563, the
prelates and ambassadors went to church with the usual ceremonies, when Jerome
Ragazzone, titular bishop of Nazianzo, made a sermon in praise of the council,
recapiculated the good laws and ordinances which were made in it, and read the
decrees concerning purgatory, the intercession and invocation of saints,
images, and their worship; they also read the decree for reformation of monks,
containing twenty chapters, and one was added to shield the pope's authority,
and to leave him in full liberty to dispense with all the canons. -- The second
day they also read the decrees concerning indulgences, the choice of meats,
fasts, and holy days; they made an act of reference to the pope about the index
expurgatorius, missals, breviaries, ceremonials, and the care of making a
catechism.

This last session of the council gave as little satisfaction as the rest had
done; for after all the fair promises of setting about a reformation, there was
nothing of importance effected, except some regulations that properly belonged
to civil government. Germany slighted the council to the highest degree; for
the prelates of this nation had not been present in the last convocation; very
few bishops from Hungary or Poland; none at all from England, Swedeland,
Denmark, or the Low Countries; the French bishops came only at the latter end;
and including the Spaniards, they did not exceed the number of forty: all the
rest were Italians, to the number of 150, and therefore it had the name of the
Council of the Pope and the Italians. The pope, on the 26th of December, gave
the bull of confirmation, wherein he forbids, under pain of excommunication,
the publishing of any commentaries, or observations, upon the councils,
ordaining, in all doubtful cases, recourse to be had to the holy see.

What regard was paid to this council by the French, is evident from the
following citation: for, at the closing of the council of Trent, Du Ferrier,
the king's ambassador, entered his protest against every thing of a civil
nature, that had been transacted in that assembly. We find, by a letter of John
de Mervilliers to his nephew, the bishop of Rennes, ambassador to the court of
Vienna, dated from Fontainebleau the third of March, that "As soon as the
cardinal was returned from the council, the presidents of the parliament and
the king's council, were summoned to court to see the decrees and acts of that
assembly; and the matter being debated, the attorney general said, That with
regard to the doctrine, the parliament did not intend to meddle with it, but
held every thing as sound and orthodox, that was determined in a general and
lawful council: but, as for the decrees of discipline and reformation, they had
found in several things, derogatory to the rights and privileges of the
Gallican church, and therefore to be rejected Henault, abridged by Nugent, p.
i. p. 416.
."

Further means for promoting the grand point of the pope's supremacy, were the
inquisition of Italy, the Jesuits, the Missions prohibiting books, and other
measures to divest all temporal sovereigns from any jurisdiction in spiritual
affairs. -- These things sufficiently show the pope's design to erect an
universal supremacy; yet, in the exercise of it; the pope's hands have been
tied by the cardinals and congregations. -- This power seemed to increase, and
the popes became more and more shackled, which no pope better understood than
Sixtus V. who first conceived that protestantism might accidentally be turned
to the advantage of the pope; but this project was defeated by the general
constitution of Europe, the pragmatic sanction.

CENTURY THE SEVENTEENTH.
In this century we find the popes have been more concerned for the
preservation than the increase of their power and authority, and they seem to
have been thoroughly sensible of the necessity of such conduct.

Their spiritual monarchy, in its external limits, has, doubtless, been rather
contracted then extended, though the persecutions of the protestants in
Germany, Hungary, and France, have not indeed been totally without effect. The
several accessions of great princes to the church of Rome have not been
detrimental to the pope; and the missions, among the heathens and Eastern
nations, have unquestionably contributed something to the propagation of the
Romish faith.

But it would be no difficulty to show, that all these means have been far from
answering their end in the manner expected; that the endeavors used for
bringing back the protestants under the old yoke, especially in England, have
miscarried; that the protestants, by a closer union, and the progressive
increase of their power, have gradually, in effect, weakened Roman catholic
houses; and the propagation of popery has been not a little restrained by
public laws An Abstract from Walch's History of Papacy. See also Brandt's
History of the Reformation in the Low Countries, and Laval's History of the
Reformation in France.
.

It is only in the writings of the bigots of Rome, and in the prossessorial
chains of the Jesuits, that the inward constitution of this supremacy remains
unaltered; for if, instead of looking into the Roman catechism for what ought
to take place, we consider the actual state of things, we must admit the
observation of Monsieur Voltaire, though made some time since, "That in the
opinion of the great, at least, the infallibility of the pope, with the power
founded in it, is a chimera, not believed even at Rome, and yet maintained; and
the pope, a sacred person, whose feet are to be kissed, but his hands bound
Walch, before cited, p. 298, who adds by way of note -- The pretended belief of
this article at Rome, may be seen in Blanchi's Treatise Della Potesta e della
Politia della Chiesa, written in opposition to that friend of liberty,
Giannoni. There is also a work, lately drawn up by the inquisition, concerning
papal power, to depose kings, or discharge their subjects, from their oath of
allegiance; which piece would probably have met with a better reception in the
twelfth century. See Voltaire's Siecle de Louis XIV.
.

The justice of this idea of the pope and his infallibility appears from all
the transactions with the crowns of France, Spain, Sardinia, Naples, the
republic of Venice, and even the house of Austria.

It is still more evident, that in church affairs, and even in cases relating
to the persons of ecclesiastics and church lands, the temporal princes and
states have discovered and asserted their ancient rights; that in France those
obnoxious decrees of the councils of Constance and Basil have not been admitted
as articles of fsith; that the papal bulls are no further submitted to, than as
they correspond with the prevailing maxims of the state; that, on these
accounts, the popes are very cautious of hazarding a decision in doctrinal
controversies; that none prove more refractory sons of the Roman father than
the Jesuits, when his will and their's happen to clash.

Of late the pope has not been allowed to make any new conquest. Castro,
Renciglione, Comacchio, Parma, and Placentia, are clear proofs that it was
never imagined the successors of St. Peter were to bring armies into the field;
and the forwardness of any to make good their pretensions that way, of which
there have been too many instances, is looked upon as a disgrace to the
character of a pope.

The elections of popes are more and more carried on by intrigue, but, at the
same time, more and more corrupt: the principal authority and influence of the
pope seem rather to unite or center in the courts of Madrid and Rome, than at
Versailles or any other court.

With respect to doctrine and ceremonies, notwithstanding the council of Trent
adjusted matters of this nature, for the most part, not only by decrees of the
council, but in all difficult matters referred to the future decision of the
pope; yet we find, very early in this century, many disputes were agitated,
viz. The controversy concerning grace and free will, held at Louvain before
Clement VIII. and Paul V. the pope published a decree in 1611, by which he
ordered, that nothing should be published, relating to these matters, upon any
pretense whatsoever. This decree was renewed by Urban VIII. 1625, but those
prohibitions had no effect; for there appeared a variety of treatises of both
sides upon these matters.

Another dispute was revived concerning ecclesiastical and political authority.
This was chiefly managed between the lawyers and the divines. It was occasioned
by the pope's interdict of the republic of Venice, and was calculated to
maintain, on one hand, the authority of the senate, to make such laws as
concerned the civil state of that republic; and that the pope had no right to
publish an interdict on that account. This dispute terminated in favor of the
rights of princes, in opposition to the pretended authority of the pope.

Jansenism prevailed greatly in France about the middle of this century, which
occasioned three assemblies of the clergy at Paris, in 1653, 1654, and 1655,
who drew up a formulary, in order to terminate the dispute, which was confirmed
by the king's mandamus.

Another dispute in this century was concerning the frequency of receiving the
communion, which was managed with some warmth, but admitted of no satisfactory
decision.

But a controversy of more importance took place about the year 1680, between
the clergy of France and the court of Rome, about the regale. The regale is a
right, by which the king enjoys the revenues of the archbishoprics and
bishoprics of the kingdom, and confers benefices during the vacancy of the
sees, till such time as the incumbent has taken the oath of allegiance; and
this the king claimed as a right that did belong to him universally throughout
his dominion, except two or three provinces. Pope Innocent XI. seemed
determined to oppose his claim: at length, in 1681, was held a national
council, or general council of the clergy, to regulate this dispute, who
acknowledged his majesty's right of the regale over all churches of the
kingdom, and comprised the whole matter in four articles: 1. That kings and
princes are not subject to the ecclesiastical power, as to their temporals. 2.
That the decrees of the council of Constance, concerning the authority of
general councils, ought to remain in full force and virtue. 3. That the use of
ecclesiastical power ought to be moderated by the canons. 4. That, although the
sovereign pontiff has the first place in matters of faith, though his decrees
regard all churches, and each church in particular, yet his judgment is not
infallible, unless it be followed by the consent of the church. See a larger
Account of these Matters. Dupin, Cent. xvii.


CENTURY THE EIGHTEENTH.
The history of this century we shall attempt in a general way, by enquiring a
little further into the nature of the papal power, the prerogatives and
influence of this spiritual monarchy, as it was exercised immediately preceding
the reformation, and which the present principles of that church direct and
countenance them in the exercise of.

If we consider, that the popes rise to that dignity from very inferior
stations, were heretofore frequently, and are still sometimes, of mean
families, without any support from kindred or relations, deriving a great part
of their revenues from the subjects of other princes, and this in virtue of
their claiming a greater share in their allegiance, exercising an authority
grounded only in opinion, and frequently assuming a superiority over those, to
whom they have not been themselves in obedience; when this is duly considered,
we cannot help wondering, that this ecclesiastical empire has stood so long,
grown up to so great a height, and continues yet to enjoy a green old age, that
does not seem to betray any symptoms of a speedy dissolution.

But, upon a nearer and closer inspection, we shall find, that this spiritual
monarchy, like some of the leaning towers that have been so famous in history,
though it seems to carry evident marks of weakness, is, in fact, a structure very
strong in itself, contrived with great skill, as well as erected with much art.
If in other monarchies princes have pretended to a divine right, the pope goes
still further, and claims a kind of divine power, by which he is raised as much
above other princes, as those princes are above their people. This claim,
together with the title of Holiness, having the recommendation of a long
prescription, cannot but excite an high veneration in the minds of such as
believe it, the papal character being given with the greatest ceremony, by
those who are presumed to be the best judges of religion; and the religious
interest seem, in the opinion of the multitude, to alter the very nature of him
who is adorned therewith, and to transform him, from a man of like passions
with themselves, into a sacred person. It is true, that, in protestant
countries, as nothing of this is believed, so it is very hard to be understood;
yet the fact is beyond dispute: and, whatever wiser persons in popish kingdoms
may conceive, the bulk of the people have the highest reverence for the holy
father.

The close connection between the clergy in all popish countries and the court
of Rome, joined to the occasional benefits that monarchs themselves may receive
by bulls from the holy see, makes them unwilling to interpose or break off that
commerce which their subjects have with Rome, that, upon certain occasions,
they may derive favors from thence, which may easily procure what otherwise
might with difficulty be obtained by their own authority. The subjection of the
clergy to a foreign head, makes them sometimes more tractable to their natural
sovereigns than they otherwise would be, since the good will and friendship of
a single person is more easily attained than the direction of many; and
besides, in those cases, there can be no appeal to the people; because, in all
such disputes, they think an entire submission the duty of the clergy. We may
add to this another reason, which is, that the popish princes cherish the
spiritual power of the pope, as the means of preserving unity in religious
disputes, which very seldom disturb the church without disturbing the state
also. Thus it appears that, independent of enthusiasm and superstition,
political principles have no small share in promoting that adherence to the sea
of Rome, which, at first sight, seems so irreconcilable to the absolute
authority of sovereign princes, and which, notwithstanding, by their dexterous
management, is often made to cooperate therewith.

As to the interior strength of the papal government, we need only reflect,
that the advantages of birth are well supplied by the great parts, and other
qualifications, with which a man must be necessarily endowed, who is promoted
to this dignity. His being obliged to celibacy is another point of great
consequence, inasmuch as it prevents the changing this elective into an
hereditary sovereignty, which would be entirely repugnant to the fundamental
maxims of this constitution. We may add to this, the precautions taken in
electing a person far advanced in years, which leaves no room for attempting to
alter the settled principles of the government; and all great politicians
allow, that it is the sacrificing these to the interest of a family, or to the
private advantage of the reigning prince, that opens a way to the ruin of the
best-digested systems. It has also been an old rule in the conclave, never to
elect two popes of the same family or faction, or even of the same disposition,
in immediate succession, for the same reason. In short, it would be endless to
enumerate particulars; but the character of the church of Rome, in respect to
policy, has always stood so high, as to be thought the best school for training
ministers in all the popish monarchies, from whence also it draws great
advantages.

We must not, however, imagine from hence, that because the fundamental maxims
of the sea of Rome have been always the same, the administration of the
government has been exactly uniform, since, considering the vast variations in
men's temper's and habits in different ages, this must appear a thing absolutely
impossible: neither ought we to imagine, that any constitution could be so
framed, as to extinguish in the minds of princes all natural regard to their
families: but on the one hand, such has been the skill and capacity of these
spiritual monarchs, that from time to time they have made such prudent
alterations in their exterior conduct, as has perfectly kept up that relation
between the church and the court of Rome, upon which their authority depends:
they have likewise, on the other, reduced their family tendernesses into a kind
of system, by which the nepotism of the Roman pontiffs has been in many reigns
subservient to the interest of the state, as well as agreeable to the
inclination of the popes, who thought they could never trust their affairs in
so safe hands for themselves, as with those who must be conscious, that their
wealth, their influence, and their power, must, in a great measure, determine
with the life of him from whom they were received, and that, besides, they
must, from that moment, lie open to the strictest enquiries possible into their
past conduct.

One may, with great truth and impartiality, venture to assert, that the whole
scheme of the Romish religion is admirably well adjusted to maintain, in every
respect, the power of the supreme head: he is reputed infallible, that his
decisions may have the greater weight: the traditions of the church, which,
with the members of it, pass for a rule of faith, are subject to his control;
all religious doctrines are liable to his censure; the power of absolution,
even in the highest cases, is attributed to him; he dispenses the treasures of
the church, I mean spiritual treasures, such as pardons and indulgences; he
grants dispensations of all kinds; he regulates fasts and feasts at his
pleasure: in a word, being reputed the successor of St. Peter, and the visible
head of the Christian church, he has prerogatives without bounds, and without
number; so that it is no surprising thing at all, that so much power, directed
by so great policy, should be able to perform such mighty things, and to
preserve itself for so many ages.

But our estimate of this power would be extremely imperfect, if we did not
take notice of the several ranks and orders of men subject, in an especial
manner, to the holy see; and which, without any great impropriety in the term,
may be styled the spiritual forces of his holiness. In the first class of these
stand the cardinals, who are acknowledged princes of the church, and pretend to
the next in dignity to crowned heads; they were originally no more than the
parish priests of Rome, and their number sometimes greater, sometimes less; but
now it is fixed to seventy-two, in allusion to Christ's disciples: heretofore a
cardinal was content to be styled his excellency; but now they assume the title
of eminence, which was formerly given to princes, and thereupon the latter took
the title of highness; the cardinals are of all nations, that the influence
arising from the hopes of this dignity may be the more extensive: the
nomination to hats by crowned heads is a new stroke of Romish policy, which
heightens the dependence upon the holy see, while it seems to lessen the papal
authority; the majority, however, are chiefly Italians, to prevent the throne
from being filled by a stranger; and it is provided, that in all elections the
person chosen shall have the voices of two thirds of those who enter the
conclave, that there may never be a strong faction against the pope amongst the
cardinals, which might be attended with ill consequences. All the subordinate
dignities of the church may be considered as the nobility in the pope's
spiritual empire.

But as in all others, so in this, the strength of the monarchy consists in the
number of its subjects; and if we take into our view the secular and regular
clergy in the church of Rome, the former bound by the most sacred ties, and the
latter not by vows only, but by their interests to the obedience of the holy
see, we cannot but entertain a high opinion of its power; since long ago it was
the calculation of a certain sovereign, that in Europe he had three hundred
thousand parishes, and fifty thousand convents, subject to his jurisdiction,
who, more or less, upon different occasions, resort to Rome, and carry thither
an immense treasure. And it is very easy to discern, that nothing has been
neglected which could possibly contribute to render the foundations of this
monarchy firm and strong: the most important trust of educating youth is
entirely in their hands who are devoted to the service of the holy see; the
Jesuits are particularly famous for their application in this respect, and when
they have received the first tincture of literature, such as are sent to
complete their studies at the universities, meet with the same doctrine and
discipline; and whatever the science be to which they apply, veneration for the
pope is a thing so frequently insisted on, and so strongly impressed, that it
is almost impossible they should ever lose it while they remain at those
seminaries of learning, and attend the offices of the church. Besides these,
the number of inferior clergy, who enjoy ecclesiastical benefices of all sorts,
are so numerous, and afford such ample maintenance, and such agreeable
prospects to men of all ranks and tempers, in conjunction with the canon law,
which is peculiar to this spiritual monarchy, that the most effectual provision
is made for a constant succession of persons, bound to support that interest,
which is the support of themselves and all their pretensions.

As these are bound by affection, and by finding their own account, to a
constant submission, so the proper methods have been taken for subjecting the
laics in that church also to such an obedience as they cannot well break
through. Amongst these we may reckon auricular confession, masses for the dead,
the direction of female consciences, the opportunities they have of working
upon persons in their dying moments; and many more circumstances that might be
mentioned, favorable to their interest, afford us a reasonable probability
that the papal authority will not decline much more than it has already done,
especially if succeeding popes imitate the moderation of their immediate
predecessors, and endeavor to support their influence rather by address than
by the force of ecclesiastical censures, which is a sort of artillery that no
longer does the execution it did in the darker ages, when the little learning
there was remained entirely among the priests and the monks.

The reader will apprehend this more clearly, if he takes a short view of the
European powers, that still profess obedience to the sea of Rome. In Poland the
clergy are numerous and well provided for, having a great share of power
allotted them by the constitution, and are for the most part composed of the
younger sons of the nobility. -- In Germany it is visible, that the popish
religion rather prevails than declines, and the ecclesiastical electors and
other prelates are so formidable a body in the diet, as not to be apprehensive
of any future secularizations. It is, besides, the interest of feveral great
houses to support the church, as it is now constituted, on the score of the
preferments, which are in a manner entailed on the younger sons of their
family, so as not only to afford them noble establishments, but also render
them capable of supporting the head of their house, instead of being a burden
upon him, as would be the case if those dignities were secularized. -- The
hereditary countries of the house of Austria remain strictly attached to the sea of Rome. -- The French, or Gallican church has, indeed, always claimed a
kind of freedom, which having been improved by the struggles that have been
heretofore made against them, the modern popes have wisely had recourse to
another method, which seems to have had a better effect, and whilst the courts
of Rome and Versailles agree, both will find their account in the reciprocal
support of each other's power. -- In Spain and Portugal the papal authority
stands upon a much stronger foundation, as appears from the amazing wealth of
the clergy in the former, and the joy with which the sovereign of the latter
accepted very lately, from the pope, the title of Most Faithful, (conferred by
a bull from the pope, Jan. 1749) as well as many instances of a superstitious
regard to the doctrines and practices of that church. -- In Italy the influence
of the pope extends every where, and he is so able to make either his favor or
his displeasure felt, that all the princes and states of his communion, find it
their interest to live upon good terms with his holiness, and as none
understand their own interest better, are like to continue in the same
inclinations, received from their ancestors, in that respect.

It has been generally supposed, that one of the maxims of the sea of Rome has
been, attaching itself to the superior interest, and always courting that power
most which is uppermost; and, in proof of this, much has and may be said: but
at the same time it is very certain, that the true interest of the holy see
consists in supporting the balance of power, because its influence depends
chiefly upon an equality among the princes of that communion; and if any of
these should gain an entire ascendency, the sea of Rome could not fail of
feeling the first effects of it. This is not only evident in speculation, but
from experience likewise. -- The truth is, that while the court of Rome
continues famous for policy, we can never expect her falling from this maxim;
for as, in decency, it imports the holy father to show an equal affection for
all who profess themselves his children, whereby he may best secure their
reciprocal affection, duty and confidence Abstract from the present State of
Europe, p. 423.
.

These points may be further illustrated, were we to consider his temporal
authority, which the Roman pontiff enjoys in consequence of his dominions in
Italy and elsewhere. He is lord of considerable territories, and possessed of
gold and silver, which St. Peter, even admitting him to have been bishop of
Rome, certainly did not bequeath to the sea. What the dominions of the pope
are, what his revenues and riches, nor whether these are lawful possessions, is
not my province to enquire. It is not only probable, but unquestionable, that
these are more the support of his supremacy and authority in the church, than
any real persuasion of his infalibillity and divine right; though to establish
such sentiments has been made the study and business of the Jesuits.

1713. Pope Clement XI. was prevailed with by the Jesuits at Paris, to issue
the bull Unigenitus, which chiefly relates to points of dispute between the
Jansenists and the Dominicans, and for establishing the pope's authority. This
bull, besides being an evidence that the pope may err, both in matters of faith
and historical facts, proved the means of greatly endangering the authority of
the pope; it kindled a flame in France which spread over the whole Romish
church: broke out more violently after the death of Lewis XIV. The new king of
Sicily would not part with his monarchy; and the zeal which the pope
manifested, served only to increase the papal pensioners, among whom was now
the Pretender, as he could no longer stay in France; for the bull, which begins
with the pastoral office, made no impressions in France; and from the growing
opposition that was made to it, not only in France, but in the Low Countries
and Germany, he found it necessary to use his best efforts in its defense; but
finding himself unequal to the task, he consented at length to some overtures.

Benedict XIII. discovered a more pacific disposition, and was much
disappointed in the great good he expected from the Jesuits; for he found them
more active in support of the bull Unigenitus than he could have wished.
However, notwithstanding cardinal de Noailles, and cardinal Fleury, etc.
subscribed it, Benedict always continued a staunch Dominican. He published the
bull Petiosus, which the Jesuits will hardly admit to be a just exposition of
the doctrine of grace. We must not omit this pope's pacific disposition, to
reconcile the Roman, Greek, Lutheran, and reformed parties; and is more famous
for personal endowments, especially learning, than for the prosperity of his
pontificate.

The intrigues and clashings among the several Roman catholic courts, and the
ambitious schemes of the cardinals (who now obtained the title of Eminences),
the artifice and industry of the Jesuits and other orders of priests, served to
weaken the power and influence of the popes. The occurrences of latter times
convince us, that the measures, particularly of the Jesuits, rendered them
suspected of being so entirely the emissaries of the pope, as to disturb the
peace and tranquillity of kingdoms.

The late extirpations of the order of Jesuits, in Portugal and in France, are
undeniable proofs that the pope's authority is no longer absolute, but limited
and restrained, where the Jesuits have attempted an undue influence, or their
principles, and their numbers, riches, and unconstitutional measures, have been
found inconvenient, or prejudicial to the civil state of the kingdom.

In latter times the progress of arts and sciences, and of learning in general,
may reasonably be supposed to be a very considerable means of limiting that
unbounded power and authority of the pope, so long usurped, and to weaken and
destroy such attempts as were made upon the rights of princes; and at the same
time to remove that unreasonable superstition that too generally prevailed in
the minds of the common people for whatever had the sanction of papal
authority; and this is equally applicable to those errors and corruptions in
doctrine, worship, and ceremonies, that have in process of time prevailed in
that church; many of the grossest of them sprung up in the darkest and most
barbarous ages of christianity, when learning degenerated into fabulous legends
and monkish stories, when to understand Greek, and other languages, was
suspected, and to believe the Antipodes was esteemed heresy; then was the time
to impose on an undiscerning age, and to obtrude upon their understanding the
belief of miracles performed by the relics of departed saints, and many
doctrines, such as purgatory, transubstantiation, etc. which are not only
unscriptural, but repugnant both to reason and common sense.

In the two last centuries the increase of knowledge, has produced various
effects among persons of different ranks: those, whose interest or
prepossessions have not rendered them the friends and abettors of papal
authority, and impositions on the consciences of men under various pretensions,
and have seen the inconsistency of many of their doctrines, practices, and
ceremonies, with genuine Christianity, have paid only an external regard to
their ceremonies, to avoid ecclesiastical or civil penalties: some have looked
with indifference on all the outward forms and modes of religion, whilst many
have fallen into direct infidelity; and deism is now too general among the
politer part of the inhabitants both in Italy and France.

This may suffice as a preliminary to the present state of religion in the
church of Rome, constitution, doctrine, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the present constitution, discipline, doctrine, worship, and
ceremonies of the church of Rome.
THE church is defined by the council of Trent to be the one, visible, holy,
and catholic, that is universal, established by God on a solid basis, who has
bestowed on it the power of opening the gates of heaven to all true believers,
and shutting them to all heretics and infidels: it likewise has the power of
pardoning and absolving sins, and excommunicating all such as are disobedient
Catechism of the council of Trent.
. -- This church is both triumphant and militant: the former is The illustrious
society of those blessed spirits and saints, who having triumphed over the
world, the flesh and the devil, enjoy everlasting happiness in peace and
security: the latter is the congregation of all true believers upon earth, who
are constantly obliged, during their whole lives, to resist the world, the
flesh and the devil. -- Jesus Christ is the immediate governor of that part of
the church which is triumphant in the heavens; but as the church militant
required a visible head or director, he has substituted one in his room, who is
accounted, by all true catholics, as the sole and sovereign depository of the
faith, and perpetual director of the belief, of all true Christians Monsieur
Picart's Edition of the Religious Ceremonies and Customs of all Nations, vol.
i. p. 284.
, who is commissioned to promote some of them to the highest preferments in
heaven The Canonization of Saints.
, and to confer on others such briefs as will one day entitle them thereunto
Beatification.
: it must not here be objected, that he breaks in upon the prerogative of Jesus
Christ, since on the contrary no true believer can enter into heaven, but
through the recommendation of this his visible vicegerent Monsieur Picart,
from whose edition of this work, illustrated with his own cuts, we have
selected many extracts, was educated in the religion of the Roman catholics,
and resided at Paris till, upon his favoring some protestant principles, he
found it necessary to retire to Holland. This work was originally wrote by Leo
of. Modena, a rabbi of Venice, 1637. He appears in general to be impartial.
. This supremacy and dignity is conferred on the bishop of Rome; and if it be
asked, upon what authority they ground these boasted claims and prerogatives,
as well as the foundation in general of their doctrines, worship, and
ceremonies, they will freely declare, that the tradition of the ancient
fathers, and the authority of councils, something beside the scriptures and
distinct from it, they acknowledge as of equal authority, the rule of their
faith and practice.

I. But, in the first place, it may be proper to observe, that the bishop of
Rome is by way of pre-eminence, styled POPE, a name derived from the Latin word
papa. Their doctrines are from thence denominated popery, and the members of
that church papist. This church is likewise called Roman catholic, because the
bishop of Rome is not only styled supreme, but ecumenical or universal bishop:
this title was first confirmed by Phocus to pope Boniface III. about 600 years
after Christ Dr. Chandler's Notes of the Church, p. 26.
: the pope is likewise styled holiness in the abstract, God's vicegerent, vicar
of Jesus Christ, successor of St. Peter, prince of the apostles, and father of
all the kings of the earth Mr. Bernard Picart's Religious Ceremonies, vol. i.
p. 299.
. He wears three keys; one as an emblem of his power to give absolution, or of
admitting into the kingdom of heaven; another to denote his power of
excommunicating sinners; and the third, with much ceremony, is delivered unto
him, to signify and imply his universal knowledge and infallibility; Picart,
ibid.
and he wears a tripple crown to inform the Christian world, that he is priest,
emperor, and king. And, we may with great truth and impartiality assert, that
the whole scheme of the Romish religion is admirably well adjusted to maintain,
in every respect, the power of the supreme head: he is reputed infallible that
his decisions may have the greater weight. -- The traditions of the church are
subject to his control: all religious doctrines are liable to his censure: the
power of absolution, even in the highest cases, are attributed to him: he
dispenses the treasures of the church, I mean spiritual treasures, such as
pardons and indulgences: he grants dispensations of all kinds: he regulates
fasts and feasts at his pleasure: in a word, being St. Peter's successor and
visible head of the Christian church, he has prerogatives without bounds and
without number Present State of Europe, p. 426.
.

Dr. Barrow Dr. Barrow's Works, 4to edit. p. 31.
has drawn up the claims of the pontiff as follows: that to the pope, as
sovereign monarch, by sanction of the whole church, do appertain royal
prerogatives, called regalia petri, in the oath prescribed to the bishops, such
as these which follow:

To be superior to the whole church, and to its representatives, in a general
synod of bishops: -- to convocate general synods at his pleasure, all bishops
being obliged to attend at his summons: to preside in synods so as to suggest
matter, promote, obstruct, and overruled, all the debates in them: to confirm,
or invalidate, their determinations, giving life to them by his assent, or
substracting it by his dissent: to define points of doctrine, or to decide
points of controversy authoritatively: to enact, suspend, dispense with,
ecclesiastical laws and canons: to relax or evacuate ecclesiastical censures,
by indulgence and pardon: to make void promises, oaths, and obligations to
laws, by his dispensations: to be the fountain of all jurisdiction and dignity:
to be himself accountable for none of his doings, exempt from judgment, and
liable to no reproof -- to summon and commissionate soldiers by croisade, to
fight against and destroy infidels.

But though this is in general admitted, we ought here to observe, there are
diversity of sentiments with respect to vesting this power solely in the person
of the pope. The Jesuits, and almost all the several orders of monks, in Italy,
profess to believe, I. That the pope alone is infallible, and have attempted to
prove it in their disputes with the Jansenists. But this appearing too gross a
supposition, has been denied by Bellarmine Bellarmine de Pontifice, l. iv. c.
ii.
, and disclaimed by pope Adrian, etc. Monsieur Voltaire says, that the
infallibility of the pope, with the power founded in it, is a chimera not
believed even at Rome; and yet it is maintained -- that the pope is a sacred
person, whose feet are to be kissed, but his hands bound.


II. Others assert, that infallibility is lodged not in the pope, but in a
general council only. Thus it was agreed in the councils of Constance and
Basil; and this is the opinion of the Gallican church in general Ibid. Cressy
in Exomolog. in the Appendix, chapter iv. numb. 7. Holden de Resolutione Fide, l.
ii. chapter i.
, and of several learned doctors elsewhere See Walch's Preface to the History
of the Pope's.
.

III. That a pope and a general council together, are infallible, i. e. That
when a general council is called by the pope, when he resides in it, either in
person or by his legates, and when he confirms its decrees; then they are
infallible: they cannot possibly err, and ought to be implicitly submitted to
and obeyed Bellarmine,
.

IV. Others are of opinion, that infallibility is only in the church universal,
i. e diffusively in the whole mystical body of Christ, consisting of all its
members here upon earth, so as that, though neither pope nor council, nor any
particular church, are infallible, yet when their decrees are received and
submitted to by the catholic church, they then become infallibly true and
absolutely binding Bellarmine de Council. l. ii. chapter ii.
. Accordingly they build their faith and practice on tradition, and decrees of
synods and councils, as of equal, if not greater authority, than the scripture.
The council of Trent declared, "That the oral tradiditions of the catholic
church, meaning the Roman, were to be received with equal piety and reverence,
as the books of the Old and New Testament Pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia
suscipit ac venerator. Se^ also Wright's Scrip. and Tradition, p. 13.
; and he that despises the said conditions, is accursed Council, Trid. Decr.
de Scripturis.
." Accordingly the church claim the sole right of determining what books of the
Old and New Testament, shall be deemed canonical, and in what sense any
particular passages of it are to be understood. And in the thirteenth articles
of the catechism, composed by a committee appointed by the council of Trent,
and approved by that council, it is said, that the church being instituted by
God to be the guardian of the scripture and tradition, (the word written and
unwritten) from her we are to receive the canonical writing. And from hence the
new canon of scripture, as it is called, took its rise Mons. Picart, vol. I. p.
268.
.

Gratian declares, that the decrees of councils, and the decretals of popes,
ought to be esteemed of equal authority with the sacred scriptures Did. 19,
and 20.
. To the same purpose pope Gregory the Great Lib. i. epist. xxiv.
.

The CANON law is a collection of ecclesiastical constitutions, decisions, and
maxims, taken partly from scripture, partly from the ancient councils, and
partly from the decrees of popes, and the reports and the sayings of the
primitive fathers, whereby all matters of polity in the Romish church are
regulated.

The common law, that obtained throughout the West till the twelfth century,
was the collection of canons made by Dionysius Exiguus in 520; the capitularies
of Charlemaign, and the decrees of the popes from Sircius to Anastasius. -- No
regard was had to any thing not comprised in these; and the French still
maintain the rights of the Gallican church to consist in their not being
obliged to admit any thing else; but to be at liberty to reject all innovations
made in the canonical jurisprudence since that compilation, as well as all
papal decrees before Sircius.

Indeed, between the eighth and eleventh centuries, the canon law was mixed and
confounded with the papal decrees from St. Clement to Sircius, which till then
had been unknown: this gave occasion to a new reform or body of the canon law,
which is the collection still extant under the title of the Concordance of the
Discarding Canons, made in 1151, by Gratian, a Benedictine monk, from texts of
scripture, councils, and sentiments of the fathers in the several points of
ecclesiastical polity. This work he divided according to the order of matters,
not of times and councils, as had been done before; so that, upon the
appearance of this, all the ancient collections immediately sunk. -- It is
divided into three parts; the first into an hundred and eight distinctions; the
second into thirty-six causes, and the third into five distinct parts: the
second part of the canon law consists of the decrees of the popes from 1150, to
pope Gregory IX. in 1229.

In 1297, pope Boniface continued the papal decrees as far as his time: this
part the French make particular exception to, by reason of that pope's
differences with their king, Philip the Fair. To these pope John XXII. added
the Clementines, or the five books of the constitutions of his predecessor
Clement V. And to all these were after added twenty constitutions of the said
pope John, called the Extravagantes; and some other constitutions of his
successors.

All these compose the body, or corpus, of the canon law, to this time, which,
including the comments, makes (three volumes in folio) the rule and measure of
church government Chambers's Dictionary.
. There are a variety of other collections of the canons and decrees of
councils, which make up the body of the canon law; which canons and
ecclesiastical laws it is the business and profession of the canonists, or
ecclesiastical lawyers, to study, explain, and apply with great exactness; and
to vindicate their authority, and maintain an inviolable regard to them, by all
the sanctions annexed to them.

But besides these ecclesiastical laws and canons, which are the bulwark of the
constitution of the Romish church, there are other institutions of that church
more especially calculated for preserving an uniformity of faith among
Christians. These formularies or creeds are chiefly three, viz. that called the
Apostles, of which we have given account, p. 30; the Nicene, p. 41; and the
Athanasian, p. 56, of which a repetition is unnecessary. I shall only observe,
that the Nicene creed has been ever held in great esteem by that church, and
constitutes the first twelve articles of that ultimate rule of their faith and
practice, pope Pius IV. creed.

The creed itself contains the substance of the decrees and canons of the
council of Trent, and being usually divided into twenty-four articles, is so
plausible as to express the first twelve in the very words of that creed called
the Nicene, the greatest part of which most prorestants profess to believe and
acknowledge: but there is this great difference, as was before observed,
between the manner wherein the Nicene creed is imposed in popish countries, and
wherein they, who adhere to true protestant principles, receive it, or any part
of it; that the one require it to be received upon an equal footing with the
holy scriptures; the other believe and acknowledge the things contained in it,
not because the fathers of the Nicene council so believed and so decreed; but
because they apprehend, that the things themselves are contained in the holy
scriptures, and so far only as they are therein contained; so that their faith
is ultimately resolved into the word of God, and not into the commandments of
men: herein they assert their liberty as becomes protestants Burroughs's View
of Popery, p. 7.
.

But this, it seems, was not enough for a creed of the church of Rome: there
must be some form of faith, whereby, as by an authentic act, papists must for
ever be distinguished from protestants. Twelve new articles are therefore
added, which are all truly Romish, and built not upon the authority of
scripture, but solely upon tradition and human authority Burroughs's View of
Popery.
, viz. principally the council of Trent.

The papists profess to believe the creeds themselves, from the authority of
tradition, or of those councils that made or confirmed them.

The orthodox faith does not depend upon the scriptures considered absolutely
in themselves, but as explained by catholic tradition. The faith was comprised
and preserved in creeds, handed down from one orthodox bishop to another, whose
business it was to keep this sacred depositum pure and undefiled, and to
deliver it to his successor. -- It is the most compendious way to orthodoxy to
study the tradition of the church Burroughs's View of Popery.
.

It may here be proper to observe the manner in which the articles of pope
Pius's creed are connected with those of the Nicene. The Nicene creed makes
mention of one holy catholic and apostolic church; and the creed of pope Pius
begins with a profession of admitting and embracing the traditions, etc. of the
same church; insinuating that all the traditions of the church of Rome are
traditions of the one holy catholic and apostolic church: and it is certain,
that the Romanists do pretend, that all these characters belong to their
church, and to that alone; they make themselves the whole church of Christ, and
exclude all others from being so much as a part of it; they confine holiness to
themselves, and confidently affirm, that their church alone is derived from the
apostles Rhemish's Annotations on the Argument of the Epistles.
.

These things are not indeed expressly asserted in the XIIIth article of pope
Pius's creed; but since this creed, in its XXIIId article, speaks expressly of
the holy catholic apostolic Roman church, as the mother and mistress of all
churches, it therefore evidently confines these characters to that church: --
and since this creed, composed by pope Pius IV. was approved and confirmed by
the council of Trent, as the rule and standard of the Roman catholic church The
council of Trent was the last general council, begun by pope Paul III. Dec. 15,
1545; continued by Julius III. resumed by pope Pius IV. in 1559, and ended by
him Dec. 4, 1563.

The opening of this council, together with the remarkable transactions of it,
and its being the final council for determining all controversies relative to
religion, render it the most considerable of any.

On the 15th of December the pope's legate, with twenty-five bishops, clothed
in their pontifical habits, assembled with ^a great number of divines, the
clergy, and the regular ambassadors of the king of the Romans. The mass of the
Holy Ghost was celebrated, and Coruelius Muffin made an elaborate discourse of
the authority of councils, that hereby heresies were extirpated, manners
reformed, schisms extinguished, crusadoes decreed, and even kings deposed, etc.
etc. Then the president of the council demanded of the assembly, to order and
declare, that the holy general council of Trent do begin, and is begun, to the
glory of the Holy Trinity, the increase and exultation of the faith, and the
Christian religion, the extirpation of heresy, the union of the church, the
reformation of the clergy and Christian people, and the depression and
extinguishing of the enemies of the Christian name; to which the prelates
declare their satisfaction, by answering placet, and ordered the notaries to
make a public act of it. -- There were twenty-five sessions, in which were
present seven cardinals, five whereof were the pope's legates, sixteen
ambassadors from kings, princes and republics, two hundred and fifty
patriarchs, archbishops and bishops, abbots and generals of orders, all divines
and doctors of the civil law (a) Peter Jurieu. History of the Council of Trent.
.

The proceedings and transactions of this council, their decrees, etc. show in
more legible characters the design and tendency of this council, which to use
the words of a reverend prelate, was for no other end than to give the force of
laws to the many abuses complained of, and thereby render the wound incurable.


. To this I shall pay principal regard, as it may be explained and confirmed by
Bossuet, in his Exposition of the Catholic Catechism -- in the Breviaty -- the
Catechism ad parochos -- in the Catholic Christian Instructed in the
Sacraments, Ceremonies, and Observations of the church, by R. C. -- In the
modest and true Account of the chief Points in Controversy between the Roman
Catholics and Protestants, by N. C. -- In the Profession of the Catholic Faith,
extracted out of the Council of Trent -- from a Vindication of the Roman
Catholics -- as also a piece entitled, a plain and rational Account of the
Roman Catholic Faith, and such other of their books as have come under my
notice.

A Summary of the doctrine, discipline, and ceremonies, of the church of Rome,
as contained in Pope PIUS's Creed.

Article I. I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and
earth, and of all things visible and invisible Pope Pius's Creed, Art. I.
. The one true and living God in three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
Cath. Christian, p. 5.
.

Exposition. It principally consists in believing, that he is the Creator and
Lord of all things; that it is our duty to adhere to him with all the powers
and faculties of the mind, through faith, hope, and charity, as being the sole
object that makes us happy by the communication of that summum bonum, which is
himself. The internal adoration, which we render unto God in spirit and in
truth, is attended with external signs, whereof sacrifice is the principal, as
a solemn acknowledgment of God's sovereignty over us, and of our absolute
dependence on him Bossuet's Expos. of the Cath. Catechism, p. 3.
.

The idea of God, which nature has engraven on the minds of men, represents him
as a being independent, omnipotent, all perfect, the author of all good and all
evils, that is, of all the punishments which are inflicted for sin Lamy's
Introduction to the Scriptures, p. 372.
.

Art. II. I believe in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten son of God,
begotten of the Father before all worlds, God of God, light of light, very God
of very God, begotten not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom
all things were made.

Expos. I do profess to be fully assured of this most certain and necessary
truth, that Jesus Christ, the Savior and Messiah, is the true, proper, and
natural Son of God, begotten of the substance of the Father, which, being
incapable of division or multiplication, is so really and absolutely
communicated to him, that he is of the same essence, God of God, light of
light, very God of very God. I acknowledge none but him to be begotten of God
by that proper and natural generation, and thereby excluding all which are not
begotten, as it is a generation; all which are said to be begotten, and which
are called sons, but are so only by adoption.

Art. III. Who for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven, and was
incarnate of the Holy Ghost of the virgin Mary, and was made man Profession of
the Catholic Faith, p. 3.
.

Expos. That in this person, the divine and human natures were so united, that
they were not confounded, but that two whole and perfect natures, the godhead
and manhood, were joined together in one person; that of him many things are
said, which are proper to one nature only.

Art. IV. And was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate; he suffered and
was buried.

Expos. That this person did truly suffer in his human nature, the divine being
not capable of suffering; though he was crucified, dead, and buried, appears from
Matt. xxvii. When by sin mankind was become obnoxious to the divine justice, he
offered himself an expiatory sacrifice.

Art. V. And the third day rose again, according to the scriptures.

Expos. Christ did truly rise again from death with that very body which was
crucified and buried. I also knew him in the flesh, says St. Ignatius, and
believe on him: And when he came to those who were with Peter, he said to them,
Touch me, handle me, and see that I am no spirit without a body.

Art. VI. He ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father.

Expos. This article teaches us, that he ascended in like manner into heaven,
and sits at the right hand of God to make intercession for us.

Art. VII. And is to come again with glory to judge both the living and the
dead, of whose kingdom there shall be no end.

Expos. Our Lord's remaining in heaven till the day of judgment appears from
Acts iii. 20, 21. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached
unto you, whom the heavens must receive until the times of the restitution of
all things. And chap. x. v. 42. where St. Peter says, And he commanded us to
preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he, which was ordained of God
to be the judge of quick and dead.

Art. VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who
proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son is adored
and glorified -- who who spoke by the prophets.

Expos. This article teaches, 1. That the Holy Ghost proceeds both from the
Father and the Son. 2. That he is of one substance, majesty, and glory, with
the Father and the Son, very and eternal God. Inasmuch as such operations are
ascribed to the Holy Ghost, as cannot be ascribed but to a person distinct from
the Father and the Son, and therefore must be a person distinct from them both;
and inasmuch as such things are ascribed to him, as cannot be ascribed to any
but God, and for this reason they are coequal and consubstantial.

Art. IX. I believe in one holy catholic and apostolic church Pope Pius's
Creed, Art. IX.
.

Qu. When it is asked in the grounds of the catholic doctrine (contained in the
profession of faith of pope Pius IV.) What do you gather from these words? it
is answered, 1. That Jesus Christ has always a true church upon earth. 2. That
this church is always one by the union of all her members in one faith and
communion. 3. That she is always pure and holy in her doctrine and terms of
communion, and consequently always free from pernicious errors. 4. That she is
catholic, that is, universal, by being the church of all ages, and more or less
of all nations. 5. That this church must have in her a succession from the
apostles, and a lawful mission derived from them. 6. (Which follows from all
the rest) That this true church of Christ cannot be any of the protestant
sects, but must be the ancient church communicating with the pope or bishop of
Rome Ibid. p. 6.
; that this church is infallible in all matters relating to faith, so that she
can neither add nor retrench from what Christ taught Ibid. p. 12. See these
Grounds, etc. answered, in a View of Popery, by the Rev. Mr. Jos. Buroughs, p.
1 to 30.
.

Accordingly we find, the catholic Christian asserts, that God has been
pleased, in every age, to work most evident miracles in their church, by the
ministry of his saints in raising the dead to life, in curing the blind and the
lame, in casting out devils, in healing inveterate diseases in a moment,
attested by the most authentic monuments, which will be a standing evidence to
all nations, that the church of Rome is the true spouse of Christ See
Middleton's Prefatory Discourse, p. 90. See likewise Cardinal Bellarmine's
Notes of the True Church, and Dr. Chandler's Answer thereto, in his Two
Discourses preached at Salters Hall, and a Collection of Travels, published by
Churchill, p. 805.
.

Art. X. I acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins.

Expos. Baptism is defined by the church of Rome to be a sacrament instituted
by our Savior to wash away original sin, and all those we may have committed
-- to communicate to mankind the spiritual regeneration and the grace of Christ
Jesus, and to unite them to him as the living members to the head sect; Alet's
Ritual.
.

St. Cyril of Jerusalem says, the Catechumen, after they were uncloathed, were
anointed from the feet to the head with exorcised oil; after this they were
conducted to the laver, that they were asked, "If they believed in the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit?" That after they had made a profession of this
faith, they were plunged three times into the water Dupin, vol. II. p. 113.
.

Those, without all doubt, were judged the most important doctrines of the
gospel, in which the Catechumens were required to be instructed before they
were received into the church by baptism. This short form was the original
creed proposed to the Catechumens, viz. "I believe in the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost;" which, in the second century, came to be enlarged, in
opposition to the Gnostic heresy D. Bull. Ind. Eccles. Cath. lxiv. f. iii. D.
Wall's Hist. of Infant Bapt. p. 69, f. x. See Bereman's Hi. of the Trinitarian
Controversy, p. 21.
.

But since that they have changed both the subject and mode Lawrence of
Christian Morals, v. I. p. 193.
.

The ceremonies now used in the administration of baptism, according to
Durandus, and other approved authors, are, 1. They consecrate the water with
prayer, and pouring in of oil at three times. 2. They cross the party on the
eyes, ears, nose, and breast. 3. He is exorcised with a certain charm, or
exsufflation, or breathing. 4. They put consecrated salt into his mouth. 5.
They put spittle into his nose and ears. 6. Add imposition of hands, and the
sacerdotal blessing. 7. They anoint him with holy oil on the breast. 8. And
lastly, they anoint him on the crown of the head, using perfume, etc. There was
anciently the kiss of peace given him; but that is now left off, together with
putting a lighted wax taper into his hand -- giving him milk and honey to
drink, and clothing him with a white garment Roman Ritual.
.

Art. XI. I look for the resurrection of the dead.

Expos. I am fully persuaded of this, as a most evident and infallible truth,
that as it is appointed for all men once to die, so it is also determined that
all men shall rise from death; that the souls separated from our bodies, are in
the hands of God, and live; that the bodies dissolved in dust, or scattered in
ashes, shall be recollected in themselves, and reunited to their souls; that
the same flesh which lived before shall be revived, and the same numerical body
which did fall shall rise; that this resurrection shall be universal, no man
excepted; that the just shall be raised to a resurrection of life, and the
unjust to a resurrection of damnation; and that this shall be performed at the
last day, when the trump shall sound.

Art. XII. I believe in the life of the world to come. Amen.

Expos. I believe that the just, after their resurrection and absolution,
shall, as the blessed of the Father, receive the inheritance, and as the
servants of God, enter into their Master's joy, freed from all possibility of
death, sin, and sorrow, filled with an inconceivable fullness of happiness,
confirmed in an absolute security of an eternal enjoyment in the presence of
God and of the Lamb for ever and ever Thus far the profession of the catholic
faith is conformable to the apostles, or rather to the Nicene creed, and to the
general belief of protestants themselves; but the following Profession of the
Roman catholic church, as contained in the additional articles of pope Pius's
creed, with the expositions thereon, will appear repugnant to the profession of
protestants.
.

Art. XIII. I most firmly admit and embrace the apostolical and ecclesiastical
traditions, and all other observations and constitutions of the same church
Pope Pius's creed, art. xiii.
.

They affirm that divine truth, which we are all bound to receive, to be partly
written, and partly delivered by word of mouth; which is more fully expressed
in the preface to the Roman catechism, drawn up by order of the church of Rome,
where we find these words toward the conclusion of it -- "The whole doctrine
to be delivered to the faithful is contained in the word of God, which word of
God is distributed into scripture and tradition Romish Catechism.
."

He that receives the faith of the Romish church, not only receives those
doctrines in which we agree with them, but the whole doctrine of the church,
summarily abridged in the creed of pope Pius IV. in all the points and articles
of faith which that church delivers to be believed of all men that desire to be
saved, which are to be conceived as one entire body or system of truths, and
all assented to, believed, and received, on pain of damnation. Thus Fisher the
Jesuit Cap. iv. in his Treatise of Faith.
, "Faith must be entire, whole, and sound in all points; and it is not
sufficient steadfastly to believe some points, misbelieving, or not believe
others, or any one. For not to believe any one point whatsoever, which God by
revealing it does testify to be true, and which by his church he has commanded
us to believe, must needs be damnable, as being a notable injury to God's
verity, and a great disobedience to his will." And Chamelon asserts the same,
"All articles (says he) of faith, so determined by the church, are fundamental,
none of them may be denied without heresy Concilium Reditus, p. 20.
."

Art. XIV. I do admit the holy scriptures in the same sense that Holy Mother
Church does, whose business it is to judge of the true sense and interpretation
of them, and I will interpret them according to the unanimous consent of the
fathers Pope Pius's Creed, art. xiv.
.

The council of Trent decreed that the scripture alone is not a rule of faith
without tradition, and traditions are to be received with the like regard and
veneration as the scriptures Con. Trident. sess. iv.
.

The author of the profession of catholic faith, on the article of scripture
and tradition, asks,

Q. What do you believe concerning the scriptures?

A. That they are to be received by all Christians as the infallible word of
God.

Q. Do you look upon the scriptures to be clear and plain in all points
necessary to salvation?

A. No.

Q. How then is the danger to be avoided?

A. By taking the meaning and interpretation of the scripture from the church,
and by apostolical and ecclesiastical tradition.

Q. What do you mean by apostolical tradition?

A. All such points of faith or church discipline which were taught or
established by the apostles.

Q. What difference is there between apostolical and ecclesiastical traditions?

A. Apostolical traditions are those which had their origin or institution from
the apostles, such as infantbaptism, the Lord's day, (or first day of the week)
receiving the sacrament, fasting, etc. Ecclesiastical traditions are such as
received their institution from the church, such as holidays, feasts, and fasts.

Q. How are we to know what traditions are apostolical, and what not?

A. In the same manner, and by the same authority, by which we know what
scriptures are apostolical, and what not; that is, by the authority of the
apostolical church, guided by the unerring spirit of God.

Q. But why should not the scripture alone be the rule of our faith, without
having recourse to apostolical traditions?

A. First, Because without the help of apostolical traditions we cannot so much
as tell what is scripture, and what not. Second, Because infant baptism, and
several other necessary articles, are either not at all contained in scripture,
or at least are not plain in the scripture without the help of tradition.

For Christ has left his church, and her pastors and teachers, to be our guides
in all controversies relating to religion, and consequently of holy writ Ibid.
p. 19.
.

Thus from the tenor of this article it appears, that the holy scripture in
general is accounted so obscure, even in things of the greatest importance,
that the common people must by no means be allowed to take their own sense of
it, but must have recourse to the interpretation of the church.

Art. XV. I do profess and believe that there are seven sacraments, truly and
properly so called, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, and necessary for the
salvation of mankind, though not all of them to every one, viz. baptism,
confirmation, eucharist, penance, extreme unction, orders, and matrimony; and
that they do confer grace; and that of these baptism, confirmation, and orders,
cannot be repeated without sacrilege. -- I also receive and admit the received
and approved rites of the catholic church, in her solemn administration of all
the aforesaid sacraments.

A sacrament is an institution of Christ, consisting in some outward sign or
ceremony, by which grace is given to the soul of the worthy receiver Profession
of Catholic Faith, p. 15, 16, and 17.
.

Baptism is a sacrament instituted by Christ, according to his commisson, and
from the belief and practice of the church of Christ in all ages, and of the
apostles themselves, who administered baptism in water See the Xth Article of
this Creed. Also, Profession of Cathoic Faith, p. 20.
.

Confirmation is a sacrament wherein by the invocaon of the Holy Ghost, and the
imposition of the bishops hands, with the unction of holy chrism, a person
receives the grace of the Holy Ghost, and a strength in order to the professing
of his faith Profession of Catholic Faith, p. 20.
.

In this sacrament the church of Rome use oil, olive, and balm; the oil to
signify the clearness of a good conscience, and the balm as the savor of a
good reputation; and use this form: "I sign thee with the sign of the cross,
and confirm thee with the chrism of salvation in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost". For which they quote tradition Bishop Burnet's
Exposition of the XXXIX Articles, p. 336.
.

Confirmation is that which makes us perfect Christians, and impresses an
indelible character after baptism, and imparts to us the spirit of fortitude,
whereby we are enabled to profess Christianity even at the hazard of our lives;
and is therefore deemed a sacrament by the church Calmet's Dict. Article of
Confirmation.
.

The sacrament of the Lord's supper, or the Eucharist. "Eucharist The word
Eucharist is not, as our author says, peculiar to the Roman catholic church,
but his explanation of it is, and the eu^ charist, as he interprets it, one of
the capital and gross errors of that church. There is more truth in the reason
alleged by him, for denominating the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by this
term eucharist. Strange! so absurd a doctrine as that of transubstantiation,
should be seriously asserted by men of understanding.
is a word, says Calmet, particularly set apart in the catholic church, to
signify that sacrament which really and in truth contains the body and blood of
our Savior Jesus Christ, under the appearance of bread and wine, consecrated
at the sacrifice of the mass. It is called eucharist, because Jesus Christ, in
the institution of this divine sacrament, gave thanks to God, broke the bread,
and blessed the cup; Eucharistia in Greek signifying thanksgivings, and answers
to the Hebrew Barach, to bless, or Hodah, to praise Article Eucharist.
.

Penance or infliction, the act of using or submitting to punishment, public or
private, as an expression of repentance for sin, is deemed one of the seven
sacraments: -- it includes confession of sins to the priest, which, if it be
accompanied with any degree of contrition, does, upon absolution received from
the priest, put them into a state of salvation, though they have lived the most
lewd and debauched lives Bishop 'Tillotson's Danger of Salvation in the Church
of Rome.
.

Q. When the question is asked in the Grounds, etc. What do you mean by the
sacrament of penance?

A. The answer is, Confession of sins with a sincere repentance, and the
priest's absolution Grounds of the Catholic Faith, p. 21.
.

The council of Trent not only ascribes to priests the character of presidents
and judges for remitting or reclaiming of sins, Session xiv. cap. v. and speaks
of the penitents in confession, as brought before a tribunal, that by the
penitence of the priest they might be delivered from their sins, cap. vi. but,
in the ninth canon of the same session, pronounces an anathema on any who deny
that the sacramental absolution of the priest is a judicial act.

The papists define penance to be, "A sacrament consisting in some outward sign
or ceremony, by which grace is given to the soul of the worthy receiver,
instituted by Christ when, breathing upon the disciples, he gave them the Holy
Ghost to remit and retain sins; that is, to reconcile the faithful fallen into
sin after baptism: it differs from baptism not only in matter and form, but
also, because the minister of baptism is not a judge in that ordinance; whereas
after baptism the sinner presents himself before the tribunal of the priest as
guilty, to be set at liberty by his sentence: -- it is, however, as necessary
as baptism: the form consists in the words, "I do absolve thee." Contrition,
confession, and satisfaction, are parts of penance, and the effect of it is
reconciliation with God. -- Contrition is grief of mind for sins committed with
purpose to sin no more, and was ever necessary at all times, but especially in
such as sin after baptism: it is a preparation to remission of sins: -- and by
penance the church has ever understood that Christ has instituted the entire
confession of sins, as necessary, by the law of God, to those who fall after
baptism: for, having instituted the priests his vicars for judges of all mortal
sins, it is certain, that they cannot exercise this judgment without knowledge
of the cause. -- But, when this is done, the priest, who has authority,
delegate or ordinary, over the penitent, remits his sins by a judicial act; and
the greater priests reserve to themselves the pardon of some faults more
grievous, as does the pope; and there is no doubt, but that every bishop may do
this in his diocese; and this reservation is of force before God. -- And in the
hour of death any priest may absolve any penitent from any sin. Satisfactions
imposed by the priests -- What these are, are too well known to need
description See Council of Trent, Session. xiv. and a Profession of Catholic
Faith, Printed in 1734. also Dr. Hunt on Penance and Pilgrimages, p. 21.
.

Extreme unction is a sacrament, and to be administered when persons are in
imminent danger, and last of all to be applied Trident. session. xiv. c. xiii.
.

Q. What do you mean by extreme unction?

A. You have the full description of it in James v. 14, 15. Is any sick among
you, let him call for the elders (the priests) of the church, and let them pray
over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of
faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have
committed sins, they shall be forgiven him Grounds of the Catholic Faith, p. 23.
.

Orders. If any one shall say, that orders or holy ordination is not truly and
properly a sacrament, instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, or that it is a
human contrivance invented by men, who were ignorant of ecclesiastical affairs,
or that it is only a particular rite of choosing ministers of the word of God,
and of sacraments, let him be anathema Dupin's Hist. of the Council of Trent,
Session xxiii. Canon iii.
; -- or that the Holy Ghost is not given by holy ordination, let him be
anathema Ibid. Canon iv.
.

Orders, says the author of the profession of the catholic faith, is a
sacrament instituted by Christ, by which bishops, priests, etc. are consecrated
to their respective functions, and receive grace to discharge them well.

Matrimony. If any man says that this is not truly and properly one of the
seven sacraments, instituted by Jesus Christ, but that it is an institution
only of the church, and does not confer grace, let him be anathema Session
xxiv. Canon i.
.

And if any man says, a churchman in holy orders may marry or contract
marriage, and that when it is contracted it is good and valid, notwithstanding
any ecclesiastical law to the contrary, or that any who have vowed continence
may contract marriage, let him be anathema Canon ix.
.

This was first instituted by God Almighty in Paradise between our first
parents, and this institution was confirmed by Christ in the new law, Matt.
xix. 4, 5, 6. where he concludes, What God has joined together let no man put
asunder Grounds of the Catholic Faith, p. 23.
.

Art. XVI. I embrace and receive every thing that has been defined and
declared by the holy council of Trent, concerning original sin and
justification * Pope Pius's Creed, Article XVI.
.

Good works do truly deserve eternal life, and whosoever holds the contrary is
accursed Trid. Session vi. c. xvi. Canon xxxii.
.

The council of Trent declares that all of the human kind have lost their
holiness and righteousness by the sin of Adam, session v. section 2. making an
exception for the Virgin Mary.

"That eternal life ought to be proposed to the children of God, both as a
grace mercifully promised, and as a reward faithfully bestowed on them for
their good works and merits Bossuet's Exposition of the Catholic Catechism.
."

"That the good works of a justified person are not so the gifts of God, that
they are not also the merits of the justified person; and that he being
justified by the good works performed by him through the grace of God and
merits of Jesus Christ, whose living member he is, does truly merit increase of
grace and eternal life Session vi. Canon xxxii.
. A learned prelate observes they speak so uncertainly of this matter, as
evidently shows, they either knew not themselves what they would establish, or
were unwilling others should know it Archbishop Wake.
."

Dr. Allix, one of their champions, tells us, "that Vega, who wrote his books
of justification during the time he was at the council, maintains that the
council by truly meriting did understand meriting de Condigno See the Index
Expurgatorius, published in 1384.
.

And Maldenate the Jesuit, also, asserts, that we do as truly and properly,
when we do well through God's grace, merit rewards, as we do deserve punishment
when we do ill * Clarkson's Morning Exercise, p. 407.
.

Cardinal Bellarmine expressly asserts, that our good works do merit, ex
Condigno, eternal life, and not only by reason of God's covenant, but also by
reason of the work itself Bellarmine de Just, lib. v. cap. xvii.
.

But Bossuet, on the doctrine of merit, observes, that the church professes her
hope of salvation to be founded in Christ alone. "We openly declare, says he,
that we cannot be acceptable to God but in and through Jesus Christ; nor do we
apprehend how any other sense can be imputed to our belief, of which our daily
petition to God for pardon, through his grace, in the name of Jesus Christ, may
serve as a proof Picart, vol. i. p. 260, where the quotations are larger.


Art. XVII. I do also profess, that in the mass there is offered unto God, a
true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead; and that,
in the most holy sacrament of the eucharist, there is truly, really, and
substantially, the body and blood, together with the soul and divinity of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and that there is a conversion made of the whole substance
of the bread into the body, and of the whole substance of the wine into the
blood; which conversion the whole Catholic church call Transubstantiation.

Thus Bellarmine asserts, "that the celebration of the passover was an express
figure of the eucharist; but the passover was a sacrifice; therefore the
eucharist must be so too. -- That if Christ be a priest for ever, the rite of
sacrificing must continue for ever. But there can be no sacrifice, if we
destroy that of the mass Bellarmine de Missa, l. i. c. 7.
.

Therefore N. C. says, that the whole substance of the bread and wine, after
consecration, is changed into the body and blood of Christ, without any
alteration in the accidents or outward forms. He adds, The words on which
transubstantiation is founded, are these, This is my body, which is given for
you, Luke xxii. 19. Now that these words are to be taken in a literal sense,
nothing can be more plain, both from Christ's promise of giving his body, and
from St. Paul's words, 1 Cor. x. 16. and 1 Cor. xi. 27.

This sacrifice was only ordained as a representation of that, which was once
accomplished on the cross, to perpetuate the memory of it for ever, and to
apply unto us the salutary virtue of it for the absolution of those sins, which
we daily commit Modest and True Account of the chief Points in Controversy, p.
108. See Chandler's Notes of the Church, p. 42.
.

If we ask the author of the Catholic Christian Instructed, How can the
accidents of bread and wine remain without the substance, or the whole body and
blood of Christ, be contained in so small a space as that of the host, nay even
in the smallest sensible particle of it? or the body of Christ be both in
heaven, and at the same time in so many places upon earth? He will say, By the
almighty power of God, which is incomprehensible as himself; the immense depth
of which cannot be fathomed by the short line and plummet of human reason
Andrews on Transubstantiation, p. 85. who cites Cath. Christian.
.

The catholic christian urges, in support of this doctrine, that our church
catechism, in answer to the question, What is the inward part or thing
signified? says, The body and blood of Christ, which is verily and indeed taken
and received by the faithful in the Lord's supper Preface to the Catholic
Christian.
.

And the council of Trent, effectually to extirpate all heresies and heretics
out of the church relating to this point, declares Sess. 22, Can. 1.
, that, if any one says, that a true and proper sacrifice is not offered up to
God at the mass, or that to be offered is any thing else than Jesus Christ
given to be eaten, let him be anathema.

Canon III. If any one says, that the sacrifice of the mass is only a sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving, or a bare memorial of the sacrifice, which was
completed upon the cross, and that it is not propitiatory nor prositable to any
but him that receives it, and that it ought not to be offered for the living
and for the dead, for their sins, their punishments, their satisfactions, and
their other necessities, let him be anathema.

Canon IX. If any one says, that the usage of the church of Rome, to pronounce
part of the canon, and the words of consecration, with a low voice, ought to be
condemned; or that the mass ought only to be celebrated in the vulgar tongue;
and that water ought not to be mixed with the wine, which is to be offered in
the cup; because it is against the institution of Jesus Christ, let him be
anathema.

These definitions of faith were followed with a decree to enforce them Dupin's
E^^les. Hist. of the Sixteenth Century, b. iv. chapter xviii.
.

When it is asked in the catechism, What is the catholic doctrine as to the
mass? It is answered, The consecration and oblation of the body and blood of
Christ, under the sacramental veils or appearances of bread and wine, wherein
is offered a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the
dead Grounds of the Catholic Doctrine, p. 31.
.

The church of Rome declare, that, upon the priest's pronouncing these words,
Hoc est corpus meum, the bread and wine in the eucharist are transubstantiated
into the natural body and blood of Christ, the species or accidents only of the
bread and wine remaining, and have made it an article to be believed under an
anathema Council Trident, Ses. 13 de Real. Pros.
.

Cornelius a Lapide tells us, it was the opinion of some of their grave
divines, that this change is made after so powerful and effectual a manner,
that, if Christ had not been incarnated before, the force of this charm would
have incarnated him, and clothed him with human nature.

That in the sacrifice of the mass, Christ is offered as often as that is
celebrated; and that, though therein he be unbloodily offered, yet it is a true
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins both of the living and dead, and denounces
the person accursed that denies any part of this Council Trident. Ses. 22, cap.
1.
.

Solitary masses, wherein the priest communicates alone, are approved and
commended, and whosoever says they are unlawful, and ought to be abrogated, is
accursed Ibid. can. viii. See Discourses of Transubstantiation, 1685; and
another of the Real Presence, printed at oxford, 1687.
.

Art. XVIII. And I believe, that under one kind only, whole and entire, Christ
is taken and received.

Bread and wine, after consecration, are turned into the substance of Christ's
body and blood, without changeing the species. -- And the people are forbidden
to receive the sacrament in both kinds Conc. Trident. Sess. 13.
.

The council of Constance decreed, that Christ did institute this sacrament in
both kinds, and that the faithful in the primitive church did receive in both
kinds: yet, that the practice of receiving in one kind was highly reasonable,
they appointed the continuance of consecration in both kinds, and of giving to
the laity only in one kind, since Christ was entire, and truly under one kind
Conc. Constance, Sess. 13, held A. D. 1414.
. And they assigned these further reasons, lest the blood of Christ should be
spilt -- lest the wine kept for the sick should fret -- lest wine may not
always be had -- or lest some may not be able to bear the smell or taste.

One would think, says a judicious author, that the church of Rome withheld
the cup from the people, merely to show their authority and power Rev. Mr.
Burroughs's View of Popery, p. 77.
, in dispenseing with, or rather in opposing directly, the laws of her
professed Lord and Master. Let their own words testify for them Conc. Constant.
apud M. l'Abbe, tom. xii. p. 100.
: "In the name of the holy and undivided Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Amen. This present sacred, general council -- declares, decrees, and
determines, that although Christ instituted and administered to his disciples
this venerable sacrament after supper, under both kinds of bread and wine, yet
this, notwithstanding the laudable authority of sacred canons, and the approved
custom of the church, has maintained, and does maintain, that such a sacrament
as this ought not to be made after supper, nor to be received by the faithful
otherwise than fasting, excepting in case of infirmity, or other necessity
granted or admitted by law, or by the church: and since, for avoiding some
dangers and scandals, the custom has been rationally introduced, that though this
sacrament was in the primitive church received by the faithful under both
kinds, and afterward by the makers of it under both kinds, and by the laity
only under the species of bread -- such a custom as this ought to be accounted
a law, which must not be rejected, or at pleasure changed, without the
authority of the church. They who assert the contrary are to be driven away as
heretics, and severely punished by the diocesans of the places, or their
officials, or by the inquisitors of heretical pravity."

The council of Florence has the following paragraph, in relation both to this
and the eucharist: "The priest, speaking in the name of Christ, makes this
sacrament; for, by virtue of the very words themselves, the bread is changed
into the body of Christ, and the substance of the wine into his blood: yet so
that whole Christ is contained under the species of bread, and whole under the
species of wine; also in every part of the consecrated host and consecrated
wine; when a separation is made, there is whole Christ L'Abbe Council. tom.
xiii. p. 537.
.

Art. XIX. I do firmly believe, that there is a purgatory, and that the souls
kept prisoners there do receive help by the suffrage of the faithful Pope
Pius's Creed, art. xx.
. -- That the souls of the patriarchs and holy men, who departed this life
before the crucifixion of Christ, were kept as in prison, in an apartment of
hell, without pain. -- That Christ did really go into local hell, and delivered
the captive souls out of this confinement Bellarmine de Christo, lib. iv. cap.
11, 12.
. -- The fathers assert, that our Savior descended into hell, went thither
specially, and delivered the souls of the fathers out of that mansion Rhem.
Annot. on Luke xvi. s. 7.
.

"Bellarmine says there is a purgatory after this life, where the souls of
those that are not purged, nor have satisfied for their sins here, are to be
purged, and give satisfaction, unless their time be shortened by the prayers,
alms, and masses of the living Trident. sess. xxv.
."

The council of Trent say, that souls who die in a state of grace, but are not
sufficiently purged from their sins, go first into purgatory, a place of
torment, bordering near upon hell, from which their deliverance may be
expedited by the suffrages, that is, prayers, alms, and masses, said and done
by the faithful Bellarmine de Purgat. lib. ii. c. vi.
.

That souls are to continue in purgatory till they have made full satisfaction
for their sins, and are thoroughly purged from them; and that whoever says that
there is no debt of temporal punishment to be paid, either in this world or in
purgatory, before they can be received into heaven, is accursed Council.
Trident, sess. vi. can. xxx.
.

In fine, the catholic church being instructed by the Holy Ghost, having always
taught, pursuant to the holy scriptures and the ancient tradition of the
fathers, that there is a purgatory, and that the souls there detained are
comforted by the suffrages of the faithful, especially by the acceptable
sacrifice of the altar. The holy council commands bishops to take particular
care that the faith and belief of the faithful, concerning purgatory,
conformable to the holy doctrine handed down to us by holy fathers and holy
councils, be believed and every where so taught and preached The decree of the
council at the opening the 25th sess. See ^arl's Sermon, Salters Hall.
.

And if any shall say,

Art. XX. I do believe that the saints reigning together with Christ are to be
worshipped and prayed unto, and that they do offer prayers unto God for us, and
that their relics are to be had in veneration Pope Pius's Creed, article XX.
.

(I do not, I would not, charge the papists with believing angels or saints to
be their redeemers, nor do I imagine that they pray to them as such.)

But every catholic is taught that angels are to be worshipped and invoked,
because they are always in the presence of God, and most willingly take upon
themselves the defense of our safety, which is committed to them Catechism ad
Paroch. sect. xix.
. They are taught that in honoring saints who sleep in the Lord, in invoking
them, in reverencing their sacred relics and ashes, the glory of God is so far
from being lessened that it is greatly increased Sect. xx.
; that they are to be worshipped and invoked, because they constantly pray to
God for the salvation of men Sect. xxiv.
.

In the church of Rome they pray to saints and angels as their intercessors
Trident. session xxv. Catechism. Romans par. iv. c. ix.
.

The church of Rome says, that angels and saints are to be worshipped and
prayed unto, though with an inferior kind of worship than is paid to God
Catechism Romans par. iii. c. ii. p. 89.
.

That it is good and profitable to pray to saints and angels Council of
Trident. session xxv. de Invocat.
.

The church of Rome requires that due worship and veneration be given to them,
such as kissing, uncovering the head, and falling down before them, and
denounces a curse against those who think otherwise Ibid. and Catechism Romans
par. iii. c. ii. p. 24.
.

In answer to this question * Grounds of the Catholic Doctrine, p. 37, 38.
, What is the catholic doctrine touching the veneration and invocation of
saints?

The answer is, We are taught, 1st, That there is an honor and veneration due
to the angels and saints; 2d, That they offer prayers to God for us; 3d, That
it is good and profitable to invoke them, that is, to have recourse to their
intercession and prayers; 4th, That their relics are to be had in veneration.

When the reason of it is asked, the answer is, Because the church, in all
ages, has paid this honor and veneration to the saints, by erecting churches
and keeping holidays in their memory: a practice which the English protestants
have also retained.

The church, says Bossuet, in his Exposition on the Creed, in telling of us,
that it is beneficial to pray to the saints, teaches us to pray to them in that
spirit of charity, and according to that order of brotherly love, which
inclines us to request the assistance of our brethren living upon earth; and
the catechism of the council of Trent teaches us to beg of them to be our
advocates, only using this phrase, Pray for us. And in vindication of this
their sentiment and practice they allege, that the church of England still
retains this collect upon the day of St. Michael and All Angels: "O!
everlasting God, who have ordained and constituted the service of angels in a
wonderful order, mercifully grant, that as thy holy angels always do thee
service in heaven, so by thy appointment they may succor and defend us on
earth Plain and Rational Account of the Catholic Faith, p. 48.
."

Art. XXI. I do firmly believe that the images of Christ, of the blessed
Virgin, the mother of God, and of other saints, ought to be had and retained,
and that due honor and veneration ought to be paid unto them Pope Pius's
Creed, art. xxi.
.

The minister shall teach the people, that images of saints are to be placed in
churches, that they may be likewise worshipped Cat. ad Paroch. part iii. sect.
4.
. If any doubt arises about the meaning of the word Worship, when applied to
images, he, the minister, shall teach them, that images were made to instruct
them in the history of both Testaments, and to refresh their memories; for
being excited by the remembrance of divine things, they excite more strongly to
worship God himself Ibid.
.

It must be owned, that the papists contend, that images are not to be
worshipped as God; and that you are not to imagine there is divinity in them.
The honor, or worship, they say, is to be referred to the prototype; and with
respect to the virgin Mary, they are not charged with worshipping her, or
putting their trust in her, as much as in God, but, strictly speaking, with
paying her divine worship. The breviaries are full of examples of such honors
paid to her. In the little office of the blessed Mary, she is desired to loose
the bonds of the guilty -- drive away evils from us -- demand all good things
for us -- make us chaste -- protect us from the enemy -- receive us at the hour
of death. She is set forth in the express language of their liturgies, missals,
and breviaries at Rome, as the mother of mercy, hope of the world, and the only
trust of sinners; and the saints addressed under the title of intercessors,
protectors, and dispensers of grace.

Bishop Stillingfleet says, the council of Nice defined true and real worship
to be given to images, i. e. that images were not only to be signs and helps to
memory, to call to mind, and represent to us, the object of worship, but that
the acts of worship were to be paid to the images themselves. The former use of
images does suppose them to be only of the nature of books, which represent
things to our minds, without any act of adoration performed to that, which is
only an instrument of intellection, although the thing represented to the mind
be a proper object of adoration Bishop Stillingfleet's Discourse of Idolatry,
p. 575.
. But those who go no farther stand condemned and anathematized by the second
council of Nice. For images are not only to be placed in temples, but also to
be worshipped as if the persons represented thereby were present Trident. Sess.
xxv. Catech. Romans Par. iv. c. vi. p. 4.
.

All the devotion paid to their saints extends no farther than to desire their
prayers, and that the pictures and images of them, which we see in their
churches, are no more than mere memorials, designed to express the esteem which
they retain for the persons so represented, or as helps to raise their
affections to heavenly things, and that every child amongst them knows this to
be true See Mr. Hugh's Sermon. Salters Hall, on the Veneration of Saints and
Images.
.

Art. XXII. I do affirm, that the power of indulgences was left by Christ in
the church, and that the use of them is very beneficial to Christian people
Pope Pius's Creed, art. xxii.
.

The council of Trent proposes nothing more relative to indulgences, according
to Mons. Bossuet; but that the church had the power of granting them from Jesus
Christ, and that the practice of them is wholesome; which custom, that council
adds, ought still to be preserved, though with moderation, lest ecclesiastical
discipline should be weakened by too great a toleration.

By indulgences granted by the popes and prelates of the church, persons are
discharged from temporal punishment here and in purgatory Trident Sess. xxv.
Bull, p. ii. 4.
.

The dispensing power of indulgences extends not only to the worst crimes, but
the priests have power according as they please to grant indulgence for any
time, and to give absolution according to their own pleasure. Thus in an
indulgence granted by Clement VI. in the year 1351, to the king and queen of
France, and their successors, which we shall produce in the pope's own words,
transcribed from D'Achery's Spicilegium; the English translation of which is as
follows See Burroughs's View of Pope Pius's Creed, p. 157.
.

"CLEMENT, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to our most dear children in
Christ, John and Joan, the illustrious king and queen of France, greeting, and
apostolical benediction: Your design we readily agree to, those especially by
which ye may obtain from a propitious God, as ye piously request, peace and
health of soul: hence it is, that we, inclining to your supplications, do, by
apostolical authority, by the tenor of these presents, for ever, indulge to
you, and your successors, who for the time being shall be kings and queens of
France, and to every of you, and them, that such confessor, religious or
secular, as any of you or them shall think fit to choose, may commute for you
and them, such vows as perhaps you may have made already, or which by you and
your successors may be hereafter made, (the ultramarine vow, and that of the
blessed apostles, Peter and Paul, and that of chastity and continency, only
excepted), and also such oaths by you taken, or by you and them hereafter to be
taken, as you and they cannot commodiously keep, into other works of piety,
according as he shall see expedient, for the health of your and their souls,
and agreeable to God. Be it therefore utterly unlawful for any man whatever, to
infringe this our grant, or by a rash adventure, to proceed in opposition to
it; but if any shall presume to attempt this, let him know, that he shall incur
the indignation of Almighty God, and of his blessed apostles, Peter and Paul.

"Given at Avignon, the 19th of April, in our ninth year." Art. XXIII. I do
acknowledge the holy catholic and apostolic Roman church to be the mother and
mistress of all churches; and I do promise and swear true obedience to the
bishop of Rome, the successor of St. Peter, the prince of the apostles, and
vicar of Jesus Christ Pope Pius's Creed, Art. XXIII.
.

Q. Proposed The Grounds of the Catholic Faith, p. 51, 52. Compare this with
the history of the church in the 17th century.
. What is the catholic doctrine as to the pope's supremacy.

A. I. That St. Peter was head of the church under Christ.

II. That the pope, or bishop of Rome, is at present head of the church, and
Christ's vicar upon earth.

Q. How do you prove these propositions?

A. By the unanimous consent of the fathers, and the tradition of the church,
the bishops of Rome are the successors of St. Peter, who translated his chair
from Antioch to Rome, and died bishop of Rome. Hence the sea of Rome, in all
ages, is called the sea of Peter, the chair of Peter, and absolutely the sea
apostolic; and in that quality has, from the beginning, exercised jurisdiction
over all other churches, as appears from the best records of ancient church
history.

Q. Why do you call the Romish church the mother and mistress of all churches?

A. Because her bishop is St. Peter's successor, and Christ's vicar upon earth,
and consequently the father and pastor of all the faithful; and therefore this
church, as being St. Peter's see, is the mother and mistress of all churches.

Under this explanation we find the belief of it declared to be necessary to
salvation. So says the conclusion of this creed, confirmed by pope Pius V. And
to the same purpose, Boniface VIII. in his canon law, asserts and decrees;
"Moreover we declare, and say, and define, and pronounce to every human
creature, that it is altogether necessary to salvation, to be subject to the
Roman pontiff Lib. i. tit. 8. cap. i.
."

Though it is not immediately under my notice to examine the real merit of
transubstantiation, I shall conclude this article with the mention of one
argument, urged by the catholic Christians for it, which, if it has any force,
must be allowed indeed to be conclusive. "That the unerring authority of the
church has declared it to be true, and enjoined the belief of it, (and after
such a decision) that it is the part of an infidel, rather than a Christian, to
ask, how can this be Se^ Catholic Christian, p. 32, 47, 52, 57.
?" This implicit faith to the authority of the church, our author declares to
be the indispensible duty of every Christian.

Art. XXIV. I do undoubtedly receive and profess all others things that have
been delivered, defined, by the sacred canons and ecumenical councils, and
especially by the holy synod of Trent, and all other things contrary hereunto;
and all heresies condemned, rejected, and anathematized, by the church, I do
likewise condemn, reject, and anathematize.

This bull (as they call it) bears date on the ides of November 1564, and
concludes in the usual manner, with threats of the indignation of God, and of
his blessed apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, against all that infringe or
oppose it.

And every reader, I suppose, discerns, that this is not merely a confession of
faith, but likewise a solemn oath; and so the title of it bears, A bull
concerning the form of an oath of profession of faith; which faith all
ecclesiastical persons, whether secular or regular, as they distinguish them,
and all military orders, are obliged to take -- As follows: "This true catholic
faith, without which no one can be saved, which at this present time I do, of
my own accord, profess, and sincerely hold, I, the same N. N. do promise and
vow, and swear, God assisting me, most constantly to retain and confess, entire
and unviolated, to the last breath of my life, and so far as in me lies. I will
likewise take care, that it shall be held, taught, and preached by my subjects,
or those the care of whom belongs to me, in the discharge of my office." -- And
it is as easy to observe, that this is perfectly new, both as an oath and as a
profession of faith, never was there any such creed imposed before, or so much
as framed, much less tied upon men by an oath. For when these fathers met at
Trent, and were to make a profession of faith by rehearsing the creed, which
the Roman church uses, so the words are Sess. 3.
, they could find none to profess, but the Nicene creed: no larger creed was in
use, no, not even in the Roman church; but these very men, who afterward
turned new creed-makers, were forced to be content with that.

Though this creed is asserted to be the true catholic faith, it is in no sense
catholic, as to place, nor time; for it was no where used till they made it, no
not there, nor is now every where believed, and was not, in the additional
articles to the Nicene creed, believed in any church for above 1500 years; nor
now used in that church itself, when they admit members into the catholic
church by baptism; but they are said to be put into a state of salvation, by
their professing to believe the Nicene creed alone: which is a direct
contradiction to the terms of this creed, wherein are included the doctrines of
transubstantiation, worshipping images, the seven sacraments, traditions, and
other constitutions of the Romish church, there declared to be necessary to
salvation Dr. Patrick's (since bishop of Ely) Pillar and Ground of Faith.
.

The council of Constance declares, that they being a general council, lawfully
congregated in the Holy Ghost, and representing the catholic church, it has
power immediately from Christ, which every one, of whatsoever state, or
dignity, even the papal, is obliged to obey in things appertaining to faith,
etc. or suffer condign punishment Sess. v.
.

This creed is peculiarly adapted to the genius and spirit of popery, and to
the particular views of this council, requiring, That all things which have
been delivered, defined, and declared, by the sacred canons of this synod he
received and believed without doubting; an assent so full and implicit can
scarce be complied with by any reasonable agent. But even this believing is not
enough; if you do not condemn and anathematize all, that under the character of
unbelievers are condemned, and anathematized by the church. And what is the
consequence of that? Why, if he is a heretic, and condemned by the church, he
must be treated as an heretic, and subjected to all the punishments which the
church decrees should be inflicted on them See Burroughs's View of Pope Pius's
Creed, p. 135.
. From these doctrines, taught and inculcated by the church of Rome, have
streamed forth the impious doctrine of subjects renouncing allegiance to such
princes as would not obey the pope, and even of murdering them and all their
adherents.

Out of the numerous particulars, which the Romanists profess without doubting
to receive, I shall make only one quotation from the great Lateran, holden by
pope Innocent III. in the year 1215. It is made a part of the canon law Decret.
Gregor. lib. v. tit. vii. cap. xiii. See Burroughs's View of Pope Pius's Creed,
p. 136, 137, 138. See the Article Persecution.
, and according to the literal translation of it into English is as follows:

"We excommunicate, anathematize, all heresy, which lifts up itself against
this holy, orthodox, and catholic faith, which we have set forth, condemning
all heretics, by what names soever they be reckoned. Let those who are
condemnedbe left to the secular powers in being, or their bailiffs, to be by
them punished with due animadversion; they of the clergy being first degraded
from their orders; so that the goods of those condemned, if they be of the
laity, be confiscated; if of the clergy, applied to those churches from which
they received stipends: as for those who shall be found only marked with the
suspicion of heresy, if they do not, according to the consideration of the
suspicion, and the quality of the person, prove their own innocence by a
suitable purgation, let them be smitten with the sword of anathema, and, till
they give a fitting satisfaction, be avoided by all, so that, if they remain a
whole year under excommunication, they be from that time condemned as heretics:
but let all secular powers, whatever offices they exercise, be admonished and
induced, and if need be, le^ them by the censures of the church be compelled,
as ever they wish to be accounted faithful, for the defense of the faith,
publicly to take an oath, that they will, bona fide, according to their power,
endeavor to exterminate heretics, marked out by the church, from all the lands
subject to their jurisdiction, so that from the time when any one shall be
advanced into power, whether perpetual or temporal, he shall be obliged to
confirm this matter with an oath: but if the temporal lord, being thereunto by
the church required and admonished, shall neglect to purge his territory from
this heretical defilement, let him, by the metropolitan and the rest of the
bishops of the province, be tied up in the bond of excommunication; and if he
disdain to make satisfaction, let this within the year be signified to the
pope, that from that time he may denounce his vassals to be absolved from
fidelity to him, and expose his country to be occupied by catholics, that they,
having exterminated the heretics, may without any contradiction profess it and
keep it in the purity of the faith, with a salvo to the right of the principal
possessor, provided that he yield no obstacle in this affair, nor set up any
impediment: the same law, however, to be observed with regard to such as have
principal lords; and as for those catholics, who, taking the badge of the
cross, shall set themselves to the rooting out of heretics, they shall be
favored with the same indulgence, and fortified with the same holy privileges,
which are granted to those who go to the aid of the Holy Land Rev. Mr.
Burroughs's View of Popery, p. 136. who quotes Decret. Gregor. lib. v. tit.
vii. cap. xiii.
."

There is a variety of things in this decree which deserve our notice. First,
that all those in general are condemned as heretics, who venture to oppose what
the pope and his council pronounce to be the holy, orthodox, and catholic
faith; then that the poor condemned heretics are delivered over to the secular
powers to be by them punished with due animadversion; the first act of which is
ordered to be a deprivation of all worldly substance. All princes are obliged
to take a solemn oath that they will exterminate heretics out of their
dominions. -- The people are likewise by this decree exposed to intolerable
slavery before they are delivered over to destruction, by being made subject to
anathema when only marked with a suspicion of heresy, and if they do not prove
their innocence by what the priest shall account a sufficient purgation, they
are to be avoided by all. Thus left at the mercy of the priest, who for want of
receiving such satisfaction as he shall judge proper, can direct and oblige the
magistrate to deprive them of substance and liberty, and even life itself.

The following judicious reflections on pope Pius's creed, by the Rev. Mr.
Buroughs, may not be unacceptable to our readers. "Let any man, who has ever
read the New Testament, judge what likeness there is, between the doctrine of
pope Pius's creed, and that which was taught by our blessed Lord and his
apostles, Nay, let any man of sober thought, whether he has read the scriptures
or not, judge whether it is possible, that such a religion should ever come
from God, as that which the church of Rome tells you is necessary to salvation.

The doctrine of Christ and his apostles teaches us the highest veneration of
the one living and true God, the wise and righteous and gracious governor of
the world, and the most ardent affection to him as our best friend and
benefactor: and directs and encourages us to seek of him, with a full assurance
of faith, every needful blessing, in the name of Jesus Christ, the only
mediator between God and men. It requires of us righteousness and equity in our
whole conduct toward those with whom we have to do; and very particularly
recommends a mutual forbearance and affectionate tenderness among Christian
brethren, with regard to the misapprehensions and mistakes into which they may
fall. And, as any religion must do which comes from God, it lays a very great
stress upon a sober, temperate course of life; excluding from the kingdom of
heaven those who allow themselves in the contrary course.

But in the preceding papers we have seen, that the religion of the church of
Rome opposes that of our Lord Jesus Christ in all these respects, though it
pretends in every one of them to adhere to it. The papists profess indeed to
acknowledge one only living and true God: yet at the same time it is notorious,
that they pay more real worship and adoration to angels and saints, and even to
images, than to him. And to keep up this practice, such thoughts are suggested
to the people's minds concerning the divine being, as are altogether unworthy
of him, and inconsistent with the honor of the one and only mediator, in whose
name we are directed to address him. Nay, the multiplicity of the prayers
themselves, which are addressed to saints and angels, begging for their
intercession, tends to make the people think concerning the kindest and most
benevolent being in the world, that he is almost inexorable, and that nothing
but continual importunity will prevail with him for any favor: whereas the
mediation of Christ, as stated in the New Testament, teaches no such thing; but
encourages us, sinners as we are, to go directly to God in his name, in whom he
has declared himself to be well pleased. But this one mediator is by the church
of Rome overlooked, in a crowd of others of her own making.

Then, instead of a strict regard to righteousness, and sobriety, the doctrines
of indulgences and purgatory, and so likewise that of absolution, upon
confession and satisfaction at the will and pleasure of the priest, encourage
all manner of vice and wickedness: since, according to these doctrines, a man
may buy off any punishment, if he survives the wicked actions he resolves upon;
or, at the worst, can have them bought off when he is dead, if he has but money
enough to leave behind him.

As to forbearance and brotherly kindness; the church of Rome is a sworn enemy
to these Christian virtues. She will not bear the least deviation from her own
traditions, decrees, and canons. She makes them all necessary to salvation,
both in this life, and that which is to come; presumptuously denouncing eternal
damnation to those who do not punctually observe and obey them; and cruelly
destroying such of them as she can get into her own power.

What good pretensions the church of Rome has to be the church of Christ, she
shows by setting up another head over the church besides Christ, inconsistently
with his legislative authority, and contrary to his own express direction.

How little value she has for the scripture, she shows by setting up her own
traditions upon an equal footing with it. And by the same means, and by
claiming the sole authority of interpreting scripture, she prevents, as much as
in her lies, its being of any use to the people, even when they can get a sight
of their Bibles, which for the most part is forbidden. She will not suffer them
to exercise their reason in judging of that revelation, which she tells them
God has given for their direction. No: if you will be a true member of this
church, you must give up your reason, and even the testimony of your senses
too; as appears notoriously in the affair of transubstantiation. And yet it is
evident, that our blessed Lord himself frequently appealed to the judgment and
conscience of his hearers, concerning the goodness and divine original of his
doctrine; and always to their senses, as often as he wrought any miracles.

How destructive to all the views of true religion is the stress which popery
lays upon external services, to the neglect of what is inward and pertaining to
the conscience; and how fatally this tends to harden men in their sins, and to
make them resolve against the irksome work of subduing ill habits, and
laboring after those which are truly good; is too visible to need a
demonstration.

How absolutely this corrupt church is resolved upon maintaining a dominion
over men's consciences, and what cruel measures she takes for that purpose, has
been sufficiently shown. How contrary this domineering and cruel spirit is to
the humble and peaceful spirit of Christianity, needs no proof, to those who
have any acquaintance with the books of the New Testament. And how inconsistent
it is with the peace of civil government, and even with the safety of those,
whether governors or people, who refuse to put themselves entirely into the
priests power; is not only evident in the nature of the thing, but notorious
from history, in all those cases where the priests have thought it worth their
while to try their strength Rev. Mr. Burrough's View of Popery, p. 143, 144,
145, 146.
."

It is farther necessary to observe, that as the Roman catholics are sensible
how justly these articles in their plain and obvious sense are objected to, and
censured by protestants, with the expositions and confirmations of ^^em by
councils, etc. They have endeavored to evade their literal sense, and to give
a more plausible and ambiguous form of expression in their room. The most
remarkable piece of this kind is entitled, "A Vindication of the Roman
Catholics," being a most solemn declaration of their utter abhorrence of the
following tenets, vulgarly laid at their door, printed at London at the
beginning of king James's reign, and reprinted in 1743, when an invasion was
designed against England by the pretender. It was calculated to introduce
popery, by making it appear, that popery was not that horrid antichristian
thing, but in its own nature mild and gentle, and as fair as truth itself. The
author, and the present editor, say, that if the ensuing curses be added to
those appointed to be read on the first day of Lent, "they will seriously and
heartily answer Amen to them all."

I. Cursed is he that commits idolatry, that prays to images or relics, or
worships them for gods.

Resp. Amen.

Notwithstanding the readiness of the Roman catholics to oblige themselves to
answer Amen to this curse, yet it may be worth enquiring how far they are
guilty of this crime. Idolatry consists in the acknowledgement of authority and
dominion in some invisible being or beings over us, which they have not. If
this be attributed to saints and angels, it is idolatry.

II. Cursed is every goddess worshipper, that believes the Virgin Mary to be
any more than a creature; that honors her, worships her, or puts his trust in
her as much as in God; that believes her above her Son, or that she can in any
thing command him.

Resp. Amen.

You are not charged with believing the Virgin Mary to be more than a creature,
nor with worshipping her, or putting trust in her, as much as in God, but with
worshipping her. Whether it be more or less, or as much as God, is not the
point; but whether she ought at all to be worshipped. The papists are charged
with giving undue honor and worship to, and trust in her; an honor which has
not the countenance of one single passage in scripture, much less command to do
it.

III. Cursed is he that believes the angels or saints in heaven to be his
redeemers, that prays to them as such, or that gives God's honor to them, or
to any creature whatever.

Resp. Amen.

I do not, I would not, charge the papists with believing angels or saints to
be their redeemers, nor do I imagine that they pray to them as such; what they
are to be charged with is, praying to saints, praying to beings who are
supposed ready and able to help them, without any grounds from revelation,
without knowing that they have authority over us, without knowing that they can
hear us, without knowing that they are permitted to help us, or intercede for
us.

IV. Cursed is he that worships any breaden god, or makes gods of the empty
elements of bread and wine.

Resp. Amen.

In this, as in all the other preceding points, there is an equivocation. May
we not word the curse thus -- Cursed is he that worships that which before it
was consecrated was bread and wine, and after consecration seems to all our
senses to retain the substance of bread and wine? If this were the case, it
would be worshipping a breaden god. What then is the difference between the
consecrated bread, and the same bread unconsecrated? You tell us of a change
made in the elements by consecration, and that what before was bread is now
Christ himself.

V. Cursed is he that believes that priests can forgive sins, whether the
sinner repents or no; or that there is any power in earth or heaven that can
forgive sins, without a hearty repentance and serious purpose of amendment.

Resp. Amen.

In answer to this I observe, that our author supposes that priests can forgive
sins, if the sinner does repent; he supposes likewise, that the sinner is a
believer in Christ, and that the priest can forgive such a sinner if he
repents: now a priest that pretends to forgive the sins of a repenting
Christian, assumes to himself a power or privilege which can never be proved to
be given to him. Who can forgive sins but God alone, against whom they are
committed? If therefore any priests assume to themselves a power over
Christians to forgive them their sins, they transgress the law of Christ under
the cover of his words, which they pervert to uses of their own.

VI. Cursed is he that believes that priests can give present absolution to any
persons for sins they may commit in time to come.

Resp. Amen.

"This curse, I suppose, is added by the editor, that it is an article of the
catholic faith, to believe that no power on earth can license men to lie,
forswear, and perjure themselves, to massacre their neighbors, or destroy
their native country, on pretense of promoting the catholic cause or religion."
But this is far from being clear. Suppose your neighbor, or those of your
native country, to be heretics, what is the catholic faith, or catholic
practice, in this case? Is it not expressly declared Council Constan. sess. xix.
, that no prejudice or impediment can or ought to arise to the catholic faith,
or ecclesiastical jurisdiction, by any acts of kings, that may hinder the
ecclesiastical judge to proceed and punish the heretic, if he refuses to
retract? and is it not the catholic faith and practice to order Ibid. p. 56.
all princes and states, etc. not to permit known heretics to preach within
their districts, to have any lodging or house, to engage in contracts, to use
any trade, or to have the comforts of humanity with the faithful in Christ? and
if they die, are they not denied Christian burial? Ibid. sess. xx. xxxv.


VII. Cursed is he that believes there is authority in the pope, or any other
that can give leave to commit sins, or that can forgive him his sins for a sum
of money.

Resp. Amen.

That the pope pretends to forgive something for a sum of money. is not, I
think, disowned; that he intends to give leave to commit sins, or that he
forgives sins for a sum of money, is here denied. But it will be asked, What is
the intent and design of indulgences, plenary indulgences, indulgences for 1000
or 10,000 years? What, are those instruments of indulgence not only to a man's
self, but to all his family and relations for three generations inclusive See
p. 161.
.

VIII. Cursed is he that believes, that, independent of the merits and passion
of Christ, he can merit salvation by his own good works, or make condign
satisfaction for the guilt of his sins, or the pains eternal due to them.

Resp. Amen.

If this be so, then there is no surplus of good works in any of the saints; in
consequence, no spiritual treasure of the church, no works of supererogation;
for, if there were, a man might merit salvation by his own good works, and make
condign satisfaction for the guilt of his sins; and then the question is, How
far a man may merit salvation?

IX. Cursed is he that contemns the word of God, or hides it from the people,
on design to keep them from the knowledge of their duty, and to preserve them
in ignorance and error.

Resp. Amen.

This is an evasive account of the papists hiding the scriptures from the
people. The question is, Why are the scriptures kept at all from the people?
And the answer is, That they do not keep them for this or that particular
purpose. It may be so; but you may have other purposes, other ends, other
designs, all bad in themselves, at the same time that you profess to hide the
scriptures from the people, not on design to keep them in ignorance.

X. Cursed is he that undervalues the word of God, or that, forsaking
scripture, chooses rather to follow human tradition than it.

Resp. Amen.

Admit that the papists do not design to "undervalue the word of God, admit
that they do not forsake the scripture, admit too that they do not choose to
follow human traditions rather than it:" yet they may put human traditions upon
an equal footing with the scriptures: they may join traditions to scripture,
and make both to be equally observed. The council of Trent did this, when it
professed to "receive and reverence all the books of both the Old and New
Testament, since God is the one author of both, and also traditions, which
relate to either faith or manners, as if they were dictated either by word of
mouth, by Christ, or by the Holy Spirit, and preserved in a constant succession
in the catholic church." It received them, I say, with equal affection of piety
and reverence: nay, it pronounced an anathema to all who willingly and
wittingly contemned traditions." Now, if the scripture alone, and by itself,
contains the rule of faith, they who join tradition to it to form the rule of
faith, undervalues the word of God as not sufficient of itself to give us the
rule of faith; and that equal tradition to the scriptures undervalue the
scriptures, because they treat human traditions just with the same regard as
they do the word of God.

XI. Cursed is he that leaves the commandments of God to observe the
constitutions of men.

Resp. Amen.

Supposing one were to charge the papists, not with absolute leaving the
commandments of God to observe the constitutions of men, but with obliging men
to observe the constitutions of men equally with the commandments of God; this
would be what they could not discharge themselves from. What are their
auricular confession, absolution, penances, but human constitutions, not in the
word of God? What is made heresy by their church, and treated with anathemas,
excommunications, burnings, tortures, and all the severest penalties that
inhuman cruelty could invent, but something not contained in the word of God,
something that is a mere invention of men? But the fact is, that in many
instances they have left the commandments of God, to observe the constitutions
of men.

XII. Cursed is he that omits any of the Ten Commandments, or keeps the people
from the knowledge of any one of them, to the end they may not have occasion of
discovering the truth.

Resp. Amen.

It is not of any great consequence, I apprehend, how the Ten Commandments are
divided, provided that every one of them be inculcated, and the people are
taught their full meaning; but yet the usual distinction is on many accounts
preferable, as the reason of the prohibition of images is distinct from the
having other gods, and the coveting of our neighbor's house, and coveting his
wife and goods, are founded upon the same reason. The Jews of old understood
the division of the commandments to be as all protestants have made it, and so
Josephus has distinguished them, Ant. Jud. l. iii. c. iv. and so has Philo;
both of them expressly calling that the second commandment which we call so.

XIII. Cursed is he that preaches to the people in unknown tongues, such as
they understand not; or uses other means to keep them in ignorance. R. Amen.

It should not have been said, -- that preaches to the people in an unknown
tongue; but, that prays in an unknown tongue in public assemblies. It is well
known, that all their public services are in a tongue which the people do not
understand: can this tend to edification? Or if the priest call upon the people
to join in certain acts of worship, can the people understand what they are
called upon for? They are present at the litanies, and other public acts of
devotion, which are all performed in Latin: can they join in prayer to God,
when they know not what is said? Is it to be called prayer, when neither the
words, nor the sense, is such as that the petitioner can know what he prays
for? He may indeed be devout, and list up his heart to God, whilst the priest
reads something which is not understood. But the apostle has observed, If I
pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is
unfruitful. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with
the understanding also -- Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall
he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks,
seeing he understands not what thou say? 1 Cor. xiv. 14, 15, 16. I do not
say, that this is done with design to, or for this end, that they may keep the
people in ignorance: but it is an obsurd, a senseless piece of management,
which can answer no good end.

XIV. Cursed is he that believes that the Pope can give to any, upon any
account whatsoever, dispensations to lie, or swear falsely; or that it is
lawful for any at the lost hour to protest himself innocent in case he be
guilty. R. Amen.

How far, and to what particular cases the Pope's dispensing power may extend,
or he himself may apply it, may be hard to say. It is certain, that application
has been made to him to grant dispensation to many within degrees prohibited by
the Levitical law, and he has claimed this power. Now, if he may dispense with
one law of God, he may with equal right dispense with another. He has dispensed
with oaths, nay absolved from oaths: and it is an allowed fact, that he has
frequently put this in execution. And this power has never been taken away, or
given up, that I have heard.

It is added, Cursed is he that believes it lawful for any one, at the last
hour, to protest himself innocent in case he be guilty. Ay, or at any hour. But
suppose a man to be absolved by a judicial act of priestly absolution from
guilt, can he then be deemed guilty? If he be cleared a culpa and reatu, from
sau't and guilt, why may he not protest himself innocent? It is true, he cannot
do this if he be guilty; that is, if he thinks himself not free from guilt: but
where the judge has in form pronounced a man innocent, and declared all guilt
to be removed, the offender has a right to protest himself innocent, and he may
be weak enough to believe himself to be so.

XV. Cursed is he that encourages sins, or teaches men to defer the amendment
of their lives, on presumption of a deathbed repentance. R. Amen.

The point which should be made good by Papists is, that their sacraments of
absolution and extreme unction do not naturally tend to encourage sins, and
lead men to defer amendment on presumption of their good effects on a deathbed
Absolution pronounced in form, as from the minsters of God, and a supposed
power in every priest to free every one from all kind of sin, when danger of
death appears, cannot but be an encouragement to defer amendment till the last
hour.

When extreme unction is made a sacrament, and is to be administered on the
deathbed, and it is declared to be for these uses, that it gives grace which
remits sins, and particularly the lighter ones, commonly called venial; that it
frees the soul from that weakness and languor which it has contracted from sin,
and from the remains of sin; that it administers joy and comfort to the souls
of the faithful, and supplies them with arms and strength to resist the devil,
and to break his force. -- When extreme unction has all these good effects,
must it not naturally encourage men to go on in vice, and to defer amendment,
when they have so good a sheet-anchor at last? It is not knowing mankind, not
to see this natural effect. So that though he is pronounced accursed, who
encourages, that is, exhorts, advises, or promotes designedly any sin, or that
teaches to defer amendment of life on presumption of a deathbed repentance;
yet if the ordering and general conduct of things is such as tends naturally to
this effect, this may be charged with encouraging, what the natural result of
it is; and the debate will be only about the propriety of the word encourage,
which signifies not only active exciting, but not obstructing when you see the
ill effect of an action.

XVI. Cursed is he that teaches men that they may be lawfully drunk on a
Friday, or on any other fasting-day, though they must not taste the least bit
of flesh. R. Amen.

As I never heard of any body that pretended to teach men that they may be
lawfully drunk on any day, I look upon this curse as a mere fally of zeal: it
is enough to remark, that the eating any flesh is forbidden absolutely by the
church; the drinking wine is not so, upon their fasting days. The thing I would
recommend to the consideration of all Papists is, their departure from
scripture. Why do they command abstinence from flesh on so many days in every
week? Why abstain from meats, which God has ordained to be received by all
with thanksgiving? Why is such a fast enjoined, as may be kept with drinking of
wine, and other even stronger liquors? I do not charge them with allowing
excesses in liquors, but with enjoining to many fast and meagre days, on a
spiritual not medicinal account, and this without authority from Christ or his
apostles, nay in direct compliance with that mark that is mentioned as a sign
of an apostasy from the faith.

XVII. Cursed is he who places religion in nothing but a pompous show,
consisting ONLY in ceremonies, and which teaches not the people to serve God in
spirit and in truth.

Here again is a sad instance of chicane. Nobody, I believe, charges the
Papists with placing religion in nothing but pompous show: but they are charged
with cumbering religion with numerous rites and ceremonies, with processions,
pilgrimages, and all the evils arising from such sorts of follies. The
doctrines and practices of the gospel are plain, simple, easy things; which yet
have been so loaded, so overburdened with ceremonies, that an apostle of
Christ, were he to arise and be brought to the baptism of any person, would not
be able to say what they were about. Let us suppose the water consecrated, the
person standing at the church-doors forbid to enter into the church, and there
cathechized. Then exorcism is used to expel the devil, etc.

XVIII. Cursed is he who loves or promotes cruelty; that teaches people to be
bloody-minded, and to lay aside the meekness of Jesus Christ. R. Amen.

It is right to disclaim cruelty and bloody-mindedness: but if the people are
taught, that heretics may be killed; if heretics may be delivered over to the
secular arm and be burnt; and all are heretics who oppose the rights and
privileges of the Roman church; if they are represented so odious to God and
man, that they may be justly destroyed; if their deserving the flames be so
inculcated, that the people who are spectators at an Auto de Fe, shall look on
the person condemned by the holy inquisition, and see them carried to the
flames without emotion, nay with joy, as if they were murderers or robbers,
justly condemned, and deserving the fate they met with: -- this is to promote
cruelty, and teaching the people to be bloody-minded.

XIX. Cursed is he who teaches that it is lawful to do any wicked thing, though
it be for the interest and good of mother church; or that any evil action may
be done that good may come of it.

What think you of the lawfulness of destroying, rooting out heretics by fire,
imprisonment for life, and such like inhumanities? Did the Romish church ever
deem it lawful to keep faith with such, when it could easily avoid it? Did not
your church give safe conduct to Jerome of Prague, and yet condemn him and get
him burnt? They denied indeed the validity of the Emperor's safe conduct to
John Huss, and because the council did not grant it, it was deemed void. But
the council gave it to Jerome of Prague; and yet, because he made a retraction,
and repented of his retraction, they found him guilty, and delivered him over
to the flames.

XX. Cursed are we, if, amongst all those wicked principles and damnable
doctrines commonly laid at our doors, every one of them be the faith of our
church; and cursed are we, if we do not as hearthy detest all those hellish
practices, as they that so vehemently urge them against us. R. Amen.

I have mentioned above, what are the particular tenets which the Papists are
charged with; and which this author has not endeavored to vindicate them from.
He may pronounce these cursed, and yet be guilty of idolatry, false worship,
prayers to saints and angels, trust to priestly absolutions, and indeed offend
against some precepts of the gospel, or maintain some very unjustifiable
practices, which he may seem to condemn, though he really designs to abet them.
When therefore he adds,

XXI. Cursed are we, if in answering and saying Amen to any of these curses, we
use any equivocation, or mental reservations; or do not assent to them in the
common and obvious sense of the words. R. Amen.

When, I say, this is added, I cannot but reply -- You may say Amen to these
curses without any equivocation, or mental reservation, and you may assent to
them in the obvious sense of the words, and yet you may be guilty of great
equivocation in framing these causes, and you may design to deceive the
ignorant by them. You may say very well and very truly, cursed is he that
believes the Virgin Mary to be more than a creature, or that trusts in her as
much as in God; and yet you may believe in her, worship her, honor her, and
pray to her. You may curse them that believe that priests can forgive sins,
whether a sinner repents or not; and yet you may maintain, that priests act
judicially in forgiving sins. You may curse him that worships a breaden god,
that is, believes a waser to be a god; and yet let consecration be added to the
wafer, and then you may think it lawful to worship what your adversaries still
see to be bread, though you think it God. The fault therefore lies in the
framing these curses; in so wording them, that ignorant people may be deceived;
in concealing the truth of what your doctrines are, at the same time that you
make converts to your church and mispersuaded people, and cover that which you
dare not openly avow.

Having thus given an account of the doctrine and discipline of the Catholic
church, according to the articles of Pope Pius's creed, explained and confirmed
by a variely of decrees of council, definitions of popes, cardina^s, and many
approved authors; and suggested some suitable inferences from thence, and then
introduced their evasive representation of many of their articles, though
introduced in the form of an anathema; I shall close this part with the mention
of some particular doctrines and practices, taught and defended by them, most
repugnant to Protestant principles, and in^^^^ces of their gross corruption,
viz.

I. Of Prayer and Preaching in an unknown Tongue.
The council of Trent decreed, that divine service should not be performed in
the mother tongue Sess. 22. cap. 8.
.

The church of Rome does anathematize all those that hold a vulgar tongue
necessary to divine service, and does absolutely forbid their own missal to be
so translated, and does persecute those that have so used it Bellarmine de
Verb. I. ii. cap. 16.
. Yet Bellarmine acknowledges it was otherwise long after the apostles time.

By this means, says the author of the History of Popery, the common people are
deprived of the instruction and comfort of God's word in their public worship.
-- The prayers and supplications put up to God, are in a language that they
know not what is said; and therefore cannot assent with their hearts, nor have
such devout affections excited in their souls, as would recommend their prayers
to the throne of grace.

Vitalian, in the year 666, was the first who established it, commanding the
Latin service generally to be received into the western churches; though at
that time, in most parts, few of the people understood it History of Popery,
vol. I. p. 166.

See Tillotson's Works, vol. I. p. 277.

Bays of the Worship of God in an unknown Tongue.


.

II. Of their prohibiting the Use of the Scriptures in the vulgar Tongue, to
the Laity.
The scriptures are strictly prohibited to be read in the vulgar tongue without
license from the bishop Reg. Ind. Lib. Prohib. R. 4.
. The reason assigned is, that more prejudice than profit will redound from it.

This liberty was thought too much, and therefore the faculty of granting such
license was taken away by the order of Pope Clement VIII Reg. Ind. Lib. prohib.
Anct. Sexti. V. and Clem. VIII. obser. circa 4 regul.
. But when the Papists are charged with refusing the scriptures, they take the
confidence to deny it, or endeavor to put such glosses upon it, as to make
their denial of the scriptures to the laity a better way of ganting them; since
they pretend to give the true sense of them, and thereby to deliver them with
peculiar advantage See the Right of the People to read the Scripture, by Dr.
Stratford, since Bishop of Chester.
.

In consequence of thus withholding the use of the Bible or scriptures, from
the inspection of the people,

I. The church of Rome decrees men's private judgment of discretion, as utterly
insufficient to make any certain distinction of truth from falsehood, in
matters of religion.

II. She allows no sufficient rule, without the true church (as she styles
herself) to guide and direct our private judgment of discretion.

III. She resolves all certainty, as to matters of faith, into the authority of
the true church.

IV. She authorizes the true church to impose upon us, an absolute necessity of
believing such things as before were not necessary to be believed Eighth Note
of the Church, considered by Dr. Scott, R. of St. Giles.
.

But that this is a novel imposition of that church, will appear from a variety
of instances of the Popes, and of the fathers, who have asserted the right of
all Christians to the use of the Bible, as Pope Gregory, St. Chrysostom, and
St. Austin Hem. 9. in Epist. ad Colos. Expos. Moral. etc.
.

If the reader desires to know when, and upon what occasion, this liberty was
first taken from laymen, I will now tell him. The first synodical prohibition
was that of the synod of Toulouse, in the year 1228, in these words: "We forbid
that laymen be permitted to have the books of the Old and New Testament, unless
some one out of devotion desire to have the psalter or breviary for divine
offices, and the hours of the Blessed Virgin Mary; but even those now
mentioned, they may not have translated in the vulgar tongue D'Acherii, tom.
II. p. 624.
." The special occasion of this decree, was the preaching of the Waldenses, who
taught, that, in articles of faith, the holy scriptures were the rule by which
men were to judge; that whatsoever was not agreeable to the word of God ought
to be rejected; that the reading and knowledge of the scriptures was free and
necessary to all men, both laity and clergy. But when the church of Rome had
got a variety of new articles of faith as would not abide the old test, it was
prudently done to deprive the people of the scriptures, that they might not be
able to discover the errors into which they led them Dr. Stratford's Discourse
of the People's Right to read the Scriptures.
. And it is highly probable, that the like motive occasioned this privilege of
reading the scriptures to be limited to licensed persons in the 22d sessions of
the council of Trident, and have been since more strictly confirmed by the
authority of other councils, and the decrees of Pope Clement VIII. about the
year 1592. This was indeed, says another reverend prelate Dr. Grove, late
Bishop of Chichester's Discourse of the Protestant and Popish way of
interpreting Scripture.
, a great degree of caution, but not a jot more than she stood in need of; for
when she had for a long time performed all her public offices in an unknown
tongue, and robbed the laity of half the communion; when she had introduced a
strange worship of relics and images, and set up to herself many mediators for
intercession; when she had maintained, that Christ was offered every day in the
sacrifice of the mass, and taught and done many things apparently repugnant to
the word of God: then, to secure herself in the possession of these doctrines
and practices, it was but necessary she should divest the common people of the
scriptures, and claim to herself the sole right of interpreting. This, and
nothing but this, could sufficiently guard her against all contradiction; for
whatever exposition she gives of any controverted place, none must dare to call
it in question, though she may have frequent occasion to frame glosses directly
contrary to the express letter of the text. She is got into that impregnable
fortress, and will never be forced to yield to the clearest evidence that can
be brought, while she is able to make good this unlimited power of
understanding every thing in her own sense. No wonder that the Romanist
contends with so much zeal, to bear down all with the judgment of the church;
and if he can gain this one point, he makes himself master of all the rest. But
Protestants will easily see the fallacy of such pretensions, and bear their
testimony against such usurped authority.

But there is another artifice made use of, and practiced for the sake of
evading this charge; which is occasionally producing versions of the scriptures
into the mother tongue, or in the modern tongues; wherein they have contrived,
by various falsifications, to make them speak the language of their missals and
breviaries, in order to sanctify their novel rites by the authority of the
apostles, and make the people believe they had been practiced from the times
even of the gospel. Thus, to countenance the practice of canonizing, or
beatifying, or making saints in the church, they have rendered a passage of St.
James v. 11. not as it ought to be, Behold how we count them happy or blessed,
but Behold how we beatify those who have suffered with constancy: and in favor
also of their processions, where is said, Heb. xi. 30. That the walls of
Jericho fell down, after they had encompassed it about seven days; their
version renders it, After a procession of seven days around it: and, to give
the better color to their trade of pilgrimag^s, St. Paul, according to their
version, requires it as the qualification of a good widow, that she have lodged
pilgrims, (...) Tim. v. 10.; and St. John praises Gaius for having dealt
faithfully with pilgrims, John iii. 5, etc. See a treatise, entitled Popery an
Enemy to Scripture, where the learned and ingenious author, Mr. Serces, has
given a large collection of these falsifications.

Of Indulgences.
Indulgences are the surest touchstones which his holiness makes use of to try
the faith of true believers. A vast number of devotees imagine that they
infallibly secure the attainment of paradise. The origin of these means, this
salutary institution, which has since degenerated into an abuse, seems
particularly hinted at in a passage of St. Cyprian: but be that as it will, the
release from torments was not known till a long time after by the name of
indulgence. It was common enough indeed in the seventh and eighth centuries.
Pope Sergius, in the 884, gave three forty days indulgences at once to such as
should visit the church of St. Martin on the Hills, on the festival peculiarly
devoted to the service of that saint.

If the term Indulgence be defined, we mean a remission from temporal pains,
which are due to actual sins. It will be comprehended with ease, that access to
heaven is not therefore the freer to such devotees as have obtained it, unless
by acts of virtue they concur to make it effectual; and yet every one is
conscious of the excessive power ascribed to indulgences, and of the vast
services they have done to avarice, misguided zeal, and ambition. No one
however ought to imagine, that our intent is to overthrow the real advantages
of them by this expression; for we are no strangers to the miracles wrought by
St. Bernard, who, whilst he was preaching up the indulgences of Pope Eugenius
III. inflamed the hearts of the believers of his age at once with a spirit of
war and contrition, and showed the atonement of their crimes, and the remission
of their torments, annexed to those crosses and swords wherewith he persuaded
them to arm themselves against the infidels. We are very sensible likewise,
that St. Bridget declares, in her revelations, the vision she had of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who informed her, "That the most infallible way to atone for all
sins, was to procure indulgences; that with respect to himself, whenever he was
inclined to treat any soul with tenderness and affection, he would advise it to
reside constantly at Rome, there being no place in the world where so many
indulgences could be procured." To this we might add, that there is no city
more commodious than this for devotees, who would turn their piety toward this
object. The Basilicas have indulgences for every day in the year, and on
festivals they are redoubled.

Of Indulgences for the Dead, etc.
When the question is asked in the Catholic Christian,

Q. What is the meaning of indulgences for the dead?

A. They are not granted by way of absolution, since the pastors of the church
have not that jurisdiction over the dead; but they are only available to the
faithful departed, by way of suffrage, or spiritual succor, applied to their
souls out of the treasure of the church.

Q. What is the meaning of a jubilee?

A. A jubilee, so called from the resemblance it bears with the jubilee year in
the old law, Lev. xxv. and xxvii. (which was a year of remission, in which
bondsmen were restored to liberty, aad every one returned to his possessions)
is a plenary indulgence granted every twenty-fifth year, as also upon other
extraordinary occasions, to such as, being truly penitent, shall worthily
receive the blessed sacrament, and perform the other conditions of fasting,
alms, and prayer, usually prescribed at such times.

Q. What then is the difference between a jubilee and any other plenary
indulgence?

A. A jubilee is more solemn, and accompanied with certain privileges, not
usually granted upon any other occasions, with regard to the being absolved by
any approved confessor from all excommunications, and other reserved cases, and
having vows exchanged into the performance of other works of piety. To which we
may add, that as a jubilee is extended to the whole church, which at that time
joins as it were in a body, in offering a holy violence to heaven by prayer and
penitential works; and as the cause for granting an indulgence at such times is
usually more evident, and more or greater works of piety are prescribed for the
obtaining it, the indulgence of consequence is likely to be much more certain
and secure.

Of Oaths of Allegiance to Foreign Princes.
If we consider the supremacy of the Pope, and infallibility of the church of
Rome, in a political point of view, viz. as prohibiting the members of it from
taking oaths of allegiance to any Protestant prince where they reside, or
breaking of them, the genuine nature of this religion will more evidently
appear.

Pope Urban decreed, that it should be lawful for subjects to break their oaths
of allegiance with all such princes as were not in communion with the Pope
History of Popery, vol. I. part iii. p. 342.
.

The Pope claims a right to absolve men from their oaths, and they have
frequently done it. The council of Constance has given us a remarkable instance
of absolution from oaths, in the case of Frederic Duke of Austria; where they
say, notwithstanding any oaths actually taken to the contrary, from which we
absolve them, that they, and every one of them, shall effectually obey, etc.
Council of Constance, sess. 35.
If now this council did assume to itself a power to absolve from oaths, it is
mere trifling to say that the church of Rome cannot license men to perjure or
forswear themselves, since the practice is allowed to absolve men from their
oaths, and the Pope has declared that truth is not to be kept with heretics.

Pope Martin V. writing to Alexander Duke of Lithuania, says, "Know ye, that
you could not pledge your faith to heretics; and if you keep your faith with
them, you would sin MORTALLY See more Instances in Dr. Whitby's Discourse
concerning Laws, ecclesiastical and civil, against Heretics.
.

And whilst princes are prohibited pledging or keeping faith with heretics, no
doubt subjects may be absolved from their oaths to their princes by plenitude
of the papal power: by the same plenitude they may be dispensed with to lie,
and swear falsely. What security is there that this may not be the case? for it
is equally easy to grant a dispensation to sin for the future, and to absolve
for sin that is past; and the same power that can do the one can do the other:
now that the Pope has done the one, is not disputed; therefore he may or can do
the other Dr. Sykes's Remarks on the Vindication of the Roman Cathesics, p. 34.
.

This has given occasion to a late judicious enquiry, how far Papists ought to
be treated as good subjects? Of which I presume my readers will approve the
following abstract.

I. It is true, " that all and every good subject has a right to protection,
let their religious tenets be what they will, unless they are inconsistent with
the interests of civil society; and therefore it is apprehended, that the laws
of this land are not against the believers of transubstantiation as such, nor
against the believers of imageworship as such, nor against the believers of
such like notions as such; which if a man can bring himself to believe, and
will let others be at liberty not to believe, let him, in God's name, enjoy his
notions: but wen^ I say this, I cannot but observe, that the Papists never have
at any time, in any country where they could prevent it, given or professed to
give a toleration to such as dissented from their notions: they never have
permitted any man any where to profess opinions contrary to the sentiments
which they profess. They have always declared such to be heretics, and they
have never failed to persecute such when they have had it in their power. Their
professed tenets are, that such men are every where to be expelled as scabbed
sheep Enquiry, p. 5. who quotes the Words of Pope Martin.
, which infect the whole flock of Christ, and therefore are not to have the
comforts of humanity with the faithful of Christ. They have therefore no right
to a toleration where they are undermost, who never at any time, or in any
place where they could prevent it, have granted or professed to grant a
toleration to others who have differed from them; for which reason they should
not, of all people, complain, if they do not enjoy what they never yet did
grant; they have no right to complain of hardship, injustice, persecution, or
whatever name they will give it, if they do not obtain from our legislature
what other dissenters from the church of England enjoy, a toleration and
freedom from penal laws; for those who never grant, or profess to grant such
privileges, have no right to complain if they are deprived of them.

II. If the Roman Catholic tenets be not against the laws of civil society here
in Great Britain, why do not the Papists give the common tests of their
allegiance, that all other good subjects do? Tender them to any sectary of any
denomination of Protestant Dissenters, Presbyterians, Baptists, Independents,
any but Papists and professed Jacobites, and they readily take them, and in
consequence enjoy the liberty they have a right to: whereas, if the Papists be
called upon to take the oaths, they all instantly refuse; summon them to
appear, give them notice of time and place, in times of common danger to the
public, call upon them to give security for their good behavior, -- not one,
where there are four or five hundred, will appear. Now, surely the protection
of a government is not due to any, but such as are ready to give the ordinary
tests of their allegiance to that government.

III. It is well known to all Protestants, that Pope Paul V. has absolutely
forbid all Papists, or, if the term be more agreeable, all Roman Catholics, to
take the oath of allegiance. He insists they cannot take it salva fide
Catholica, and salute animarum vestrarum, consistent with the Catholic faith,
and the salvation of their souls. Should I add the authority of a cardinal, I
mean Bellarmine, to the authority of the Pope, it may be thought I add a notion
only of a particular divine. Why now should any one employ his endeavors to
have the Roman Catholics enjoy the protection of good subjects, when they will
not, they cannot, they dare not, give the ordinary test of allegiance to the
government?

IV. The oath of allegiance is only an acknowledgement of the King to be
rightful and lawful King of this kingdom, and that the Pope has no power or
authority to depose him; and that the person who takes such oath will continue
to bear faith and true allegiance to him, notwithstanding any declaration of
excommunication made or granted by the Pope. Now, if the Pope expressly forbids
all Papists to take this oath, and declares his brief to be drawn by his
special direction Vide Pope Paul V.'s Brief, apud Collier's Church History,
vol. II. Records, p. 105.
; and orders that they "should not go to the churches of heretics, nor hear
their sermons, nor communicate in their rites, lest they should incur the anger
of God; and that they cannot, without the most evident and grievous injury of
the honor of God, take the oath" of allegiance; and accordingly all do refuse
to take it. What right then have Roman Catholics to protection under this
government See the case of Archpresbyter Blackwell, who was here in England in
King James I.'s time, who was committed to prison, and obtained his liberty by
taking the oath of allegiance; and the consequence was, that he was removed
from his office for taking of it, and one Birchett put in his place.

Collier's Church History.
?

Now the Papists have gone on ever since in this refusal to take the oath of
allegiance, and for that reason they ought to be treated as enemies to the
government.

V. Protection and allegiance, in all states, in all governments, are
reciprocal. The reason of men's entering into society is, by uniting strength,
to secure themselves, since otherwise they might be too weak to resist the
attacks of those that might invade them: every particular private man therefore
is protected by the strength of the whole, and every one that claims the
advantage of this security, is under obligation to join with the society
against its enemies. Hence it is, that all governors have a right to demand
tests of allegiance from the people; and all those who refuse to give them,
when called upon, in effect, declare themselves enemies of that society. When
therefore Papists refuse the test of allegiance, they have a right to be
refused protection. Nor have they any reason to complain of injustice,
hardship, oppression, or by whatever name they may call the execution of the
laws of this land; since an enemy of any society is by the law of
self-preservation to be guarded against, and enemies are not to be treated as
friends.

VI. Imagine that the legislative power in any society has fixed the person who
shall govern them on the throne; now, if the community consents to, and
approves of, and readily gives the test of their obedience and submission to
the person fixed by the legislature, and any sect, or the men of any
profession, who refuse to take the usual oath for the proof of their
allegiance, is it not natural for the government under which they live, to have
a jealous eye over them, to guard against the increase of their strength, to
observe whether they tamper with the people to corrupt them, to enquire who
they are that endeavor to make converts to such an opposition, and to inflict
some punishment on such as misbehave themselves in such manner? Now, if any
convert to Popery is made an enemy by principle to our government, the
government is thereby in proportion so much weakened.

When therefore our editor tells us, "unanimity can never be expected, unless
all the subjects are equally protected," -- he should have said, -- "unless
friends and enemies are equally protected," -- and then he had spoke what he
wanted to be done. But are such as refuse the common tests of friendship, to be
equally protected with those that are friends? -- The word subject, indeed, is
a good term, that comprehends all who live under any government, be they what
they will, friends or not friends; and if they behave themselves as good
subjects, should have a right to protection. But while they acknowledge a
supremacy in a foreign person, and an absolute submission to him, and own a
dependence so much upon his power, as not to think it lawful to submit to our
laws, but so far only as that foreign power permits, who, as their governor,
pronounce it unlawful to take the oath of allegiance to our King; they cannot
justly be looked upon as a sect that ought to be indulged as good friends and
good subjects; but as professed subjects of a foreign power, and an enemy to
that state under which they have long enjoyed peace and quiet See an Enquiry
how far Papists ought to be treated here as good subjects, printed in 1746.
.

Of PERSECUTION by the Church of ROME.
As several of the doctrines of the church of Rome are unscriptural and absurd,
it is no wonder if she could find no other way to support even the outward
profession of them but by force and violence; from hence are derived those
peremptory decrees in behalf of persecution, which were enacted by the fourth
Lateran council, held under Pope Innocent III. in the year 1215 Popery always
the same, Introduction, p. 1.
. and of that of Constance, that sat from 1414 to 1418. -- And in the fifth
council of Toledo, can. 3. these holy fathers say, "We the holy council
promulge this sentence or decree, pleasing to God, that whosoever hereafter
shall succeed to the kingdom, shall not ascend the throne, till he has sworn to
permit no man to live in his kingdom who is not a Catholic; and if any
afterward violate this promise, let him be anathema marantha, in the presence
of the eternal God, and become fuel of the eternal fire Grosvenor's Sermons at
Salter's Hall, p. 12.
."

Hence it is, that Paul IV. in his dying words to the cardinals about him,
recommended to them the tribunal of the inquisition, as the best prop and main
bulwark of Roman faith. That was speaking like a Pope indeed, but not like a
true vicar of Jesus Christ. Hence it was, that in the following ages that
church proceeded with the utmost rigor against all those who presumed to
dissent from her.

Let impartial history recount, if she can recount, the numbers of God's
creatures that have been murdered in God's name by that church Fordyce on the
Delusive and Bloody Spirit of Popery, p. 589.
.

Let history tell of the carnage committed in the many holy wars. -- The holy
wars! -- undertaken for the extirpation of infidels Busching's History of
France, vol. II. p. 339.

British Memorial, p. 15.


.

In Bohemia, from the year 1523 to 1632, by oppressive fines, severe
discipline, and cruel deaths History of Bohemia Persecution, printed 1650, p.
269 and seq.
.

The cruelties at Thorn in Poland, by beheading, hanging, severe whipping, etc.
in order to suppress all the Protestant churches and schools, which the primate
of Poland calls the sacred execution at Thorn, against the profaners of holy
things, and which, he says, ought never to be forgotten Primate's Letter to the
Palatinates of Poland.

Political State, Aug. 1733.


.

The poor Saltzburgers were but lately before our eyes stripped of all they had
in the world, and drawn from their habitations by a bigoted priest and prince,
who as a bishop had sworn it, and as a popish prince was obliged to it; their
leaders seized, and thrown into dungeons; others executed with the utmost
rigor; husbands torn from their wives, and parents from their children. A case
so deplorable their treatment, so inhuman, that even another Popish prince, the
Emperor of Germany, interposed to put a stop to it, as it was purely for
conscience sake See a Serious Call to the City of London, containing many
Accounts taken from the High Dutch, in 1732.
.

The Vaudois, partly subject to France, and partly to the Duke of Savoy, felt
the sad effects of Popish cruelties in 1646 to 1655, when the French King
excited, by various methods, the Duke of Savoy to persecute them with the
utmost severity, so that in Piedmont, in the space of ten years, more than
40,000 were put to death, or driven to Germany, Holland, and England See the
History of the Massacre at Piedmont, by Sir Samuel Moreland.
. Read the history of the persecution of the German Protestants, as well as
those in the Low Countries, how they were oppressed and harrassed under
innumerable severities by the Popes, etc. from 1521 to 1623 Brand's Hist. of
the Reformation, in 3 vol. fol. for that period.
, and from thence to 1663 Beza's History from 1621 to 1663.
.

In France, in 1685, when Lewis XIV. repealed the edict of Nantz (made by his
predecessor Henry IV. for allowing the Protestants the free exercise of their
religion in 1598) which he declared should be irrevocable; and though the
present Lewis XIV. owned, that he owed his crown to his Protestant subjects;
yet ungratefully he forced 150,000 of them out of his kingdom, dragooned others
into Popery, sent others, who refused to comply, for slaves, chained them in
his galleys, forced their children from them to be educated in monasteries, and
shut up others to perpetual imprisonment. The Protestants at Dauphiny in France
were severely persecuted in 1744, pursuant to several edicts published by the
French King for the suppression of Protestants Great Britain's Memorial, p. 17.
in Languedoc; and the districts of Montauban at Puy-Laurens, Castres, Saint
Foi, Nismis, on account of their religious assemblies, were fined, imprisoned,
and put to death in the years 1745, 1746, and 1747. More violent proceedings
against the Protestants of Vivarais about the same time Popery always the same,
p. 43.
; and even so lately as 1762, the reverend Mr. Rochette was executed at
Thoulouse, for professing the Protestant religion, and permitting others to
join with him in his own house to worship God according to their consciences
Letter from France, published in the Royal Magazine for May 1762.
. Nor was this a singular instance, but well accords with the articles or
edicts now in sorce, published by the King of France Popery always the same.
The French King's Edict and Articles, from p. 78 to 100.
.

Let all civil and ecclesiastical histories relate the cruel proceedings
against the Protestants in Hungary, in the beginning of the seventeenth century.

Let this Holy Mother Church relate the massacre of Paris, on St. Bartholomew's
day, 1572, in which about 30,000 Protestants were murdered in cold blood,
according to Thuanus; some authors affirms above 100,000, among whom were 5 or
600 noblemen and gentlemen of distinction. Thuanus himself calls it a most
detestable villainy, and in abhorrence of St. Bartholomew's day. Such a
complication of hellish cruelty, who could have thought it! found panegyrists
by the abetters of Popery. Peter Charpertier wrote an apology for it; John Des
Caurres extolled it in an ode, and the most luxuriant encomiums were bestowed
upon it in a speech pronounced before Philip II. The holy father himself,
Gregory XIII. was no sooner informed by cardinal de Lorraine, than he went in
procession to St. Lewis's church, where he returned the merciful Maker and
Redeemer of mankind public and solemn thanks for that bloody work. Nay, that
horrible transaction was represented at Rome in a magnificent picture, with
this inscription, The triumph of the church; which, indeed, as our author
observes, was very proper, if it meant the triumph of the church of Rome over
christianity and humanity itself See Bayle's Dictionary, Article Charpentier,
and Article Caur^^s, or Popery always the same, p. 60.
.

Let history relate too the massacre of Ireland in the reign of Charles I. in
which about 100,000 Protestants were barbarously murdered in the space of two
months, chiefly by Popish priests.

When the Popish emissaries were ripe for executing their barbarities in
Ireland, their proceedings against the English were various. Some of the Irish
were content to strip, plunder, and to expel them; then they were spirited up
by their priest to shake off all humanity, and to murder men, women and
children, which ended in this final resolution, entirely to root out the very
name of a Protestant in Ireland. The many methods of cruelty are too shocking
to tender minds to relate. The particulars may be seen in a small piece,
entitled Popery and Slavery displayed, p. 19, 20.

Yet as notorious as was this scene of barbarity, it was industriously promoted
by the priests, who administered the sacrament to many, on condition they would
spare none; and this was backed by the benediction and indulgence of the Pope,
of which the following is a true copy.

The POPE 's BULL. Ad futuram Rei Memoriam.
URBANUS OCTAVUS, etc.
"Having taken into our serious consideration the great zeal of the Irish,
toward the propagating of the Catholic faith, and the piety of the Catholic
warriors in the several armies of that kingdom (which was for that singular
fervency in the true worship of God, and notable care had formerly in the like
case by the the inhabitants thereof, for the maintenance and preservation of
the same orthodox faith, called of old the Land of Saints) and having got
certain notice, how, in imitation of their godly and worthy ancestors, they
endeavor, by force of arms, to deliver their thralled nation from the
oppressions and grievous injuries of the heretics, wherewith this long time it
has been afflicted and heavily burdened; and gallantly do in them what lies
to extirpate and totally root out these workers of iniquity, who in the kingdom
of Ireland had infected, and always striving to infect, the mass of Catholic
purity with the pestiferous leaven of their heretical contagion: We therefore
being willing to cherish them with the gift of those spiritual graces, whereof
by God we are ordained the only disposers on earth, by the mercy of the same
Almighty God, trusting in the authority of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul,
and by virtue of that power of binding and loosing of souls, which God was
pleased (without our deserving) to confer upon us: To all and every one of the
faithful Christians in the aforesaid kingdom of Ireland, now, and for the time
of militating or fighting against the heretics, and others enemies of the
Catholic faith, they being truly and sincerely penitent, after confession, and
the spiritual refreshing of themselves with the sacred communion of the body
and blood of Chirst, do grant a full and plenary indulgence, and absolute
remission for all their sins, and such as in the holy time of jubilee is usual
to be granted to those that devoutly visit a certain number of privileged
churches, within and without the walls of our city of Rome; by the tenor of
which present letters, for once only, and no more, we freely bestow the favor
of this absolution upon all and every one of them; and withal desiring heartily
all the faithful in Christ, now in arms as aforesaid, to be partakers of this
most precious treasure.

"To all and every one of these aforesaid faithful Christians, we grant
license, and give power to choose into themselves, for this effect, any fit
confessor, whether a secular priest, or a regular of some order, and likewise
any other selected person approved of by the ordinary of the place, who, after
a diligent hearing of their confessions, shall have power to liberate and
absolve them from excommunication, suspension, and all other ecclesiastical
sentences and censures, for whomsoever, or for what cause soever, pronounced or
inflicted upon them; as also from all sins, trespasses, transgressions, crimes,
and delinquencies, how heinous and atrocious soever they be; not omitting those
very enormities in the most peculiar cases, which by any whatsoever former
constitutions of ours, or of our predecessors Popes, (than which we will have
these to be no less valued in every point) were designed to be reserved to the
ordinary, or to the apostolic see; from all which the confessor shall hereby
have power granted him to absolve the foresaid Catholies at the bar of
conscience, and in that sense only. And furthermore, we give them power to
exchange what vow or vows soever they were formerly astricted to (those of
religion and chastity excepted) into any other pious or good work or works,
imposed or to be imposed on them, and every one of them to perform in all the
foresaid cases, by a wholesome penance, according to the mind and will of the
confessor.

"Therefore, by the tenor of these present letters, and by the virtue of that
holy strict obedience, wherein all Christians are bound unto us, we charge and
command all and every one of the reverend brethren, archbishops, bishops, and
other ecclesiastical prelates, and whatsoever ordinaries of places now residing
in Ireland, together with all vicars, substitutes and officials under them; or
these failing, we command all such to whom in those places the care of souls is
incumbent, that as soon as they shall have received copies of these our
letters, they shall forthwith, without any stop or delay, publish them, and
cause them to be published, throughout all their churches, dioceses, provinces,
countries, cities, towns, lands, villages, and places whatsoever. etc. etc. etc.

"Now, that these principal letters of ours, which cannot be conveniently
brought to every place, may the sooner come to the notice of all, our will and
pleasure is, that any whatsoever copies or transumpts, whether written or
printed, that are subscribed with the hand of a public notary, and which have
the seal of some eminent person in ecclesiastical dignity affixed thereunto, be
of the same force, power, and authority, and have the like credit in every
respect given unto them, as would be to these our principal letters, if they
were shown and exhibited.

"Dated at Rome in the Vatican, or St. Peter's palace, the 25th of May 1643,
and in the twentieth year of our pontificate.

M. A. Maraldus."


Let history impartially relate the slaughter of about forty thousand of poor
Americans Bishop of Chiapas's Account of the Voyages and Cruelties of the
Spaniards in America, printed at London, 1699, Oct.
, on pretense of their resisting the attempts made for their conversion, as
well as on accounts purely political.

And let that infernal slaughterhouse, the inquisition, be described in its
proper colors, where all the cruelties that imagination can invent; or the
malignity of demons can inflict, to insult and torture, and, if possible, to
damn the miserable victim, are practiced in terrible perfection. Spain can
boast of many of these holy inquisitions, as they are pleased to call them, as
at Madrid, at Seville, Toledo, Grenada, Lordova, Cuenca, Valladolid, Mincia,
Lerida, Logrono, St. Jago, Saragossa, Valencia, Barcelona, and Majorca; as also
without the kingdom, as in the Canary islands, Mexico, Carthagena and Lima
Busching's Geography, vol. II. page 250.
.

In Portugal and Italy the inquisition is in full force, and ordained merely
for the extirpation of heresy, i. e. every thing contrary to the doctrine and
practices of the church of Rome, in which they make use of the most dreadful
and bloody tortures, to sorce persons to confess, and burn them without regard
to age, sex, or condition. Once a year, or oftener, they celebrate what they
call an Auto de Fe, or act of faith; and when the sentence of the holy tribunal
of the inquisition is to be executed, it is generally on some festival, in the
view of the court, and with the acclamations of the people See Limborch's
History of the Inquisition, translated, by Dr. Chandler, with his History of
Persecution prefixed.

British Memorial, and Grosvenor's Sermon. at Salt. Hall.


. Nay, so infatuated are they to Popish cruelty, that even the King of
Portugal, on his recovery from sickness, a little before the late earthquake,
caused an act of faith to be celebrated, when three Jews, and one relapse
Protestant, were burnt, as a public thanksgiving to God for his reovery.

Dr. Geddes tells us, that infinitely more Christian blood have been shed by
the Papal empire and its agents, for not complying with the idolatry of its
worship, than ever was shed by the Roman heathens Geddes, vol. III. Essay VI.
.

Does it appear from hence that Popery is mended in these respects, or is it
easy to conceive how it ever should? Can these principles be disowned, which
are declared to be the dictates of the Holy Ghost, decrees and canons framed by
infallible councils, the performance of which is therein declared to be
well-pleasing to God, and in themselves meritorious?

A concise account of the inquisition I have occasionally given in the history
of the Reformation in the Low Countries, A. D. 1550, and need not repeat it
here; but I shall add the concluding paragraph of Limborch's History of the
inquisition, translated by Dr. Chandler, and with it I shall close this part.

The Papists, says Professor Limborch Limborch's Hist. of the Inquisition, p.
318.
, glory that the inquisition is the most certain remedy to extirpate heresies;
especially, Ludovicus a Paramo Lib. II. 3.4, 5.
, takes a great deal of pains to show that heresies have, in several places,
been extinguished by the help of the inquisition, and at last concludes in
these words: "These are some of the fairest fruits, which the most fertile
field of the holy office has produced to the church in all kingdoms, where it
has not been obstructed. But amongst all provinces and countries, the kingdoms
of Spain do every day receive the noblest sruits; for as in these countries the
holy office of the inquisition is maintained with greater severity, and is in
greater honor and esteem with the nobles and princes, so it flourishes in
greater authority and power, whereby the judges of the earth carry on more
diligent inquisition against heresies, and more effectually pull them up by the
very roots." And because the inquisition is so effectual a method to extirpate
heresies, he gathers from thence, that it was ordained for this purpose by the
most wise providence of God. But what is really unjust in itself, and carried
on by unjust methods, cannot have God for its author. Nor is success any
argument that the inquisition is from God; the first inquiry is, whether it be
suitable to the nature of the Christian doctrine? If it be not, it is then
unjust and antichristian; many things are unrighteously undertaken by men, and
accomplished by violence and cruelty, by which innocence is oppressed, which
although God, in his just and wise counsel permits, he is far from approving.
Even in Japan, a cruel persecution has extinguished the Christian religion, as
preached by the Roman priests, so that the Roman Catholic religion is equally
extinguished there, by the violence of persecution, as these doctrines are in
Spain, which are contrary to the church of Rome, and which they render odious
by the infamous name of heresy; and yet they will not allow that any just
argument can be drawn from hence to prove, that that persecution was directed
by the Divine Providence, as a most effectual remedy for the extirpation of
their religion. If other parties of Christians would use the same diligence and
cruelty of inquisition against them, I may venture to affirm, that they
themselves could not withstand it; but that, within a few years, the Popish
religion would be extinguished in all Protestant countries, and scarce a single
person left who would dare to profess it. But God forbid that the Christian
religion should ever be propagated this way, which does not consist in a
feigned and hypocritical profession, but in a sincere and undissembled faith.
And therefore, as no one ought to assume to himself the power of judging
concerning it but God, the searcher of hearts, to him only let us leave it to
pass the true judgment concerning every man's belief. Let us in the mean while
detest the tyranny of the Papists, and strive to reduce those who in our
judgment hold errors in the way of truth, by the good ossices of charity and
benevolence, without arrogating to ourselves a judgment over the consciences of
others. And, out of a serious regard to the last great day of judgment, let us
approve our consciences to God, and every one of us, expecting from his mercy
an equitable and righteous judgment, pray without ceasing, ARISE, O LORD, AND
JUDGE THY CAUSE.

Of CROISADES.
This device is said to be first hatched by that superstitious hermit named
Peter of Picardy.

Pope Urban very opportunely made use of for his advantage, and under the
pretense of sympathising with the unhappy Christians at Jerusalem, raised an
army to favor the purposes of dominion and authority, and, in a long harangue
in a general council of the west, at Cleremont, in the year 1095, he concluded
his oration in the following words: "We therefore release all faithful
Christians that shall bear arms against heretics and infidels of great and
wonderful penance for their sins, and receive them under the defense of the
church, and the protection of St. Peter and St. Paul.

Besides the particular designs of Urban in this expedition, it frequently was
made to serve other purposes, as their ambition or their resentment inclined
them, as we find they were afterward against the Albigenses or Waldenses.

Here it may be very proper to speak a little of the persecutions carried on
against the Albigenses or Waldenses, their principles being the same, the
former name being given them from their inhabiting the town Albigium; the
latter as having embraced the principles in general of Peter Waldo; and this is
amply confirmed by the Popes processes, and sentence against them, it being
always in the name of Waldenses.

The first persecution was raised against them by Pope Innocent III. about the
year 1198, who pretended at first to reduce them by reason and argument, and
for that purpose sent two men amongst them, who found them so well established
in their principles, that they offered a free and public disputation. In the
mean time Pope Innocent strengthened himself, and prepared to destroy or
conquer them. Upon this footing the Pope likewise sent out his spiritual
thunderbolts, or anathemas, and in the same or following year erected the
inquisition; an office peculiarly intended for the finding out and punishing
such as they pleased to call heretics, in which monks were principally
employed, and chiefly they of the order of St. Dominic, instituted by the Pope;
and by these means, together with the invitations and promises given by the
Popes bulls of full pardon of sin and paradise to all that would come and bear
arms against them for forty days; so that the army increased to near 100,000
Bennet's Persecution and Cruelty of the Chapter of Rome.
; and history mentions their destroying in the space of six months, or
thereabout, 200,000 Dr. Grosvenor's Sermons against Popery.
. He likewise excommunicated and declared war against Raymond Earl of
Thoulouse, and his subjects, for not joining in the persecution of the
Albigenses.

Of the WORSHIP of the CHURCH of ROME.
This may be considered in regard to the objects of it, the stated daily
service, and also as varied at particular times in the solemnities or
ceremonies of it, and as performed by the Pope, Cardinal, or Priests. But as a
particular relation of all these would exceed the limits of this work, I shall
only give an account of some of their solemnities and ceremonies that are most
remarkable, referring the reader, for the form and method of the common and
ordinary service, to the Romish missal or breviary, etc.

Of the ALTAR.
The ALTAR. according to the sacred canons, should be made of stone, and it is
the bishop's province to consecrate it; the table to be of one single stone,
supported by pillars; there should be three steps to go up to it, covered with
a carpet, and it is the clerk's business to take care that the table be covered
with a chrismal, that is, a fine cloth, as white as possible, be laid upon it.
All this must be observed with the greatest exactness with respect to the high
altar, where Christ's body is for the generality deposited. The clerks must be
dressed in their surplices when they approach it, and immediately kneel down
and adore the holy sacrament. Certain rules are likewise to be observed in the
change of the ornaments: the whole must be blessed, crossed, etc. sprinkled
with holy water. The same formalities are to be observed with respect to the
tabernacle of the altar, to the pyx, the box where the host is locked up, and
the corporals on which they consecrate; in all which they are to provide every
thing of the greatest value; neither gold, silver, or precious stones, are
spared to adorn it; and the most splendid productions of art contribute to its
luster. Tapers are set on the right and left side, which must be made of white
wax, except in offices for the dead, etc.

There must be a crucifix in relievo on the altar of curious workmanship, and
the crucifix must be so placed as that the foot may be as high as the top of
the candlesticks. We shall pass by the cruets, basins, etc. for washing, etc.
There is also the little bell, which is to be rung at the Sanct^s, the two
elevations; the clerk must tinkle it twice at each Sanctus, and at each
elevation nine times, viz. thrice when the priest kneels down, thrice when he
elevates the host, and thrice when he sets it down upon the altar. The same
formalities are observed in regard to the chalice, etc. The altar is enclosed
with rails, generally of curious workmanship, and the service conducted with
much solemnity and great ceremony.

Of the DIVINE SERVICE, Canonical Hours, etc.
The service consists of prayers and holy lessons, which the church has
appointed to be read every day by the clergy at particular hours. This service
is called by the church the canonical hours; because it was ordained by the
canons of the church, which not only prescribed the hours in which it is to be
said, but likewise the particular circumstances in which it is to be said. This
office is in general called the breviary, which has its name from being an
abridgment of a longer service, that was formerly used, than is at present.

This office is to be said in a standing posture, pursuant to the ancient
custom of the church, and upon the knees on the days of penance.

The office consists of seven hours, if mattins and lauds are to be reckoned
one, but eight in case they are divided. In the more early ages it was composed
but of six parts, which were Tierce, Sexte, and None, for the day, and for
night, the evening, the midnight, and morning prayers. At present they are
divided into seven or eight, viz. mattins for night, lauds for the morning,
prime, tierce, sexte, none for the day, vespers for the evening, and compline
for the beginning of the night. The hour of saying prime, is directly after
sunrising, tierce is fixed to the third hour of the day, sexte at the sixth,
none at the ninth hour, vespers toward the evening, and compline after
sunset; and due care is taken that these offices be all carefully performed at
or near the times here specified The Papists pretend great antiquity for
canonical hours; they are undoubtedly derived from Judaism, or we may trace
their original from Paganism. The heathens had their mattins, and the Egyptians
saluted their gods every morning; they had also their primes, seconds, and
tierces, which we call prime, tierce, sexte, etc. -- See Du Choul on the
Religion of the Ancients See likewise Picart's Ceremonies, vol. I. p. 312.
.
.

The habits of the Pope, bishops, deacons, and other inferior officers, are
variously modified, according to the time, place, occasion, etc. When the Pope
celebrates mass himself, the cardinals appear in white damask robes laced with
gold. The cardinal bishops wear copes, the cardinal priests chasubles; the
cardinal deacons, tunics, and all of them white damask mitres. The bishops wear
copes too, but they are of rich silks embroidered with gold, and white linen
mitres sewed on paste-boards.


Of the CEREMONIES of the MASS.
We shall now lay before our readers, in a concise manner, the ceremonies of
the mass, which the Catholics look upon as the most acceptable of all
adorations, and the most effectual of all prayers. The church not only prays
herself at this sacrifice, which the priest offers up to God in the most solemn
manner, but Jesus Christ, by the sacrifice of his own body, offers up to his
Father the most perfect adoration that can possibly be paid him, since it is
offered by a God.

The mass consists of two parts, viz. the first, from the beginning to the
offering, which was formerly called the mass of the catechumens; and the
second, from the offering to the conclusion, called the mass of the faithful.
All persons without distinction were present at it till the offering; then the
deacon cries out, holy things are for such as are holy; let the profane depart
hence.

Monsieur Picart presents us with thirty-five curious prints to illustrate the
several descriptions of those ceremonies Vol. I. p. 324. and seq. See also the
Explanation of the Mass.
.

I. The priest goes to the altar, in allusion to our Lord's retreat with his
Apostles to the garden of Olives.

II. Before he begins mass, he says a preparatory prayer. The priest is then to
look on himself as one abandoned of God, and driven out of paradise for the sin
of Adam.

III. The priest makes confession for himself, and for the people, in which it
is required that he be free from mortal and from venial sin.

IV. The priest kisses the altar, as a token of our reconciliation with God,
and our Lord's being betrayed by a kiss.

V. The priest goes to the epistle side of the altar, and thurifies or perfumes
it. Jesus Christ is now supposed to be taken and bound.

VI. The Introite, said or sung, i. e. a psalm or hymn, applicable to the
circumstance of our Lord's being carried before Caiaphas the high priest.

VII. The priest says the Kyrie Eloison, which signifies, Lord have mercy upon
us, three times, in allusion to Peter's denying our Lord thrice.

VIII. The priest turning toward the altar, says, Dominus vobiscum, i. e. The
Lord be with you: the people return this salutation, cum Spiritu tuo, and with
thy Spirit, Jesus Christ looking at Peter.

IX. The priest reads the epistle relating to Jesus being accused before Pilate.

X. The priest bowing before the altar, says, Mund^cor, i. e. Cleanse our
hearts. The gradual is sung. This psalm is varied according as it is the time
of Lent or not. The devotion is now directed to our Savior's being accused
before Herod, and making no reply.

XI. The priest reads the gospel wherein Jesus Christ is sent from Herod to
Pilate. The gospel is carried from the right side of the altar to the left, to
denote the tender of the gospel to the Gentiles after refusal by the Jews.

XII. The priest uncovers the chalice, hereby to represent our Lord was
stripped in order to be scourged.

XIII. The oblation of the host, the creed is sung by the congregation. The
priest then kisses the altar, then the priest offers up the host, which is to
represent or import the scourging of Jesus Christ, which was introductory to
his other sufferings.

XIV. The priest elevates the chalice, then covers it. Here Jesus's being
crowned with thorns is thereby figured to the mind, showing that he was going
to be elevated a victim; and it is well known the victims of the Pagans were
crowned before they were sacrificed to their idols.

XV. The priest washes his fingers, as Pilate washed his hands, declares Jesus
innocent, blesses the bread and the wine, blesses the frankincense, and
perfumes the bread and wine, praying that the smell of this sacrifice may be
more acceptable to him than the smoke of victims.

XVI. The priest turning to the people, says, Oratre Fratres, i. e. let us
pray. He then bows himself to the altar, addresses himself to the Trinity, and
prays in a very low voice. This is one of the secretums of the mass, and the
imagination of the devout Christian is to find out the conformity between this
and Christ being clothed with a purple robe; but we shall be cautious of
adding more on this head, that we may not lose ourselves in the boundless ocean
of allusions.

XVII. The priest says the preface at the close of the Secretum. This part of
the mass is in affinity to Jesus Christ being condemned to be crucified. The
priest uses a prayer to God the Father, which is followed by the Sanctus, holy,
holy, holy is the Lord, etc. which the people sing.

XVIII. The priest joining his hands, prays for the faithful that are living.
This is said to be in allusion to Jesus Christ bearing the cross to die upon,
that we might live.

XIX. The priest covers with a cloth the host and chalice, St. Veronica
offering her handkerchief to Jesus Christ.

XX. The priest makes the sign of the cross upon the host and chalice, to
signify that Jesus Christ is nailed to the cross.

XXI. The priest adores the host before elevated, and then he raises it up, in
the best manner, to represent our Savior lifted up upon the cross. He repeats
the Lord's prayer, with his arms extended, that his body might represent the
figure of a cross, which is the ensign of Christianity.

XXII. The priest likewise consecrates the chalice, and elevates it, to
represent the blood of Jesus Christ shed upon the cross.

XXIII. The priest says the Memento for the faithful that are in purgatory.
This prayer is in allusion to that which our Lord made for his enemies; but
this allusion would be forced and unnatural, unless the devotees looked upon
themselves as his enemies.

XXIV. The priest then raises his voice, smiting his breast, begs God's
blessing on himself and congregation, for the sake of such saints as he
enumerates, and implores the divine Majesty for a place in paradise, to imitate
the thief upon the cross.

XXV. The priest elevates the host and cup, and says the per omnia. then the
Lord's prayer The sign of the cross, which he makes on the host, the chalice,
and the altar, is to represent to God that bleeding sacrifice which his son
offered up to him of himself; then the devout Christian becomes the child of
God, and is in allusion to the virgin Mary's being bid to look on St. John as
her son.

XXVI. After the Lord's prayer, the priest says a private one to God, to
procure his peace by the mediation of the Virgin Mary and the saints, then puts
the sacred host upon the paten, and breaks it, to represent Jesus Christ giving
up the ghost.

XXVII. The priest puts a little bit of the host into the chalice. The true
Christian is now with an eye of faith to behold Jesus Christ descending into
Limbo, i. e. hell.

XXVIII. Then the priest says, and the people sing, Agnus Dei, etc. thrice
over, and the priest smites his breast. This action is an allusion to those
who, having seen our Lord's sufferings, returned home smiting their breasts.

XXIX. After the Agnus Dei is sung, the priest says a private prayer for the
peace of the church. He then kisses the altar, and the instrument of peace
called the paxis, which being received at his hands by the deacon, it is handed
about to the people to be kissed, and passed from each other with these words,
peace be with you; and whilst the paxis is kissing, the priest prepares himself
for the communion by two other prayers, when he adores the host, and then says
with a low voice, I will eat of the celestial bread; and smiting his breast,
says, I am not worthy that thou should enter into my house, three times
after eating of the bread. He uncovers the chalice, repeating verse. ^. of the
115th psalm according to the Vulgate. When the priest has received the
communion, he administers it to the people. The application of these ceremonies
is to the death and burial of Jesus Christ, and his descent into hell.

XXX. After this the priest, putting the wine into the chalice, in order to
take what is called the ablution, repeats a short prayer; then he causes wine
and water to be poured out for the second ablution, accompanied with another
short prayer, and then salutes the congregation. These ablutions allegorically
represent the washing and embalming the body of Jesus Christ, etc.

XXXI. The priest sings the post communion, or prayer for a good effect of the
sacrament then received, expressed by the glorious resurrection of the
regenerate Christians, and is to be looked upon as the representation of our
Lord's resurrection.

XXXII. The priest turning to the people, says, Dominus vobiscum, salutes the
congregation, as the ambassador of Christ, with the message of peace.

XXXIII. The priest reads the beginning of St. John's gospel, and particularly
of Jesus's appearing to his mother and disciples, and uses some short prayers.

XXXIV. The priest dismisses the people with these words, Ite, missa est,
depart, the mass is concluded: to which they answer, God be thanked. This, they
say, points to the ascension of Jesus Christ, where he receives the eternal
reward of that sacrifice, both as priest and victim.

XXXV. The people receive the benediction of the priest or bishop, if he is
present, to represent the blessings promised, and poured down upon the apostles
by the Holy Ghost.

This benediction must be given after kissing, with eyes erected to heaven, and
their arms stretched out, and then gently brought back to the stomach, that the
hands may join in an affectionate manner for the congregation of the faithful.
The extension of the arms, and joining of the arms, are both mysterious, and
show the charity with which the priest calls his spiritual brethren to God.
When he pronounces the benediction, he must lean in an engaging posture toward
the altar, as prescribed by the Italian symbolical authors, viz. Piscara,
Baudry, and others. Picart's Religious Ceremonies, vol. I.


Of the ADORATION of the HOST.
The host, or consecrated wafer, among the Roman Catholics, they worship with
the profoundest reverence; of which Dr. Middleton relates as follows. "This
celebrated act of Popish idolatry, the adoration of the host, I must confess
that I cannot find the least resemblance of it in any part of the Pagan
worship; and as often as I have been standing by at mass, and seen the whole
congregation prostrate on the ground in the humblest posture of adoring at the
elevation of this consecrated piece of bread, I could not help reflecting on
that passage of Tully, when speaking of the absurdity of the Heathens in the
choice of their Gods. But, says he, was any man ever so mad as to take that
which he feeds upon for a God? This was an extravagance reserved for Popery
alone, and is now become the principal part of worship, and the distinguishing
article of faith in the creed of modern Rome Middleton's Letters, p. 179.
.

The general division of masses is into high and low. High mass, called also
grand mass, is that sung by the choristers, and celebrated with the assistance
of a deacon and a subdeacon. Low mass is that wherein the prayers are barely
rehearsed, without any singing, and performed without much ceremony, or the
assistance of a deacon and subdeacon. As to ordinary masses, there are some
which are said for the Christian's soul, for releasing it from purgatory, or
mitigating its punishment there. A sufficient sum must be left to the priest
for this purpose. The dying man sometimes bequeathes 20 or 30,000 masses to his
soul, charging the pastor, on whom he principally relies, toremit this stock to
him in the other world. There are likewise private masses for the recovery of
stolen goods, for health, and for travelers, or for returnning God thanks for
particular mercies; these are called votive masses. The mass used at sea, where
the cup is omitted, lest the wine should be spilt by the ship's motion, is
called the dry mass.

There are several sorts of solemn masses; such are the collegiate, the
pontifical, those celebrated before the Pope, cardinals, or bishops, at
Christmas, Passion week, etc.

When HIGH MASS is performed episcopally, or by a bishop, it is attended with
more ceremony and magnificence. As soon as the bishop is observed to come in
sight, the bells are rung; on his setting his foot within the church-doors, the
organs begin to play. The master of the ceremonies gives the sprinkler to the
head canon, who presents it, after he has kissed both that and his sacred hand.
His lordship sprinkles himself, and then the canons, with it, in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and then goes and says a
prayer before the altar, on which stands the holy sacrament, at a desk prepared
for that particular purpose, and does the same at the high altar; from whence
he withdraws into the vestry, and there puts on his peculiar ornaments, in the
following order.

The subdeacon goes to a little closet contiguous to the altar, and takes from
thence the episcopal sandals and stockings, which he elevates and presents to
the bishop. Then the deacon kneels down, and pulls off his lordship's shoes and
stockings, who is in the midst of seven or eight acolites, or readers, all upon
their knees, as well as the deacon, in their respective habits, who spreads the
prelate's robes. Two acolites, after they have washed their hands, take the
sacred habiliments, holds them up, and gives them to the two deacon assistants,
to put upon the bishop as soon as he has washed his hands. The deacon salutes
the bishop, takes off his upper garment, and puts on his amiot, the cross
whereof he kisses; then they give him the albe, the girdle, the cross for his
breast, the stole, and pluvial. He kisses the cross upon receiving each of
them, thereby to testify his veneration of the cross; the deacons and
assistants likewise kiss these sacred vestments. As soon as the bishop is
seated, they put his mitre on, and a priest presents him with the pastoral
ring. The deacon gives him his right glove, and the subdeacon his left, which
each of them kiss, as also the hand they have the honor to serve in all these
circumstances. There are some pretry ceremonies to be observed, which those who
are fond of mysteries may endeavor to account for. It is more material to
acquaint our readers, that ejaculatory prayers have been adapted to each
individual piece o^ the episcopal robes, and that the devotion of this ceremony
is supported and confirmed by the singing the office of tierce. Prayers
intended to return God thanks for the sanctification of his church by the Holy
Ghost.


The bishop being thus dressed in all his habiliments Each of these have a
mysterious significance; the stole represents the yoke of the gospel; the shoes
being taken off, alludes to Moses putting of his shoes; the D^tmatica is to
represent to the deacon that he must be crucified to the world: the albe
denotes the purity of the priest's soul; the pastoral ring implies the priest's
spiritual marriage with the church; his gloves are to denote that he is
insensible of his good works; the girdle, that he will be girded with justice
and virtue; the sandals, that is to walk in the paths of the Lord; the horns of
the mitre, the Old and New Testament; the shepherd's crook, his correction and
paternal authority; the plavial, which was formerly used by travelers, to
represent the miseries of this life, and thus the bishop is to become a living
image of the true Christian. This account is given by Casalius: but to show us
the propriety and reality of these pretended characters, requires some farther
explication and proof. Picart's Ceremonies, vol. I. p. 335.
, his clergy range themselves round about him. Two deacons, who are canons,
place themselves on each side of him, both in their dalmaticas; and after them
a deacon and subdeacon. Then the incensebearer with the censer, and a priest
with the navet, out of which the bishop takes incense, puts it into the censer,
and gives it his benediction. After this he kisses the cross, which is upon the
vestry altar, and then goes in procession to the other altar, where he is to
celebrate the mass. The incense-bearer walks at the head of the procession; two
wax-candle bearers, with lighted tapers in their hands, march next on each side
of him who bears the cross; all the clergy follow them; the subdeacon who is to
sing the epistle, carries before his breast the New Testament shut, with the
bishop's maniple in it; a deacon and priest march just before the bishop; the
bishop carrying his shepherd's crook in his left hand, to dispense his
blessings to those good Christians he passes in the way. The bishop being
advanced to the altar, bows himself once to the clergy, and when he enters on
the first step of the altar, delivers his crook to the subdeacon, and the
deacon takes off the mitre; then the prelate and clergy bow to the altar, or
rather to the cross on the altar; after which the clergy withdraw, except two
priests assistants, one on his right, and the other on his left hand, with the
incense-bearer, the subdeacon, and two deacons assistants, and then the
ceremony of the mass service begins with the Confileor See Picart's Religious
Cer. vol. I. p. 336.
, etc. and the choir sings the introite Offices, Vestments, and other
Distinctions, see the Dict.
.

The SOLEMN MASS, celebrated by the POPE,
Has much of magnificence and ceremony: we shall relate a simple part Apion's
Account, in his Tableau de la Cour de Rome, and Picart's Cer. vol. I. p. 339.
. A pontifical solemn mass principally differs in two respects, always
observed, when his holiness himself officiates. The first is this, the two
gospels are sung, one in Greek, and the other in Latin; the second, that the
communion is different in the papal mass, and performed after the following
manner: after the Agnus Dei is sung, his holiness goes to his throne; the
cardinal deacon of the gospel stands in such a manner on the epistle side, with
his hands closed together, that he cannot only see the sacrament on the altar,
but the Pope likewise going to his throne. When his holiness is seated, the
deacon goes and takes the consecrated host upon the paten, covered with a veil,
and, turning to the people, elevates it three times successively, that is to
say, in the middle and at each end of the altar. After that he gives it to the
subdeacon, who carries it to his holiness; in the mean time, the same deacon
takes the chalice, in which is the consecrated wine, and having elevated it
three times as he did the water before, carries it to the Pope, who adore Jesus
Christ under both kinds, as soon as they are brought to him, which he performs
with a moderately low bow of half his body in a standing posture; and when the
deacon and sub deacon are come close to him, they place themselves one on his
right hand, and the other on his left hand; his holiness takes the large host
which is upon the paten, and communicates, putting it into his mouth: he then
gives two small ones to the deacon and subdeacon, who are kneeling, and kisses
his hand before they receive them. The deacon however still holds the chalice,
till the assistant cardinal bishop, dressed in his cope, comes up to the
pontifical throne, when the Pope's vestry-keeper presents him with a small gold
Pope, one end whereof he dips into the chalice, and his holiness at the same
time takes hold of the other, and inclining his head a little, sucks up a part
of the consecrated wine, leaving the rest to the deacon, who carries the
chalice to the altar, and there sucks up a part of it, and leaves a little for
the subdeacon, who drinks it without the Pipe, as also that which is poured out
for the ablution of the chalice, which he wipes with the purificatory, or white
linen cloth: in the mean time his holiness gives the kiss of peace only to the
deacon, and the communion only under one kind to the other cardinals,
ambassadors, princes, prelates, and sometimes to private persons, who have
desired to receive that mark of honor from him The Emper^r and the King of
France always receive in both kinds.
, after which he returns to the altar, and goes through the mass with the usual
ceremonies and solemnity.

We might here relate the peculiar ceremonies attending high mass at Christmas,
when his holiness officiates, who, being dressed in all his pontifical
ornaments (the most remarkable whereof on this occasion are the white pluvial
and precious mitre) by the cardinal deacons already in their robes, blesses the
incense presented to the thurifier; after that the pontiff is preceded by the
Roman and other prelates, who all wear white mitres.

The incense-bearer, and seven acolites, each with a wax-taper in his hands,
walk before the cross-bearer, and a clerk of the chamber before the
incense-bearer, who holds a sword lifted up, with a cap upon it, which is a
representation perhaps of the irresistible power and efficacy of the pontifical
sword, which Christ's vicar has inherited from St. Paul, with that of freeing
Christians from the bondage of the devil, by a right acquired by the son of
God, whose nativity is then celebrated. It is considered likewise as an emblem
of the church's dignity and freedom under the government of the Pope. Many of
the superior clergy make up this holy procession; and should the Emperor, or
any other sovereign prince, happen to be at Rome at that time, he must carry
the train of the Pope's mantle; two cardinals likewise hold up the two ends of
it. His holiness walks in a very stately and majestic manner, under a canopy
supported by eight gentlemen of the first rank.

As soon as the Pope is got into the church, he passes on to a chapel, and then
sits down. The cardinals come and bow to him, and kiss the hem of the holy
father's pluvial on the right side; then comes the other prelates in order, and
kiss his right knee. The Latin and Greek deacons, who assist his holiness,
stand in readiness at the altar. After some anthems are sung, a vestry-keeper
puts on the arms of a Latin subdeacon, a small napkin, whereon are laid his
holiness's sandals and stockings. The subdeacon carries altogether to the Pope,
with his hands held up to his eyes. The acolites follow him, and whilst the
fubdeacon and a gentleman of the privy chamber get under the holy father's
pluvial, to put on his stockings and his sandals, the acolites take care to
spread the borders of the pluvial whilst the subdeacon is putting them on. The
assistant bishops who are present at this religious ceremony hold before his
holiness a book and a wax-taper, who, with his assistant deacons, sings an
anthem and a psalm. The choir sing tierce, during which the Pope rises, and an
assistant bishop goes up to him with the pontifical; two taper-bearers attend
with lights in their hands. The pontiff takes off his mitre, which is done
frequently in this ceremony, and puts it on again. Then an assistant bishop
lays the pontifical on his own head, that his holiness may read the office of
the day, and another assistant supports the book in one hand, and holds a ^aper
in the other: when the pontiff is seated again, and his mitre put on, he is
presented with some water to wash him. His holiness having washed, the gospel
deacon, assisted with two others, takes off his mitre, pluvial, and stole, in
order to put on several other robes, which the acolites bring him from the
altar, viz. the girdle, the breast-cross, the dalmatica, the ^unic, the albe,
the gloves, etc. all which must be devoutly kissed, and the pallium, the cross
whereof his holiness kisses Lastly, they put the ring on hi^ finger, called the
pontifical ring. His holiness thus equipped, and followed by two auditors,
holding up the corners of the pluvial, humbly proceeds to the Confiteor before
the steps of the altar, and the three youngest cardinal priests advance to kiss
the holy father's mouth and his breast. Then the gospel deacon censes his
holiness, and his holiness the altar, and then the ceremony of the service
begins; during which there is the ceremony of delivering to the Pope a purse
with twenty-five julio's in it of antique money; and the subdeacons and the
master of the ceremonies kiss the Pope's feet, with some other insignificant
ceremonies.

Of saying the Mass in LATIN.
The Catholics say it is no hindrance to the devotion of the common people in
the least, provided they be well instructed in the nature of this sacrifice,
and taught how to accompany the priest with prayers and devotions adapted to
every part of the mass; such as they commonly have in their Manuals, or other
prayer-books.

It is a common sacrifice that is offered for all, and in some manner by all;
but as for the particular form of prayers used by the priest in the mass, there
is no obligation for the faithful to recite the same. All that God or his
church requires from them, is to assist at that sacrifice with attention and
devotion; and this they fully comply with, when they endeavor to follow the
directions given by them, and use such prayers as are best adapted to each part
of the mass, though they be not the same as the priest uses.

Of the Procession on GOOD FRIDAY.
The gloomy solemnity of the day does not permit of certain honors which
otherwise would be paid to his holiness. The cardinals don't bow to him, nor do
the ministers who are to sing the passion kiss his foot. When those who sing
the service come to those words, having bowed down his head, he yielded up the
ghost, the Pope, the minister who officiates, and the rest of the congregation,
turn themselves toward the altar, kneel down, and pray with a very low voice.
In the hight, at 22 o'clock, according to the Italian manner of counting the
hours, the Greeks perform the obsequies of our Savior, in their own tongue,
round a great crucifix, and on a bed of state, adorned with flowers. At
Courtray, a town in the Austrian Netherlands, there is a procession on
Good Friday to mount Calvary. The city gives twenty-five livres to a poor man
to represent the suffering Savior, while the monks assure him of salvation if
he die under the wounds or blows given him. -- nor is the procession at
Brussels, in which the crucifixion of our Lord is represented, less
extraordinary in its circumstances. The city and court join in the solemnity,
which is attended with such a parade of ceremonies as are too numerous to
mention See Picart, vol. II. page 26, 27, 28.
.

The PRONE or HOMILY.
The Prone, or Homily, is too considerable a part of the service to be omitted.
Under the word Prone, Alet's Ritual tells us, we are to include the instruction
which is given to the people relating to what is necessary for salvation; the
prayers of the church in a peculiar manner for the faithful; the publication of
festivals, fasts, banns of matrimony, holy orders, marriages, and other things
concerning the discipline of the church. The Prone follows the gospel, because
this part of divine service is particularly intended for the explication of the
mysteries of religion, and the sacred writings. This is performed with so much
ceremony, that I shall beg leave to refer the reader to Alet's Ritual, or
Picart's religious ceremonies, vol. I. page 360.

Of the Devotion of Catholics to the Virgin Mary.
1. It is, they say, grounded upon her great dignity as mother of God, and the
close relation which she has thereby to Jesus Christ her son; for how is it
possible to love and honor Christ with our whole heart, and not value and love
his mother?

2. It is grounded upon that supereminent grace, which was bestowed upon her,
to prepare her for that dignity; upon account of which she was saluted by the
angel Gabriel, St. Luke, i. 2^. full of grace, and by St. Elizabeth she is
styled blessed among women, Luke i. 42.

3. It is grounded upon her extraordinary sanctity; for if she was sull of
grace before she conceived in the womb the fountain of all grace, to what a
degree of sanctity and grace must she have arrived, du^ing so many years as she
lived afterward? especially since she bore nine months in her womb the author
of all sanctity, and had him thirty years under her roof, ever contemplating
him and his heavenly mysteries, St. Luke ii. 19 and 51. and on her part never
making any resistance to the affluence of his grace ever flowing in upon her
happy soul.

4. It is grounded upon that supereminent degree of heavenly glory with which
God has now honored her, in proportion to her grace and sanctity here upon
earth, and the great interest she has with her blessed Son, and through him
with his heavenly Father Catholic Instructed, p. 235.
.

Of the Use of BEADS, the ROSARY, etc.
Q. Why do Catholics so often repeat the Hail, Mary?

A. To commemorate the incarnation of the Son of God; to honor his blessed
mother, and to desire her prayers.

Q. What is the meaning of the Beads?

A. It is a devotion, consisting of a certain number of our father and hail
Mary's, directed for the obtaining of blessings from God, through the prayers
and intercession of our Lady.

Q. But is it not highly absurd, that, according to the common way of laying
the beads, there are repeated ten hail Mary's for one our father?

A. It would be absurd indeed, and blasphemous too, if the meaning of this were
to signify that the blessed Virgin is either more powerful or more merciful
than her ^on, or that we have a greater confidence in her than in him; but we
are sar from any such notions.

Q. Why then is the hail Mary repeated so much oftener in the beads than the
Lord's prayer?

A. Because the beads being a devotion particularly instituted to commemorate
the incarnation of Christ, and to honor him in his blessed mother, it was
thought proper to repeat so much the oftener that prayer, which is particularly
adapted to these ends. In the mean time, it may be proper so take notice, 1.
That if in the beads there be ten hail Mary's said for one our father, in the
mass and office of the church, almost all the prayers are directed to God
alone. 2. That every hail Mary, both by the nature of the prayer, and the
intention of the church, is directed more to the honor of the son than of the
mother, as well because the church, in honoring the mother, has principally in
view the honor of the son, as also because this prayer particularly relates to
the incarnation of Christ; and if withal it begs her prayers, then she is only
desired to pray for us.

To which if we add, that her prayers are ten times better and more acceptable
to God than ours, it will appear no ways absurd that we should so frequently
desire her prayers; for as to the repetition of the same prayer, it is what is
recommended to us by the example of our Lord, St. Matt. xxvii. 42, 44, etc. and
has nothing of absurdity in it.

Q. What is the meaning of the Rosary?

A. The rosary is a method of saying the beads, so as to meditate upon the
incarnation, passion and resurrection of Christ; and it is divided into three
parts, each part consisting of five mysteries, to be contemplated during the
repeating of five d^cads or te^s upon the beads. The first five are called the
five joyful mysteries, viz. the Anunciation, when our Lord was conceived in his
mother's womb; the Visication, when the blessed Virgin visited her kinswoman
St. Elizabeth, and by her was declared blessed among women, etc. the Nativity
of our Lord, his presentment in the temple, together with the purification of
the blessed Virgin, and his being found in the temple in the midst of the
doctors, etc. The five next are called the dolorous and sorrowful mysteries, as
having relation to the passion of Christ, and are, his prayer and agony in the
garden, his being scourged at the pillar, his crowning with thorns, his
carriage of his cross, and his crucifixion and death. The five last are called
the five glorious mysteries, viz. the resurrection of our Lord, his ascension
into heaven, the coming of the Holy Ghost, the assumption of the blessed
Virgin, and her coagmenation, together with the eternal glory of the saints in
the kingdom of heaven Catholic Christian instructed, page 234.
.

Of the Invocation of ANGELS and SAINTS.
Q. What is the doctrine and practice of the Catholic church, with regard to
the invocation of angels and saints?

A. We hold it to be pious and profitable to apply ourselves to them in the way
of desiring them to pray to God for us; but not so as to address ourselves to
them as if they were the authors or disposers of pardon, grace, or salvation,
or as if they had any power to help us independently of God's good will and
pleasure.

Q. But, in some of the addresses made to the saints and angels, I find
petitions for mercy, aid or defense; what say you?

A. The meaning of those addresses, as far as they are authorized by the
church, is no other than to beg mercy of the saints in this sense, that they
would pity and compassionate our misery, and would pray for us. In like manner,
when we beg their aid and defense, we mean to beg the aid and defense of their
prayers; and that the angels to whom God has given a charge over us, would
assist us and defend us against the angels of darkness; and this is no more
than what the Protestant church asks in the collect for Michaelmas day, praying
that as the holy angels always serve God in heaven, so by his appointment they
may succor and defend us upon earth Catholic Christian, page 224.
.

Of the Use and Veneration of RELICS in the Catholic Church.
Q. What do you mean by relics?

A. The dead bodies or bones of the saints we call relics; as also whatever
other things have belonged to them in their mortal life.

Q. And what is the doctrine and practice of the church with regard to these
things?

A. We keep such things as these with a religious respect and veneration, for
the sake of those to whom they have belonged, but principally for the sake of
him to whom the saints themselves belonged; that is, for the greater glory of
God, who is glorious in his saints, and to whom is referred all the honor that
is given to his saints.

Q. What reason has the church for showing this respect to the dead bodies or
bones of the saints?

A. 1. Because they have been the victims, and the living temples of God, in
which his divine Majesty has, in a particular manner, inhabited, and which he
has sanctified by his presence and grace; and therefore, if God required of
Moses, Exodus iii. 5. and of Joshua, Josh. v. 15. to loose their shoes from off
their feet, in respect to the ground on which they stood, as being rendered
holy by his presence, or that of his angels, we must think that it is agreeable
to his divine Majesty, that we should testify the like honor to that venerable
earth of the bodies of his saints, which he in such an extraordinary manner has
sanctified, by abiding in them as in his temples. 2. We know the bodies of the
saints are preordained to a happy resurrection and eternal glory, and upon this
account also deserve our respect. 3. The bodies and other relics of the saints
have been, and are daily the instruments of the power of God for the working of
innumerable miracles; which God, who is truth and sanctify itself, would never
have effected, if it had not been agreeable to him that we should honor and
respect these precious remnants of his servants. 4. The relics and shrines of
the martyrs and other saints serve very much to encourage the faithful to an
imitation of their virtues, and to help to raise their souls from the love of
things present and temporal to the love of things eternal.

Of MIRACLES performed by or before the Images of the Virgin Mary and other
Saints.
Aringhus, touching upon this subject, says, that the images of the blessed
Virgin shine out continually by new and daily miracles, to the comfort of their
votaries, and the confusion of all gainsayers. Within these few years, says he,
under every Pope successively some or other of our sacred images, especially of
the more ancient, have made themselves illustrious, and acquired a peculiar
worship and veneration, by the exhibition of fresh signs; as it is notorious to
all who reside at Rome. He instances the images of St. Dominica, so conspicuous
at this day for its never ceasing miracles, which attract the resort and
admiration of the whole Christian world Aringhus Roma subterran. tom. ii. p.
464, sect. 13. as quoted by Middleton.
.

In a collegiate church of regular canons, called St. Mary of Imprunetta, about
six miles from Florence, there is a miraculous picture of the Virgin Mary,
painted by St. Luke, and held in the greatest veneration throughout all
Tuscany, which, as often as that state happens to be visited by any calamity, or
in any peculiar danger, is sure to be brought out and carried in procession
through the streets of Florence, attended by the Prince himself, with all the
nobility, magistrates, and clergy, where it has never failed to afford them
present relief in the greatest difficulties; in testimony of which they produce
ancient acts and records, confirmed by public inscriptions, setting forth all
the particular benefits miraculously obtained from each procession, and the
several offerings made on that account to the sacred image for many centuries
past, down to these very times Middleton's Prefatory Discourse to his Letters
from Rome, page 12.
.

All their apologists indeed declare, that they do not ascribe these miracles
to any power in the image itself, but to the power of God, who is moved to work
them by the prayers and intercessions of his saints, for the benefit of those
that have sought that intercession before the pictures or images, and in order
to bear testimony to the faith and practice of the church in that particular
article Catholic Christian, page 251.
.

Dr. Middleton tells us, in his letters from Rome, that they pretend to show us
there two orginal impressions of our Savior's face, on two different
handkerchiefs, the one sent a present by himself to Agbarus Prince of Edessa,
the other presented by him at the time of his crucifixion to a saint or holy
woman named Veronica, on a handkerchief which she had lent him to wipe his face
on that occasion; both which handkerchiefs are still preserved, as they affirm,
and shown with the utmost reverence; the first in St. Sepulchre's church, the
second in St. Peter's, where, in honor of this sacred relic, there is a fine
altar built by Pope Urban VIII. with a statue of Veronica herself, and there is
a prayer in their book of offices, ordered by the rubric to be addressed to
this sacred and miraculous picture, in the following terms. -- "Conduct us, O
thou blessed figure, to our proper home, where we may behold the pure face of
Christ Middleton's Letters from Rome, page 174.

See likewise Conformity of ancient and modern Ceremonies, page 158.


."

Of the Ceremony of carrying the CROSS or CRUCIFIX before the sovereign Pontiff.
On all common, but public occasions, the cross is carried before the sovereign
Pontiff. At the end of a pike about ten palms or spans long, the image of our
Savior is turned toward the Pope; and the chaplain, who carries it, walks
bareheaded, when his holiness goes in public, or is carried on men's shoulders;
but when he goes in a coach or chair the chairman carries the crucifix on
horseback bareheaded. But on all solemn and religious occasions where the Pope
attends in his sacred robes, an auditor of the rota carries the crucifix at the
solemn procession, on horseback, dressed in a rocket and capuche, or sort of
cope, purple-coloured; but there are three days in Passion week on which he and
the sacred college go to the chapel in mourning, without the cross being borne
before him.

We find likewise even as early as the sourth century, the cross was in great
veneration among Christians; to countenance which the Papists have formed many
sabulous stories and pretended miracles. It has however been an increasing
superstition ever since, so that festivals have been invented in honor of the
cross. The invention of the cross is celebrated on the third day of May; the
exaltation of it on the fourteenth day of September; and one of the principal
relics is the pretended parts of the cross on which Christ was crucified. The
rituals prescribe the proportionable form and manner in which they should be
made, and in which at our devotion it should be figured on the breast. The
consecration of public and private crosses is another ceremony, or rather a
sormal service, in which an incredible number of ceremonies are united. The
consec^ation of crosses is said to be very ancient, at least as early as the
seventh century: some celebrated crucifixes have likewise peculiar homage paid
them; such as the crucifix called Santissimo Crocesisso at Naples, the Santo
Volto at Lucea, the crucifix at Loretto, the sacred crucifix at Trent; to which
we may add that of the Beguine nuns at Ghent; to all of which some pretended
miracles are attributed See Baudry, Manuale Sacr. Cerem. page 76.

Picart's Religious Ceremonies, vol. l. page 349.


.

Of the CONSECRATION of public and private CROSSES.
Crosses of all sizes are consecrated after the following manner: an acolite is
very busy in lighting up the candles at the foot of the cross, and the
celebrant, with a grave aspect, is seated in a chair provided for this purpose,
with his pastoral crosier in his hand, and in the midst of the clergy in their
surplices, appears very intent upon this ceremony. The celebrant must be
dressed in all his pontifical habilaments; the amiot, albe, girdle, stole,
white pluvian, plain mitre, and his pastoral staff; thus equipped, he presents
himself before the great cross, and part of the clergy turn toward him; he
makes a discourse to the people on the excellence of the cross, at the foot
whereof three tapers are lighted, and then the celebrant takes off his mitre,
and repeats a prayer before the cross. The Litany follow it, and then an
anthem; he then sprinkles the cross with holy water, and afterward perfumes it
with frankincense; then the candles are placed on the arms of the cross, to
which, if high, he ascends by a ladder, and concludes with music, singing of
psalms and prayer Pontific. Romans
.

Of the ADORATION of the Cross.
After nones, the officiating priest goes up to the altar, preceded by the
acolites without tapers, and the rest of the ministers of the altar: they first
kneel before it, and bow to the cross; a duty at all times necessary, but more
especially on this day. Immediately after that the officiating priest repeats
certain prayers with a low voice; then the acolites cover the table of the
altar, and lay the mass book on a black cushion on the epistle side; then the
minister goes up to the altar, and kisses it, and afterward repeats or sings
with a low voice the several lessons of the day, and another minister after
him. Prayers being ended, the officiating priest uncovers the top of the cross,
and elevates it with both his hands, at the same time singing these words,
Behold the wood of the cross; then the congregation rise up with their heads
uncovered, then the ministers of the altar sing these words, on which the
Savior of the world has suffered death. The choir answers, Let us come and
adore it. Then they all fall on their knees, and immediately rise up; then the
officiating priest uncovers the right ar^n of the crucifix, and the head of
Jesus; shows it, elevates it, and says as before. Then he uncovers it quite,
and with a louder voice repeats the same ceremonies. The ceremony of the
adoration being ended, the deacon salutes the cross, elevates it, and carries
it to the altar with bended knees, and when he lays it down bows before the
altar.

Of the SIGN of the Cross.
The Papists say, this holy sign is made use of in all the facraments, to give
us to understand that they have their whole force and efficacy from the cross,
that is, from the death and passion of Jesus Christ. What is the sign of
Christ, says St. Augustine, which all know, but the cross of Christ, which
sign, if it be not applied to the foreheads of the believers, to the water with
which they are baptized, to the chrism with which they are anointed, to the
sacrifice with which they are fed, none of these things are duly performed
Catholic Christian, page 1, 2.
.

St. Chrysostom, toward the close of the fourth century, displays also the
miraculous cures wrought by the use of consecrated oil, and by the sign of the
cross; which last he calls a defense against all evil, and a medicine against
all sickness, and affirms it to have been miraculously impressed in his own
time in peoples garments T. XI. page 387. T. 5. page 271. quoted by Middleton
in his Inquiry into the miraculous Powers, page 136.
.

Bellarmine, to justify this device of the sign of the cross, or of crossing
themselves, and the wonderful virtue and benefits thence arising, urges the
sprinkling of the blood of the paschal lamb on the posts of their doors, Exodus
xii. 7. God's commanding in a vision to the prophet a mark to be set on such of
the inhabitants of Jerusalem as had not wallowed in the same transgression with
the rest, but wept for all the abominations that had been done in the midst
thereof, Ezekiel. ix. 4. What is this to the Papist's crossing himself, to keep
the devil from him, to make him lucky in his business, to preserve him from
sin, to guard him from danger, etc.?

This suggests the following reflections, 1. That the signing one's self with
the cross has neither command nor example in scripture, nor any promise of any
special grace or benefit to be thereupon conferred; therefore there is no
reason to expect any such extraordinary virtues or assistance from using the
same.

2. If the sign of the cross was first instituted by men only to be an external
mark of Christians from others, then it is no such sacred and venerable sign as
to be able to convey to or operate in us such blessings; but the first is
plain, as well from the silence of scripture, as from the voice of history.

3. If therefore external signs, instituted by God himself, when they become
the instruments or occasion of superstition or idolatry, are to be taken away,
then much more signs of human institution, as this of the cross is.

Therefore, since Papists have so horribly abused this sign, every Protestant
justly disowns and protests against the superstitious and idolatrous conceits
which they have introduced relating thereunto; amongst whom the sign of the
cross makes void the cross of Christ, they attributing to the cross that which
solely and peculiarly belongs to Christ, and is the effect of his death through
faith in him, but not effected by the sign of the cross See History of Popery,
vol. I. part 1. page 110.

Dr. Middleton's Letters from Rome, page 145.


.

Of FASTS, LENT, SAINTS DAYS, etc. in the Church of Rome.
Montanus, toward the end of the second century, was the first that we read of
who instituted laws concerning fasting. Miltiades, bishop of Rome, ordained, A.
C. 311, that none should fast on Thursdays or Sundays, because Thursday Christ
instituted his supper, and on Sunday he ascended into heaven. Pope Gregory I.
in the sixth century, excepted Sundays only, and added (...) days to Lent, viz.
Ash Wednesday, and the three fo^^^wing days, to make up the number of forty
days which Christ fasted, and prohibited the eating not only flesh, but cheese,
milk and eggs. Pope Gr^ory II. decreed, that, in Lent, they should fast on
Thu^^day as well as other days. In the eighth century, (...) Gregory VII.
decreed, that S^turday should be kep^ as a day of fasting, because on that day
Christ lay in his s^pukhre. Pope Sylv^ster appointed Friday to be cl^^rv^d ^a
day of fasting in memory of our Lord's passion. Pope Honorius III. ordered,
that (...) Christ^as day happened on a Friday, they should (...) and rejoice,
and not fast. Pope Urban VI. appoi^ted that the eyes of the three s^as^s
attributed to the (...) Mary should be fasted on, viz. the Visitation, (...)
Assumption, and Nativity See this more fully in the History of Popery, vol. l.
page 100.
; but Irenaeus says, that some fasted one day only, some two days, some more in
the time of Lent, and it was in his time that the unity of faith was well
maintained, notwithstanding this variety Eusebius, lib. v. cap. 26.
. Would you know the r^^^en why fish is permitted to be eaten on fast-days,
Durandus has informed us Durandus's Rationale, lib. vi.
, viz. because God never cursed the waters; because the remi^^on of sins is
promised to water baptism, and the spirit of the Lord moved upon the face of
the waters. The Popes of Rome require all Christians to observe the fasts
according to the practice of the church of Rome, and have declared a violation
a mortal sin, reserving however to themselves the power of granting
dispensations to as many as can pay well for them.

Of EXORCISMS and BENEDICTIONS, of Blessings of Creatures in the Catholic
Church, and of the Use of Holy Water.
Q. What do you mean by exorcisms?

A. The rites and prayers instituted by the church for the casting out devils,
or restraining them from hurting persons, disquieting places, or abusing any of
God's creatures to our harm.

Q. What is the meaning of blessing so many things in the Catholic church?

A. We bless churches and other places set aside for divine service, altars,
chalices, vestments, etc. by way of devoting them to holy uses. We bless our
meats, and other inanimate things, which God has given us for our use, that we
may use them with moderation in a manner agreeable to God's institution; that
they ^ay be serviceable to us, and that the devil may have no power to abuse
them to our prejudice. We bless candles, salt, water, etc. by way of beging of
God that such as religiously use them may obtain blessings, etc.

Of the Exorcism of SALT.
I exorcise thee, O creature of salt, by the living God, by the true God, by
the holy God, by that God who, by the prophet Elisha, commanded thee to be cast
into the water, to cure its barrenness, that thou may by this exorcism be
made beneficial to the faithful, and become to all them that make use of thee,
healthful both to soul and body; and that in what place soever thou shall be
sprinkled, all illusions and wickedness, and crafty wiles of Satan, may be
chased away, and depart from that place; and every unclean spirit commanded in
his name, who is to come to judge the living and the dead, and the world by
fire. Amen.

Of the Exorcism of the WATER.
I exorcise thee, O creature of water, in the name of God, the Father Almighty,
and in the name of Jesus Christ his Son our Lord, and in the virtue of the Holy
Ghost, that thou may by this exorcism have power to chase away all the power
of the enemy; that thou may be enabled to cast him out, and put him to
flight with all his apostate angels, by virtue of the same Jesus Christ our
Lord, who is to come to judge the living and the dead, and the world by fire.
Amen.

Then the priest mingles the salt with the water, saying,

May the salt and water be mixed together, in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Q. But does it not savor of superstition to attribute any virtue to such
inanimate things as blessed candles, holy water, Agnus Dei's, etc.

A. It is no superstition to look for a good effect from the prayers of the
church of God, and it is in virtue of these prayers that we hope for benefit
from these things, when used with faith, and daily experience shows us that our
hopes are not vain.

Q. What do you mean by Agnus Dei's?

A. Wax stamped with the image of the lamb of God, blessed by the Pope with
solemn prayers, and anointed with the holy chrism Catholic Christian, page 257.
.

Of the great VARIETY of their Religious Orders and Societies of PRIESTS.
These seem, says Dr. Middleton, to be formed upon the plan of the old colleges
or fraternities of the augurs, pontifices, salii, fratres arvales, etc. The
vestal virgins might furnish the hint for the foundation of nunneries; and I
hence observed, says he, something very like to the rules and austerities of
the monastic life in the character and manner of several priests of the
heathens; but above all in the old descriptions of the lazy mendicant priests
among the heathens, who used to travel with bags on their backs, and raise
contributions of money, bread and wine; wherein we see the very picture of
their beging friars, who are always about the streets in the same habit, and on
the same errand Dr. Middleton's Letters from Rome, page 220.
.

Cicero, in his book of laws, restrains the practice of begging alms to one
particular order of priests, and that only on certain days; because, as he
says, it propagates superstition, and impoverishes families, which plainly
discovers the policy of the church or Rome in the great care that they have
taken to multiply their begging orders.

Of WASHING the Feet of the Poor.
The Pope and Cardinals being come to the ducal wall, where the ceremony of
washing the feet is to be performed, the cardinal deacon assistants clothe his
holiness with his purple, stole, his red cope, and plain mitre. Their nunneries
are clothed in purple copes, and his holiness puts three spoonfuls of
odoriferous spices into the thurable, and gives his blessing to the cardinal
deacon who is to sing the gospel; after which one of the apostolical subdeacons
gives the Pope a book of the New Testment to kiss, and the cardinal deacon
incenses him three times; immediately after a chorus of musicians sing these
words, A new commandment I give unto you, that you love one another; then the
Pope takes off his cope, and putting on a white apron, washes the feet of
thirteen poor priest strangers, who sit on a high form or bench, clothed in
white camblet, with a kind of coul that reaches down to the middle of the arm.
They are first washed clean with soap before they are presented to him to wash,
and he then washes them, and then the major domo presents them a napkin, and
the Pope's treasurer presents them with two medals, one of gold, and the other
of silver; then the Pope returns to his seat, and washes his hands, and then
they sing the Lord's prayer, and other prayers in Latin. The magistrates of
Rome are present at this ceremony, which ends with a sumptuous entertainment.
This practice of washing the poors feet is solemnised on Holy Thursday by all
the princes of the Romish religion in Europe. -- In France the king's chief
physician makes choice of twelve children for that purpose, whose feet are
washed by his majesty, and he himself serves up the dishes; they are afterward
presented, in the King's name, with money, bread, and clothes. -- The king of
Spain performs this ceremony in his antichamber, after having performed his
devotions at chapel; and after the service is over an entertainment follows for
the accommodation of many poor. Clothing is likewise distributed, and then the
chief almoner pronounces a blessing Aimon of Ceremonies, cited by Picart, vol.
II. page 21, 22.
.

Of BOWING at the Name of JESUS.
This custom appears to have had its rise about the seventh century. The church
of Rome probably borrowed is from the Pagans or Mahomedans; the former indeed
not only bowed their body, but fell down postrate, or upon their knees, before
their idols. The latter more nearly resemble this custom; for when an Iman
pronounces the name of Mahomed, the Turks bow down their heads to express the
veneration they have for the founder of their religion. From those authorities,
Monsieur Picart says, as for bowing the body, or only the head, it has ever
been practiced in religious worship, as being a natural demonstration of the
respect which we owe to the Almighty, but do not attempt to assign any reason
why the custom of bowing at the name of Jesus was introduced, and not at the
mention of the name of God, or why it is to be most solemnly complied with in
the recital of the creed Picart's Dissertation on Religious Worship, vol. I.
page 16. This practice was disavowed by the Waldenses in the eleventh century,
and by the Lutherans, according to Brentius's Declaration, cited by Mr.
Hickman, Apol. page 109.
.

Of BURNING LAMPS and WAX TAPERS before the Shrines and Images of their Saints.
No sooner do one enter their churches, than the eye is attracted by a number
of lamps and waxcandles, which are constantly burning before the shrines and
images of their saints. In all the great churches of Italy, says Mabillon, they
hang up lamps at every altar. The primitive writers frequently expose the folly
and absurdity of this heathenish custom; they light up candles to God, says
Lactantius, as if he lived in the dark; and do not they deserve to pass for
madmen, who offer lamps to the author and giver of light? But this is a piece
of zeal which continues still the same in modern Rome, where each church
abounds with lamps of massy silver, the gifts of princes and other persons of
distinction; and it is surprising to see how great a number of this kind are
perpetually kept burning before the altars of their principal saints or images,
as St. Antony of Padua, or the lady of Loretta, as well as the vast profusion
of wax-candles with which their churches are illuminated on every great
festival, when the high altar, covered with gold and silver plate, disposed in
beautiful figures, and stuck full of wax-lights, looks more like the rich
side-board of some great Prince, than an altar to pay divine worship at.

Of VOTIVE Offerings.
There is another thing almost equally remarkable as the number of lamps and
wax-lights, viz. the number of offerings, or votive gifts, which hang round
their altars in consequence of vows made in time of danger, and in gratitude
for deliverance, and cures wrought in sickness or distress; a practice so
common among the Heathens, that no one custom of antiquity is so frequently
mentioned by all their writers; a piece of superstition so beneficial to the
priesthood, that it could not fail of being taken into the scheme of the Romish
church, where it reigns to this day in so gross a manner as to give scandal and
offense even to some of their own communion; there being so great a number of
them hanging up in their churches, that, instead of adding beauty, they really
hinder us from observing the sight of more beautiful ornamented parts. These
offerings are sometimes little figures in wood or wax, but especially pieces of
board painted; sometimes indeed fine pictures, describing the manner of the
deliverance obtained by the miraculous interposition of the saint invoked; so
that one of them said, it might reasonably be questioned whether we imitate the
religion or the superstition of our ancestors See Middleton's Letters from
Rome, page 149.
.

Of INCENSE.
In some of the principal churches of Rome, where you have before you in one
view a great number of altars, and all of them smoking at once with streams of
incense, that one would imagine one's self transported into the temple of some
Heathen deity. Under the Pagan emperors, the use of incense for any purpose of
religion was thought so contrary to the obligations of christianity, that in
their persecutions the very method of trying and convicting a Christian was by
requiring him only to throw some grains of it into the censor. Under the
Christian emperors it not only was looked upon as a rite so peculiarly
heathenish, that the very places or houses where it could be proved to have
been done were by a law of Theodosius confiscated to the government; but at
present, in the church of Rome, there is always a boy in a surplice waiting on
the priest at the altar, with the sacred utensils, and among the rest with a
vessel of incense, with many strange motions, crossings, etc. as it is smoking
around and over the altar Middleton's Letters from Rome, p. 133.
.

Of HOLY WATER.
Sprinkling Holy Water by the priest on solemn days, and used likewise by every
one going in or out of a church, by dipping a finger in a basin or vessel for
that purpose, and therewith crossing himself; is a custom borrowed from the
Heathens. Platina, in his history of the Popes, ascribes the institution of
this Holy Water to Alexander the First; but that does not appear true, because
we find the primitive Fathers speaking of it as a custom purely heathenish, and
condemning it as impious and detestable. Justin Martyr says, it was invented by
demons. However, the Roman Catholic church adopt the use of holy water, on
pretense of securing mankind against the delusions of the devil, and many of
their learned writers reckon up several virtues and benefits derived from the
use of it, both to the soul and the body, and to assert the attestation of the
same by miracles. This holy water is nothing more than a mixture of salt, with
common water, and blessing it by the priest. Middleton's letters from Rome, p.
136, and seq. Where he likewise quotes his authorities.

Of the CANONIZATION of Saints.
As to the proof of miracles, which is essential to these canonizations, every
one will conceive how easy it must be in a function contrived to serve the
interest of the church, and the ambition of its rulers, to procure such a
testimonial of them as will be sufficient for the purpose.

In the college of St. Omer's, says Dr. Middleton, the father who showed us the
house produced some relics of Thomas Becket, who is worshipped as a great
saint in that church; and notwithstanding he was a prelate of a most daring,
turbulent, seditious spirit, ambitious and insolent, and guilty of the highest
ingratitude to the King, traitorously endeavoring to excite the King of France
and the court of Flanders to enter into a war with his King and country, and
when he was cited by the King and Barons to answer for his mal-administrations,
he absolutely refused to appear, declaring himself responsible to none but God
and the Pope; yet this man is now adored as one of the principal saints and
martyrs of the Romish church, whose character, he says, he had chosen to give,
as an illustrious example from our own history, what kind of merit it is that
has exalted so many others in the same church to the same honors; and he
challenges Catholics to tell what opinion their church entertains of Garnet the
jesuit, who was privy to the gunpowder plot, and suffered for his treason; and
he must say they declare him to be a saint, and martyr of Christ, for such he
is held to be at Rome and St. Omer's Dr. Middleton's Prefatory Discourse, p. 75.
.

This author adds, that the canonization of saints is become as common almost
as the creation of cardinals, there having seldom been a Pope who did not add
some to the calendar. Benedict XIII. canonized eight in one summer, Clement
XII. four, and there is seldom any pretense wanting for supplying fresh saints,
when it gratifies the ambition of the Pope, or other Princes of that communion,
or some of their name and family.

Of PROCESSIONS made to St. Peter's Church in the Time of Lent.
It was a remarkable part of the Heathen superstition, that, on some particular
days, they had processions in honor of the God whose festival they were
celebrating, wherein they were attended by priests in surplices, with
wax-candles in their hands, carrying upon a pageant the images of their Gods;
according to the account of Apuleius and others.

Monsieur Tournefort, in his travels through Greece, reflects upon the Greek
church for having retained in their worship many of the rites of heathenism:
But the reflection was full as applicable to his own as to the Greek church, in
the very instance of carrying about the pictures of their saints, as the Pagans
did those of their Gods.

Thus, says our author Dr. Middleton, in one of those processions lately made
to St. Peter's in the time of Lent, I saw that ridiculous penance of the
flagellantes, or self-whippers, who march with whips in their hands, and lash
themselves on the bare back till they bled, in the same manner as the fanatical
priests of Bellona used to cut and flash themselves of old, in order to please
that Goddess.

And in the Romish church they have another exercise of the same kind, and in
the season of Lent; for, on a certain day appointed annually for this
discipline, men of all conditions assemble themselves toward the evening in
one of the churches of the city, where whips or lashes made of cords are
distributed to every person present; and after they are all served, and a short
office of devotion performed, the candles being put out upon the warning of a
little bell, the whole company begin presently to strip themselves, and
exercise their whips on their own backs for about an hour, till, satiated with
being their self-tormentors, they put on their clothes, and at the tinkling of
a little bell they appear again in their proper dress Dr. Middleton's Letters
from Rome, p. 191.
.

Of the BENEDICTION of the Pontifical Robes.
This benediction cannot be performed but by a Bishop, unless he directs that a
priest should officiate in his stead; but whoever performs it must be dressed
in a surplice with the stole over it, of a color suitable to the day. The
benediction differs in no respect from any of the foregoing, and is given by
the light of tapers with the sprinkling of holy water and a few prayers, which
may be seen in the ritual; all the robes from the mitre down to the sandals
receive the same benediction.

Of the BENEDICTION of those who are appointed for the Holy War.
When the bishop blesses the new warrior, he gives him a sword, blessed before
by his lordship by the sprinkling of the holy water. In giving him the sword,
he exhorts him to employ it against the enemies of the church, and true
religion; then it is sheathed, and the bishop himself girds it upon him, the
soldier all this time upon his knees, then gets up, draws it, flourishes it
twice in the air, and brings it over his left arm; then the bishop takes the
sword, and gives him three gentle blows, and then gives him the kiss of peace,
and a second time gives him his benediction, and then the person kisses his
lordship's hand, and goes home in peace.

Of the BENEDICTION of IMAGES.
It was prohibited by the decrees of the council of Trent, to erect any
extraordinary and unusual images in churches, without the bishop's license and
approbation first had and obtained; and they proceed to the benediction or
consecration of an image, in the same manner as to that of a new cross; while
the prayer is saying, the saint whom the image represents is named, and after
that the sprinkler is taken, and the priest to conclude the consecration
sprinkles the image with holy water; but when any image of the Virgin Mary is
blessed, it is incensed three times as well as sprinkled, to which are added an
Ave Maria, some psalms and anthems, the prayer beginning Deus qui Virginitatem
aulam, etc. The anthem, O gloriosa Dei Genetrix, the magnificat, etc. A double
sign of the cross, made with the priest's right hand, concludes the ceremony
Picart's Ceremonies, vol. I. p. 355, who quotes Piscara Praxis Cer. lib. ii.
sect. 12. chap. iii.
. See the consecration of public and private crosses, p. 229.

The BENEDICTION of Bells.
The ceremony of blessing bells, is by the Catholics called christening of
them, because the name of some of the saints is ascribed to them Pope John
XIII. first baptized Bells, cent x.
, by virtue of whose invocation they are presented, in order that they may
obtain his favor and protection. The benediction devotes them to God's
service, that he may confer on them the power not barely of striking the ear,
but of touching the heart, by the influence of the Holy Ghost; when they are
thus blessed and rung out, they contribute very much toward the priest's
success in his exorcisms, etc. It is the bishop's peculiar province to perform
this ceremony. For the method of casting, of consecration, perfuming, with
other ceremonies, we refer the reader to Picart's edition of their ceremonies,
vol. I. p. 353.

Lest we should be thought too tedious in this part of our history, we have
purposely omitted, or but slightly treated of several of the distinguishing
doctrines, practices, and ceremonies, of the church of Rome, as the celibacy of
the clergy, the distinction between mortal and venial sins, auricular
confessions, the feasts and festivals, according to the Roman callendar,
excommunications on Holy Thursday, the custom of wearing relics, as a part of
the table-cloth (as it is pretended) that was laid when our Lord instituted his
last supper, or part of the napkin with which he wiped his disciples seet, as a
remedy against diverse diseases.

The ceremonies of the Pope's coronation, the lent stations, strewing of ashes,
carnival lent, ember week, Passion-week, Palm Sunday, etc. of uncovering the
chalice at the altar, of the procession of the host to the grave, adoration of
our Savior's shroud.

The consecration of the altar, of the oil and vessels, blessing the new fire,
the benediction of altar cloths and linen, the corporals and tabernacles, of
the pix, ciberium, paten, and chalice, with other decorations of the altar, and
a variety of other ceremonies, on which they lay no small stress, and on which
Protestants differ in their opinions and practice.

History of the GREEK Church.
THE Greek church may (at least) for several centuries be considered as a part
of the Roman church, having the same apostolical foundation (nay, the church of
Jerusalem was established by the apostles much Allet's Ritual. Picart, p. 353.
earlier than that of Rome) and the bishops maintained a reciprocal regard for
and communion with each other, were united in some general councils, and held
the unity of faith in the most important articles, notwithstanding some
difference in sentiment; but it must be acknowledged, that, as early as the
second century, they were divided as to the time (and the obligation) of
celebrating Easter. They likewise adhered pretty much to the doctrine of Arius,
acknowledged the supremacy of the Father to the Son; and as it was the custom
of many of the bishops to draw up a creed for his own church, most of their
articles were conformable to the canons and creed called the apostles, which in
substance is of the greatest antiquity; and did also admit of the Nicene creed,
drawn up A. D. 318: but in process of time the Nicene creed was new-modelled by
the general council of Constantinople, A. D. 381, when that part of it relating
to the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father was rejected by them, and
from this time we find some unchristian animosity subsisted between the eastern
and western churches, each censuring and anathematizing each other. Many points
merely speculative distracted and divided the churches, pelagianism, and the
authority of particular counc^ls, etc. and these not only continued, but
increased to the sixth century; councils convened in the east, in opposition to
those in the west; the remarkable disputes (before mentioned) called the three
chapters, and about the corruptibility or uncorruptibility of the body of Jesus
Christ, and whether we may or ought to say that one of the Trinity suffered,
upon which many of the eastern churches separated in their communion from the
church of Rome; and it is certain the Greek church made some good regulations.

In the seventh century they convened a council, which fixed the discipline of
the Greek church, made 102 canons, or ecclesiastical laws, although they were
never received in the west, approving the canonical letters of St. Basil,
appointed the mysteries of the sacrament to be received rasting; they gave the
sacrament in both kinds; mixed water with wine; forbad the eating cheese or
eggs in Lent, that there should be no fasting on Saturdays, and prohibited the
eating of blood.

Other matters of dispute contributed to widen their difference; and in the
ninth century there was a contest between the Pope of Rome, and the Patriarch
of Constantinople, about Bulgaria. The P^pe's legates affirmed it belonged to
the Pope, and that the Bulgarians ought to submit themselves to the church of
Rome. The eastern patriarchs asserted, that Bulgaria having been taken from the
Greeks, and formerly governed by Greek bishops, ought to be subject to the
patriarch of Constantinople: the Emperor likewise favored the patriarch's
party, and a division consequently ensued, A. D. 878. The Greeks soon after
preferred ten articles of accusation against the Latins; the first was against
the procession of the Holy Ghost; the Greeks denying that the Holy Ghost
proceeded from the Father and the Son, and asserted his proceeding from the
Father only. They found fault with the Latins for not having eight weeks in
their Lent, with the Latin priests shaving their beards, with their being
obliged to celibacy, with their forbidding to anoint with the holy chrism the
foreheads of those they baptized. They charged them with making bishops of
deacons, without first conferring on them the order of priest; they opposed the
primacy of Rome, and would have preferred the Patriarchs of Constantinople, or
at least made them equal; they likewise charged the Latins with making the holy
chrism with river water, and with offering a lamb at Easter, together with the
body and blood of Christ, after the manner of the Jews.

From this time we may with some propriety consider the Greek church as
distinct from the church of Rome, notwithstanding so great an agreement as
there subsists between the eastern and western churches, both in their
principles and practices, especially as the constitution of the Greek church
differs from that of Rome.

The Greek church, according to their original constitution, is governed by
four patriarchs, viz. those of Alexandria, of Jerusalem, of Antioch, and of
Constantinople; the latter of which assumes to himself the title of Universal,
or Ecumenical Patriarch, on account of his residing in the imperial city, and
having a larger jurisdiction than the rest. This title was confirmed by a
council convened in that capital in the year 518. This Patriarch likewise
assumes the title of holiness, in the abstract; and Cyril Lucar, at the
beginning of one of his letters, assumes the title of ecumenical judge of the
Christian churches dependant on the imperial throne of Constantinople See Sieur
Aymon's authentic Memoirs.
.

The Emperor of the Turks may indeed with truth be styled the supreme head of
the Greek church, as the Patriarch himself, the bishops, etc. are obliged to
procure his letters-patent before they can act in their respective functions.

The following is a SUMMARY of the BELIEF and PRACTICE of the GREEK CHURCH.
I. They believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth,
and of all things, visible and invisible.

II. In one lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten son of God, begotten of his
Father before all worlds, God of Gods, light of lights; very God of very God,
begotten, not made, being one substance with the Father, by whom all things
were made: who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from heaven, and
was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made man, and was
crucified for us; also under Pontius Pilate; he suffered and was buried, (or
descended into the grave) and the third day he rose again according to the
scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and fitteth at the right hand of the
Father; and he shall come again with glory to judge both the quick and the
dead, of whose kingdom there shall be no end.

III. That the Holy Ghost proceeds only from the Father, not from the son; yet
they believe him to be God.

IV. They do not acknowledge the Pope's supremacy, nor infallibility, nor
consequently that the church of Rome is the true mother church; they even
prefer their own to that of Rome, as the most apostolical; and on Holy Thursday
excommunicate the Pope, and all the Latin prelates, as heretics and schismatics.

V. They believe no other sacraments than baptism and the Lord's supper.
Baptism they perform, by dipping the person three times under water distinctly,
at the name of the FATHER, the SON, and of the HOLY GHOST. They use a kind of
anointing, crossing, etc. in baptism. They baptize infants, and have one
godfather or godmother, according to the sex of the child. But baptism is often
deferred by them, till their children are five, ten, or fifteen years of age,
or longer, and they rebaptise all the Latins who are admitted to their
communion.

VI. That the Lord's supper ought to be adminstered in both kinds, even to
infants, before they can be capable of distinguishing the spiritual food from
any other. The laity are indispensibly obliged to receive the sacrament in both
kinds. They seal the bread in the eucharist with the form of a cross. Their
bread is leavened. They receive both the bread and wine together in a spoon,
from the hands of a priest, and always fasting. Whether they acknowledge
transubstantiation or not, which is disputed, they pay a superstitious
veneration to their consecrated bread. They do not indeed carry it in
procession, but after the priest has consecrated it, he elevates it, and says,
Thou art my God; thou art my King, I adore thee; Lord have mercy upon me,
miserable sinner, and in the whole of this service are extremely superstitious.

VII. They exclude confession, confirmation, extreme unction, and matrimony,
from being sacraments. Though they recommend a confession four times a year;
yet they deny that auricular confession is a divine precept, and at best regard
it only as an injunction of the church, and insist that it ought always to be
free and voluntary; but is in no wise necessary to make a full discovery of all
their sins, or of all the circumstances attending them.

VIII. Confirmation is administered immediately after baptism. This has always
been esteemed by them a part of the priest's office, and is not deferred to be
performed by a bishop, in any of the Greek churches.

IX. Extreme unction, as used by the Papists, is practiced in some degree; but
they disclaim that name, or calling it a sacrament: the Greeks administer it to
all sick persons, and as often as a person in such circumstances might desire
it, without waiting till the person is at the point of death.

X. They maintain likewise, that matrimony is no sacrament; but, on the
contrary, an union that may be dissolved, and that, in the case of adultery, or
other provocations, it may be lawful to separate. Their priests are equally
approved, if married before the taking holy orders; but they don't indulge them
in that respect afterward. They think marriage a fourth time unlawful. They
deny that fornication is a mortal sin.

XI. Though they disbelieve the notion of purgatory, they offer up prayers for
the dead. The words of their office, cranslated, run thus, "Grant, O Lord, that
his soul may be at rest, in those mansions of light, consolation and repose,
from whence all grief and sorrow are for ever excluded."

XII. They are divided as to their sentiments of hell, as of a different nature
and duration. They, in general, favor the notion, that the torments of hell
will not be eternal.

XIII. The Greeks, and all the eastern nations in general, are of opinion, that
departed souls will not be immediately and perfectly happy; that the first
Paradise will be a state of repose, and the next of eternal felicity.

XIV. They enjoin the observation of diverse fasts and festivals: they have
four lents; the first begins on the fourteenth of November; the second, the
great lent before Easter; the third, the week after Pentecost; and the fourth,
on the first of August. At these times they eat nothing that has blood, or oil,
nor milk-meats, but herbs, and shellfish, and are so extremely superstitious,
that they scarce allow an egg or flesh-broth to a sick person. Yet they disdain
the Latins for their observations of the vigils before the nativity of Christ,
and the festivals of the Virgin Mary and the apostles, as well as for their
fasting in Ember-Week; they prohibit all fasting on Saturdays, except on the
Saturday preceding Easter.

XV. They strictly abstain from eating such things as have been strangled, and
such other meats as are prohibited in the Old Testament.

XVI. They reject the religious use of graven images, and statues, although
they admit of pictures in their churches, and have a great veneration for them.

XVII. They worship angels, and pray to the Virgin Mary, pray and sing hymns to
the saints, and are very superstitious in the histories of them.

XVIII. They attend prayers, morning and evening, and enjoin prayers for Kings,
and all civil and ecclesiastical magistrates, and for the conversion of
schismatics and heretics.

XIX. They enjoin obedience and honor to the priest,

XX. They forbid the laity to invade the rights and benefits of the clergy, and
all kinds of sacrilegious acts.

XXI. They forbid marrying in Lent, or on other fasts.

XXII. They prohibit the frequenting theaters, and other Gentile customs.

XXIII. They forbid the laity to read the books of heretics.

XXIV. Though they reject the Apocrypha, as being uncanonical; yet they hold
some traditions of equal authority with the scripture; and greatly venerate the
writings of Basil, Chrysostom, Damascene, etc.

XXV. Of all the general councils that have been held in the Catholic church by
the Popes at different times, they pay no regard to any after the sixth; and
reject the seventh, which was the second held at Nice.

XXVI. Their excommunications are often made on very frivolous occasions.

XXVII. They hold justification by faith and works conjointly.

XXVIII. They deny that the office of subdeacon is at present an holy order.

XXIX. They have a great number of monks, all of St. Basil's order; these have
their abbots. The patriarch, Metropolian, and bishops, are of this order.

XXX. They have sour liturgies or masses; St. James's, St. Chrysostom, St.
Basil's, (which they principally esteem) and Gregory the Great, which last is
used by the Latins, and they celebrate the mass in the old Greek tongue
Notwithstanding from the preceding articles it appears, that the constitution
and doctrine of the Greek church is in some respects modelled more agreeable to
scripture than the church of Rome; yet their extreme superstition in the
observation of their I eats, in the performance of the sacraments, their
consecrated places, vestments, utensils, and even the hollowed ground, show
they come very little behind the church of Rome in superstitious ceremonies.
.

The ARTICLES OF FAITH of the FRENCH or GALLICAN CHURCH This term is very
ancient, for we find it in the council of Paris, held in the year 362; by it is
understood the body or French Roman Catholics. See p. 118.
.
The French church, by acknowledging the Pope's supremacy, and by persevering
inflexibly in the principles, and (with very little exception) to the numerous
train of superstitious ceremonies of that holy mother church, may be considered
as one of her perfectly obedient sons. It is true, the French nation soon
perceived, that the Pope's claim was unlimited, and would affect not only the
royal prerogative, but the liberty and property of his subjects; and therefore,
in the eleventh century, the French King not only objected to, but refused
compliance with some claims of the Pope relating to the right of conferring
benefices. And though this dispute, in the close of the twelfth century,
between Boniface VIII. and Philip I. King of France, produced some dreadful
effects, the French never lost sight of their point, but asserted the King's
prerogative to what what was called the regale; and in the fifteenth century,
when the council of Trent had established the authority of the Pope, in
opposition to the prerogative of the King of France, he ordered his ambassadors
to protest against it; and in the year 1680, when Pope Innocent XI. seemed
determined to oppose his right, there was held a national council of the clergy
to regulate this dispute, who confirmed his right of the regale over all the
churches of the kingdom. Yet soon after Lewis XIV. to discover his
superstitious veneration of the Pope, and his bigoted attachment to the
persecuting spirit of popery, or in complaisance to the Pope, repealed the
edict of Nantz, and banished his Protestant subjects, or treated them with
cruel severities.

But notwithstanding the acknowledged supremacy of the Pope in spirituals, the
French church differs in some respects in its constitution, privileges,
liberties, etc. for this church has all along preserved certain ancient rights,
that she has possessed almost time immemorial, neither are these privileges any
grants of Popes, but certain franchises and immunities derived to her from her
first original, and which she has taken care never to relinquish.

The following articles point out wherein they consist.

I. The King of France has a right to convene synods, or provincial and
national councils.

II. The Pope's legates (a latere) are never admitted into France, unless with
the approbation and allowance of the King.

III. The legate of Avignon cannot exercise his commission in any of his
Majesty's dominions, till after he has obtained the King's leave for that
purpose.

IV. The prelates of the Gallican church, being summoned by the Pope, cannot
depart the realm upon any pretense whatsoever, without the King's permission.

V. The Pope has no authority to levy any tax or imposition upon the
ecclesiastical preferments, upon any pretense either of loan, vacancy, annates,
tithes, procurations, or otherwise, without the King's order, and the consent
of the clergy.

VI. The Pope has no authority to depose the King, or grant away his dominions
to any person whomsoever. His holiness can neither excommunicate the King, nor
absolve any of his subjects from their allegiance.

VII. The Pope likewise has no authority to excommunicate the King's officers,
for the executing and discharging their respective offices and functions.

VIII. The Pope has no right to take cognizance, either by himself or his
delegates, of any pre-eminences, or privileges, belonging to the crown of
France, the King being not obliged to argue his prerogatives in any court but
his own.

IX. Counts Palatine made by the Pope, are not acknowledged as such in France.

X. The Pope cannot grant licenses to churchmen, the King's subjects, to
bequeathe the issue of their respective preferments, contrary to the laws of
the King, and customs of the realm.

XI. The Pope cannot grant a dispensation to enjoy any estate, or revenues in
France, without the King's consent.

XII. The Pope cannot grant a license to ecclesiastics, to alienate
church lands, situate and lying in France, without the King's consent.

XIII. The King may punish his ecclesiastical officers for misbehaviour in
their respective charges, notwithstanding the privilege of their orders.

XIV. No person has any right to hold any benefice in France, unless he be a
native, or is naturalized by the King, or has a dispensation for that purpose.

XV. The Pope is not superior to an ecumenical, or general council.

XVI. The Gallican church does not receive, without any distinction, all the
canons, and all the decretal epistles, but keeps to that ancient collection,
called Corpus Canonicum, which Pope Adrian sent to Charlemagne, toward the end
of the eighth century, under the pontificate of Nicholas I. the French bishops
likewise declaring it to be the only canon law, wherein their liberty consists.

XVII. The Pope has no power to dispense with the law of God, the law of
Nature, or these ancient canons

XVIII. The regulations of the Apostolic chamber, or court, are not obligatory
on the Gallican church, unless confirmed by the King's edicts.

XIX. If a Frenchman makes application for a benefice, lying in France, his
holiness is obliged to give him an instrument, under the seal of his office;
and, in case of refusal, the parliament of Paris can give orders to the bishop
of that diocese to give him institution; which institution will be of equal
validity with the Pope's.

XX. It is only by sufferance that the Pope has what they call a right of
collating to benefices in France.

These liberties are esteemed inviolable, and the French Kings, at their
coronation, solemnly swear to preserve and maintain them.

As the Gallican church, with respect to the authority of the civil power, is
exempt from that absolute subjection to the Pope of Rome, which other nations
in Europe are under to him, it is no wonder if their government, in church as
well as state, somewhat differ; so that we find the cruelties of the
inquisition has not yet had any footing in France; though it must be owned the
French have given too many proofs of a similar deportment to the mother church,
by many instances of cruel persecutions for conscience sake, as well by
suppressing the liberty of free enquiry in matters of religion, as by the many
superstitious rites and ceremonies of her worship. It shows it is no other than
Rome papal. The mass is solemnized with all the magnificence and ceremony as at
Rome, and attendance of persons of all ranks enjoined under various penalties;
the confession to priests acknowledged of necessity to salvation; the
procession of the host through the streets of Paris is attended with great
formality, and at its approach foreigners as well as natives are required to
pay a superstitious respect to it, etc. Broughton's Dictionary.


CHAP. III. Of the State of KNOWLEDGE and RELIGION in BRITAIN, more
particularly from the first Propagation, and consequent ESTABLISHMENT of
CHRISTIANITY, to the Comcement of the Reign of WILLIAM the CONQUEROR, 1066.
WE shall now take a retrospective view of those dark and babarous ages of the
world, when paganism and the grossest idolatry had overspread these isles, and
succinctly point out some remarkable occurrences and circumstances that
intervened, and at length made way for the introduction and prevalence of
Christianity, though for a long time after incumbered with a variety of Romish
superstitions.

The ancient inhabitants of Britain, not only at first settling here, but for a
considerable time, were in a state of ignorance and barbarity; nor indeed could
it from the nature of things be otherwise, unless countries should happen to be
peopled by large colonies from societies that have already arrived to a
considerable proficiency of knowledge and government, which could not possibly
be the case in early periods. The persons who originally settled in these
remote parts of Europe, being rude and unpolished themselves, were able to
carry nothing along with them but their own savage manners, and their own gross
conceptions.

The first inhabitants of an uncultivated region generally apply themselves to
such employments and exercises as the want of provision may urge them to;
probably to hunting as the most speedy means of subsistence; the next stage is
pasturage, and a third agriculture; the last step is regulated governments: all
these must, as it were, make way for the introduction of knowledge, the truest
source of religion.

Though England might be peopled several centuries before the first accounts we
have of it, yet the barbarous condition in which we perceive it to have been,
is no more than might reasonably be expected. At the time when Caesar invaded
the island, even husbandry itself does not seem to have been universally
followed: our ancestors however do not appear to have been without some skill
in war; for though in this respect they were greatly inferior to the Romans, yet
they conducted their opposition to Caesar in a manner that redounds highly to
their credit, considering the amazing abilities of that general, and the
excellent discipline of his army. Ambition and resentment seemed at this time
to have gained the ascendancy of their reason and humanity; that they had
brought the wretched arts of mutual destruction much sooner to perfection than
those which refine the soul, and are cultivated to adorn, improve, and bless
society. To rectify this great disorder and unhappiness, some persons were
pretty early distinguished, by a superior penetration into the difference of
principles and actions, whose dispositions likewise led them to compassionate
the unhappy state of mankind at that time, so far sunk in ignorance and
barbarism. Some of the first thus distinguished and employed, famous in
history, were the Druids Rapin's Hist. translated by Lidiard, Introd. p. 10.
.

The DRUIDS, History of the Druids.
according to the general history of them, we are apt to look upon as persons
of very extraordinary accomplishments. This deception has been assisted by our
poets, who have spread a glory round them, and have painted them in a manner
that disposes us to regard them as almost divine. No one has more charmingly
contributed to carry on the delusion than the ingenious and elegant Mason, in
his Caractacus. But if we reduce our ideas to the test of sober reason, we
shall not find much in the Druids that was particularly excellent and valuable.
They were the priests of the time, and, like other priests, had address and
subtility enough to acquire a vast authority, and to keep the people in
absolute subjection. They were likewise magistrates as well as priests, and had
the determination of civil causes; a circumstance which was the natural effect,
both of their superior quality, and superior knowledge; for what knowledge then
prevailed, was principally confined to them. However, the remains we have of
the Druids do not give us a very high opinion of the progress they had made,
though undoubtedly they went far beyond the rest of their countrymen, and it is
probable that individuals among them might be men of great wisdom.

They entertained the notion of transmigration; a notion which has spread from
the farthest east to the remotest west, and which has been so widely embraced,
that a philosophical person cannot help looking on this fact as a singular
phenomenon in the history of human nature, and imagine that either there is
something in it very natural to the unenlightened mind of man, or that it
proceeded from an ancient and general tradition. The best principles advanced
by the Druids were, that the Deity is one, and infinite, and that his worship
ought not to be confined within walls; that all things derive their origin from
heaven; that the soul is immortal; and that children should be educated with
the utmost care. But their prodigious veneration for the misletoe, and the
great effects they attributed to it, their opinion that the moon is a sovereign
remedy for diseases, with others of their sentiments and customs, showed a
strong superstition; as their prohibiting an intercourse with strangers, if not
merely a political law, testified a savageness of manners; and their allowance,
nay, command, of human sacrifices carries in it the evidence of the most
shocking cruelty. In truth, they were little more than the barbarous priests of
a barbarous and unle^tered people. Their knowledge is said to have reached to
physics, to the mathematics, to astronomy, and to medicine; but as it was never
committed to writing, it could not be very extensive: indeed it chiefly
consisted of the arcana of their doctrines and worship, and had a special
relation to magic. Whatever their wisdom was, if we may give credit to the
testimony of Caesar, it was found here in greater perfection than in Gaul; from
whence children were sent into Britain, to be instructed in the discipline of
the Druids. The same author informs us, that it had its original in this
country; but that is a circumstance much disputed.

There were likewise priests of an inferior order, called Bards, whose
principal business was to celebrate the praises of the gods and departed
heroes, in odes and verses, and to sing them to their harps, at their religious
assemblies, public festivals, and private entertainments. These men were, in
fact, the heralds, the chronologers, and the historians, as well as the poets
of the land, for they kept up the memory of illustrious transactions; and by
their compositions, which tradition handed down to posterity, they transmitted
from age to age the names and characters of patriots and warriors Abstract from
the Library, p. 73.
.

The divine Homer himself can be considered as no other than one of them, whose
consummate excellency, and a number of circumstances, contributed to preserve
his works from oblivion, and to raise him to the highest seat in the temple of
Fame. Bards have been found in many countries, and continued in Scotland and
Ireland nearly to our own time. As to the ancient British ones, we have few
remains of their productions; but we may venture to assert that many of them
were truly valuable.

There was another order of persons called Eub^tes, who applied themselves to
the contemplation of the works of nature, and the study of philosophy. What
progress they then made, we have very little account of; but they rather seem
to have had some wild notions in astrology, than any proper principles of
philosophical knowledge, that might have improved their minds in the right
knowledge of God, and the true principles of religion.

Such was the general state of things, till the island came under the dominion
of the Caesar's, which may be considered as a new ^pocha in the history of the
knowledge of ancient Britain.

Whoever has a strong regard to the cause of freedom, Roman Empire united in
Theodos^us, A. D. 387.
can scarce avoid being filled with indignation, when he beholds the Romans
spreading desolation and slaughter around them; wantonly subduing the nations
of the earth, and unjustly depriving them of their liberty. But all this time,
wherever they conquered, they were for polishing and reforming the manners of
the inhabitants, and diffusing the knowledge of arts and sciences; though it
must be owned, that, during the warm contests which subsisted between the
Romans and the Britons, when the latter so gloriously, so bravely, though so
unsuccessively, struggled to maintain their independence, little progress could
be made in literature: but when the country was peaceably settled into
provinces, then civility began to spread itself, and knowledge more generally
diffused, insomuch that many of the British nobles studied the Roman learning,
and valued themselves on their magnificence and politeness, becoming pleased
with what was in fact the badges of their slavery.

During this time there were, no doubt, schools of philosophy, and several
eminent men; but who were most celebrated, or what sciences were most
cultivated, we are not able to say, no traces of them being now to be found.
The confusion that succeeded destroyed all the remains of learning, and left a
blank in this period which cannot be filled up.

But there is one event belonging to this era, A. D. 314.
which, besides its own immense importance in other views, comes more
immediately under my notice, viz. the propagation of christianity in these
isles. It is not necessary to inquire who was the person by whom the religion
of Jesus was first preached, or the exact time when it was introduced:
supposing we reject all conjectures of its being promulged by the apostles, or
their immediate disciples, it is probable that it was very soon communicated to
the Britons. It might be gaining ground, and spread greatly, before it received
a civil establishment, as we are informed of many martyrs who witnessed to the
truth, under the persecution raised by the Emperor Dioclesian, of whom St.
Albian is reckoned the protomartyr of North Britain; and from the days of
Constantine the gospel would no doubt be much diffused, and generally embraced:
accordingly we are assured, that three British bishops assisted at the council
of Arles, A. D. 314. and subscribed the acts of that council. 359.
We read also that some of them were present at the council of Aminium in 359
The Library, p. 75.

The History of the Church of Great Britain, p. 6.


."

Now, so illustrious an event as the propagation of christianity in this
country, could not take place without bringing along with it a mighty change in
the state of knowledge; all those who embraced our holy religion were turned
from gross idolatry and absurd superstition, to the belief and worship of one
God. The reception of it was a vast acquisition of wisdom, as it contributed in
many respects to expand the mind, and soften the manners of our ancestors; it
would not in those simple times, when human reason was more imperfect than it
now is, produce such noble and extended views of things as we can at present
attain, especially considering how soon errors and superstitions began to be
mixed with the gospel; nevertheless it had not then been corrupted so much as
it hereafter was, and during the purer ages it might greatly promote just and
rational sentiments in general Abstract from the Library, p. 76.
.

What the particular state of religion was, it is difficult to ascertain; but
we find doctrinal disputes agitated men in those days, as well as in succeeding
periods. The notions of Arius are said to have been embraced in this country,
and it is an undoubted fact, that Pelagianism was very prevalent. It was so
prevalent as to occasion sharp controversies, and some bishops were sent over
from Gaul to recover the Britons to the opposite opinions, though without any
lasting success.

From about this time, 424
when the Romans leave Britain, there arose a confused succession of British
Kings, or rather petty tyrants, for twenty years Blair.
, till the year 445, when Vortigern is chosen King. 445
He was originally chieftain of the Silures, settled in Radnorshire, and had
acquired some reputation by his warlike achievements against the enemies of
his country; though his martial genius by no means appeared at this juncture,
when, instead of exerting the natural strength of the kingdom, which, if
properly applied, would have been sufficient to secure it from the designs of
the enemy, he placed his dependence upon foreign auxiliaries. By his weakness
or knavery he betrayed his country into the hands of the Saxons, who had for a
century and a half infested the coast of Britain to such a degree, that the
Roman Emperors, from the reign of Dioclesian, maintained a considerable
military force under the count of the Saxon shore, on purpose to secure this
island against the descents of those piratical adventurers Smollet, p. 121.

Collier's Ecclesiastical History, vol. I. p. 61.


.

Vortigern, 447
not a little agitated by his fears, which were the more predominant from a
conseiousness of his demerit, employed his emissaries to alarm the nobility
with the exaggerated accounts of the strength, destination, and malevolence of
their old enemies the Scots and Picts. Having thus artfully prepared their
minds for the proposal, he summoned them to a general council, on pretense of
deliberating on the necessity of the state, and there managed their passions
with such dexterity, that they invested him with full power to invite the
Saxons into England, and assign to them the isle of Thanet for their habitation.

The Saxons did not long remain inactive: 452
Vortigern being pressed by his enemies from the north, they marched against
the Scots and Picts, who had advanced as far as Stamford in Lincolnshire, when
a battle ensued, in which the Saxons and Britons obtained a complete victory;
after which the Saxons returned to the place of their destination, where they
were supplied with food and raiment at the expense of Vortigern, who would have
had no cause perhaps to repent of their arrival, which were only about 1500;
but their own country being populous, and withal so barren, and the fertile
lands of Britain so agreeable and alluring, that, in a very little time, they
were reinforced with 5000 men, formed the ambitious view of becoming sole
masters of England, and industriously sought an occasion of quarrel, and, after
some struggles for victory, 477
the last of which was an incursion of the Saxons under Hengist and Esca, the
Britons were defeated, and became the subjects of the Saxons. This was an event
not only prejudicial in general to the liberties and properties of Britain, but
to science and religion in particular. Vortigern was by this time become a
contemptible partisan of the Saxons, and so immersed in vice and debauchery,
that St. Germanus, deputy of the Gallican church in Britain, reprimanded him
for his dissolute life; that he was anathematised in a council of the British
clergy, and his subjects discharged of their allegiance.

And whatever the state of knowledge might be in this island before the
introduction of the Saxons, it certainly received a great change for the worse
at that period. The repeated invasions of those barbarians, the wars they
raised, and the desolations they occasioned, spread a general consusion,
dispersed the Britons to the remotest parts of the country, destroyed the
monuments of learning, and left no room for the improvement and cultivation of
the mind.

The few literary records we have, relate only to such persons as lived where
the Saxons did not rea^h. The schools founded by Dubricius and Iltutus in North
Wales, produced several men whose names have been transmitted with honor to
posterity; though in fact we are but little acquainted with their real
seize. Among these were Patrick and David, who exerted themselves much in
preaching the gospel, and whom the superstition of latter ages has advanced
into tutelary saints, the first of Ireland, and the second of Wales. The
monastery of Bangor was particularly famous for the education of youth. A
number of scholars were brought up in it, who made some figure in their days;
and among the rest Gildas, who wrote a treatise upon the destruction of
Britain, and from whom we principally derive our information concerning the
state of things during the latter end of the fifth, and part of the sixth
century.

To the Saxons let us now direct our view, History of the Saxons, and K.
Eth^lhert's conversion.
and, with respect to knowledge, we shall find them in a dismal situation. They
were in the lowest condition of ignorance, rudeness, and barbarity; their
religious worship consisted of the grossest idolatry, and they sacrificed
prisoners of war to the Gods. The first circumstance of any note among them,
was, the reception of the gospel by Ethelbert, the King of Kent, and his
subjects. His Queen Bertha, who was daughter or niece to Chilperic, King of
Paris, and a Christian, had, together with Lindhard, a bishop, as it is said,
of piety and learning, who attended her from France, prepared the way for this
great event, by converting several persons, and by producing a favorable
disposition in the mind of her husband. But the grand work was carried on by
Austin, and other monks, sent by Pope Gregory from Rome. One thing in this
affair deserves to be taken notice of, which is, that Ethelbert, whether it was
owing to the good impressions of his lady, or the natural dictates of reason
working in his own rude, but unprejudiced understanding, allowed to his people
the utmost liberty of conscience. He treated the missionaries with respect,
heard them with attention, and permitted them to propagate their doctrines
without interruption; both before and after he had embraced christianity, he
left his subjects to an entire freedom of judging and acting for themselves.
His conversion, however, was followed by that of the whole nation; a fact the
less to be wondered at, when we consider that the barbarians, having no settled
sentiments, are in general ready to receive any which are offered by such as
excel them in knowledge, and especially when encouraged by their own prince.
This is confirmed by a variety of instances in the history of the world; for we
shall almost always find, that the ignorant and upolished conquerors of a
civilized country submitted, without much hesitation, to the religion of the
people they had subdued.

As to the change that was produced by Austin and his attendants in the
principles and manners of the Saxons, it was not, to speak the most favorably
of it, by any means so happy an alteration as would have been brought about,
had the gospel been preached in purer ages. The truth at that age was mixed
with so much error and superstition, that the understanding of our ancestors
could not be so greatly enlarged, by the reception of christianity, as at first
we might be apt to suppose; for, however upright the intentions of Austin might
be, it is evident by many instances that he was a very weak man.

Austin, otherwise called Augustine, arrived in England in the year 591 as a
simple monk and missionary; soon after which he was honored with the Pope's
pall, and created bishop of Canterbury. In this character he obtained no small
influence over Ethelbert, and was the instrument of his conversion to
christianity. He very soon after assumed the pomp and authority of a
patriarchal metropolian, or apostle of the English nation. He was indeed
consecrated as such at Arles, to which he made a voyage for that purpose; and
at his return to Britain he sent Laurentius, with a monk called Peter, to make
the Pope acquainted with the success of his labors, and desire his opinion and
direction touching certain points relating to the behavior of the bishops and
clergy. His holiness having considered and replied to the questions, which with
their answers may be seen in Bede's history of the church, sent over Melitus,
Paulus, Justus, Melinus, and Rusinianus, to assist him in converting the
Saxons; at the same time he transmitted directions about erecting sees among
the new convents, with a pall for Augustine, which is an undyed piece of woollen
cloth, laid upon St. Peter's tomb by the Pope's own hand, and worn over the
shoulders by the metropolitans when they officiate. Augustine was likewise
permitted by his master to convert the Pagan temples into Christian churches,
after due purification, and to institute anniversary sestivals of saints and
con^ec^ations, upon which the good people should build booths around those
places of worship, kill oxen, eat, drink, and be merry, with moderation. A very
singular indulgence, judiciously granted to the English, who were used to good
cheer, and would not have at first relished the practice of fasting and other
mortifications.

Some have asserted, that Austin and some others, with more probability than
Paulinus, baptized ten thousand in one day. To which soever of them this fact
is attributed, it is probable that these numerous conversions were too much
like those since carried on by popish missionaries, and consisted more in a
change of outward profession, than any real alteration of sentiments,
dispositions, and manners. This is farther apparent from the Saxons being
allowed to retain many of their Pagan customs and rites of worship, provided
they applied them to other objects; a permission which, though calculated to
answer political purposes, was directly contrary to the practice of the
apostles, and in its very nature destructive to the progress of true religion.

As for Ethelbert, he was become so zealous a convert, that he bequeathed his
own palace to the church, and retired to Reculver, that Augustine might be more
at his ease at Canterbury. Notwithstanding all these favors, and the princely
magnificence in which he lived, this pious apostle could enjoy no content while
the British clergy lived independent of his authority, and unsubjected to the sea of Rome.

Independent, therefore, of the desire which Austin had to diffuse the light of
the gospel in general, we find he was particularly zealous for his own
authority, and extremely solicitous to subject the British Christians, in the
remote parts of the island, to his metropolitan jurisdiction, and to the
doctrines and discipline of the sea of Rome. This is a circumstance the more
remarkable, as the British bishops of that age had more enlarged views of
things: accordingly they disclaimed all submission to the Roman church, and
nobly asserted their independence Abstract from the Library, p. 129.
.

This is particularly related by Spelman Spelman in conciliis.
, who says, that Austin, by the aid of Ethelbert, King of Kent, called a
council of Saxon and British bishops, to meet in the confines of the Mercians,
on the borders of Worcestershire and Herefordshire, who met under an oak, in
imitation of the pagan Britons, and performed their superstitions, as an
imitation, and yet a correction, of their idolatry. He insisted upon their
keeping the festival of Easter, and administering the sacraments after the
manner of the Roman church, and this with all the haughtiness of a Roman
Emperor. The British bishops, and many learned men, differing from the Romish
priest, rejected his traditions which he brought from Rome, and detested his
pride, renounced his authority, and would not accept of him for their
archbishop, as he desired to be, and for the space of an hunderd years at least
refused to communicate with those that had received these traditions and
devices. Then the bishops and churches of Scotland joined with the Britons
against those new observances, which the said Augustine brought from Rome. At
that time there were near a thousand monks at the monastery at Bangor in Wales,
who distinguished themselves for their sobriety, supporting themselves by
labor, and spending their leisure hours in prayer and meditation. Over that
church at Austin's coming was Dinochus, a learned man, who, when Austin
required the British bishops to be subject to his Romish authority, proved, by
many arguments, that they did not owe him any such subjection; whereat
Augustine, being highly offended, is said to have spoken to the following
effect: "That if they would not accept of peace with their brethren, they
should receive war from their enemies; and seeing they would not join with him,
in preaching the way of life to the Saxons, they should feel the weight of
their enemies sword." To which some relate, that he stirred up Ethelfred King
of Northumberland against them, who perfidiously and unmercifully slew many of
them, which was soon afterward recompensed by some British princes; Blederic
Duke of Cornwall, Margaduc Duke of South Wales, and Cadwan Duke of North Wales.
Compare Smollet's History of England, p. 217, with the History of the Church of
Great Britain, 4to, p. 13.


Augustine did not long survive this ineffectual effort; but, before his death,
he consecrated his fellow missionaries Melitus and Justus; the first of whom
was ordained bishop of London, and the other promoted to the sea of Rochester:
616
but after the death of Ethelbert and Sibert, the people apostatised, and
expelled these reverend prelates, who fled to France for refuge from Pagan
persecution. Ethelbert died A. D. 616, and Austin about the same time, and was
buried at Canterbury.

Laurentius, who succeeded to the sea of Canterbury, seemed to inherit the
pride and bigotry of his predecessor, and still labored to subject the British
church to the tyranny of Rome: but when the son of Ethelbert, and some other
Saxon princes, relapsed into idolatry, he began to think of making his retreat;
and would certainly have crossed the sea, but, by a ridiculous contrivance to
reconvert Eadbald, viz. of pretending an appearance of St. Peter, and of
receiving some severe stripes from him, which upon stripping, and showing the
marks to the King, he was so wrought upon, that he returned to the pale of the
church, and restored the fugitive prelates. Laurentius soon after died, and was
succeeded by Melitus; a prelate of noble extraction, and eminent piety; and his
successor was Justus of Rochester, who was empowered by Pope Boniface V. to
consecrate bishops Smollet's History, p. 216.

Library, p. 129.


.

Notwithstanding the honor of the change in the state of knowledge and
religion has been chiefly attributed to Austin and his assistants; 619.
yet it was in a great measure owing to others. The West Saxons were converted
to christianity by Berinius, who was invested by the Pope with the episcopal
dignity for that purpose, independent of Augustine and his coadjutors; and
particularly in the kingdom of East Anglia, Northumberland and Mercia. For
before this period Paulinus had begun to propagate christianity among the
inhabitants of Northumberland, by the assistance of Ethelburga the wise of King
Edwin; but the slaughter of that Prince soon overturned all that had been done,
and the nation reverted back to idolatry; afterward when, Oswald, one of his
successors, was desirous of converting his subjects, he sent to the Scotch
monastery, from whence at length he received Aidan; a person who deserves to be
raised from the obscurity of the times, and to be mentioned with singular
veneration and esteem, since he was not only learned as any of his
cotemporaries, but took peculiar care to have schools erected for the education
of youth: he likewise earnestly recommended, both to the clergy and laity, a
diligent and constant study of the scriptures; being sensible that this was the
only way of promoting a genuine and rational knowledge of divine truths, and
the consequent practice of religion. Aidan preached the gospel to the Saxons,
and by his ministry was the kingdom of Northumberland converted to
christianity. Aidan likewise divided his substance among the poor, and went
from town to town catechizing and instructing the Pagans, or confirming the
Christians in their faith History of the Church, p. 15.
.

The times of the heptarchy furnish us with few such examples, though they
abound in the history of many persons, distinguished as warriors, as
politicians and devotees. The far greater number of Princes were likewise
persons of this character; two only or principally deserve to be mentioned; the
first is Sigebert King of East Anglia, A.D. 636, who, in consequence of his
having been an exile in France, had acquired an understanding and a taste
superior to his cotemporaries: accordingly, when he was settled on the throne,
he did not merely endeavor to convert his subjects to christianity, but
instituted seminaries for instruction in the languages and such other
literature as was then known: he has sometimes been considered, though without
sufficient reason, as the founder of the university of Cambridge. The schools
appointed by him were erected in several places, and can by no means be
considered as the establishment of an university; and his knowledge was not so
enlarged as to preserve him from the superstition and weakness of the times;
for, we read, he closed his reign, A. D. 640, by retiring into a monastery. The
other Prince of note is Ina, of whom we shall speak by and by.

About this time Sussex and the Isle of Wight were also converted, and Honorius
archbishop of Canter^ bury divided England (so much thereof as was Christian)
into parishes; the first Lent began in those parts of England which obeyed the
Roman celebration of Easter.

Penda Prince of Mercia, 641.
having married Alfreda, daughter of Oswy, King of Northumberland, renounced
paganism, embraced christianity, and propagated it in his dominions. Indeed
Penda his father, that persecutor of piety, was yet alive (and survived two
years after) still persisting an heathen till death, but was so far mollified
as to permit a toleration of christianity in his subjects History of the
Church, p. 17.
.

Platina tells us In Bonifacio, 4to.
, "there was a famous seminary of learning at Colmkil, from whence sprang many
eminent persons, who not only gave a check to the beginning of antichristian
pride at home, and in our neighboring country, but they sowed the seed of the
gospel in other nations; such was that famous Rumold, who was called
Mechlinensis Apostolus. Gallas converted Helvetia from Paganism, as Pappas
witnesses, and built sundry monasteries there. Calumba, a man of excellent
learning and piety, lived some time at Bangor, and thence went into Burgundy,
where he began a monastery at Luxovien, and taught the monks of his own country
especially to live by the work of their own hands, visited Germany, and made
many converts there, and Levin also turned many to the faith about Ghent and
Esca. Diuma was ordained first bishop of Mercia in the reign of the Christian
Penda, where he converted many to the Christian faith, and for his
distinguishing gifts the bishopric of Middlesex was committed to him, unto whom
succeeded Cella, a Scot. Florentine went to Strasburg, and was the first bishop
thereof in 669. About the same time Kellian, the first bishop of Wortsburg,
first instructed the people of East France in the Christian faith. Colonat a
priest, and Thomas a deacon, followed him in all his travels; Barcard
succeeded, to whom King Pippin gave a dukedom."

Pope Agatho very early discovered a zealous regard to promote truth and peace
throughout the churches, Agatho Pope, A. D. 678, his character, etc.
and accordingly summoned the bishops of Italy to meet at Rome, in order to
choose, together with him, such persons as should be judged the best qualified
for probity and learning, to discharge so great a trust.

Pursuant thereunto, Pope Agatho sent John (the archchaunter of St. Peter's in
Rome) into England, to compose the difference between Honorius and Wilfrid, the
two archbishops, and withal to deliver them the acts of Pope Martin I. and to
teach them to sing the liturgy according to the custom of Rome. Benedictus
Biscopius, a nobleman of England, went to Rome in the service of the church,
and brought many books into the monasteries of Tinmouth and Wirmouth.

Bid, speaking of the custom of those days, says, that at this time they
frequented the church with a zealous regard to the public worship; the care of
the doctors and priests was to serve God, not the world; to feed souls, not
their own bodies: that in those days, wheresoever a clerk or monk did come, he
was received as a servant of God; that the people gave good heed unto the words
of his exhortation; for masses were not then performed as the common service of
the church, nor were the priests prohibited to marry; but Bid, in the
subsequent part of his history, complains of the degeneracy of the church, and
prevalence of popish doctrines and ceremonies; and more especially of the
usurpation, power and influence of the clergy, instances of which are not
wanted in the annals of our own and other nations, many of which will occur in
the following part of this history.

After this Theodorus (who succeeded Deus-dedit) bishop of Canterbury, brought
many books thither, erected a well-chosen library, and encouraged his clergy to
make use thereof. He rigorously professed conformity to Rome in the observation
of Easter, and for that purpose a council was called at Hartford: there Easter
was settled according to the Romish rite. In this synod nine other articles
were concluded on, as Stapleton has thus translated them out of Bid.

I. That no bishop should have ought to do in another diocese, but be contented
with the charge of the people committed unto him.

II. That no bishop should any-wise trouble such monasteries as were
consecrated, and given to God, nor violently take from them any thing that was
theirs.

III. That monks should not go from one monastery to another, unless by the
leave of their own abbot; but should continue in the obedience which they
promised at the time of their conversion and entrance into religion.

IV. That none of the clergy forsaking his own bishop, should run up and down
where he lists; nor when he came any where, should be received without letters
of commendation from his diocesan, etc.

V. That such bishops and clerks as are strangers, be content with such
hospitality as is given them; and that it be lawful for none of them to execute
any office of a priest, without the permission of the bishop in whose diocese
they are known to be.

VI. It has seemed good to us all, that a synod and convocation should be
assembled once a year, on the first of August, at the place called Cloveshoo.

VII. That no bishop should ambitiously prefer himself above another; but
should all acknowledge the time and order of their consecration.

VIII. That the number of the bishops should be increased, as the Christians
became more numerous.

IX. That no man commit adultery, nor fornication; that no man forsake his own
wife, but only for adultery, as the holy gospel teaches. And if any man put
away his wife, being lawfully married unto him, if he will be a right Christian
man, let him be joined to no other; but let him so continue, or else be
reconciled again to his own wise.

This synod Stapleton called the first of the English nation, that is upon
record, whose canons are completely extant.

The other prince that comes under our notice, is INA, King of Wessex, INA, K.
of Wessex, A. D. 688. His character.
who sustains the character of a lawgiver. He cannot, indeed, be compared with
the celebrated legislators of Grecian antiquity: he was not so profound as
Lycurgus, nor so wise as Solon; but surely the first Saxon monarch, who
composed a body of written laws, is an object worthy our attention. This work
he executed by the advice, and with the concurrence of his nobles, bishops, and
other eminent persons. Some of his institutes related to the church, and some
to the state. They continued in force a considerable time, and at length became
the foundation of the code established by Alfred. But excellent as Ina was in
several respects, he disgraced himself by an absurd superstition, and
introduced into his dominions the tax called Peter's pence, which afterward
extended through all England.

Urged by mistaken notions of religion, he resigned his crown, and took a
journey to Rome, in order to confer with Pope Gregory II. He returned to his
own country to take leave of his wife Ethelburga, who retired into a monastery
at Barking; then returning to Rome, he assumed the habit of a monk, and died in
obscurity and contempt, A. D. 727.

A little before the reign of Ina there flourished in Kent, Theodore, a native
of Tarsus, and archbishop of Canterbury. This man was more learned than any of
his predecessors, and deserves to be recorded, as taking uncommon pains to
promote the cause of literature; schools were erected by him, in order to teach
the languages, geometry, arithmetic, music, and astronomy; and so successful
were these schools, that Bid assures us he knew several persons educated in
them, who were able to converse in Greek and Latin as fluently as their native
tongue. This was, undoubtedly, a great attainment; and though the design of
Theodore seems principally to have been to carry on his scheme of spreading the
customs and discipline of the Roman church; yet, whatever views his were, it
must be owned that the encouragement of knowledge was a noble and generous
method of executing his purposes.

Whether it was owing to the seminaries established by this celebrated prelate,
or to what other causes, the imperfection of records will not permit us to
determine; but during the latter end of the seventh, and the beginning of the
eighth centuries, learning, such as it was, was rather upon the advance in
England. There is something in the style and manner of the writers, who lived
at that period, which is superior to the authors who preceded or came after
them for several ages; and then flourished a set of men, who, all things
considered, deserved a large share of reputation. Egbert, archbishop of York,
was famous as a great collector of books, a scholar, and a patron of
literature. Eddius composed the life of bishop Wilfrid in a better taste of
language than had hitherto been customary. Acca produced a number of
theological pieces.

But of all the eminent persons that adorned this era, Bid the Venerable, his
character.
Bid was the most illustrious; and indeed, notwithstanding the defects of his
works, which are chiefly owing to the defects of the times, he was really an
extraordinary man. He was the first who wrote a regular ecclesiastical history;
and though it is too full of fables and false miracles, it still continues to
be valuable. Nor was his knowledge confined to divinity and the annals of the
church, but reached to the arts and sciences in general; to grammar, astronomy,
chronology, natural philosophy, and ethics. It is true, his treatises on these
subjects will be sound very imperfect, when compared with the enlightened
productions of modern ages; nevertheless, they prove him to have had an
uncommon genius and application. He obtained when young the appellation of
Venerable, and will always be regarded as a character that is entitled to
peculiar honor and esteem.

Bid was the luminary of the north, where he constantly lived; and next to him
in reputation was Aldhelm, who was something before him in point of time, and
the chief ornament in the south of England. It is universally agreed he was the
first Englishman who composed in Latin; none having heretofore done it, in this
island, but such as were either foreigners from the continent, or Irish, or
Scots, or Britons: he has likewise himself assured us, that he was the first
who introduced poetry among the Saxons, and who wrote upon the measure of
verses. He died A. D. 734, aged 72 History of the Church of Great Britain, p.
22.
.

About the year 700, Egfrid expelled Wilfred from his see at York, on account
of his factious spirit and dangerous influence with the people; but Wilfred
appealing to the Pope, it was decreed in a full synod that he should be
restored; but Egfrid set the Pope and his decree at defiance. However such was
the zeal of Wilfred, that the merit of converting the South Saxons is ascribed
to him, after his expulsion from the sea of York; and though he is said to have
confirmed his doctrines by miracles, his great success seems to have been owing
to the favorable disposition of Adelwalch, who had already embraced the
Christian faith, and to the great influence Wilfred acquired among the common
people.

The archbishop of Canterbury not only endeavored to extend his jurisdiction
over the British church, but also to reduce the Scottish clergy to the dominion
of the Pope. Theodore, a Greek, having been promoted to the sea of Canterbury,
held a synod at Harford, where, among other particulars in the book of canons,
to be diligently observed, he insisted upon their keeping Easter according to
the literal direction, on the Sunday after the fourteenth day of the first
month. This was a stroke aimed at the Britons and Scots, who celebrated that
festival by another rule; and two bishops from Icolm-kill had prevailed upon
the Northumbrians to adopt their usage in this respect, though they had been
converted by Roman missionaries. Oswy, King of that country, considering the
difference as a subject of great importance, proposed a conference at Whitby in
Yorkshire, between Colman, one of the Scottish prelates, supported by several
monks of his nation, and Wilfred, who had already brought over the Queen to his
opinion. The dispute was of consequence decided in favor of this courtly
abbot; while Colman and his party recounced their preferment, and retired to
Scotland.

About the year A. D. 709, a synod was held at Alancester, in Worcestershire,
to promote the building of Evesham abbey, which was done accordingly; and the
same was bountifully endowed by Offa, and other Mercian kings, with large
revenues. Not long after another synod was called at London, to introduce into
England the practice of image worship, which as yet was no public practice.
Much about the same time it became fashionable for the Kings and Queens of
England to turn monks and nuns, and retire into convents; so that in the space
of a few years nine distinguished themselves by this monkish practice. From
hence we may likewise assert, that the Romish power and superstition gained
ground in the English nations. Aldhelm, bishop of Sherborn, wrote a book in
favor of the Romish time, and manner of celebrating Easter, which had no small
influence on the minds of the people.

The sea of Canterbury was at the death of Cuthbert filled with Bridwin, a
noble Saxon, of remarkable piety and discretion. But he survived but three
years, when Adulph being elected archbishop, received the pall from Pope Paul
V. This prelate exerted all his interest and industry to prevent Offa, King of
the Mercians, from erecting an archiepiscopal see within his dominions, by
which his own metropolitanical power would be dismembered; but Pope Adrian, to
whom the dispute was referred, decided in favor of Offa, whom he empowered to
erect Litchfield into an archbishopric, to which all the Mercian bishops were
declared suffragans.

This was the last blow given to the independency of the British church, for it
fixed Offa and his new elected archbishop Adulph, in the interest of Rome,
which was so sensible of the great influence it had gained by this compliance
with Offa's ambition, that the Pope sent Gregory bishop of Ostia, and
Theophilact, another prelate, in quality of legates to England. These came on
pretense of reforming the discipline of the English church, and executing the
partition of the metropolitanical power of Canterbury. A synod was accordingly
held in Northumberland, and gave an assent to all the articles which had been
already prepared by the legates. These were in effect little more than a
confirmation of canons, which had formerly received the sanction of the church,
excepting however two new articles, one of which is an admonition to kings to
respect the clergy, and the other a caution to the people against choosing
illegitimate sovereigns. The decrees of this synod were afterward confirmed by
another, held at Calcluith, which was more frequent and full than the other,
and Adulph received the pall from Rome, without Lambert's daring to murmur, for
fear of being impeached of treasonable practices.

Offa having exerted himself so much in favor of the church, was considered in
other countries as a very religious Prince, and received from Charlemagne the
decrees of the second councils of Nice, recommending image worship, against
which the famous Alcuin, who was an Englishman, and a tutor to Charlemagne, had
writ with great energy and learning. Indeed his performance had a remarkable
effect among the Germans, for by means of it image worship was solemnly
condemned at the council of Frankfort Smollet, p. 218.
.

Several synods were successively held at Canterbury, at Cloveshoo, at
Calcluith, and another afterward at Cloveshoo, all relating to matters of a
beneficiary nature, and to the prerogative of the Pope or Princes.

In the year of our Lord 747, Decrees of the synod of Cloveshoo, A. D. 747.
there was a famous synod held at Cloveshoo, or Clyff, near Rochester in Kent.
The matter of the debate related to the government and discipline of the
church. This synod was composed of twelve English prelates; Ethelbald likewise
King of the Mercians, and the temporal nobility, were present at it, and many
of the clergy. The following compendium of the decrees of this synod will
afford us an idea of the state of religion at that time.

At the opening of the synod, Pope Zachary's letters were first read in the
original by archbishop Cuthbert, and then translated to the audience. In these
letters, as Malmsbury relates, the Pope admonished the English clergy to reform
their lives, and threatened those with excommunication that continued in their
irregularities.

This preliminary being over, the bishops proceeded to draw up a body of
canons, some of which I shall mention.

1st, It was decreed, that every bishop should be careful to support his
character, execute every part of his office, and maintain the canons and
constitutions of the church, against all sort of liberty or encroachment. And
that those of this order should answer the expectations of their stations, nor
engage in secular affairs so far as to be disabled for their functions; but to
be remarkably eminent for their probity, self-denial, and learning; that by
this means they may be qualified to make an impression upon the people, both by
their instructions, and by their practice.

2dly, That the prelates and clergy should be careful to keep a good
correspondence with each other, without any flattering applications to any
person; considering that they are the servants of the same master, and
entrusted with the same commission; and therefore, though they are divided by
distance of place and country, they ought to be united in affection, and pray
for each other, that every one may discharge his office with integrity and
conscience.

These two canons, but especially the last, seem to be drawn on purpose to
guard the liberties of the English church against the pretensions of Rome, and
to throw off that precedent of servitude, which Boniface had set them in his
letter to archbishop Cuthbert. It is true, they do not mention the Pope; but by
obliging the bishops to stand up in defense of the ancient canons, not to
flatter any person upon the score of his ecclesiastical distinction, because
the bishops have all of them the honor of the same commission and employment;
these general glances, with the grounds, upon which they stand, seem plainly
designed to fence against that submission to the papal chair which Boniface
recommended.

3dly, That the respective bishops should visit their diocese every year, call
the people of all ranks and conditions together, and be particularly careful to
preach to those, who lie most out of the way of instruction; and not suffer any
unwarrantable and heathenish customs, such as divination, amulets, charms, etc.
to continue in the diocese.

The fourth, fifth, and seventh, relate to the regulation of monasteries. The
sixth orders the bishops not to ordain any priest, without a previous
examination upon the points of learning and morals.

The eighth puts the priests in mind of the advantage of their character, and
the business for which they were ordained. That they ought to abstract
themselves from the world as much as may be, and spend their time in reading,
prayer and exhortation, and other exercises of religion; and, more particularly
in the next canon, they are enjoined to preach, baptize, and inspect the
manners of the laity in those precincts and divisions assigned them by their
respective bishops. From hence it appears, that the subdivisions of the
dioceses were in some measure formed, and the lines of parishes struck out.

The tenth canon orders the priests to be thoroughly acquainted with the
doctrine and service of the church; to teach the creed and Lord's prayer in
English, and explain the sacraments to the people. This direction is agreeable
to Bede's advice to Egbert bishop of York; where he tells him, that both the
clergy and laity ought to have the creed and Lord's prayer by heart; and that
himself had translated them into English for the advantage of the common
people, and those that did not understand Latin.

In the eleventh canon, the priests are enjoined to be uniform in the exercise
of their function, and to baptize, preach and govern with the same rules and
measures.

The twelfth regulates the church-music, provides for the solemnity of the
performance, and forbids the clergy to profane the service with the air of the
theater. And in the close of the canon, the priests are enjoined to keep within
the bounds of their order, and not to do any thing which belongs to the bishop.

By the thirteenth, the holy days are to be kept every where on the same day,
and the time to be governed by the Roman martyrology.

The fourteenth provides for the religious observance of the Sunday or Lord's
day, that it ought to be wholly dedicated to God's service; that all secular
business and traveling, unless in case of necessity, ought to be forborne; that
the people are to be called to church to hear the word of God, and receive the
sacraments.

The fifteenth orders the seven canonical hours of prayer should be constantly
observed according to custom, and that nothing should be introduced but what is
warrantable by the authority of scripture, and agreeable to the practice of the
Roman church.

By the sixteenth, the litanies or rogations are enjoined to be kept with great
solemnity by the clergy and people; that which is called the great litany, by
the Romish church, is ordered to be kept the twenty-fourth day of April.

The other, which stands upon the ancient practice of the island, falls three
days before our Savior's ascension; on which divine service is to be
performed, and the people to fast till three in the afternoon.

By the seventeenth, the days on which St. Gregory the Great, and Augustine,
archbishop of Canterbury, died, are to be made holy days; and that in singing
the litany, the name of Augustine shall be mentioned after St. Gregory.

The eighteenth canon provides for the solemn times of fasting in Ember-weeks:
and that the people should have notice given to provide themselves.

The nineteenth and twentieth relate to the government and behavior of
monasteries, with respect to habit, company and employment.

The twenty-first is levelled against drunkenness, luxury, and insobriety of
conversation.

The twenty-second, enjoins the religious to live in a constant preparation for
the receiving the sacrament of the holy eucharist, or the body and blood of our
Savior, as the canon words express it.

From hence I shall pass to the twenty-fifth, by which the bishops, at their
coming from their synod, are obliged to convene the priests and abbots of their
dioceses, to publish the canons of the council, and command their observance.
And if any disorder proves too strong for the bishop's correction, he is to
acquaint the archbishop with it at the meeting of the next synod. But not a
word of carrying the complaint farther to Rome.

The twenty-sixth states the right use of charity, and provides against wrong
views and misapplications in this duty; and here the synod declares, that alms
are not given to commute for penance, to dispense with the discipline of the
church, or procure us a liberty for sinning: that those who think the justice
of God can be bribed in this manner, make their charity insignificant, and
bring an addition to their guilt: that alms signifies mercy both in the name
and thing; and that they are no less a charity to the giver than to the
receiver. And therefore he that has a true compassion for his own soul, should
always give that which is his own, and not circumvent or oppress one neighbor
to be charitable to another.

The twenty-seventh dilates upon the usefulness, and directs in the manner and
qualifications, of singing psalms. That this part of divine service ought to be
performed with due recollection, with pious dispositions and postures of
respect; and, after the singing is ended, there are prayers mentioned both for
the living and the dead; and those that do not understand Latin, are to pray in
the vulgar tongue. The prayer for the dead runs thus: O Lord, we beseech thee,
for thy great mercy, grant that the soul of such a person may be secured in a
state of indisturbance and repose; and that he may be admitted, with the rest
of thy saints, into the regions of light and happiness.

This canon, like the last, puts the people in mind not to depend upon the
performance of one branch of duty, to the neglect of another. It seems some
people began to believe that one good action was a sort of dispensation in
other cases; and, which was still more extravagant, they fancied they might
perform their duty by proxy, built upon foreign merit, and be good by the
virtue of their neighbors. The canon is the larger in exposing the vanity and
danger of this reliance, because they had a large instance of such an
unreasonable expectation in a layman of condition. This person, it seems, had
forfeited the communion of the church, and was put under discipline for some
great crime: now he desired the rigor of his penance might be taken off, and
that he might be reconciled upon the suggestion following. He acquainted those
spiritual directors he belonged to, that he had procured several persons to
fast, sing psalms, and distribute charity on his account; so that if he was to
live three hundred years, there was enough done for him by other good people,
though he should do little or nothing himself: but the canon declares, with
great indignation, against the folly of such a presumption.

The last canon enjoins, That Kings and Princes, and the whole body of the
commonwealth, shall be publicly prayed for in the church.

The bishops names that sat in this synod were, Cuthbert, archbishop of
Canterbury; Dunnus, bishop of Rochester, etc.; and Podda, bishop of Leicester,
etc. Linsey, who governed the sees of Winchester, Sherborne, etc. in the
kingdom of the West Saxons; Herdulp, bishop of Dunwich and Helman; Egwulf,
bishop of London; Milred, of Worcester; Alwi, of Lindsey; and Sigga, of Selcey
in Sussex: but Egbert, being of the royal family and brother to King Eadbert,
was not there.

When the synod broke up, archbishop Cuthbert dispatched his deacon to give
Boniface, archbishop of Mentz, an account of what was done, pursuant to the
true intent and design thereof by Ethelbald, and those bishops who acceded to
its convention, and confirmed the decrees by their subscription Collier's
Eccles. History, B. II. 159.
.

About the year 755, Kenulphus, King of the West Saxons, conferred large
privileges on the monastery of Abingdon, in Berkshire, A. D. 758, and dead
bodies were first admitted to be buried in churches, which by degrees brought
in great superstition History of the Church of Great Britain, p. 22. Ibid. 23.
.

In the year 789, The Danish Invasion, A. D. 789.
the Danes first invaded England with a considerable army. Lindesfern or holy
island was the first that felt the fury of these Pagans, but soon after no
place was secure from their cruelty.

ETHELBERT VI. King of the East Saxons, went to marry the daughter of Offa, and
Offa perfidiously caused him to be murdered, after which to commute for his sin
he gave the tenth part of all he had to the church, and several lands to the sea of Hereford, and then he went to Rome, repaired, beautified and richly
endowed the English monastery, and there confirmed to Pope Adrian the gift of
Peter pence; then was the corpse of St. Alban, in a pompous manner, taken up,
inshrined and adored by the spectators. Offa likewise procured the canonization
of St. Alban, the absolution of his own sins and many murders, and then
returning home founded the monastery of St. Alban, bestowed great riches upon
it in lands, exempted it from paying Peter Pence, episcopal jurisdiction, and
the like, and died the next year.

EGBERT, the First King of England, A. D. 800.
Egbert, King of the West Saxons, in the year 800, having vanquished Mercia,
Kent, Essex, and Northumberland, received a general invitation to accept the
sovereignty of England, both in church and state; in consequence of which he
returned and mounted the throne of Wessex, and began to reign over a people
both rich and powerful, in whose affluence and affection he foresaw his own
future greatness. He had, in all probability, already planned the union of the
heptarchy; but before he would impart the least hint of that design to the
other Saxon nations, he resolved to humble the Britons in such a manner that
they should be in no condition to interfere with the execution of his grand
project. Mean while, in order to avert the suspicion of the Saxons, he acted as
a mediator in all the differences subsisting between the princes of the
heptarchy, and in particular effected a reconciliation between Cardulf King of
Northumberland, and Kenulf King of Mercia, who had taken the field against each
other, and were on the eve of terminating their quarrel by the sword.

These good offices; employed with such moderation, the prudence he manifested
in his own government, and known capacity in the affairs of war and peace,
raised his character to such a degree of reputation, that he was considered as
the father of the English nation, and chosen chief of the Saxon heptarchy.

Egbert having united the heptarchy, was so engaged by continual wars, that he
had very little time to advert to ecclesiastical affairs; and these troubles
detached the people so much from the practice and study of religious duties,
that the whole nation was overspread with ignorance, and a total relaxation of
morals ensued. During this reign, however, Withlaf, the tributary King of
Mercia, granted to the abbey of Croyland a famous charter, which was confirmed
by the states of the kingdom. Among other privileges and exemptions contained
in this charter, it ordained that the monastery of Croyland should be held as a
sanctuary, which no officer of justice should presume to violate, on pain of
losing his right foot; and that the abbots and monks should be entertained
through all parts of Mercia, with all the honors and distinction due to a
prince of the blood. This deed was confirmed by Egbert, and seems to have been
the only ecclesiastical transaction of his reign: but his successor Ethelwulf,
who was entirely governed by the clergy, and left the administration to
Swithin, bishop of Winchester, extended his compliance to the church farther
than it had ever been carried by any of his predecessors, and bestowed upon it
the tithes of all England, in an authentic charter, confirmed in a general
assembly at Winchester, and signed by the substituted kings of Mercia and East
Anglia.

It might naturally be expected, that when the seven kingdoms came under the
dominion of one Prince, the state of things would grow better, and knowledge
begin to revive in England: but the fact was far otherwise; and if we enquire
into the causes of it, several circumstances will be found that contributed to
the production of the contrary event; the wars carried on by Egbert against his
neighbors gave rise to much confusion and desolation, and when he had reduced
the nation under his government, it would be still a considerable time before
affairs would be brought into so peaceable and flourishing a condition, as was
necessary to the progress of learning. Moreover, the spirit of the age was
directly opposite to literary improvement, an universal ignorance prevailed,
and there was no thought about the cultivation and improvement of human nature.
To this concurred the absurd sentiments that were propagated with regard to
religion, and the enormous power and influence of the clergy, which could only
be supported by the ignorance and stupidity of the people. Indeed the situation
of the whole world, during this period, and for many centuries, afford a strong
proof, that where the scriptures are neglected, and rational principles
concerning religious matters totally excluded, the other branches of science,
and the faculties of the mind in general, will greatly suffer. It may perhaps
be supposed that the monasteries had a tendency to preserve and favor
literature: but whatever their tendency was, they had in reality rather a
contrary effect; they were not examples of piety, or seats of the muses; the
persons who resided in them did not six upon them as retreats to awaken their
devotion, and enlarge their understanding, but as places where they might live
exempt from military service, and securely indulge their lust and vices; so
that monasteries were little else than the abodes of wickedness. Bid complains
of them again and again in his writings, and he has told us they were in so
corrupt a state, that such as desired to be sincerely pious were obliged to go
abroad for education Library, p. 180.
.

Bid likewise informs us, that the Christian church at that time was far gone
from its original purity; for the monks had introduced several practices into
the church, which were not of apostolic institution, making use of every means
in their power to inspire people with great reverence for the Pope of Rome, and
to an high veneration for monasteries, so that it is surprising how many was
erected, and how richly they were endowed even in the infancy of the church.

The reigns of Ethelbald, Ethelbert, and Ethelred I. are very barren of all
ecclesiastical matter; except the destruction of monasteries by the Danies,
which the historians in those days have described in very pathetic terms;
regretting in particular the three famous convents of Croyland, Ely, and
Maderhamstede, in which the monks were massacred, and their libraries burned.
We have already observed that the cruelty of the Danes was so inveterate
against every person appertaining to the culture of the Christian religion,
that those few monks who escaped their barbarity, either quitted the kingdom,
or had recourse to other employments for a livelihood, when they found
themselves deprived of the revenues upon which they formerly subsisted; so that
Alfred the Great, when he triumphed over those invaders, could find no monks in
England, and was obliged to replenish the monasteries he built with
ecclesiastics invited from foreign countries. This great prince, who
contributed so much to the restoration of learning and religion, enacted many
ecclesiastical as well as civil institutions. The first part of these is little
more than a transcript of the decalogue, omitting the second commandment,
because repugnant to image worship, which had by this time gained footing in
England. These are followed by an abridgment of the regulations instituted by
Moses, as recorded in the book of Exodus; and a recapitulation of the
gospel dispensation; after which we find a short introduction to his code of
civil laws, collected from those of Ina, Offa, and Ethelbert, the first of all
the Saxon Kings who were converted to christianity.

Another historian gives us much the same account. Introductory to the
character of Alfred, he observes, that the grand circumstance which destroyed
the very traces of knowledge, and cut it up by the roots, was the invasion of
the Danes, which so soon succeeded the abolition of the heptarchy, that there
was no time to bring the kingdom into order and discipline. In consequence of
the numerous and repeated attacks of that people, who were more barbarous than
the Saxons, an almost universal ruin was spread through the island, and the
monks were totally dispersed, so that the few among them that had applied
themselves to useful learning, were driven away or murdered; the wisdom they
possessed, whatever it was, perished with them. Hence, with respect to the
history of religion and learning, little can be recorded from the reign of
Egbert to the reign of Alfred, who, when he came to the crown, found science in
so deplorable a condition, that he has himself assured us that he scarce
remembered one man on the south side the Humber who understood his prayers in
the English tongue, or could translate a piece of Latin into his native
language Library, p. 180.
.

ALFRED, A. D. 872.
When the Danes had already subdued Northumberland and East Anglia, and gained
footing in the very heart of Wessex, all the churches and monasteries burnt,
and the whole country depopulated, Alfred seasonably and successfully assumed
the dignity of King, and merited that of father to his people Smollet, p. 249.
.

Were it not for Alfred the period we are writing of would hardly deserve to be
mentioned; Alfred's character.
but he has thrown a mighty luster upon it, for in him we meet with abilities
and accomplishments that are truly astonishing. If we had materials, it would
be very delightful to trace the steps by which such a mind advanced to
maturity, to mark the incidents that awakened the vigor of his genius, and
rendered him so distinguished and enlightened in a barbarous age, and amidst a
scene of general discord. We are informed, that when he was very young, he was
twice at Rome, and perhaps a persecuting impression might be made upon him,
while in that famous city: for though Rome itself was then in an exceeding low
state of science, compared with what it had formerly been; yet it was vastly
superior in this respect to the dark and frozen regions of the north. But
whatever impressions Alfred might receive at that place, no immediate
advancement in knowledge seems to have been the result of them; for we are told
his education was so far neglected, that he did not learn to read till he was
twelve years of age; but when he had made a beginning, his capacity and
assiduity was such, that his progress was equally surprising.

He was undoubtedly in every instance one of the most illustrious characters
recorded in history, and deservedly remains to this day the peculiar favorite
of the English nation.

With regard to his personal character, we shall find that he was superior to
any man of his time; considered as a poet and mathematician, such was his
ardent desire for the cultivation of his mind, that he always retained about
him the most accomplished scholars he could meet with, with whom he perpetually
engaged in literary enquiries and pursuits.

Nor was his wisdom locked up in his own breast, and reserved merely for his
private entertainment, but was diffused around him in a plentiful manner. He
was extremely solicitous to have his subjects enlightened and improved; and
sought out methods that could contribute to so desirable an effect. For which
purpose, one of his first steps was to invite from the British monasteries, and
from the continent, as many learned men as possible, whom he received and
treated with great marks of friendship, and in concurrence with them erected a
number of schools for the instruction of his people.

Among the learned strangers who assisted Alfred in his great work of restoring
the luster of the church, and reviving the arts and sciences, the principal
were, Johannes Scotus Erigena, an Irish Scot, who had studied at Athens and
other foreign countries, and made himself master of the Greek and oriental
languages; he then repaired through Italy to France, where he acquired an eminent
degree of favor and familiarity with Charles the Bald; and the fame of his
talents extending to England, he was invited hither by Alfred, whom he
instructed in the liberal arts, and whose friendship he enjoyed,
notwithstanding his opposition to the doctrine of transubstantiation, which
rendered him obnoxious to the sea of Rome. Toward the latter part of his life,
he opened a school in the monastery of Malmesbury, where his scholars murdered
him with their penknives; though we are ignorant of the occasion. Another
foreigner, for whom Alsred conceived a very early affection, was one Grimbald,
who entertained him so hospitably in his journey to Rome, that he afterward
created him abbot of Winchester. He was a learned divine, well skilled in
music, and distinguished himself for his talents in oratory. The first abbot of
the new abbey, founded in the isle of Ethelney, was a native of Old Saxony, and
almost all the monks, priests, and deacons were foreigners; not but that his
own country produced a number of men who distinguished themselves by their
piety and erudition, namely, Asser Menevenis, a monk of St. David's, so
attached to his retirement, that all the caresses and favors of Alfred could
not prevail upon him to forsake it entirely, though he consented to live one
half-year with the King, who promoted him to the bishopric of Sherburn, and
bestowed upon him many other marks of his particular regard. Yet he must not be
confounded with his namesake and uncle, Asserius, archbishop of St. David's,
who wrote part of Alfred's life. John, the monk, belonging to the same
monastery, to whose instruction the King owed his knowledge of the Latin
tongue. Werefred, bishop of Worcester, who had been driven by the Danes into
banishment; from whence he was recalled by Alfred, who had employed him to
translate Gregory's Dialogues. Plegmund, archbishop of Canterbury; and Dunwulf,
bishop of Winchester, who is said by some authors to have been the very
cow-herd whom Alfred served in disguise. That prince it seems discovered in him
a genius far above his station in life, which he exalted in proportion to his
merit.

But of all the ecclesiastics who dignified the court of Alfred, Neotus, or St.
Neot, was the most remarkable for his learning, piety, and example: in being
descended from the blood royal of the East Angles, he was respected as a prince
as well as a prelate; and is said, by his personal authority and admonitions,
to have restricted the sallies of Alfred's youth. He was buried at St. Guerer's
church, at Gainsbury, in Cornwall; and such at that time was the general
opinion of his sanctity, that he supplanted the Cornish saint, and gave his own
name to the church, which was thenceforward called Neotstow. The palace of Earl
Alric, in Huntingdonshire, was afterward converted into a monastery, and
dedicated to this saint, whose body was translated thither; though not suffered
to remain in this place neither, for, in the reign of King John, his bones were
removed from this St. Neot to the abbey of Croyland. This ecclesiastic, and the
greatest part of those abovementioned, taught together in the university of
Oxford, which was regulated and endowed by Alfred, who frequently assisted in
person at their exercises, until some disputes arose between the native and
foreign professors, and then Grimbald retired to the monastery at Winchester,
which the King had lately founded Smollet.
.

Moreover, that the path of knowledge might be rendered still easier to the
English nation, Alfred employed the ablest persons who were about him, in
writing such books as were calculated for the information of the multitude; a
most judicious and useful scheme! and as there were but very few who were
capable of putting it into execution, he commenced author himself, and composed
a variety of pieces; so great a variety, that we are astonished at his finding
leisure to produce them in the midst of the dangerous wars, and important
public concerns, in which he was continually engaged.

The motive from which his literary performances took their rise, does him
honor: he did not write from a principle of vanity, but from a laudable view
for the improvement and happiness of mankind; and accordingly we find the
matter of them were worthy of his character, as the prince and father of his
country. Many of his compositions relate to the principles of government and
laws; and others of them were calculated for the instruction of his people in
general, adapted to inspire them with devotion, to excite their attention to
the moral virtues, and to provide for them innocent and instructive
entertainment. Nor should his method of doing it pass unnoticed, as he employed
the learned about him to give the general sense of an author, and then gave it
a dress best adapted to the taste and to the apprehensions of the public.

Nor did he confine his subjects to his own times, but in most of his
undertakings extended his views to the welfare of posterity: besides the
schools erected by him in different places, he prohibited any one from assuming
the trust and dignity of a magistrate who was not versed in learning; and, that
there might not be wanting a supply of men qualified to discharge the several
offices of government, he compelled, by law, those who had competent fortunes
to give their children a proper education.

One principal object which showed his regard to learning, University of Oxford
founded by King Alfred.
and has rendered his name peculiarly illustrious, was his being the FOUNDER OF
THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD. We say the founder, though we are not insensible that
some writers have contended for a higher antiquity, but, we think, not
supported by sufficient authority.

Alfred erected three halls, in each of which twenty-six scholars were
educated. The sciences taught were divinity, logic, music, geometry, astronomy,
grammar, and rhetoric; and the ablest men of the age were appointed the
teachers. Such was the beginning of Oxford as a seat of letters, and the
residence of the muses; and since that time it has risen to its utmost degree
of splendour, and has become the largest university in the world: it has no
equal for the number and magnificence of its colleges and public buildings, the
size and value of its libraries, the multitude of its professors and pupils,
and the variety of its endowments. It has produced persons eminent in all
branches of literature; classical and polite learning have appeared in it with
peculiar luster; and it continues the habitation of substantial knowledge, true
taste, and national instruction.

Alfred shines with equal, perhaps with greater glory as a legislator, than he
does as the friend and patron of letters in general; and not one of our English
princes deserve to be named with him in this respect: for, in order to provide
for his subjects a full body of laws, he searched into the institutions of
foreign nations, collected the regulations of the British Kings, and of his
Saxon ancestors, and drew from them what was most valuable and useful. It is
much to be lamented that the code established by him has not been transmitted
to us entire; but enough of it remains to fill us with the warmest veneration
for his memory, and to convince us that he had the noblest views for the
happiness of posterity, as well as of his own times; and the natives of this
island must owe him peculiar esteem, since to him we are indebted for many of
the most important privileges which, at the present day, constitutes the
dignity and felicity of our political constitution Library, p. 183. Rapin's
Hist. vol. I. p. 14.
.

Moreover, with relation to his skill in the arts, and his attention to
commerce, he was superior to any monarch of the age: he erected cities,
repaired palaces, and applied himself diligently to the study of ship-building,
so as to reduce it to a science, and invented vessels of such a construction as
enabled him to obtain the victory in several engagements with the Danes. From a
motive of piety, and to relieve the Christians of Malabar, he sent persons to
the East Indies, and his ships returned home with precious stones, perfumes,
and other valuable commodities. It is likewise a certain fact, that he
attempted the discovery of a north-east passage, and employed Octhar, a Dane,
and Wolstan, an Englishman, for that purpose.

If we consider the religion of Alfred, though no doubt it partook of the
temper of the times, yet we have no reason to believe that it was remarkably
superstitious: there is nothing recorded of him which favors of the mean and
monkish spirit observable in many preceding and succeeding princes; his piety
was ever sincere and fervent, and as rational as the period in which he lived
would admit.

In Alfred we may behold what amazing effects may be produced by the genius and
abilities of one man. Such was the influence he had upon the nation, that, in a
few years, it was transformed into quite another people: the English, from
being cowardly, poor, despicable, and ignorant, became brave, rich,
respectable, and, comparatively speaking, knowing and polite; but they were
governed by a prince who was almost a prodigy in every respect, and we must
travel through several centuries before we shall find a character on which we
can expatiate with equal pleasure, and which does so much honor to human
nature.

Though Alfred was a prodigy, yet his own improvements were much limited by the
ignorance of the age; and he must necessarily be unacquainted with a thousand
things that are at present known by persons of very moderate capacities. This
too was the case with regard to the professors and tutors appointed by him at
Oxford and other places; they had not accurate and extensive views of any
science, and therefore could not communicate such views to their disciples.
Indeed it was not possible, in so dark a period, to make a large progress in
philosophy and sound learning; the state of religion, the prevailing manners of
the world, the want of good examples, all stood in opposition to the
advancement of real wisdom: add to this, that the repeated invasions of the
Danes put a stop to the cultivation of knowledge, and at length brought back an
universal barbarism. This great prince died in the fifty-second year of his
age, October 26, A. D. 900.

As it would exceed the limits of this work to give a detail of the civil and
ecclesiastical laws of this prince, the curious reader may refer to Collier's
Eccles. Hist. Vol. I. book. iii. p. 163 to 169.

EDWARD, A. D. 900.
Edward, Alfred's successor, imitated the virtues of his father in a number of
benefactions to the church; yet his reign is remarkable for a very particular
exertion of the authority of the Roman see. Pope Formosus being informed that
the bishopric of Wessex had been many years vacant, sent over a bull,
excommunicating the King, and all his subjects; which being publicly read at a
general assembly of the states, by Plegmund, archbishop of Canterbury, the
vacant sees were immediately filled, and three new bishoprics erected in
Wessex: then Plegmund set out for Rome, where the sentence was revoked, and, at
his return to England, he consecrated seven prelates in one day.

But notwithstanding this instance of weakness, all historians agree in
bestowing high encomiums upon EDWARD, and in representing him as not much
inferior to his father. It is, however, but little which is said of his
literary character; though enough to convince us that he was a man of abilities
and understanding. Perhaps we may consider as some proof of it, an useful and
remarkable regulation he made, that if a servant was guisty of theft, the
person who recommended him should be answerable for his crime, and responsible
for his right behavior. We read also, that Edward was particularly careful in
the education of his children: that, in consequence of his attention in this
respect, they were distinguished by their improvements; and that his daughters
were so celebrated for their accomplishments, as to be sought after, and
obtained in marriage, by the greatest foreign princes, kings, and emperors.

But the grand point which intitles him to a place in the history of letters,
is his being generally looked upon as the founder of the university of
Cambridge. The fact, however, like other ancient facts, is not so clear as to
be wholly free from dispute; while some go back to the fabulous ages, for the
original of this famous seminary; and some contend that it had no existence as
a school of learning, till the year 1110, in the reign of Henry I. But, without
entering into these controversies, we shall only embrace the present
opportunity of observing, that, from small beginnings, Cambridge is become, in
a course of time, exceedingly illustrious, and, in rank, the second university
in the world. Inferior to Oxford in magnitude, beauty, the number of colleges,
buildings, professors, and students, it is, notwithstanding, capable of
boasting many noble edifices and foundations. But though Cambridge must yield
the palm, in these respects, to her sister, we suppose she will be unwilling to
do it in the valuable seize of science and literature. She, as well as
Oxford, has produced a number of eminent men, several of whom we shall have
occasion to mention in the course of our work; not, indeed, as members of a
single seminary, but as the ornaments of their country, and the glory of human
nature. It has often been said, that Oxford has excelled in the knowledge of
the classics, belles lettres, and the languages; while Cambridge has made a
superior progress in philosophy, mathematics, and the severer studies.
Nevertheless, it must be granted, that she has always edu^^^ed many persons who
have been celebrated for their taste in polite learning; and can, at this day,
triumph in her Hurds, her Masons, and her Greys. For our part, we sincerely
wish prosperity to both, and heartily pray there may never be any other
contention between them, than who shall form the greatest number of characters
that will be an honor to religion, to letters, and to the public.

ATHELSTAN, A. D. 925.
After the death of King Edward, his eldest son ATHELSTAN was crowned at
Kingston upon Thames, by Athelm, archbishop of Canterbury. This ceremony of
crowning and anointing the English Kings by some prelate was, ^^cording to
Malmesbury, first used in the reign of King Alfred. Athelstan soon after his
coronation began to enter upon action, and showed himself such an enterprising
and successful prince, as gave great terror to many of his enemies, and to be
esteemed and caressed by foreigners, acquired some very advantageous alliances,
procured honorable matches for his sisters; nay exceeded the bounds of the
English limits, for he obliged the Kings of Scotland and Wales to resign their
crowns to him; which he soon after, as a prince of generosity, restored to
them, upon doing him homage. Thus in civil affairs he gained applause; but all
the glory of his achievements was eclipsed by one act of inhumanity toward
his brother Edwin; who being accused of disaffection to his Majesty, he too
easily gave credit to it, banished his brother, with circumstances of cruelty
highly aggravating, by putting him into a ship with only one servant, without
rigging or crew to sail the vessel; and was driven by a storm, which soon after
befell him, to such great distress, that he threw himself into the sea. This
precipitate act of Athelstan soon after stung him with great remorse, so that
to silence the accusations of his conscience, he executed the person who
informed him against his brother, and submitted himself to seven years penance.

But nevertheless Athelstan is confessed to have been a very illustrious and
accomplished prince, and is justly ranked among the lawgivers of England. His
eloquence is, likewise, highly extolled by historians, who have been pleased to
assert that he was equal, in this respect, to the Roman orators. There was a
regulation made during this reign, that shows an enlargement of mind much above
the times, and which even more civilized ages have not been able to reach: it
was, that a merchant who had effected three voyages to the Streights, on his
own account, should be put on a footing with a gentleman. There is one fact
related concerning Athelstan, which, if sufficiently authentical, would appear
of peculiar importance in a survey of literature. We are confidently told by
several modern writers, that he ordered the Bible to be translated out of the
Hebrew into the Saxon language, for the benefit of his subjects. If this be
true, it was a work of the utmost usefulness and value, and shows the
institutions of Alfred to have produced very happy effects. But,
notwithstanding the improvements introduced by that prince, it is much to be
questioned whether there were any persons in the kingdom capable of executing
so grand a design; for, in the period we are speaking of, the best scholars
Europe afforded seem to have been totally unacquainted with the oriental
tongues.

There were several synods, or rather mixed conventions of church and state
held in this prince's reign. Sir Henry Spelman mentions four, but the most
considerable was the synod at Graetly, A. D. 928. The principal constitutions
of which were,

First, To enjoin the payment of tithes, both personal and praedial; and
requiring the bishops and others of the clergy to set a good example. The
second, for prescribing acts of charity. The third, regulates some proceedings
in law, against sacrilege, idolatrous sacrifices, witchcraft, robberies, etc.
The fourth and fifth, for ascertaining the value of coins, and preserving one
fixed standard. The sixth, prohibits buying and selling on Sundays. The
seventh, prescribes sundry penalties against perjury, as that the perjured
person should never more give evidence, nor be buried in consecrated ground,
unless severe penance be performed. By the seventh, the standard of weights and
measures were to be regulated by the bishops standard; magistrates are enjoined
to preserve peace, and to exercise lenity and forbearance toward servants.

By the preamble of these constitutions it appears that the legislature in
civil matters lay wholly on the King, and that the bishops and other great men
were convened for their advice, and not to give any force or authority to the
laws. But it is a sad instance of the deficiency in their laws, and of the
weakness of the legislature, that the fine for killing men was according to
their rank; thus that of a duke was valued at 3000 thrimsa's Thrimsa, a piece
of the value of three shillings.
, a bishop or earl 8000, a priest 2000, and of a peasant 30 thrimsa's, or at
most but 100 shillings. Athelstan, however, made some very good laws, for the
encouragement of a foreign trade, and died at Gloucester, A. D. 940.

From the days of Athelstan, down to the conquest, the state of knowledge
evidently went backward, and the nation sunk into the depth of ignorance and
superstition. Europe in general, during the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth
centuries, was overrun with ignorance and barbarity; and England, if possible,
was still in a worse condition. It is really painful to reflect, that, in the
course of several hundred years, we meet with little worthy to be recorded.
Like travelers in the deserts of Arabia, we often see nothing for a long time
together, but barren sands; and if now and then we come to a verdant spot,
though that spot is extremely beautiful, compared with the dreary prospect
around it, yet it partakes of the sterility of the soil by which it is
encompassed.

The disputes that agitated the world were of too low and trifling a nature to
merit a place in our work. The insolent and fiery Dunstan occasioned much
bustle about the celibacy of the clergy; and how little they were engaged in
literary pursuits, appears from a canon, enjoining every priest to learn some
occupation as a handicraftsman; a regulation which, was circumstances stood,
might be exceedingly proper and reasonable. Another decree prescribes, that
they shall be capable of repeating the Creed and the Pater noster. In the
reign, however, of Ethelred II. it is said, a mission was sent to Norway, at
the request of the King of that country, to convert the Norwegians and the
Swedes to the Christian religion. The archbishop of York and other divines went
over upon this occasion, and had great success, though some of them afterward
received the crown of martyrdom. What their real qualifications were, and what
influence they had, we are not able to say; but may be well assured their
instructions were tinctured with the defects of the times.

While so much darkness prevailed in the kingdom and every thing was gradually
giving way to the pretensions of the Roman see, it ought not to be omitted,
that the church of England had not as yet embraced the absurd and monstrous
doctrine of transubstantiation. This is evident from several testimonies, and
particularly from the writings of Alfric, who is the sole person that deserves
to be mentioned for more than a century; and who is also remarkable for having
drawn up a set of homilies for the use of the clergy, now so generally and
totally ignorant, as to be utterly incapable of composing discourses for the
benefit of their people. With respect, likewise, to the princes who succeeded
Athelstan, we meet with nothing but the reduction of the several Saxon statutes
and customs into one body, by Edward the Confessor; and an institution of the
same monarch, that studious men should be secure in their estates and
properties: an institution which contributed very little to the advancement of
literature.

EDMUND, A. D. 941.
Edmund succeeded Athelstan, when he was but eighteen years of age. The
Northumbrians, perhaps despising this prince's youth, broke their articles made
with Athelstan, and notwithstanding the mediation made use of to reconcile the
difference, Edmund was obliged to vindicate his right by the sword, and in the
year 944 obtained a complete victory over the Northumbrians, and so far
conquered the country as to annex it to his crown; the next year he gave
Cumberland to Malcolm King of the Scots upon the terms of homage, and that he
should assist him in the field, when oceasion required.

The same year Dunstan, who was preferred to the abbey of Glastonbury,
published his book of Constitutions, divided into ten chapters, relating to the
government and disicipline of the church, as well clergy as laity See Collier's
Eccles. Hist. vol. I. book iii p. 179.
, which for the most part are an illustration of those compiled and published
by Athelstan, and some former princes, with some additional injunctions about
fasting and giving of alms, the due observation of Lent, paying of tithes, etc.

In the reign of Edmund a great synod was convoked at London, Synod at London,
A. D. 944.
in which the bishops were enjoined to repair their churches, and the King
required to establish funds for their support. In the course of the following
year, another assembly enacted constitutions for the advancement of the
Christian religion, and the maintenance of concord among the people. Here also
churches and royal palaces were made places of sanctuary; and it was ordained,
that no mulct for breaking the peace, or satisfaction for murder, should be
accepted. About this period the famous Dunstan began to signalize himself in
the church and state. He was by birth a West Saxon, descended of a noble
family, and educated at Glastonbury, under a learned Irish monk, who instructed
youth in that monastery. Having made extraordinary progress in his studies, he
was recommended by Adhelm, archbishop of Canterbury, to King Athelstan, who
took him under his protection; but no sooner perceiving his ambitious views,
and meddling disposition, than he discarded him from his court. It was then
that Dunstan retired in disgust from the world, and conceived that affection
for the monks which he so cordially expressed in the whole course of his future
greatness. Edmund, at his accession to the throne, invited him from his
retreat, and made him his confessor; but he was for some misdemeanor dismissed
from this office, which, however, he regained by dint of interest, and acquired
amazing influence under this monarch and his brother Edred. This monastic life
was at the same time dignified by an illustrious member in the person of
Turketyl, who was an excellent soldier and sound politician, and quitted the
office of chancellor to embrace the life of a recluse, at Croyland, of which he
was made abbot, after having received the habit, together with the episcopal
benediction and pastoral staff. He was no sooner established in the
ecclesiastical office, than he resigned the monastery, with all its deeds, to
Edred, who afterward restored them to Turketyl and his monks, in a full
assembly of the states at London, whom he exempted from all service and
encumbrances, and confirmed all the former privileges of the monastery, except
that of its being a sanctuary, which the abbot wisely refused.

EDRED, A. D. 948.
Edred, brother to Edmund, and third son to Edward the Elder, succeeded to the
crown. This was an interruption to the right line, for the late King left two
sons, Edwy and Edgar; but being both very young, they were set aside, and Edred
being likewise a good benefactor to the monks, the crown was given to him
without much opposition, and he was crowned by Odo, archbishop of Canterbury.
Edred is described as a prince of great courage and enterprise: in the first
year of his reign he reduced the Northumbrians, who had revolted; his next
expedition was against the Scots, whom he brought to terms merely by the terror
of his arms.

With regard to religion, Edred's conscience was in a manner governed by
Dunstan, insomuch that he submitted to great austerities at his direction, and
was sent for as his confessor, in his last illness, to give him absolution. He
died A. D. 955.

He is said to be the first of all the Saxon monarchs who assumed the title of
King of Great Britain, a circumstance that favors the opinion of those who
affirm that the King of Scotland held his crown as a fief depending upon
England. Though Edred had two sons, Edwy, son of Edmund, succeeded to the
crown: the elective power was, in all probability, a privilege which they
retained when they first submitted to monarchical government, and a wise
precaution to prevent the mischiefs that attend the administration of an infant
King Smollet, vol. I. p. 289.
.

EDWY, A. D. 955.
Edwy was elected King by the suffrages of the clergy and nobility. This young
monarch was so remarkably handsome, that he acquired the surname of Pancalus,
or, the Fair, and at his accession was so much in favor with Odo, archbishop
of Canterbury, that he crowned him with his own hands at Kingston. The King had
married a very beautiful lady, named Aelgivia; but the match was so contrary to
the opinion of the bishops and nobles, as gave rise to a series of troubles,
and his foundness for her greatly weakened the authority of the bishops over
him; for after dinner, on the day of his coronation, Edwy withdrew to an
apartment where his wife was, which gave great offense to the bishops and the
nobility, and the archbishop commanded him to be fetched back again, and,
though every body else refused, Dunstan was ready enough to obey Odo's order,
who, reproaching him for his fondness, dragged him to his company. Such an
outrage could not fail to excite the resentment of the young monarch and the
King's friends, who were offended at the overbearing pride of the abbot; and
soon after Edwy demanded a restitution of the sums which Edred had committed to
his charge, and strongly insinuated that he had embezzled the public money.
Dunstan haughtily answered, that the money had been app^^ed to pious uses by
the late King's express orders; which though, by his artful answer, for the
present stopped any further proceedings, Dunstan was soon after banished the
kingdom, and returned to Flanders.

Odo, the archbishop, thinking the dignity of the priesthood degraded by the
exile of Dunstan, somented a disaffection: the Mercians and Northumbrians
entered into measures with the archbishop; they rebelled, set up Edwy's younger
brother Edgar, a boy of thirteen years of age, for their King, who recalled
Dunstan, and immediately ordained him a bishop, to give him a seat in that
assembly, who made it their business to gloss over this opposition, or
rebellion, with the name of religion, for which many pretended miracles were
attested to support their unwarrantable proceedings. I mention these instances,
though a digression, to show what exorbitant power and influence the bishops
had acquired at that time; so that some historians speak of him as having, by
his imprudent measures, forfeited his crown and his happiness; and that if he
had been less resolute, he might have soothed his enemies. If he had been more
resolute, he might have put it out of their power to hurt him. Edwy dying,
though not without suspicion of being murdered, Edgar succeeded to the crown.

EDGAR, A. D. 959.
Edwy dying without issue, the whole kingdom was reunited under Edgar, who,
though in the prime of his youth, had already given undeniable proofs of a
shining genius, and the most solid understanding. He had manifested his ability
in making himself master of a part of his brother's dominions; and he
afterward demonstrated the extensiveness of his capacity, by keeping his
subjects in submission, and his enemies in fear, without straining the regal
authority, or engaging in any martial enterprise: but he awed his neighbors by
taking such measures, for the defense of his kingdom, as disabled them from
invading it with any prospect of success. He divided Northumberland into two
governments, and constantly maintained a strong body of forces in the northern
provinces, that they might be at hand to quell any insurrection that should
happen among the turbulent people; and in order to secure his dominions from
the discontents of foreign Danes, he equipped a very strong fleet, amounting to
two thousand five hundred vessels, divided into different squadrons, and
stationed in such a manner that they were continually cruising round the
island, which was thus effectually covered from insult. Such wise precautions
could not fail to establish peace and tranquillity among his people, which, in
order to fix beyond any probability of interruption, he engaged Kennett, King
of Scotland, in his interest, by ceding to him the whole county of Lothian,
extending from the Tweed to the Forth, for which, and the northern counties
already bestowed upon Malcolm, that prince certainly did homage. It was, in all
probability, owing to this cession and treaty, which secured the Scottish King
as an ally, that Maccuse, King of Man and the isles, some monarchs of Galloway,
and the Prince of Wales, submitted so peaceably to the government of Edgar.

The next year Edgar, being at Chester, summoned all the tributary knights to
attend him at that place, who rowed his barge down the river Dee, in his way to
the monastery of St. John the Baptist, while he himself sat at the helm.
Smollet considers this circumstance as no more than a compliment, or frolic,
acted in an excursion of pleasure; when it is evident, from the King's
behavior, that it was a real act of homage: nor can his remark, that his
successors might justly boast of themselves to be Kings of England, when
attended in that manner, be understood in any other light.

Edgar did not think it sufficient to protect England from the insults of
foreigners, but he turned his thoughts to some regulations that were necessary
in the state, and then in the church. The first was in respect to the
magistrates, of whom there was a general complaint; and that he might be better
effect his purpose, he every year made a visit to some part of his kingdom, to
have the best accounts he could obtain of the conduct of his judges, etc.; and
to remove the abuses complained of, he enacted, that every magistrate,
convicted of giving a sentence contrary to law, if through ignorance, should be
fined one hundred and twenty shillings; but if knowingly, should be turned out,
and rendered incapable of acting for the future. We must acknowledge this care
worthy of a prince, as it was a proper expedient for restoring such a regard to
justice as is the security of the rights of subjects, and the authority of
government Rapin, vol. I. p. 127.
.

Another wise regulation was, the reducing all weights and measures to one
standard: this he found necessary to support the credit of the kingdom in
foreign markets, in which respect he acquired the praises bestowed on him by
ancient historians: nay, we may go further; we may boldly say, that he
surpassed them, inasmuch as they obtained their fame by acts of rapine, and the
destruction of their species; whereas Edgar's fame was built upon a noble
foundation, that of justice and benevolence Rider, vol. I. p. 22.
.

But, besides every instance of his great wisdom in regard to civil affairs, he
appears to be piously disposed: it is said he founded forty monasteries; that
he repaired and embellished a great number, among others that of Glaston,
founded by Edred his uncle. Ingulphus, in his history of Croyland, says the
treasure of that monastery, in the reign of Edgar, amounted to no less than ten
thousand pounds, besides the vessels, shrines, and other things. Edgar not only
enriched the monasteries, but undertook to establish the monks a second time in
the possession of ecclesiastical benefices, which he performed with a high
hand. This was said to be effected principally at the persuasion of Dunstan,
whom Edgar had made archbishop of Canterbury; and it is highly probable that
Edgar himself thought he did a signal service to the church by putting it under
the direction of monks. Dunstan, in conjunction with him, professed to bring
about a reformation in the inferior clergy; for this purpose a council was
convened, and Edgar himself was present. At this council, the speech he made
plainly shows how much he was biassed in favor of the monks, and discovered
his great dislike of the secular clergy, on account of their immoralities.
However, as it appears to flow from sentiments of piety, and is one of the most
remarkable transactions of his reign, though it cannot find place in this
history, we refer the reader to Rapin's history Vol. I. b. iv. p. 129.
.

We cannot wholly omit some of the principal canons of that convention. They
confirm the civil privileges and immunities of the church; prescribe the
religious observation of the Lord's day; enjoin the clergy to attend constantly
at their devotion; forbid the priests changing their cures. It enjoins every
priest to learn some employment, to prevent indigence in case of misfortune; it
strictly requires parents to instruct their children in the Christian faith;
orders that no persons be buried in a church, excepting persons of known
probity; forbids the eating of blood: lastly, the priest is to press the
people, under his cure, to confession, penance, and satisfaction; lastly, to
the use of oil in baptism, and for the anointing of the sick Collier's Eccles.
Hist. vol. I. b. xi. p. 187.
.

After these canons there follows a form of confession, wherein are directions
for the confessarians; and here the priests are obliged to a thorough
examination of the penitent, and the penance to be proportioned to the nature
and degree of the crime, and the condition, temper, age, and capacity of the
person. And in case of infirmity, or weakness of constitution, the rigor of
fasting was to be dispensed with. And it is somewhat remarkable, that where the
Pater noster is enjoined to be said threescore times a day, there is not the
least mention of one Ave Maria, which is an argument that the modern
applications to the Blessed Virgin were unpractised by the church.

A controversy arose, between the monks and the secular clergy, about the
lawfulness of priests marrying, in which both parties appeared in earnest, and
produced perhaps the best arguments on each side, but conclusive in the
affirmative; which we may see, with a variety of testimonies, in Collier's
history before cited.

EDWARD the Martyr, A. D. 975.
Immediately after the decease of Edgar, Elfser, Duke of Mercia, sworn enemy to
the monks, expelled them from all the benefices in his country, which he filled
again with secular priests. Some other noblemen followed his example in
different parts of the kingdom; but the Duke of East-Anglia, and many other
persons of the first rank, adhered to Dunstan and his party, which was likewise
espoused by almost the whole body of the commons, who looked upon that prelate
as a saint and an apostle. This diversity of sentiments produced a contest
concerning the succession. Elfrida, their queen-dowager, a woman of an
ambitious spirit, had, by her emissaries, circulated some doubts about the
validity of Edgar's marriage with the mother of Edward, in hopes of raising her
own son, Ethelred, to the throne; and as the other was supported by Dunstan,
all that prelate's enemies declared for the son of Elfrida. Though by these
means there was a very powerful faction formed in his favor, the archbishop,
confiding in his great popularity, arose from the assembly of the states, while
they were deliberating upon the choice of a successor to Edgar, and taking
prince Edward by the hand, conducted him to the church, where he was anointed
and consecrated, in the twelfth year of his age, amidst a vast concourse of
people, who testified their joy in loud acclamations.

Whatever inclinations the opposite party felt to controvert this irregular way
of proceeding, they would not run the risk of disobliging the multitude, but
left Edward in quiet possession of the throne; while his stepmother, Elfrida,
retired to Corf-Castle, in Dorsetshire, which was assigned her dowry, and there
in secret hatched schemes for his destruction.

Dunstan having thus secured the continuance of his own power, exerted all his
endeavors to maintain the monks in the benefices they had acquired in the
preceding reign, which he endeavored to support by pretended miracles.

Edward however called a synod at Amesbury, in Wiltshire, in which several
canons were made with a design to bring the province to a nearer conformity
with the Roman church. Besides these ecclesiastical affairs, no transaction of
consequence distinguished the reign of Edward, which lasted but four years, and
was concluded in a very tragical manner. The King returning one day from the
chase in Dorsetshire, rode up to the gate of Corf-Castle, to pay a compliment
to his stepmother Elfrida, who invited him to alight; but being in a hurry to
be gone, she prevailed with him to drink a glass of wine on horseback, and
while he was swallowing the liquor was stabbed in the back by one of her
domestics.

ETHELRED II. A. D. 978.
Such was the disposition and inexperience of this prince, that we find the
reins of government were greatly relaxed, and all the necessary precautions for
the security of the kingdom entirely neglected: the principal nobility who had
been entrusted with the government of different counties, perpetuated the
administration in their families, assumed the name of dukes, exercised an
independent authority in their own districts, and disregarded that union, upon
which alone the safety and welfare of the nation could depend. The Danes took
advantage of it to renew their depredations on the kingdom, and Ethelred seeing
his realm reduced to a miserable situation, obeyed the dectates of his fears
and despondence, and submitted to pay thirty thousand pounds to those invaders;
upon which many of the Danes retired to their own country. But a good number of
them chose to fix their habitation in England; where being supported by the
natives of the same race, they became extremely insolent and oppressive. In
short, we find nothing interesting in the reign of this prince of a civil or
religious nature; for at the beginning of it he found a rich and flourishing
kingdom, which he left in extreme poverty. He died after a short illness, in
the thirty-seventh year of his reign, A. D. 1016.

EDMUND II. surnamed Ironside, A. D. 1016.
On the death of Ethelred, the citizens of London immediately proclaimed
Edmund, his eldest son, by Ethelgiva, his first wife. This young prince was of
a constitution so remarkably strong, that he acquired the surname of Ironside.
The many signal proofs of his courage and conduct contributed to his election
at this juncture. And Livignus, archbishop of Canterbury, crowned him soon
after. But the rest of the bishops and nobility being summoned by Canute to
Southampton, declared for him, and solemnly renounced the race of Ethelred.
After the Dane had taken an oath, that he would govern them faithfully in
matters, both secular and religious, after many contests and struggles for the
crown, Edmund was induced to open a conference on the subject of peace, in
order to prevent any farther effusion of blood. This proposal being eagerly
embraced by both parties, a treaty was concluded, in which this kingdom was
divided between the two competitors; all the country to the south of the Thames
and part of Wessex was assigned to Edmund, and all the rest of the island ceded
to Canute. After the ratification of the treaty, by the perfidy of Edric, or
some other person, in which historians are not agreed, Edmund was assassinated
before he had opportunity to display his virtues. However; he appears to have
been a person of strict justice, great benevolence, sublime generosity,
intrepid courage, and invincible patience; though these virtues were obscured
by the weakness he showed in admitting Edric into favor, notwithstanding he
had been the ruin of his father by his treachery.

CANUTE the GREAT, A. D. 1017.
As soon as Canute heard of the murder of Edmund, he convened a general council
of all the nobility and clergy at London, in order to secure the succession of
the whole kingdom. When the assembly was met, he artfully availed himself of
the last treaty he had made with the late King, and it was not without much
difficulty he preserved his kingly authority. We shall not enter upon the civil
part of his history and character; it is acknowledged by some historians, that
no King ever deserved a more contradictory character, nor that any
administration produced a greater variety of conduct: he discovered an ambition
that regarded nothing but the accomplishments of his wishes: even the acts of
superstition, which he performed to atone for his former cruelties, may be
suspected to be incited by policy, and tinctured with ambition. The grandeur of
his expedition to Rome, and the large sums he expended there, may be charged
with ostentation, if not with profusion. Yet, with all his faults, it must be
confessed he was possessed of great virtues, and was certainly a person of
great abilities. He seemed to have been well acquainted with mankind, and able
to turn the various dispositions of his subjects to his advantage. Scarce any
monarch ever raised popular odium so high, or allayed it so effectually as
Canute; but in the latter part of his reign he paid a much greater regard to
the interest and to the esteem of his subjects. The variety of his victories
did not so entitle him to the epithet of Great, as the virtues which he
practiced during the peaceable interval of his administration. It was in that
period that he manifested his piety, his charity, and his equity: his
continence was great, his address engaging, his affability remarkable, his
mercy extensive: his love of peace manifested itself in his encouragement of
those who were of a pacific disposition, and his strict regard to justice in
his severity to those who were guilty of any acts of robbery or violence. The
^der concern he had for the welfare and prosperity of the meanest of his
subjects, is evident from many of his letters to his officers; and, during the
calm of peace, he applied his thoughts to the sublime study of legislation,
and, by the number of his laws, seemed to have made it his study to leave no
grievance without redress. For the impartial administration of justice, he
ordered that no distinction should be made between rich and poor, and
recommends mercy in all decisions; that no person should be put to death for a
small offense; and in case any judge perverted judgment out of prejudice, or
for the sake of lucre, he was to be fined the value of his head This must
relate to the different value set upon noblemen, priests, or peasants.
, and removed from his place. Persons guilty of conspiracy against the King
were punished with loss of life; and the demolishing or burning houses, theft,
and murder, were declared to be such offenses for which no satisfaction could
be made by way of mulct and compensation. The regulations he prescribed with
respect to married persons, were highly conducive to make that state
respectable, and to prevent incontinence.

The ecclesiastical laws, enacted by this monarch, are not less curious than
the civil, and show that he extended his concern, not only to the secular, but
likewise to the spiritual welfare of his kingdom; and with this view he
enacted, that no fairs, markets, or other secular affairs, should be practiced
on the Lord's day. All Christians were obliged to receive the eucharist, or the
sacrament of the Lord's supper, three times a year. And in order to oblige his
clergy to live suitable to their character, and to show they were not exempted
by their order from the civil jurisdiction, he enacted, that if a priest was
guilty of murder, or any enormity, he should be deprived of his order and
dignity, in order to his receiving condign punishment. From this rude
t^^^script of his laws we may be able to form a judgment of the character of
this monarch, and to add some features to his portrait, which have been omitted
by our predecessors See Rider's Hist. vol. II. p. 116, and Rapin's Hist. vol.
I. p. 148.
.

HAROLD, surnamed Harefoot, A. D. 1036.
Canute had, the year before his death, placed his son Hardicnute on the throne
of Denmark, and his son Swein on that of Norway; but as the succession to the
crown of England was left undetermined, it was contested by several
competitors; so that when the English prelates and nobility met for the
election of a sovereign, there appeared no less than three parties in the
council; one of which was for Hard^^nute, as a descendent from a more
honorable mother; another for Harold, as being the elder brother; and a third
for Ethelred's two sons, at that time in Normandy. However, the Danes settled
in London, etc. declared for Harold, and the dispute was amicably adjusted by a
synod convened for that purpose at Oxford His character was so little known, or
his virtues so few, that it would be endless to attempt a representation of
them. We find nothing in his reign adapted to the purpose of this history, and
therefore our readers will excuse our giving so concise an account of him.

HARDICNUTE, A. D. 1040.
Hardicnute being at Bruges, with a formidable fleet at the time of Harold's
death, the English seemed resolved to anticipate any measures he could take for
the acquisition of the crown. But these intensions were soon frustrated; and he
ascended the throne, contrary to the general satisfaction of the nation. Some
of his first actions after his coronation show him to have been a man of strong
pas^ons and keen resentment, and the consequent actions of his reign such as
deserved censure rather than praise. He was certainly of an indolent temper,
fond of indulging to ease and luxury; he kept a sumptuous table, and oppressed
his subjects by many unrighteous impositions. If he had any virtue to
compensate for his vices, it was that of filial duty toward his mother;
however, he did not wear the crown long, for he died suddenly at a wedding, and
it is said through his intemperance.

EDWARD the Confessor, A. D. 1042.
The English had suffered so much from the Danes, during the reign of some late
kings, that there was a general insurrection, and they intended to drive all
the Danes out of the kingdom; but at length a council was held at Gillingham
for the election of a king; and Earl Godwin, a person of great influence,
remembering his promise to Edward, took him along with him incog. to the
meeting. After a long harrangue which the Earl made in favor of the prince, he
raised him in the midst of the assembly, saying at the same time, "Behold your
King." The assembly being staggered at so unexpected an event, after a short
pause, they agreed to elect Edward for their sovereign; and, to give sanction
to their choice, Earl Godwin was the first who did him homage.

Edward, being thus settled upon his throne, could not help showing the
fondness he had contracted for the Norman customs; during his exile he invited
over several of that nation, and behaved toward these foreigners with a
partiality that gave great disgust to the English nobility: he even carried his
regard to such a height as was both impolitic and unjust; the most important
fortresses, and the greatest posts in the kingdom, were conferred on the
Normans; and the sea of Canterbury being vacant, it was filled by one Rodbert a
monk; he soon possessed Edward with a high opinion of his capacity and
integrity, and engrossed his confidence. Godwin finding the ear of the King
possessed by a foreigner, was apprehensive that his master might be led to such
measures as were inconsistent with the good of the kingdom; he therefore
endeavored, but in vain, to remove the prelate from the place he held in the
King's esteem; but the King was not a little exasperated at the conduct of
Godwin. The Irish taking advantage of the unsettled state of the nation,
meditated a descent, which was attended with some dreadful consequences. At
length a council was convened, and Godwin and his sons, who had fled to
Ireland, and promoted the animosity of the Irish, were nevertheless acquitted
of every crime laid to their charge, reinstated in their honors and
preferments, and restored to the King's favor. Many other quarrels and
contests took place in this King's reign, which being foreign to my design I
shall omit. The King at length, worn out with years, and unable to perform the
vow which he had made of going a pilgrimage to Rome, obtained the Pope's
dispensation, on condition of his building the abbey of Westminster. This noble
structure, which still goes by the same name, was originally the temple of
Apollo, and was by King Sebert turned into a Christian church; during the
devastations of the Danes, it was destroyed and laid in ruins, till Edward
rebuilt it, for the reason already assigned. A general council of the nation
was called to confirm the King's charter, who exempted it from all episcopal
jurisdiction, and granted it the privilege of a sanctuary. The dedication of
this sacred edifice engrossed all Edward's thoughts, and the officiousness he
showed on that occasion very probably threw him into the fever, which was the
occasion of his death. The monks gave him the glorious titles of Saint and
Confessor; but it would have been with much better grace, if his public or
private virtues had ever been so conspicuous as to deserve them. The
tranquillity of his reign was certainly remarkable, if we consider the factions
which subsisted among his nobles; some have represented him as void of all
passion, and attribute much to that evenness and serenity of temper; but they
should rather have said he was void of all the social affections; his treatment
of his wife and mother would justify such a charge, nay they even extort it.
His chastity, which the monks have applauded so highly as to found his merits
of being canonized thereupon, was it not owing to natural frigidity, is such a
violation of the marriagevow as ought to transmit eternal infamy on his memory
Voltaire observes on this occasion, that one of the great faults, or great
misfortunes of this King, was his having no children by his wife, daughter to
one of the most powerful noblemen of his kingdom: he hated his wife as well as
his own mother, and for reasons of state had them both removed from court.
However the barrenness of the marriage bed proved the occasion of his
canonization, for it was pretended that he had made a vow of chastity; a rash
vow surely, for a married man, and highly absurd for a King, who stood in need
of an heir to his dominions; but by this vow, real or pretended, he forged new
chains for his country." See Smollet's elegant translation of Voltaire, vol. I.
p. 268.
. Though honored with the title of saint, and ranked by the flattery of
superstition among the martyrs, his irrascibility and inexorable resentment
were shown so flagrantly in the affair of Eustace, and in his antipathy to
Godwin's family, that it would be a stretch of equity to deem him inculpable.
The numerous miracles he is said to perform, deserve to be ranked among the
legendary accounts of papal heroes; nor do the pretended cures of the
scrophulous humor, called the King's evil, by touching, which this King
pretended to, in imitation of those of France, deserve more credit.

As his laws were looked upon by future Kings as the standard of their conduct
and administration, and made one of the articles of the coronation, it will not
be improper to give a short sketch of them. All causes in which the church was
concerned were to have the preference to any others, and every person who was a
tenant to the church was obliged to bring his action in the ecclesiastical
court. The clergy were likewise exempted from the civil jurisdiction; the
privilege of sanctuaries were confirmed, and no fugitive was allowed to be
taken from thence, unless by the bishop and his officers: every offense against
the peace of the church was left to the cognization of the bishop of the
diocese in which it was committed, and the offender was obliged to give
security, that he would make satisfaction to God, the King, and the church,
within forty days, and in case he absconded was to be outlawed; the payment of
Rome Scot, and of small tithe, he strictly enjoined, and if refused, it was
levied by the King's justice, because it was the King's alms Tyrrel judiciously
remarks, that we may from hence observe how much the Popish writers are
mistaken, who will needs make these Peter Pence to have been a tribute from the
Kings of England to the Pope.
; protection from arrests on certain days, and in certain districts, besides
those which were granted a person under the King's own hand, were now
confirmed. If any one was murdered, inquest was to be made after the criminal,
in the village or town where the body was found; in case the murderer was
discovered, he was to be delivered up to justice; in case he could not be
immediately found, a month and a day was allowed for that purpose; and in case
he was not found by that time, the town was obliged to pay forty-six marks, and
if unable to pay that sum, the fine was to be levied on the hundred, and the
money was to be kept sealed up for one year; and in case the murderer was not
discovered, six marks were to be paid to the relations of the deceased, and the
other forty were to go to the King. Those statutes which more particularly
concern the office and prerogative of the King, are compiled with great
judgment. In describing the office of a King, the statute informs us he is the
vicegerent of the supreme King, and is appointed to govern and defend this
earthly kingdom, and the people of the Lord, and above all things should
reverence his holy church, and discourage all evil doers, which unless he do,
he forfeits his title and dignity. The King had a prerogative to pardon life
and loss of member, on condition that the malefactor made the best satisfaction
he could to the persons injured. Every act of extortion and oppression seemed
peculiarly to demand this monarch's notice; he remitted the tax of Danegelt,
and could not endure the collecting of taxations by excisemen; nor were usurers
tolerated at that time in England.

This is a summary of the laws which Edward' the Confessor collected from those
which had been enacted by former Kings, and afterward enforced by William the
Conqueror, of which we shall treat in its proper place.

HAROLD II. A. D. 1066.
Historians are much divided in their opinion as to the right of Harold to the
crown, and the manner of his accession to it. Harold had no legal claim to the
crown by any hereditary right, nor, as we find, by the will of Edward. But
without entering into the merits of the dispute, Henry de Silgrave relates,
that Harold came to Edward as he was lying on his deathbed, desiring him to
appoint a successor; that he replied he had already nominated Duke William for
his heir; but the Earland his friends still persi^ing in this request, the King
turning his face to the wall, replied, "When I am dead, let the English make
either the Duke or the Earl King This author wrote in the time of Edward I. his
history is now in manuscript in the Cottonian collection, marked Cleopatra,
A12, cited by Ryder.
."

Harold however used his interest with such dexterity, as to get himself
crowned, and began his administration with many popular acts of government; he
paid great deference to the clergy, without shutting his eyes to the
irregularities of that order, severely chastising the guilty, while he bestowed
marks of his favor upon the innocent, by confirming their charters and
extending their immunities; he took the most effectual measures for the
impartial administration of justice, ordered the laws to be revived and
reformed, and examplary punishments to be inflicted on robbers and disturbers
of the public peace; and being alarmed with the news of the pretensions of
William Duke of Normandy to the crown, he fortified some of his territories and
ports.

The Duke of Normandy, though well informed of all these popular transactions
of Harold, would not desist from his enterprise; and even sent ambassadors to
demand that Harold would relinquish the crown in his favor, and to denounce
war in case of refusal. To this peremptory demand Harold replied, that William
had no sort of right to the crown of England; for, granting that the late King
had disposed of it in his favor, such a disposition (if any such there was)
could not take place, inasmuch as it was diametrically opposite to the laws of
the kingdom; which restricted Kings from bestowing their crowns according to
their own caprice, especially to strangers. With respect to himself, he had
been fairly elected by those who had a right to confer the sovereignty; nor
could he yield the crown to any other, without betraying the confidence reposed
in him by his subjects; finally, he gave him to understand, that he knew how to
defend his right against any person by whom he should be invaded: an answer,
that referred the dispute to the determination of war; for which both parties
prepared with the utmost diligence.

William the Norman accordingly embarked at St. Valery toward the latter end
of September, and after a short passage landed at Pevensey in Sussex; after
having refreshed his men, he advanced along the seaside to Hastings, where he
ordered a fort to be built, and published a manifesto. But though he pretended
that he came to revenge the death of Alfred, restore the archbishop of
Canterbury, assist the English in punishing Harold, who had seized the crown
without having any right to it (but made no mention of Edward's will) these
reasons appeared so trisling, that no Englishman would inlist under his banner;
however, he forbad his people to ravage the country, or insult the inhabitants,
whom he was pleased to term his subjects.

Harold was at York when he received the news of this invasion, and forthwith
began his march to London with the troops that had returned from the north; and
whilst he was in London, waiting for some troops that were on their march to
join him, and receiving the professions of the nobility in his favor, William
sent ambassadors to him with another threatening message, which Harold retorted
by another embassy of the same nature. Some proposals were made for the battle
being conducted by his brother Gurth. But Harold bravely replied in the
negative, and that he would by his personal behavior convince his subjects he
was worthy of the crown they had set upon his head.

The English monarch having assembled all his forces, advanced against the
Norman army, and encamped within seven miles of Hastings, where they remained
at some little distance from each other; and the Duke made some overtures, by
one of his monks, to refer the dispute to the determination of the Pope, to
quit the kingdom, if he would do him homage for the crown, or decide it by a
single combat. To these propositions Harold replied, that he was not so simple
as to submit to the arbitration of the Pope, who had already declared himself a
party; that he scorned to hold the crown of England dependent on any prince
whatsoever, nor would he put his kingdom on the issue of a single combat, in
which, though he should obtain the victory, he could reap no solid advantage;
he therefore told the messenger, God would next day decide between him and his
adversary.

The fatal day being come, the fourteenth of October, both armies appeared in
array, each of them consisting of about sixty thousand, both commanded by men
of intrepid valor; and several skirmishes happened that day, without any
remarkable advantage gained on either side. William perceiving the night
approaching, and unwilling to leave the battle undecided, made another
desperate effort to dislodge the enemy; and in this attack Harold was shot dead
with an arrow that pierced his brain.

Thus fell the brave, but unfortunate prince Harold II. with his sword drawn in
defense of English liberty, and was with his brother Gurth and Lewin sent to
their mother Githa, and were honorably interred in the abbey at Waltham, which
Harold himself had founded.

Some historians have endeavored to blacken Harold's character, particularly
for superseding prince Edgar, who had the greatest right to the throne. The
impartial will, perhaps, acknowledge Harold would have been more worthy of the
crown, had he been less anxious to obtain it; for while he was a private man,
he won the love and esteem of his fellow subjects: nor could any action of his
reign, which was not a year, forfeit that esteem and affection, especially as
he had shown a regard to the British liberties and interest by two battles,
which he fought in a short space. By one of them he obtained a signal victory
over the Norwegians, and the unhappy issue of the last was never attributed to
his want of courage or conduct. In fine, he was as far, perhaps as the nature
and perplexity of his affairs permitted, well disposed with respect to
religion, always liberal to the church, and the friend of the clergy: but in
the social and relative virtues few exceeded him; he was humane, mild, affable,
and generous, such as made his character amiable, as a husband, a parent, and a
friend.

Thus ended the Anglo-Saxons sovereignty in England; which Hengist, first King
of Kent, began above 600 years before Rapin's Hist. vol. I. p. 167.
.

As the laws and constitution of Great Britain owe their origin to the
principal transactions and revolutions of the Saxon heptarchy, etc. the
following review of the most interesting periods relative hereto may not be
unacceptable to the reader.

When the Picts and Scots had jointly invaded the Britons, who had not spirit
to stand up in their own defense, but applied for assistance to the Saxons, who
had rendered themselves a formidable people, and took the Britons under their
protection, only to gratify their ambition and increase their power and
interest; the Saxons invaded Gaul, and established the kingdom of France in
420; after which they came over to Britain, and founded the kingdom of England
in 445.

When the English and French came from Germany to people Britain and Gaul, they
transplanted with them the moderate sway and liberty of the Germans. They were
at this time Pagans; but they were soon converted to christianity, and
established that excellent government, which, under several improvements, has
been conveyed down to the present age: but they met with some difficulties in
forming their settlements, nor could they find any footing, without first
clearing their way, and driving the Britons up by themselves into a corner of
the island, where they continued till the year 1212, before they were
incorporated with England.

The Saxon form of government was rather aristocratical than monarchical; and
they were distinguished into the three ranks of noblemen, freemen, and slaves.
Hengist established the kingdom of Kent in 455; and the heptarchy, after some
confusion, was formed in 582. These seven kingdoms were considered as one grand
state or confederacy; and the command of their armies was given to one prince,
chosen out of the rest, on whom some historians have peculiarly bestowed the
title of monarch, as having the precedence and some superiority over the
others. The Saxon revolution was entire, as far as it extended: they introduced
their language with their government; and these together with their customs
have descended to their posterity, increased by other engraftments on the
original stock. Their Wittenagemot was like our parliament, of which it is the
source, where they deliberated upon the common affairs of the seven kingdoms;
and every kingdom was subject to the resolutions of the general assembly. But
it is hard to trace how regularly they moved as to civil affairs, how closely
they followed their country-customs, or where they innovated or varied from
their German forms and policy. Some footsteps are however discoverable, which
have remained to posterity; as the divisions of the country into hundreds; the
appointing of sheriffs, and electing annual magistrates by the people; as also
the jurisdiction and power of life and death by juries. The whole fabric of
this government was solid and magnificent, equally conducive to the honor of
the prince, and the security of the subjects: but it is in England only that
this ancient generous manly government of Europe survives, and continues in its
original perfection.

After the formation of the heptarchy, the monarchs of the different kingdoms,
each in their turn, aspired at the government of the whole, which occasioned
several wars among the Saxons, who freely shed their bloods, but carefully
preserved their liberties. It is remarkable, that the Saxons who settled in
Britain acknowledged an hereditary right in the female line; while those who
settled in France, abolished it there by the Salique law: but Pharamond subdued
Gaul by conquest, and Hengist planted himself in Britain by policy.

The kingdom of the West Saxons was the most considerable among the heptarchy,
and was founded by Cerdic in 495. Sexburgha, an excellent princess, governed
this kingdom in 672; and Ina began his reign in 690, who published a body of
laws, entitled, West Saxon Lege, or the laws of West Saxons, whereby he
distinguished himself as the first Saxon prince, who regularly summoned a great
council or parliament, to enact laws for the better government of his kingdom;
for none of their Kings had the power of making laws, without the consent of
the general assembly of the nation, composed of the chief nobility. It then
consisted of nine articles, and served for the foundation of the laws published
in the next century by Alfred. His successor, Sigebert, showed himself a
tyrant; and he was dethroned by his subjects, who were a free people; while the
Saxon heptarchy was soon after dissolved, and the English monarchy founded by
Egbert.

The great Egbert was of the blood royal of the line of Cerdic; but the crown
was granted to him by the election of the people, who, in the language of the
best historian, William of Malmesbury, commanded him to reign in the year 800.
He found the Saxon strength was degenerated, and their common liberty
endangered by the potency of Charlemagne, who had caused himself to be crowned
Emperor of the West. But in 829, Egbert became the sole monarch of all the
heptarchy, and was crowned King of Britain by the consent Rapin, vol. I. p. 175.
of both clergy and laity, assembled in a general council at Winchester; after
which all the Saxon kingdoms were ordered to pass under the common name of
England; and it is observable, that Egbert was not only the father of the
English monarchy, but also the august ancestor in the female line of the
illustrious house of Hanover.

About this time the Danes and Normans became terrible to England and France;
nor were their depredations abated, till they made settlements in both
countries: indeed they were another swarm of the old northern hive, and were
only a remoter branch of the Saxons. The Danes were formidable at sea, and the
naval glory of the Saxons had subsided; but Alfred revived it in 882, and Edgar
completed it in 959; which for many years preserved the liberty of England.
Alfred was justly called the father of the English constitution; but he could
not prevent the Danes from settling in his dominions, while he was forming the
origin of those laws which have preserved the glory of England, and the
liberties of Englishmen; besides, he founded, or at least greatly augmented,
the university of Oxford, and the sciences flourished under his protection.

The successors of Alfred bravely opposed the incursions of the Danes till the
reign of Ethelred II. who gave his enemies an opportunity of rendering
themselves more formidable than ever; and notwithstanding the bravery of his
successor Edmund Ironside, the Danes succeeded in their attempts; for on his
death Canute became the first. Danish King of England in 1016.

The Danish conqueror governed England like a Saxon monarch: the Danes, in a
course of two hundred years, had intermarried with the English families, and
were so much incorporated as to become one people. The Saxon laws were
confirmed, and the Danes submitted to them. But the two succeeding monarchs
behaved like tyrants, which renewed the English spirit, and recovered the
liberty of England; for the Saxon line was restored in 1041, in the person of
Edward the Confessor, who reduced the West Saxon, Mercian and Danish laws into
one body, which are still in force as the common law of the land.

Harold II. was an usurper, but was deprived both of his crown and life by an
invader. This was William the Conqueror, who defeated Harold in 1066, and
ascended the throne which he claimed by the testament of Edward the Confessor,
without any mention of conquest, as he was conscious that the English were
tenacious of their liberty.

The Normans very probably had the same original with the Danes, and
established themselves under Rollo, in 876, in that part of France to which he
gave the name of Normandy. A potent kingdom was now enslaved by a small
dukedom; for, after the battle of Hastings, the English thought no more of
striving for their liberties, because the Conqueror accepted the crown on the
pretense of election, instead of asserting his right by conquest; he swore to
observe the ancient laws of the kingdom, promised to protect the liberties of
the people; but he soon attempted to make England a land of slavery, while the
English possessions became the property of Normans, and a new race of people
spread themselves over the nations. William introduced the feodal law, and some
Norman customs, which he engrafted on those of the Saxons. The introduction of
military tenures was a violent blow upon English liberty, and all public acts
were made in the Norman tongue; so that England seemed as if she was going to
be deprived of every thing precious and valuable. But the union of the Norman
and Saxon lines under Henry I. promised better days to England; for this
prince, in 1100, confirmed his coronation oath by his charter, which confined
the royal authority within its ancient bounds, and guarded the subjects from
arbitrary power; besides, he married the Princess Matilda, the niece of Edgar
Atheling, who was the immediate heir of the line of Cerdic, whereby the Saxons
and Normans considered themselves only as one united body of Englishmen.

The conquest is indeed a great epoch in the civil history of our country, but
none at all in the history of literature, the same darkness continued in the
nation, and seems for a time to have rather increased. William the Conqueror
was wholly employed in establishing his authority in his newly acquired
dominions, with which view he endeavored to abolish the English laws, and
changed the methods of proceeding in the courts of judicature. He was also
extremely solicitous to bring in the general use of the Norman, upon the ruins
of the Saxon tongue; this however he could not effect; the consequences of
which attempt was, that both languages degenerated from their orginal state,
and became in some measure mixed with each other.

The Saxon Wettenagemot was turned into the Norman parliament, and arbitrary
power was bound by legal right. Stephen was elected King, on condition of
restoring the kingdom to its liberties, abolishing the forest laws, and
receiving those of Edward the Confessor; but the ambition of the clergy, and
the power of the barons, were too great for the prerogative of the King, and
England became a prey to the fury of civil wars. When King John obtained the
crown, he was informed by Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, "That he ascended
the throne by election, and not by hereditary succession; to the end that he
might always remember, that those who gave him the crown, had likewise the
power to take it away." All the Kings from William the Conqueror swore to the
strict observance of the laws, though that oath was observed by none. John
wanted to render himself absolute; and his people wanted as much to preserve
their liberty: he levied several oppressive taxes; the Pope absolved his
subjects from their oath of allegiance, and the King paid a shameful submission
to the papal nuncio; the barons entered into a confederacy to preserve the
constitution, and formally demanded the reestablishment of the laws of Edward
the Confessor, with the removal of the charter of Henry I. The King swore he
would never grant his subjects such liberties, as would make himself a slave;
but the barons took to their arms, and compelled the monarch to meet them in
Runemead, or the mead of Council, between Stains and Windsor; where, on the
fifth of June 1215, they obtained the sacred charter of their liberties called
Magna Charta, as also the charter of the liberties of the forest.

The charters are the foundation of the English liberties, and the bulwark of
the British constitution. Some princes have imprudently attempted to break this
sacred barrier; but they found the spirit of the people above such an
innovation, and they suffered for their temerity. However, the bill of rights,
made in consequence of the revolution, is declaratory of those liberties to
which Englishmen are entitled, and which God grant may never be violated.

With regard to the state of religion just before the conquest; although at
this time many corruptions had crept into the church, and divine worship began
to be clogged with superstitious ceremonies; yet it appears that the British
church, in some material points, had not conformed to the errors of the Romish
see.

For, first, both clergy and laity were required to exercise themselves in
reading the sacred scriptures, singing psalms, etc. The bishops and teachers
were recommended to the study of the Old Testament, according to the original
Hebrew, and the New according to the oriental Greek. And though we find prayers
for the dead, yet they were not in the nature of propitiation for their sins,
or to procure relaxation from their torments, but were only an honorable
commemoration of their memories, and a sacrifice of thanksgiving for their
salvation. Purgatory was not then in the sense in which it is at present
received; and although they pretended visions and revelations on which to found
purgatory, it was held to be destitute of the authority of scripture Fuller's
Church History, who cites Bid Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 5. History of the
Church of Great Britain, p. 37.
." And Bid likewise relates, that the communion was received under both kinds.
Cuthbert himself, a little before his decease, received the communion of the
Lord's body and blood; and though the word mass was frequent in this age, yet
it was not known to be offered as a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and
the dead.

There were nevertheless such a prevalence of many of the Popish principles and
ceremonies, that the more serious and discerning among the English began to be
greatly alarmed, especially as it was become a custom at this time in the Roman
Catholic countries to impose the belief of the Catholic faith, and a conformity
to their ceremonies, under the sanction of penal laws or ecclesiastical censure.

Some who were zealous for a reformation in France about this time, exposed
themselves to great difficulty and hazard. Among these Berengarius, who was
archdeacon of Angers in 1059, distinguished himself by inveighing against the
real presence, who preached and propagated what he believed to be the truth, in
opposition to the worship of saints and images, and other favorite doctrines
of the church of Rome, was banished. That province, and many of his adherents,
were obliged to desist from public worship, according to what they thought
their duty; but as yet any other attempts to a reformation were unsuccessful,
through the overgrown power of the Romish church. See Dupin, Cent. XI.

About this time the ancient sect of the Albigenses, or Waldenses, were
animated with fresh vigor, to stand up for the truth. These owe their rights
to Peter Waldens, in the province of Languedoc, in the time of Pope Sylvester,
in the fourth century. Their discriminating tenets were, the belief of one God,
or of the unity of God; baptism of adult believers, by dipping, fasting and
abstinence, as those of Asiatics, mentioned by Origin Contra Celsus, lib. v.
Danvers's History of the Waldenses.
. But opposing the doctrine of the Romish church, and the corrupt manners of
the ecclesiastics, notwithstanding their piety, drew on them such persecutions
as ended in their destruction Aeneas Sylvius's History of Rohemia, cap. xxxv.
.

Mr. Gerrard Brandt gives much the same account. He says, the doctrine of the
Waldenses appears to have agreed in almost every point, with the opinion of
those who, since the time of Luther, have declared against the abuses and
errors of the Romish church Poplin. Hist. Franc. Ed. 1581.
. Some of them likewise rejected infant baptism Vign. p. 408. Madg. Cent. xii.
Col. 833, etc.
and oaths, or, as some think, rash oaths only Cat. Fest. 558. Vign. p. 377.
, and all force upon conscience; their notion being, that no man should be
compelled by the sword, but won by the force of argument. The antiquity of the
doctrine of the Waldenses is acknowledged even by their greatest enemies, in
whose writings, among the slanders and contumelies which are cast upon them,
there are glorious testimonies of their regular life, unwearied diligence in
searching out the truth, and fervent zeal in promoting the same Brandt Hist. p.
12.
.

In England, many impositions on the rights of conscience, respecting doctrines
and ceremonies, had been rather attempted than established, which created
u^^^sy apprehensions in the minds of some serious and discerning Christians,
which in after times were opposed with Christian fortitude; as will appear from
the subsequent part of this History.

A TABLE of KINGS and QUEENS of GREAT BRITAIN, from 445 to 1764.
N. B. For many Years before this Period there was a confused Succession of
petty Princes, after the Romans had left Britain.

KINGS OF BRITAIN.
Vortigern 445 Vortimer 454 Ambrosius 465 Prince Arthur 508
The Kingdom subdivided into seven Kingdoms, viz.

I. KINGS OF KENT.
Hengist 455 Escus 488 Octa 512 Hermanric 534 Ethelbert 568 Edbald 616
Ercembert 640 Egbert 664 Lothair 673 Edrick 685 Withred 686 Ethelbert and
Edbert 725 Aldric 760 Edbert styled Pren 794 Cudred 978
II. Of the SOUTH SAXONS, including SUSSEX and SURRY.
Ella 491 Cissa 514 Adelwalch 548 Anthun 588
III. Of the EAST SAXONS, including ESSEX, MIDDLESEX and HARTFORDSHIRE.
Octa 512 Erchinwin 527 Hermanric 534 Sledda 587 Sebert 598 Saxred, Seward and
Sigebert 616 Sigebert alone 624 Sigebert II. 653 Surthelm 660 Sibbi and Sigeri
665 Sibbi alone 683 Suefrid 694 Sigchard 595 Offa and Withred 700 Ceolred 709
Snithred 746 Sigered 799
IV. Kings of the SAXON HEPTARCHY in SOUTH BRITAIN. Viz. NORFOLK, SUFFOLK,
CAMBRIDGESHIRE, BEDFOEDSHIRE. EAST ANGLIA.
Uffa 575 Titilus 578 Ridowald 599 Erpwald 624 Sigebert I. 636 Egrick Annas 644
Adelwald 655 Aldulph 664 Alswold 683 Beorna and Ethelbert 749
V. MERCIA in the Midst.
Cridda 582 Wibba 595 Redowald 595 Cearlus 616 Penda 625 Oswy 657 Wolpher 659
Ethelred 675 Cenred 709 Ceolred 715 Ethelbald 752 Offa 757 Egfrid, three
Months. Cenulph or Renulph 796 Kenelm and Ceodulf 819 Bernulf 821 Ludican 825
Witglaph 825 Egbert 825
VI. NORTHUMBERLAND.
Ida 547 Adda 559 Glappa 566 Fridulph 570 Theodoric 579 Athalaric 586 Athelfrid
593 Edwin 617 Esrick, and Anfrid 633 Oswald 634
Divided into two Parts, viz. BERNICIA, including NORTHUMBERLAND, EDINBURGH,
FRITH. DEIRA, including YORK, DURHAM, WESTMORLAND and CUMBERLAND. BERNICIA.
Oswy 643 Adelwalt (Deira) 652 Egfrid 670 Alchfrid (Deira) 662 Alchfrid
recalled Ofred 705 Cenred 716 Osric 718 Ceolulph 739 Turns Monk in 736 Edbert
737 Osulph 758 Adelwald 759 Alered 765 Ethelred 774 Alswald II. 779 Afred 789
Ethelred in 790 restored Osbald and Ardulph 796 Ardulph 801 Arswald II. 808
Andred 810
VII. Kings of WESSEX or WEST SAXONS.
Cerdic 519 Kenrick 534 Ceaulin 560 He conquers Sussex 591 Ceobric 592 Ceolulph
598 Cinigissil and Quic^tus 611 Cinigissil alone 636 Cenowalch 643 Sexburga 672
Adelwalch 648 Census 672 Escwin and Centwin 675 Ceadwalla 686 Ina 688 Adelard
727 Cudred 740
EGBERT unites the SAXON HEPTARCHY, under the Name of ENGLAND, A. D. 828. KINGS
OF ENGLAND.
Egbert 828 Ethelwolf 838 Ethelbald 857 Ethelbert 860 Ethelred 866 Alfred
surnamed the Great 872 Edward I. 900 Athelstan 925 Edmund I. 940 Eldred or
Edred 948 Edwy 955 Edgar 959 Edward II. 975 Ethelred II. 978 Edmund II.
surnamed Ironside 1016 Canu^e the Great King of Denmark 1017 Harold surnamed
Harefoot 1036 Canute II. or Hardiknute 1040 Edward III. furnamed the Confessor
1041 Harold, 9 Months 1066 William the Conqueror 1066
KINGS OF SCOTLAND.
Fergus 404 Eugenius I. 420 Dengardus 452 Constantine 457 Congallus 479 Goran
501 Eugenius II. 535 Eugeuius III. 551 Congallus II. 558 Kinathal 569 Aidan 570
Kenneth 604 Eugenius IV. 605 Ferchard 622 Donald 636 Ferchard II. 650 Malduinus
669 Eugenius V. 688 Eugenius VI. 692 Amberkelethus 790 Eugenius VII. 703
Merdacus 710 Etfinus 730 Eugenius VIII. 761 Fergus II. 764 Solvathius 767
Achaius 787 Congallus III. 819 Dongallus 824 Alpinus 831 Kenneth 834 Donald V.
854 Constantine II. 858 Ethus 874 Gregory 875 Donald VI. 892 Constantine III.
903 Malcolm I. 942 Indulphus 958 Duffas 968 Cullen 972 Kenneth III. 977
Constantine IV. styled the Bald 994 Grinus 995 Malcolm II. 1004 Duncan 1034
Macbeth 1040 Malcolm III. furnamed Canmore 1058 Donald VII. surnamed Bane 1093
Duncan II. and Donaldagair 1094 Edgar 1097 Alexander I. 1107 David 1124 Malcolm
IV. 1153 William 1165 Alexander II. 1215 Alexander III. 1249 Interregnum from
1286 to the time of Robert Robert I. 1306 David II. 1329 Robert II. 1370 Robert
III. 1390 James I. 1406 James II. 1437 James III. 1460 James IV. 1488 James V.
1513 Mary 1542 James VI. 1567 Who reigned 36 years, and in the 45th of
Elizabeth James I. of England, unites both the kingdoms under the name of Great
Britain. 1603
The KINGS and QUEENS of ENGLAND, since the Conquest.
William I. 1066 William II. 1087 Henry I. 1100 Stephen 1135
The SAXON Line restored.
Henry II. 1154 Richard I. 1189 John 1199 Henry III. 1216 Edward I. 1272 Edward
II. 1307 Edward III. 1326 Richard II. 1377
The SAXON Line restored.
Henry IV. 1399 Henry V. 1413 Henry VI. 1422
The YORK Line.
Edward IV. 1461 Edward V. 1483 Richard III. 1483
The Families United.
Henry VII. 1485 Henry VIII. 1509 Edward VI. 1547 Queen Mary 1553 Queen
Elizabeth 1558
The Two Kingdoms United.
James I. 1603 Charles I. 1625 Charles II. 1648 James II. 1684 William and Mary
1689 Queen Anne 1702 George I. 1714 George II. 1727 George III. whom God
preserve, 1760
CHAP. IV. Of the State of KNOWLEDGE and RELIGION in GREAT BRITAIN, from the
Reign of WILLIAM the CONQUEROR, 1066, to the Reign of RICHARD I.
WILLIAM, surnamed the Conqueror, A. D. 1066.
IF we impartially consider the Duke of Normandy's attempt upon England, we
shall find it difficult to determine, whether the ground of his pretensions,
the boldness of his undertaking, or the success attending it, is most
surprising: the consequence was a dreadful anarchy of perplexity and
consternation, from different motives of interest, terror, and despair, which
this destruction occasioned in London. The Conqueror considered that the loss
of a battle might astonish, but not terrify the English; that they might have
considerable resources of men and arms, before he could be much reinforced from
Normandy. However, he concluded to begin his march for London, in three
divisions; ordering his men, if attacked, to destroy the country with fire and
sword. As he approached the capital in this manner, the terrors of the people
waxed stronger and stronger, and the clergy used all their industry and
insinuation to dissuade them from making resistance. But, in opposition to
these persuasions, Morcar and Edwin, the two brothers of Harold, took an
opportunity to sally out with their party from London, thinking to find him
unprepared: but they were so warmly received, that they retired with great
precipitation; and even this attempt was attended with no small disadvantage,
for it occasioned his setting fire to some parts of the suburbs of London; so
that at this time the nobles and prelates assembled at London, would no longer
delay to seize the only opportunity they might have, to plead the merit of a
voluntary submission. They accordingly went forth, attended by the magistrates
of London, and meeting the Duke at the head of his troops, made a solemn tender
of the crown: he received them with great courtesy, and, after having taken
time to deliberate upon the proposal, accepted the offer they had made, and
assured them they would have no cause to repent of their choice Smollet, vol.
I. p. 391.
.

The Norman having thus acknowledged the power of election in the people of
England, in deigning to receive the crown as a present, was immediately
proclaimed King, and appointed the day for his coronation at London; and
pursuant to his own desire the ceremony was performed by Aldred archbishop of
York; who upon that occasion addressed himself to the English, assembled in
great numbers, asked if they chose William Duke of Normandy for their King? and
was answered in the affirmative, with loud acclamations. The bishop of
Constance having put the same question to the Normans, and received the like
reply, Aldred set the crown on his head; and then the Norman took the
accustomed oath, importing that he would protect the church and its ministers,
govern his people with equity, enact just laws, and cause them to be punctually
observed Malmesbury.
.

The first act of sovereignty he exercised after his coronation, was the
seizure of Harold's treasure, which he found amassed at Winchester, part of
which he distributed among the principal officers of his army, part was given
to churches and monasteries; and a large share sent to the Pope, as a mark of
his gratitude for the countenance of that pontiff, to whom he in great measure
owed the success of his late enterprise.

He granted a new charter to the city of London, confirming the privileges
which the citizens enjoyed in the reign of Edward the Confessor. He preserved
the Saxon laws and constitution, and put the laws in force against robbers, who
then infested the country; and in order to add to the safety of his kingdom, he
built two castles, one at Chester, and the other at Stafford, which he
strengthened with garrisons.

The first act of his arbitrary power was manifested, in renewing the odious
tax of danegelt, a quit-rent out of all the lands of England, wardships,
reliefs, fines, etc. This was one shilling on every hide of land, that is, an
hundred acres; but every manurer of land paid if he had but a tenth part.
Rapin, vol. I. b. v. p. 141.
. This occasioned a general discontent through the kingdom, and made some
insurrections, which William very severely punished. After all the sources of
rebellion were quashed, William endeavored to introduce the laws, customs, and
language of the Normans; loading his countrymen with benefits, and oppressing
the nobles and barons of this realm. Nor was his oppressions confined to the
nobility, but extended also to the clergy, whose charters he violated without
scruple; ordained that the church lands should be subject to military service,
and furnish a certain number of horsemen: besides, he lodged great part of his
army in monasteries. Where he could get any information of any riches hid or
deposited in them, he ordered them to be searched, and seized upon every thing
that was valuable. He likewise deposed Stigand, archbishop of Canterbury, and
several other prelates, and promoted to their dignity strangers from different
climes, and some of his Norman chaplains, and seized on many of the
abbey-lands. By these means he strengthened his interest, increased his
revenues, and made himself the terror of the country, where they were too weak
to resist. Many of the English nobility fled to Scotland. This so exasperated
William, that he picked a quarrel with Malcolm King of Scotland, A. D. 1072,
who was too well prepared to be immediately intimidated; both parties prepared
for war, and both armies ready for action, but not eager to begin the attack.
William found them well entrenched, and knew Malcolm had been trained to arms,
so that both parties inclined to an accommodation; and on Malcolm's sending an
embassy to William, a peace was made on the following terms: "That the
boundaries of the two nations should be settled; that he should swear fealty to
him, or do him homage; and that William should restore the English exiles to
their estates.

After William had made things a little easy at home, he retired to Normandy,
when a considerable revolution happened in the church. At the death of
Allexander there was no small dissension in the conclave, which flamed so high,
that two Popes were elected, viz. Hildebrand and Guibert, who were each of them
acknowledged by different powers. However, the former, named Gregory VII. was
recognized by the Kings of France and England; but Hildebrand was no sooner
settled in the chair, than he discovered himself to be a person of inordinate
ambition and extraordinary insolence: determined to make William pay for the
countenance and favor he had shown him while he was cardinal, soon after his
return to England, he sent one of his nuncios to him with letters, wherein he
insisted on his doing homage to him for the kingdom of England, as a fief of
the Roman see, and demanded the arrears of Rome Scot, which had not been paid
for some years.

The answer which William made to this insolent demand, was worthy of the King
of England. He refused to do fealty to the Pope, and strengthened his refusal,
by appealing to the conduct of his ancestors, who had never left him a
precedent. The following is a translation of the original Seldom, p. 1631.
.

"To the most excellent Gregory, pastor of the holy church, William, by the
grace of God, King of England, and Duke of Normandy, sends, greeting. Hubert,
your nuncio, coming unto me in your behalf, advised me to do fealty to you and
your successors, and to take more care in making good the payments of money,
which my predecessors used to remit to the church of Rome. One of these I have
consented to, but have refused the other. As for fealty, it is what I never
have done, nor will do; because I neither obliged myself to perform it by any
promise made by myself, nor do I find my predecessors ever performed it to
yours. As for the money, it was collected in a very bad manner, for almost
three years, during my absence in France. But now I am, by God's mercy,
returned to my kingdom, I have sent by the nuncio abovementioned, what is
already collected: as for the remainder, it shall be sent, when convenient, by
the legate of Lanfranc, our trusty archbishop. We beg your prayers for
ourselves, and the welfare of our kingdom, having born a great regard for your
predecessors, and being desirous of approving our affections and obedience to
you above all others."

And although this politic Prince was thus complimentarily courteous to the
Pope, yet he retained the ancient custom of investing bishops and abbots, by
delivering them a ring, and a staff, whereby, without more ado, they were put
into plenary possession of the power and the profits of their benefice; for he
always declared he would keep the pastoral staves in his own hands. Nor would
the King suffer any in his dominions to acknowledge the bishop of Rome for
apostolical without his command, or to receive the Pope's letters, except they
were first shown unto him; nor did the King permit the bishops to pass sentence
of excommunication against any of his barons or officers, although it was for
the commission of the most heinous crimes, except leave was first had and
obtained from the King. However, the King did grant to the bishops the
jurisdiction in religious matters, and the grant of tithes, as well small as
great.

The King likewise made an act for the uniformity of the liturgy, which was to
be regulated by that then in use at Salisbury, composed by Osmond bishop of
that see.

About this time the King had contests with the Welsh and the Scotch; he levied
a numerous army, and marched with resolution to chastise and reduce them to
obedience. The peace being settled, he turned his mind to putting his finances
in a condition to supply all his necessities; and in this no prince, perhaps,
had ever greater penetration or invention than he discovered in the various
means made use of for this end, especially as he stuck at nothing he judged
subservient to this point, on which his safety so much depended. The Saxons
were already fleeced to gratify his avarice, the Normans were grown opulent by
their spoils; and as they had for a considerable time enjoyed the benefit of
his government, he thought it but just they should pay their share toward its
support; and that he might know what impositions they could bear, he ordered an
estimate to be taken of all the lands in his kingdom. Commissioners were
appointed, who had a right to make inquest, upon oath, upon or near the
premises, of the extent and value of the arable, meadow, and pasture land,
every individual had. This survey was no less than six years in making, and was
contained in two books. This register was sometimes called the roll of
Winchester, because it was deposited there. It was also named Domboc, which
name was not given it because it decides any dubious matters, but because it is
illegal to depart or appeal from its decisions. It is now called DOMESDAY-BOOK.

This scheme succeeded so well, that persons of all ranks were included, and
the value of their estates pretty well known, so as to receive a proportionable
taxation. The next year, which was 1084, was remarkable for nothing so much as
the oppressive tax of six shillings upon every hide of land throughout his
kingdom. Whether avarice or policy might have given rise for this oppression,
is very uncertain. He applied part of it for building the Tower of London. The
disaffection and jealousies, it occasioned, are much better conceived than
described. It was very natural for him to fear the resentment of his subjects,
if any opportunity presented. An invasion of the Danes indeed soon after
happened; but the English did not care to join them, and it was soon
suppressed: however, it pleased God at length to put a stop to his tyrannical
reign; for he went to Normandy, A. D. 1087, and died, occasioned by a fall from
his horse.

From the transactions of William's reign, he appears to have been a prince of
great courage, capacity, and ambition, politic, cruel, vindictive and
rapacious, stern and haughty in his deportment, reserved and jealous in his
disposition; but though sudden and impetuous in his enterprises, he was cool
and indefatigable in time of danger and difficulty. A late ingenious author
calls him a glorious tyrant; an epithet I shall leave my readers to judge of
its propriety.

WILLIAM II. surnamed Rufus, A. D. 1087.
The Conqueror was succeeded by William, his second son, called Rufus, from his
ruddy complexion, who owed his elevation to that dignity, to Langfranc,
archbishop of Canterbury. Some opposition was indeed agitated, and the nation
seemed to be in some commotion; but Langfranc wisely advised him to conciliate
the affections of the English: and he accordingly amused them with magnificent
promises to ease them of their burdensome tolls and taxes, and allow them the
free liberty of hunting. Cajoled by these professions, which were void of all
sincerity, the English adhered to his interest; and the Londoners raised an
army of 30,000 men for his service. But it was not long after, when William
began to show so much of his father's disposition, as even to procure a new
survey of many of the lands in England, and laid heavier taxes upon them. By
this and other methods, which discovered his rapacious disposition, great
contests ensued both in Scotland and Wales. A treaty was however brought about,
and peace concluded, with Malcolm of Scotland: but William by his insolence and
perfidy soon broke the treaty; and when Malcolm sent ambassadors, demanding the
performance of the articles in the late treaty, he desired the Scottish King to
come in person, to his court at Gloucester, where he should have justice done
him. Accordingly he came, where he was treated very imperiously, and was told
he must submit the affair to the decision of the English peers. Malcolm
rejecting this, returned to his own country; and, glowing with indignation,
forthwith assembled an army, and invaded Northumberland, which he ravaged as
far as Alnwick; when he had so far reduced the garrison, that the governor
demanded a capitulation, on pretense of presenting him the keys on the point of
his spear, thrust his weapon into his eye, and killed him on the spot.

But this is contradicted by Aderic. Vital. Eccles. Hist. l. 8. p. 701. who
says that Malcolm was surprised under the security of a treaty, and
unexpectedly attacked by Molbray Collier's Eccles. Hist. vol. I. p. 263.
.

Rufus being freed from a powerful enemy, in the person of Malcolm, he turned
his thoughts to invading his brother Robert's dominions in Normandy; which
neither was for the credit nor the advantage of William.

About this time Langfranc, archbishop of Canterbury, dying, William the King
seized the profits of the sea into his own hands, and kept the church vacant
for some years, as likewise the bishoprics of Winchester and Durham, and
appropriated the profits of thirteen abbeys to his own use; by which means he
brought immense treasure into his exchequer, and all benefices which he parted
with was upon the present payment of large sums History of the Church of Great
Britain, p. 39.
.

About the year A. D. 1088 began the holy war, and Robert Duke of Normandy, to
fit himself for such an important expedition, sold his dukedom for^ ten
thousand marks, to his brother William. To pay this money, King Rufus laid a
grievous tax over all the realm; extorting it with such severity, that the
monks were obliged to sell their church-plate, and even their chalices; and
when the clergy desired to be eased of their burdens, he bid them search for
their coffins of gold and silver, and dead men's bones.

At this time there was a contention at Rome between two Popes, Urban and
Clement III. Rufus took part with Clement; but Anselm acknowledged Urban, and
desired of the King leave to fetch his pall off Urban: all the rest of the
bishops were against him; mean while the King had sent two messengers to the
Pope, for the pall; who returned with the Pope's legate, with the pall, to be
given to Anselm: this legate so far persuaded the King, that he acknowledged
Urban for Pope. But upon his delivering Anselm the archbishop's pall, thereby
making void the investiture he received from King William, and obliging him
afterward to acknowledge his right of investiture, it gave great displeasure to
the King; whereupon he expelled Anselm his kingdom, confiscated the lands of
the archbishopric, and declared that his bishops did and should hold their sees
of him, independent of the Pope. Anselm compromised this affair by the
intervention of friends: upon which he returned to England; but was so zealous
for maintaining and propagating the opinion of the Pope's sole right of
investiture, that he was again obliged to fly from the kingdom.

William the Conqueror having rendered the new Forest in Hants, by his
devastation of towns and churches, a wilderness for men, and a paradise for
deer; King Rufus went there on a party of pleasure, when the King was slain by
the glance of an arrow, shot by Sir Walter Tirrell.

Thus fell William, after the reign of thirteen years, during which he
oppressed his people in every form of tyranny and insult. He was equally void
of learning, principles and humanity; haughty, passionate, profligate and
ungrateful; a scoffer at religion, a scourge to the clergy, vainglorious,
rapacious and dissolute, and an inveterate enemy to the English, though he owed
his crown to their valor and fidelity; when the Normans attempted to deprive
him of the crown, scarce possessed of one single virtue, to compensate for his
vices; and, in the words of the celebrated Mr. Pope, DAMNED TO EVERLASTING FAME.

HENRY I. surnamed BEAUCLERK, A. D. 1100.
Henry, the youngest son of the Conqueror (surnamed Beauclerk, which signifies
a good scholar) succeeded to the crown, though, had his brother been in England
at the time of Rufus's death, the English seemed more biassed in his favor,
and he would probably have acceded to the crown. However, circumstances
favored Henry's advancement to the throne, though not without some tumultuous
opposition at the election, and he was immediately proclaimed King. And as the
people had too much reason during the two last reigns, to think that a King is
very apt to disregard his coronation oath, Henry, for the farther satisfaction
of his subjects, granted the same day a charter, confirming their privileges,
and redressing some greivances under which they labored. By this deed, which
was authenticated in the most solemn manner, and transcribed into a great
number of copies, dispersed all over the kingdom, he established the churches
in possession of all their immunities, and exempted them from all the hardships
they had sustained from the tyranny of Rufus, especially that of being kept
vacant for the King's use, and afterward put up to public sale, without any
regard to merit or capacity. He abolished the excessive fines which used to be
exacted from the heirs of noblemen for the livery of their lands; permitted the
natives in general to dispose of their children in marriage, according to their
own pleasure, without paying for a license from the crown. He suppressed the
duty of moneyage, paid once in three years, in consideration of the King's
preserving the coins unaltered. He remitted all fines, mulcts, and debts in the
exchequer, arising from vexatious prosecutions; allowed the barons to bequeathe
their personal estates; exempted the lands possessed by the military tenants of
the crown from gelds, talliages and benevolences; restored the laws of Edward
III. relative to murders, thefts, etc. and forgave all rapine and depredation
committed to that time, on condition the offenders would make immediate
restitution.

In pursuance of the same laudable scheme of reformation and redress, he
expelled from court all the ministers and instruments of his brother's
debauchery and arbitrary power, and published a severe edict against
delinquents and adulterers; he abolished the odious curfew, requiring every man
at the ring of a bell at eight o'clock to put out his fire.

As Henry had been greatly obliged to the citizens of London in his acquisition
of the crown, he gratified them with another charter of very ample privileges;
and, in order to crown the satisfaction of the people, he recalled Anselm,
archbishop of Canterbury, who was become exceeding popular in England through
the influence of the monks. The prelate accepted the invitation with transport,
and soon after landed at Dover; but the King was greatly disappointed when he
found that Anselm refused to do him homage, adhering to the canons of the
council of Bari, which forbad ecclesiastics to receive investitures from the
laity, or to pay them homage on any account; and the conditions of their living
together in a good understanding were, that the king should relinquish the
prerogative of investing bishops and abbots, and pay an implicit obedience to
the Pope. Henry, though shocked at the insolent proposals of this arrogant
priest, who wanted to curtail his authority, was forced to temporize. For about
this time his brother Robert asserts his claim to the English crown, and if
Anselm's interest were to have been thrown in that scale, it might preponderate
on that side; and even, notwithstanding, the king's moderation, when Robert his
brother made a descent at Portsmouth, he found the people's mind fluctuating,
and the King was obliged to depend, in some measure, on the eloquence and
interest of Anselm, to preserve peace and loyalty to his majesty; so that at
length affairs were compromised. Henry now proceeded with rigor against many
of the nobles who had promoted the invasion by his brother: some were banished,
their estates seized, etc. while he rewarded others for their zealous
attachment to his royal person.

But all the nobles in the land were more easily managed than the archbishop of
Canterbury, who was a true monk and bigot to the church of Rome. For his design
was to accomplish two projects: the first was to establish celibacy among
ecclesiastics; (Anselm called a council at Westminster, where first he
excommunicated all married priests, though half the clergy at that time were
married;) and the second, to hinder bishops and abbots from receiving the
investiture of their benefices from the King. The Pope had given his orders for
insisting upon the execution of the canons against lay investiture;
nevertheless, the King refused to part with his prerogative, and Anselm refused
to consecrate the bishops whom Henry had appointed. This produced a quarrel,
which at length Anselm resolved to go and lay before Pope Pascal II. A. D.
1103; and he was accompanied by some bishops, who had quitted their benefices,
rather than acknowledge the King's supremacy; and the King sent two ambassadors
at the same time to defend his cause. But notwithstanding their remonstrance
the Pope remained inflexible, and would not make any concessions, though he
wrote a letter to the King in mild terms, telling him, "He should be glad to
oblige him in any thing that was consistent with justice; that he had no design
of incroaching upon his prerogative; but the granting the right of investiture
to a layman was not in his power, as it was an essential property of
church government."

The King was not well pleased with the Pope's answer, and ordered his
ambassadors to acquaint Anselm, that he did not desire to see him in England,
unless he was resolved to conform to the example of his predecessors.

Whilst Henry was abroad in Normandy, he received an expostulatory letter from
the Pope, by the hand of Anselm, and the King allowed him to return to England.

When Anselm arrived here, he was received very joyfully; and repairing to
Canterbury with the pall in a silver box, the archbishop went barefooted to
meet him, attended by all the monks of St. Augustine and Christ-church.

A legate was likewise sent by, Pope Henorius II. to go to England and Scotland
in the quality of legate a latere, and on his arrival was received by the
archbishop of Canterbury with all the honors due to his character. The legate
being commissioned to enquire into the dissentions between the archbishop of
York and the Scotch prelates, who refused to acknowledge his primacy, went to
Roxburgh, where he held a conference with David, King of Scotland, on that
subject. On his return, he presided at a general convocation of the prelates
and clergy, where, to show his authority, he was seated on an eminence above
the seats of the archbishops and temporal lords, who attended the council,
which was very disagreeable to many of the English, and the council ended with
no important advantages.

We might enlarge in the history of the reign of Henry I. by a variety of
transactions of a civil nature; but as that is not my province, shall conclude
with only observing, that he died of a fever, A. D. 1135, and shall sum up his
character in a few words. He was too fond of foreigners, too vindictive to his
enemies, too sensible to be an enthusiast, too cautious to be surprised, too
valiant to be conquered, too good to deserve the calumnies cast on him by the
monks, and too bad to be generally applauded.

STEPHEN, A. D. 1135.
Stephen ascending the throne, after being elected, rather by a cabal of
prelates and noblemen, than by a general consent of the nation, resolved to
secure the favor of the nation by some extraordinary concessions; and
therefore over and above his promise of ruling with equity and moderation, he
solemnly swore that he would not retain vacant sees and benefices in his hands,
but fill them immediately with persons canonically elected; that he would not
disturb the clergy or laity in the enjoyment of their woods; that he would not
sue any person for hunting in the royal forest; that he would never exact the
tax of danegelt. The English were so credulous as to believe he would pay a
greater regard to it, than was evident from his future conduct. However, partly
through his own treachery and misconduct, his whole reign was a scene of war
and contest, both abroad and at home. We meet with very few transactions
relative to learning or religion. There were however many religious foundations
built and endowed in the troublesome reign of King Stephen; as the monastery of
St. Mary de Pratis, founded by Robert, Earl of Leicester; the hospital of St.
Catherine, near London, founded by Maud, wife of King Stephen; and St.
Stephen's chapel at Westminster, founded by himself; as also the Cistertian
monastry at Feversham, with an hospital near the West-gate at York, etc.

He died after a short illness in 1154. His character is that of humane and
generous: he seems to have been possessed of many great qualities; and, had he
lived in happier times, he might probably have been reckoned one of the most
illustrious monarchs that ever filled the English throne.

HENRY II. A. D. 1154.
Henry came to the crown with an indisputable title. He was a prince, wise,
valiant, and generally fortunate. Soon after his accession to the throne, he
chose a privy council of clergy and temporality, and refined the common laws.
He parcelled England into six divisions, and appointed three judges to every
circuit. He erased many of the castles to the ground, as he found they were
held by persons in a kind of independence of the crown, and derogatory to the
authority of it. These regulations seem first and principally to engross his
attention, but he afterward found others to demand his concern. The gross
impositions of the Pope highly threatened the diminution of his royal
prerogatives; so that he disclaimed the Pope's authority, refufed to pay
Peter Pence, and interdicted all appeals to Rome. But he only, or chiefly,
regarded his temporal prerogatives; for had not they been invaded by the
prelates, under the direction of the Pope, they might have continued their
influence in the church in all spiritual affairs. However, the King was not
sufficiently upon his guard in the choice of his favorites.

Thomas Becket, doctor of canon law, was, by the King, made chancellor of
England; and four years after he was, by the King, made archbishop of
Canterbury; and this, in process of time, proved highly prejudicial to his
majesty's authority. One of the first matters of dispute was, that the King
having commanded that justice should be impartially executed upon all men in
his court, Becket insisted on the clergy being exempt from the jurisdiction of
the civil magistrate, and judged in the ecclesiastical court. This incensed the
King against him. To adjust matters of importance, the King called a parliament
at Clarenden, to confirm the ancient laws and customs; to which Becket and the
rest of the bishops consented, and subscribed to them; but Becket afterward
recanting, renounced the same.

The same year, A. D. 1160, the King required that the law should be put in
execution for some crimes committed by the clergy, which the archbishop would
not permit; and, without the King's knowledge, determined to repair to Rome and
lay the affair before the Pope. And this was a matter of debate for some years.

Matthew Paris recites a variety of letters between this Pope and the King, and
between the Pope and the King of France. By the mediation of the latter, Becket
had leave to return to England; however the King still retained his temporal
authority.

Upon Becket's return to England, he excommunicated several Bishops. The next
year he excommunicated lord Sackville, who had been appointed by the King vicar
of the church of Canterbury, as he had derogated, as he called it, from the
rights of the church to please the King.

The King being then in Normandy, complained greatly, to some of his domestics,
of the insolent behavior of Becket, whom he had raised from abject
circumstances to such dignity, and yet by such unparalleled ingratitude became
the continual disturber of his government. Authors vary greatly in their
conjectures, and history affords us nothing certain with respect to the motives
of the persons who came over to assassinate Becket. Whether they were incited
to it by the King, and received any promises of reward for so rash an action;
or whether they were animated by principle only, and a regard to the
tranquillity of the nation; be this as it will, William de Tracy, Reginald
Fitzurse, Hugh de Moreville, and Richard Brito, mutually engaged to revenge the
King's quarrel. They withdrew from court, and taking shipping at different
ports, arrived in England, and met at the castle of Saltwode, within six miles
of Canterbury. The next day they went to Canterbury, and advanced to Becket's
apartment, where they warmly expostulated with him about the rashness and
insolence of his conduct in his station as chancellor, and more especially as
archbishop; which making no impression upon him, it is said, they retired to
put on their armor, and soon returned to execute the assassination, which they
did with many circumstances of cruelty.

Collier says Collier's Eccles. Hist. vol. I. p. 375.
, "That, upon the news of the archbishop's death, the King and the people were
extremely troubled; though it may be easily conjectured to proceed from
different motives. The King was apprehensive that the archbishop's murder would
occasion reflection and dishonor to his highness; and so, in fact, it did
soon. The King of France wrote to his holiness, in which he made no scruple to
charge him as culpable in that act; and intimated, that the Pope should draw
St. Peter's sword against King Henry, and even to think of some new and
exemplary punishment for a crime in which the universal church was concerned.
This was likewise followed with another from the Earl of Blois, and another
from the archbishop of Sens, in which he moves for an interdict upon his
dominions.

King Henry protested his innocence, and sent an embassy to Rome, upon his
arrival in England, about that time, to compromise matters; and either from a
consciousness of his fault, or motives of policy, agreed to purchase his
absolution upon very severe terms. The Pope enjoined him to suffer appeals from
England to Rome; to quit his right and claim to investitures; to keep 200 men
in arms for the holy war; and to pay forty thousand marks of silver, and five
thousand of gold. Some add, that he submitted to strip himself naked at
Canterbury, and to he lashed by diverse monks, some of whom gave him five,
others three stripes. This was in A. D. 1170, and the Pope canonized Becket for
a saint.

During this reign, a considerable number of Germans came over to England, to
attempt a reformation from some of the gross errors of Popery. Authors differ
as to their number. The sentiments and character of these men but agree in
this, that they were severely treated, by branding them with hot irons, and by
other methods of cruelty; some were even put to death, which they bore with
great fortitude.

The reign of Henry abounds with many acts which redound to his honor,
notwithstanding his foibles, which derogate from it. He was educated with high
notions of the kingly prerogative, for which he manifested the most inviolable
attachment; and he guarded the liberties of his subjects by many excellent laws
and regulations. So that, upon the whole, he is ranked among the most powerful
and illustrious of the English monarchs.

End of the FIRST VOLUME.
N. B. As the subjects of the INTRODUCTION are various, and of an interesting
nature, I find it will take more than two numbers: for which reason I have
begun it in the last half-sheet of this, and shall finish it in the tenth
number, which completes VOL. I.

The next volume will begin with the reign o^ RICHARD I. In which, and the
subsequent reigns to the time of the Reformation, the exorbitant claims of the
Romish Church, and the prevailing errors of that religion, amply evince the
necessity of a reformation; which, with the progress of it, abroad and at home,
will come under consideration.


