A TREATISE ON THE VIRTUES and EFFICACY OF A CRUST of BREAD, Eat early in a
Morning FASTING, To which are added Some particular Remarks concerning the
great CURES accomplished by the SALIVA or FASTING SPITTLE, as well when
externally applied, as when internally given, in the SCURVY, GRAVEL, STONE,
RHEUMATISM, and diverse other diseases, arising from Obstructions.

With some critical Observations concerning the RECREMENTS of the BLOOD;
demonstrating, that when regularly secreted, they both contribute to preserve
the Life of Animals and keep them in Health.

By NICHOLAS ROBINSON, M. D.

Member of the Royal College of Physicians, and Physician to Christ's Hospital,
London.

Neque enim, ulla alia Re, Homines propius ad Deos accedunt, quam Salutem
Hominibus dando.

CICERO. The SECOND EDITION.

DUBLIN: Printed by JAMES HOEY, at the Mercury in Skinner Row, next Door to the
Tholsel.

M.DCC.LVII.

THE INTRODUCTORY DISCOURSE,
Discovering the great efficacy of the recrements of the body, to the digestion
of our food, the circulation of the blood, and the secretion of the alimentary
fluids.
I AM sensible that few physicians have examined those recrements of the body
with that attention, accuracy, and diligence, that a point of so great
importance requires; and though they are many and diverse, yet they all
contribute their share to the maceration, attenuation, and digestion of our
aliments in the mouth; to the greater liquidation of the chyle in the stomach
and intestines; to the more perfect fusion of the blood in the veins and
arteries; and the better secretion of the various juices, separated and
collected in the different folliculi or receptacles, situated in the various
organs of the body, and which are ordained by nature, to serve very great, and
important uses in the animal economy.

These recrements are distinguished from the excrementitious discharges, as the
latter are thrown out of the body, and of no further use in support of the
several respective parts of the animal, and which therefore are called the
excrements: while the former serve many great and necessary purposes in life;
so that I question whether any animal circulation, secretion, or excretion,
could be carried on, without the assistance of these recrements; for all the
motions of the chyle, blood, and animal juices, would stagnate and stand still
in an instant, were it not for the saliva, bile, pancreatic juice, and diverse
other fluids secreted from the arterial blood: And as these secreted fluids are
the main principles that support the life of animals; so in the most noxious,
venomous, and poisonous creatures, where the great mischief is done by a bite,
and the infusion of a poisonous fluid into the wound, as is done by the viper;
then, upon reflection, we discover that there must necessarily be a counter
poison, generated and secreted somewhere in the body itself, to preserve this
noxious animal from the force and deadly effects of its own poison.

But of all the various separations and secretions, I know none of so much
consequence to the body, as that secreted liquor, we call the saliva, or what
is generally meant by the fasting spittle, as will more clearly appear when we
come to speak of its effects and consequences upon the bodies of rational
animals; for without this secreted fluid, we could neither chew our victuals,
nor swallow our food into the stomach, nor digest it, after it was there; so
that all the motions of the body will grow dry, stagnate, and be at perpetual
rest, were not our several aliments mixed, attenuated, and sufficiently diluted
in the mouth, by the penetrating salts of the salival fluid, before they are
swallowed down into the stomach.

And though of late, we have heard of mighty feats being done by the virtues of
crude mercury, tar-water, and diverse other quack medicines, sold up and down
this town, with royal patents, and dignified titles; yet I question, whether in
the gravel, stone, gout, and rheumatism, there ever yet was, or at this time
is; or in times to come shall be discovered a medicine more valuable in the
foregoing diseases, than what I now offer for the benefit of mankind.

And the patient may assure himself, that, if these rules and cautions, laid
down in the following pages, are but rightly pursued, and duly executed, they
will mightily contribute, not only to preserve him in health, but also prove
extremely efficacious to restore that invaluable blessing, whenever over
powered by the force of a disease. And, in all these cases, I find little
occasion for the use of medicine, provided the patient eats his crust
punctually in a morning fasting, and is observing of the air, diet and exercise
I have set before him.

SECT. I. Of the Virtues of a Crust of Bread, eat early in a morning fasting,
with its force and efficacy in relieving the scurvy, gravel, stone, gout,
rheumatism, and various other diseases
I AM now going to speak of a remedy second to none, in the cure and relief
given in the foregoing diseases: It may indeed serve other intentions and
purposes as far as I know, but in the gravel, stone, gout, and rheumatism, I
know it to be the best and surest remedy hitherto discovered; and if you join
fasting to this noble medicine, I know none more efficacious: Would you know
this valuable secret, it is abstinence: I say abstinence; -- but by the word
abstinence, I do not mean a mere negative remedy, as if fasting was to do all
the work herself, by suffering nature, in due course of time, to resolve the
obstructions, and, at her leisure, to digest off the viscid juices and corrupt
humors; for abstinence is only necessary as an assistant, both to improve the
operation, and enable the Crust of Bread, eat early in a morning fasting, to
exert its virtues with more salutary effects: For all medicines operate best
upon an empty stomach, and few purging medicines are advised, if they are
greatly efficacious but that they are prescribed to be taken in a morning
early, and the first thing that the patient does; and he is often advised not
to eat till two or three hours after.

I choose to express myself, in the vulgar manner of speech, because the visible
relief given in the gravel or stone is usually ascribed to the Bread alone, and
not to any other assistant remedy mixed with it in the mouth, or in its passage
to the stomach, and so into the blood: For it is a truth, established by
constant observation and experience, that diverse persons, by eating a Crust of
Bread in a morning early, and fasting two or three hours after it, have
received great relief in the gravel; others have declared, that under the stone
their severest symptoms have been mightily mitigated; and some again, under the
most painful symptoms of the gout and rheumatism, have found their pains
greatly relieved by adhering to this remedy, and applying chewed bread, well
moistened with the fasting saliva, warm to the gouty parts: And I do not speak
these things of two or three people only, that have accidentally been thus
relieved, but of hundreds, nay, I may say thousands, that within my own
knowledge, have received great benefit from this invaluable and salutary
medicine.

Now to examine the main point, and enquire upon what principles this great
relief is given; for if we consider the Bread itself, this concrete can have no
efficacy, at one time more than another; if the efficacy, I say, proceeds from
the intrinsical principles of the Bread; for then a Crust eat at five or six in
the afternoon, or at a proper distance from our meals, must produce the same
effects upon the urinary passages; upon the obstructions of the joints and
membranes of the muscles, that it does, when eat in a morning fasting; and
therefore we are to consider whether this virtue and efficacy, supposed to be
lodged in the bread, may not more properly be owing to some other assisting
cause, than to the piece of Bread itself; for we know very well, that the
matter of fact is so, viz. That a Crust of Bread, eat early in a morning
fasting, does produce these good effects in the aforesaid diseases; and if we
search into the virtues of Bread, and consider what ingredients there is in a
Crust, we shall not discover any virtues in the Bread, more than to nourish the
body; for the purest wheat, when changed into never so many different forms,
only produces a more elegant nourishment: This is the prime law of its nature,
and therefore we cannot suppose that the Bread itself can contain any powers
capable of producing these principles of dissolution of the gravel, attenuation
of the phlegm, and mitigation of the painful symptoms of the stone; and
therefore I must conclude, that the Bread itself does not contain any
principles powerful enough to accomplish that great relief, that is often
received from eating a Crust of Bread in a morning early; for then its great
efficacy would sensibly appear, from the great quantities we eat of this
aliment, in our several meals, at morning, noon, and night: And hence I infer,
that the good that is known to ensue from eating the Bread, must be the result
of somewhat that accompanies the Bread, and that we can conceive to be nothing
but the fasting saliva, which leads me to speak of the origin, secretion, and
composition of this fluid, or what we vulgarly call the fasting spittle; as it
is a fluid that serves diverse great and important purposes in the animal

SECT. II. Of the origin, secretion, and composition of the Fasting saliva, as
the fluid that first mixes with the Bread, in the mouth; in its passage through
the gula; and in its descent into the stomach, as the sole cause of the
foregoing salutary effects.
I Observed in the first section, that few physicians had sufficiently examined
the recrements of the body; and so far looked into the mysteries of nature, as
to consider for what purposes and uses in life, they were separated and
secreted into their proper channels and receptacles; for we daily perceive,
that the saliva, the pancreatic juice, and the biliose humors, are three
liquors secreted from their respective organs, that serve great and eminent
purposes in the animal-oeconomy: and as the saliva, or what we call the
spittle, is the last and most considerable of the secretions, so I think it
will be proper to examine the nature, properties, and constituent principles of
a fluid, that is often the cause of considerable changes and alterations in
life.

Now the three grand recrements of the body, viz. the saliva, bile, and seed,
are three principles, that not only preserve life and health in the individuum;
but the last secreted fluid is that sacred balsam, that has continued the
species from the beginning of the world to this time, and which will so
continue it, to the latest period of nature; and therefore methinks they
deserve a more particular enquiry, than what I perceive physicians, hitherto,
have been pleased to bestow upon them: however, I shall in this little tract
only proceed to examine the recrements of the saliva, the principles of the
juices secreted in the stomach, and the properties of the bile, as subjects the
most proper at present for my enquiry; and shall postpone the last to a more
convenient opportunity.

However, before we proceed to discover the powers, efficacy, and operation of
the Fasting Spittle, I judge it highly necessary that, in the first place, we
proceed to examine the origin, secretion, and composition of this noble fluid,
as it is separated from the arterial blood: because upon these principles most
of its active powers, in a great measure, will be found to have their
dependence.

The saliva, or what we call the fasting spittle, is originally secreted from
the arterial blood by two complex glands, called the parotides, which,
according to Steno and Nuck, two accomplished anatomists, lie at the root of
the ear, one on each side of the neck: These glands secern the grosser saliva;
and by means of a number of little small tubes, arising from the inner coat of
these glands, convey the secreted liquor into one common duct, which, ne^^ the
third upper grinder, opens into the mouth, whereby the jaws, tongue, and all
the inner parts of the lips, are moistened with this viscous, secreted spittle.

But, besides these two large secretory glands, that furnish out the grosser
secretions for moistening the mouth in general, there are discovered by later
anatomists diverse other minute, conglobate glands, that secret a finer,
thinner, and more attenuated fluid: These have their roots in the polate,
tongue, gums, and lips, all whose membranes are perforated with little small
tubuli, that let into the mouth a fine, thin, volatile saliva, somewhat more
attenuated than the former: However, all these fountains of the spittle are so
commodiously situated, that they must necessarily, upon closing of the lips,
pressure of the jaws, and combining or compressing of the cheeks, squeeze out a
good quantity of their contents into the mouth, for the separating, moistening,
and dissolving of the aliments we take for the support of life.

And this is the reason, why these glands discharge the greatest quantities of
their secreted liquors, during mastication, or when we chew our food: because
then there is not only the greatest pressure upon these organs, but, at the
same time, all the parts of the mouth are put into greater motions and
compressions, than at any other time whatever, for to make the experiment if
you please to grind close the teeth, and, at the same time, compress your
cheeks with the lips, you will readily perceive a larger discharge of saliva to
rouse from these respective glands, than when the same lie still, are at rest,
and under no compression.

But, of all remedies prescribed, we ought not only to attempt to know their
origin, nature, and production, but also to endeavor to penetrate into the
principles, powers, and properties they consist of, whereby we shall be better
enabled to discover their manner of action, and the different efforts they
exert upon the various organs of the animal economy.

As to the saliva, when all the different secretions are intimately mixed in
the mouth, and formed into one uniform, attenuated, frothy humor; the mixture
then appears from experiments, to constitute a fine, thin, volatile,
silver-coloured fluid, and which is secreted from the arterial blood in the
caroted arteries, and called the saliva or spittle.

Upon examination, it appears to be a composition of salt, oil, and sulphur,
dissolved in a pretty large quantity of a sine, thin, attenuated phlegm, very
nearly resembling the consistence of soap water, to which it is very nearly
related by the virtues of its qualities.

Under a sound state of health, it is without smell, perfectly insipid, or if
it has any taste, it may properly be said to resemble the white of an egg: To
the touch it is extremely viscid; easily mixes with oil, and therefore is
oleose; it readily evaporates with the least force of fire, and therefore
contains a large portion of volatile parts; and in its nature is mightily
penetrant and abstersive, and therefore will destroy even the spericity of the
mercurial globles themselves, whose round figures are so difficult to destroy,
unless you apply salts, fire, sulphur, or ingredients of an unctions, adhesive
nature.

SECT. III. Of the properties, virtues, and salutary effects of the fasting
saliva, when externally applied to old aches, pains, recent cuts, wounds, old
ulcers, corns, sore eyes, and gouty nodes.
IF we consider the fasting saliva alone, and as it is secreted from the
salival glands situated in the jaws and mouth, we shall perceive diverse great
and remarkable effects to arise from its application; for this saliva may most
properly be called the noble Balsam of Nature, as it is a surer relief, in most
cases, where outwardly applied, than what most people will easily be led to
believe, that have not themselves tried its efficacy: I do not desire to be too
sanguine upon the virtues of the fasting saliva; but shall only beg leave of
the reader, to lay down what I know to be matter of fact; and then shall
proceed to give a detail of diverse very surprising cures, that one Mrs.
Bestock, at Nantwich in Cheshire, has done to vast numbers of people, in that
neighborhood, by the outward application of the fasting saliva, vulgarly
called the fasting spittle.

I am intimately acquainted with a gentleman, that every spring and fall was
accosted with a very trouble some scorbutic tetter; he had taken mercury in all
shapes, advised with several physicians, and by their advice had applied
mixtures, ointments, and waters, prescribed for tettery humors, but without
success: At last, he was advised to apply the fasting saliva every morning,
which, in a fortnight's time, effectually cured him.

Nor do I know a better medicine for troublesome corns. A person of some
distinction had a corn on the off side of his foot, that so shackled his limbs,
as almost to reduce him to the state of a cripple: He employed the corn-cutter
without effect; for every time it was cut it both bled and pained him very
much: these are usual accidents that happened from a nerve and vein, that
entered into the composition of the corn, and whose sensibility and cavity were
not totally destroyed by so hard a body He had made use of plasters, balsams,
ointments, lotions, and all manner of applications, but to no manner of
purpose: He then accidentally asked a gentleman's opinion, and was advised
every night to soak his feet in warm water and bran, and the next morning to
apply chewed bread, well moistened with the fasting spittle, by way of pultice,
which, in a little time, perfectly relieved him; for the corn, in less than a
week, tumbled out by the roots, and he has heard no more of it since. The like
happened to a gentleman that was advised to apply the chewed bread, mixed with
the fasting spittle, to a gouty node, which mightily relieved him, and has kept
his feet easy ever since.

In those hard excressences we call warts in the hands, face, and diverse other
parts of the body, it is an infallible cure, if constantly used. It also
mightily assists in relieving sore eyes, especially those whose eyelids from
hard drinking, are red, angry, and inflamed: In these cases, if you do but
lightly touch the parts affected, with this noble balsam, every morning, you
will find great relief. And we know, by certain experience, that in all cuts,
recent wounds, and accidental hurts, that the fasting saliva is a sovereign
remedy: and its penetrant dissolving abstersive qualities are so great, that if
it be sufficiently rubbed with mercury, vulgarly called quicksilver, it will
mortify that mineral, and destroy the spericity of its globles, though one of
the most active bodies in nature.

But the great cures done by one Bridget Bostock, at Nantwich in Cheshire, by
the external application of fasting spittle, would surmount all credit, and
scarce gain belief, had we not sufficient attestations, from several authentic
letters, that put the matters of fact above all dispute; for in a letter from a
person of undoubted character, he tells us; "that this old woman, all her
lifetime, made it her business to cure her neighbors, and people that lived
near her, of sore legs, and other disorders. But her reputation of late, seems
so wonderfully increased, that people come to her from all parts far and near.
A year ago she had, as I remember, about forty under her care: When I went to
London she had one hundred in the compass of a week; and they increased so
fast, that, by the time I came back, which was not above three weeks, she had
above eight score: and this day five weeks one hundred and sixteen; Sunday
se'ennight my wife and self went to Bridget's house, and were told by the
persons that kept the door, and let the people in by fives and sixes; that they
had that day told six hundred to whom she had administered: She at length grew
so very faint, for she never breaks her fast till she has done, that at six of
the clock in the evening she was obliged to give over her operations, though
then there were more than sixty persons to whom she had not administered. On
Monday last she had seven hundred, and every day at present near that number.

"She cures the blind, the deaf, and the lame of all sorts: Numbers of people
have received great benefit, in the rheumatism, king's evil, histeric fits,
falling sickness, and shortness of breath: She also mightily relieves the
dropsy, palsy, leprosy, cancers: and, in short, almost every disease mankind is
subject to, except the French pox, which she will not be prevailed by any means
to meddle with."

But here I must beg leave so far to interfere with this old woman, as to
declare, that in chancres, which is a very stubborn species of the venereal
disease, and which often affects the glans penis, and baffles the utmost
efforts of the physician and surgeon, without a salivation: that there is not a
surer remedy, than every morning to touch the part with the fasting saliva of a
man or woman turned of seventy or eighty years of age: And if you extinguish a
little crude mercury in the saliva, the efficacy will be so much the more
considerable and certain.

But to return from whence I digressed: "You will be desirous to know what
medicines she uses to procure such mighty relief; and I must tell you, that all
the means she uses, are only to stroke the part with fasting spittle, and
praying for them; it is hardly credible to think, what cures she daily
performs, and without you were here to see them, it must appear romantic and
incredible: for some people grow well while in the house; others while on the
road, and all find themselves better after they are got home. She is about
seventy years of age, and takes no money for her cures, though offered her; in
short, the rich, the lame, the blind, and the deaf, all pray for her, and bless
the great good she does; and the poor daily come to her in cart-loads. I am,
Sir, etc."

This letter, I am well assured, comes from a person of great veracity and
integrity; and therefore I think deserves some animadversions, as the cures the
author speaks of, are many of them very surprising, and diverse out of the
common road of external applications: However, to make suitable remarks on
these cures, we must first observe, that Bridget Bostock is seventy years of
age; that all was done (besides her prayers) by the force of the fasting
spittle; as to her prayers for a blessing upon her endeavors, I shall not
presume to say any thing, because we are assured in holy writ, that persons of
less piety, virtue, and charity, than this old woman seems to be mistress of,
have been enabled to work miracles; and therefore we can never be certain how
far God Almighty interposes his finger in assisting the relief of diverse
diseases: But in most of these cases, except the dropsy, I will be bold to say,
that the means this good woman used for the recovery of these people, were
equal to the effects that ensued; and in the dropsy there are two remedies may
be used, that will infallibly cure that disease, provided it does not arise
from a rupture of the lymphaticks, in which case there can no relief be given,
but by tapping the patient, and that only a transient relief, or the patient is
not greatly advanced in years. Thus far I could not but remark in cases so
particular in their aspect, and which were relieved by such a simple remedy as
I am now treating of.

SECT. IV. Of the vehicle most proper to convey this sovereign remedy into the
stomach, in order to facilitate its operation and salutary effects, upon the
various viscera, organs, and fluids of animal bodies.
HITHERTO we have considered the fasting saliva alone, and as it is applied to
the external parts of the body; I am come now to speak of its salutary effects,
when it is mixed, combined, and associated with the fine fluid secreted from
the glands of the oesophagus or gula, in its descent into the stomach; when it
is combined with the stomachic juices secreted from the villous coat of that
important organ; and the improvements it acquires, as a dissolvent, after it is
got out of the stomach into the intestines, and there thoroughly mixed with the
bile and pancreatic juices.

And it plainly appears, from the observations we have made in the first
section, that the bread is little or nothing concerned in producing these good
effects, we so sensibly perceive to ensue, upon eating a Crust of Bread, in a
morning fasting; nor can the virtues that follow, upon eating that concrete, be
properly ascribed to the bread itself; for it never could be swallowed, did not
the fasting saliva mix with it, and convert it to a pulpous substance, and
thereby fit it for digestion; for no dry aliments ever could be swallowed,
without a proper portion of the salival fluid, nor do I conceive, that any
other liquid menstruum would serve the intentions of nature so well as the
saliva: And this is the reason, why the greatest number of salival glands are
placed in the mouth, and consequently the greatest quantity of saliva separated
from these glandural meshes, during mastication, or the time we are chewing of
our food; for then there is not only the greatest pressure and motion in all
the parts of the mouth, but the muscles of the jaws, cheeks, and lips, are more
forcibly compressed, contracted, and put into motion, than at any other time:
for these glandular bodies, the fountains of the saliva, are so commodiously
situated, that they must necessarily, upon any pressure of the cheeks, or
closing of the jaws, squeeze out their contents into the mouth; and, to make
the experiment, let any person grind close his gums and teeth, and at the same
time, straightly compress the muscless of his cheeks and jaws, and he will
readily perceive a larger discharge of saliva to flow into his mouth from these
compressions, than is usual for the same glands, at any other time; which
plainly demonstrates how much the action of these muscles contribute to
influence the discharge of these salival glands.

But if the relief given does not consist in the virtues of the bread itself,
but in the secretion of the recrement, called the Fasting Spittle, then you
will say; to what end and purpose serves a piece of bread, eat early in a
morning fasting: To this I answer; to very great and good purposes every way:
For, in the first place, there is no other substance we know of, that can so
properly be eat in a morning fasting, as a Crust of Bread, or that the stomach
will so readily receive and digest as that concrete: Secondly, of all other
aliments, it is the most proper vehicle to imbibe and collect the Fasting
Saliva; and therefore, of all other vehicles, it is the fittest to be employed
upon these occasions, as it best mixes with the saliva: Thirdly, the force from
the teeth, necessary to divide a Crust, and break its cohesions, will more
readily squeeze out the saliva from the several falival glands.

These are the reasons I offer in preference to a Crust of Bread: and therefore
I judge that no other concrete will so readily serve the purpose, as a Crust of
Bread, unless it be what we call the captains biscuits, which they carry to sea
for their own eating: These are still preferable to bread, as they are still
harder than a crust, and more destitute of all foreign mixtures, as they are
free both from leven and yest. But as these sometimes may be difficult to be
had, so I judge a piece of bread, in general, the best vehicle we can
substitute, in order to convey the fasting saliva into the stomach. And hence
it clearly appears, that the virtue and efficacy that results from eating a
Crust of Bread, does not so properly arise from the bread itself, as the
chewing and mixing it with the Fasting Spittle; and therefore, to improve this
fine liquid, volatile soap, and exalt its virtues, I advise you, having eat
nothing over night for supper, about five of the clock in the morning, to eat
one ounce, or an ounce and half, of either wheat or rye bread, which in
chewing, will take up full half an ounce of the fasting saliva, to reduce it
into a proper, soft, pulpose substance, and which, when well chewed and
moistened, will be easily swallowed; and when you have got it down into the
stomach, then leave the rest to nature, and, if you can, go to sleep. And it is
advisable that you eat nothing for two or three hours after: Which leads me to
speak a few things of the consequences of its being got into the stomach, and
of its mixture with diverse of the secreted juices, in the stomach and
intestines.

Now this course, if steadily pursued for a month or six weeks, will prove of
great efficacy in diverse diseases, that have obstructions and sabulous
concretions for their parent, as the gravel, stone, gout, and rheumatism. Nor
is it less efficacious in tumors of the liver, spleen, and diverse other
organs; in all which cases, it is known to give great relief.

SECT. V. Of the improvements the Fasting Saliva receives from its mixing with
the stomachic, the biliose, and pancreatic juices in the stomach, intestines,
and parts adjoining; and in particular, of the nature, properties, and
constituent principles of the bile, as the greatest dissolvent in nature.
BUT after this sine, thin, saponaceous fluid, we call the saliva or spittle,
has left the mouth, and before it gets down into the stomach, it receives
considerable improvements from a fine, thin, attenuated, volatile fluid,
secreted from a number of glands, situated in the head of the gula, which still
renders it more penetrant and abstersive: It still acquires more force and
energy from its mixture with the stomach juices, discharged from the various
glands, whose orifices form the velvet coat of this important organ: These
supply the stomach with a sine, thin, clear, spumose fluid, that tastes a
little saline and acid, but is very active and volatile in its properties.

This is ordained by nature to penetrate the foods, break their cohesions, and
help forward their digestion for the nourishment of the body: And here a very
fair opportunity offers itself for me to speak of the principles of digestion,
and to discover how these important changes are brought about; that convert our
aliments into nourishment, but this would be foreign to my intention, and be a
means of rendering the discourse tedious, as my avowed design is brevity, and
only to take a view of the secreted fluids, as far as, in their course, they
join with the Fasting Saliva, in order to exalt it into a fine, saponaceous
liquor, proper to relieve the body of its insirmities.

Thus it appears how much the Fasting Saliva is improved in its nature,
properties, and action, from the lubricating lymph of the gula, the stomachic
juices, and the chylous fluid, all continually digesting in the stomach;
continually secreting from their respective glands, and continually flowing
over the pilorus into the duodenum, where they mix and unite with the biliose
and pancreatic juices, which greatly improve this noble, active medicine, and
by their tumults, conssicts, and conquassations, render it the most penetrant,
abstersive, and dissolving medicine we know of in nature.

And because I have mentioned the biliose juice as an ingredient in this fine,
volatile, dissolvent medicine, you will permit me here a little to examine into
the nature, properties, and secretion of the bile, because it is a liquor, that
will be found to have very considerable effect and consequences in the various
organs of the animal economy.

The liver is the organ ordained by nature for the separation, secretion, and
ultimate perfection of the biliose humor; and I should immediately proceed to
examine the principles and mechanism of this important organ, but that
Malpigius, that accurate anatomist, and our learned countryman Dr. Glisson,
have so fully exhausted this subject, that they have left but little, that is
new, to be said by those that come after them: And as I am only to observe the
nature of secretion, the principles of the bile, and the uses and purposes for
which it is ordained to serve in life, so I judge that the course of the
vessels, their various ramifications, and their aptness for the secretion of
this humor, will furnish out every thing necessary to be known upon this
subject.

However, I think proper here to observe, that the modus of secretion of the
bile in the liver, is different from the humors secreted in all other parts of
the body; for in all other parts the secretions are usually made from an
artery, but in the liver nature has inverted that order, and makes use of a
vein: and therefore the vena porta is appointed for this important office: this
vein receives the blood from the spleen, from the mesenterick arteries, and
from almost all the organs situated in the lower belly: this sanguineous fluid
moving much slower in the vena porta, than it would have done in an artery of
the same structure and mechanism, is the sole cause why the biliose salts are
so readily disposed to attract each other, and form a fluid with that
viscidity, necessary to give consistence to the bile; and for this end and
purpose the vena porta and biliary vessels are enclosed in one common sheath or
capsule: they enter the liver on the concave side, and are equally distributed
through all its substance; so that wherever there is a branch of the one,
there, upon good inspection, you will be sure to discover a branch of the
other: and therefore each lobe, and each gland of that lobe, whether on the
unequal or concave side, receives the same vessels, viz. A vein, nerve and
artery, called arteria hepatica, to convey the nourishment for the use of the
liver.

The porta receives the blood from the neighboring parts, which is very sharp,
by reason of the close union of the bilious salts; for the lymph that kept them
asunder is separated from the blood by the glands of the stomach, intestines,
ancreas, and mesentery: and therefore, if this sharp, detersive, saline bile,
did continue to circulate with the blood, it must frequently occasion vehement
fevers, colliquative fluxes, heart-burnings, and severe cholic pains, but these
miserable effects are often prevented by a soft olious fluid, that tempers
these sharp, keen salts, and blunts their acrimonious effects, both upon the
intestines and parts adjoining.

In the secretion of the bile, we are to observe, that the vena porta hepatica
terminates in little small glandular folliculi, that secret the bile from the
blood; from these small glands the billous humor is received into the
extremeties of the pori biliarii, as they inosculate with the extremeties of
the vena porta, and which, by their unions, form one trunk, called the ductus
hepaticus: this trunk empties part of the gall into the gall bladder: from the
gall bladder arises the ductus cysticus, which uniting with the ductus
hepaticus, form one common trunk, called the ductus communis cholidocus that
conveys the gall into the duodenum, near its curviture, that forms the
beginning of the jejunum; so that only part of the gall flows into the vesica
felea, by the cystick duct, while the other part is conveyed into the
intestines by the ductus communis cholidocus, that opens into that organ by an
oblique insertion.

The bile seems to be a gross, thick, viscid, oleous phlegm well impregnated
with salts of various kinds, as sweet, bitter, acerb, muriatic, and bitter
sweet; all which are blended and intimately mixed in a small quantity of viscid
phlegm: in this fluid, more than any other of the body, the oil and salts
greatly predominate; for an ounce of black gall contained in the fund of the
vesica fellea yields oil and salts, of each three drams; of phlegm only two
drams.

If you examine the gall in the liver, in the pori biliarii, and gall bladder,
you will find it of a different consistence, color and bitterness, in all
these three different situations; for the gall in the liver, or glandular
folliculi, is of a pale green, more fluid, saltish, and less bitter; that in
the cystick duct more viscid, less bitter, but greatly partaking of sacharine
salts: that in the gall bladder appears of a deep poracious green: and lastly,
that in the fund, inclining to a blackish hue, and which is more viscid, less
salt, but contains more of the bitterish twang.

I could not but be thus particular upon the nature, principles, and secretion
of the bile, because our great master Hippocrates avers that the ingredients of
bile are generated with the first principles of life; and when it happens to be
viteous, redundant, or defective, fails not to become the parent of most
diseases that any way can affect the constitutions of animal bodies, especially
those that are hot, fiery, and inflammatory: and though every constitution must
necessarily generate bile, yet a tense, springy constitution, or a constitution
with very elactic fibers, must necessarily have this humor in the largest
proportion, and these liable to generate much bile, are very prone, spring and
fall, to fall into loosenesses, fluxes, and the cholera morbus, which is what
we call a bilious vomiting, accompanied with a looseness, where great
quantities of yellow, green, black stools are discharged.

SECT. VI. Of some other sovereign properties of the bile; as it both promotes
the digestion of our aliments, assists the circulation of the blood, and helps
forward the glandular secretion in every part of the body.
BUT I have not yet done with the bile: for it is a secreted humor, of that
vast service and use in the animal-oeconomy, that I very much question whether
either health could subsist, or life itself be continued without its
assistance; for this bile, I am speaking of is a secretion so universal, that I
do not know one single species of animals destitute of this noble secretion;
for man, beast, reptiles, and the various classes of the fish kind, all have
bile; and, in all these different subjects, it is the bitterest humor in the
whole body; which is a strong argument with me of the necessity of bitter
medicines in diverse cases of diseases, especially when they are properly
applied.

Now the bile is so copious a subject, and affords so many experiments to
enlarge upon, that I could write a very large volume on the principles, nature,
and virtues of the bile alone, without exhausting the subject: and we find by
experience, that all people of a hot, choleric, dry constitution, are
inordinately subject to be hot, furious, and passionate, in proportion as they
generate a greater or lesser quantity of bile: however, I will not say, that
any one of the secreted liquors or recrements are the sole cause of life and
health; yet this I will aver, and am able to demonstrate, that neither health
nor life can long subsist, where the recrements of the saliva and bile are for
any considerable time obstructed: and it is the observation of all naturalists,
that the bile greatly differs in its own nature; for in the larger animals it
is less acid and sharp, than in those that are little; in beasts than in birds,
and in birds than in fishes, and in fishes, than the various tribes of insects:
however, in man we discover the most tinging bitter bile, that is in any animal
whatsoever; for it is so intensely bitter in this animal, that one drop will
communicate a bitterish twang to two ounces of water; and the same quantity
will tinge half a pint of the same fluid with a fine, beautiful, palish green.

But to be a little more explicit, and particular upon this subject: as it is a
point of such importance to the health and lives of animals, I lay it down as a
principle, not to be contested, that life itself depends upon a regular and
uninterrupted circulation of the blood and fluids through the several organs of
the animal-oeconomy: this constant and equal motion of the blood is kept up by
the circulation of the bile, that every where destroys the tenacious, thick,
viscid particles of phlegm, that renders the blood roapy, stagnant, and apt to
furr up the minutest arteries.

This bilious humor, from its inciding, penetrant, and dissolving qualities,
not only assists the circulation, but also is greatly concerned in promoting
the separation of the chile from the faeces, or matter of our stools, assists
its passage into the lacteals, and then cuts, divides, and corrects the thick
viscid slime, that often adheres to the coats of the stomach and intestines:
blocks up their secretions, and is a frequent cause of very severe cholic pains.

But amongst all the salts of the bile, which are both volatile and fixed,
there is a peculiar essential salt, endued with a very sweet property; these
essential, sacharine salts, more readily join with the chyle in the intestines
than any other; and this is that salt, that gives to the chyle both its
sweetness and taste, and that whiteness it obtains after it has passed the
venae lacteae primi genesis: this sacharine salt also gives to the urine of
those that labor under the diabetes, that sweet taste we often discover in
those that, for any considerable time, have been subject to this disease.

If we proceed farther in our enquiries, we shall discover by experiments, that
the bile of animals absterges like soap, and renders oils miscible with water:
as to its virtues, it penetrates, attenuates and resolves all obstructions in
every part of the body, and affects rosins, gums, and other tenacious bodies,
by a dissolution of their texture; whereby they are brought to mix with any
fluid they are applied to: this bile or gall is neither alcalious or acid, but
seems a combination of various salts, oils, and sulphurs, diluted in a pretty
large quantity of phlegm; and there is no question to be made, but that the
principal use of the bile is to separate attenuate, and sheath the asperities
of the chyle by its oils and sulphurs; to blunt the acids by its oleous
corpuscles, and to assist the circulation of the blood in the veins and
arteries, by its stimulating powers: It also proves a stimulus to the
intestines, and thereby facilitates the descent of our excrements, and without
which we should be perpetually costive and seldom go to stool.

As the bile is the hottest and sharpest of all other humors in the body; so
in its circulation, it every where irritates the fibers of the veins, nerves,
and arteries; and thereby keeps up the circulation of the blood, and frees the
glands from obstructions; so that without the circulation of the bile, and
constant secretion of this bilious humor, the circulation of the blood would
be languid, the secretion of the several humors stand still, and life itself
be extinct; for there is no other power, that we know of in nature, capable of
keeping up the blood's motion, save the bile: and therefore, in the blood,
these bilious salts are set at such a distance from each other, as only to
irritate the veins and arteries to a degree, as may keep the blood in motion,
and help forward the secretion of the several respective humors to their
destined ends and purposes of life; but as the stomach and intestines are
composed of more solid coats, so, to make any suitable impressions upon their
viscid, slimy secretions, there was a necessity for a more active, volatile,
inciding humor: and therefore, as the bile came to be secreted into the vena
porta of the liver, it was deprived of its fluidity, that a greater quantity of
its various salts might be concentrated into a smaller portion of phlegm; for
by this means its salts are so nearly collected, that they form a thick viscid,
saline, bitter humor, whose office is to stimulate the intestines, keep up
their peristaltic motions, and help forwards the descent of the excrements, and
without which they would be apt to stagnate in the intestines, and create
obstinate costiveness and severe cholic pains; so that the bilious salts serve
several ends and purposes in life; for as they exist in the blood, so they
assist the circulation; as they are secreted in the liver, and flow into the
intestines, the more fine parts help forwards the separation of the chyle, and
its secretion into the lacteals, while a grosser portion of the bilious salts
mix with the excrements, and facilitate their descent; and without which the
animal itself neither could well subsist under a sound state of health, or
continue in life for any considerable time.

After so much said concerning our enquiries into the nature, principles, and
secretion of the bile, I shall only observe on the fluid secreted from the
pancreas, that it is a fine, thin, lymphatic liquor, whose office, when mixed
and incorporated with the saliva, stomachic juices, and bile, serves to dilute
and attenuate the chyle, and facilitate its motion into the lacteal vessels;
which leads me to treat of the essicacy of the saliva, when duly mixed,
properly incorporated, and perfectly united with the foregoing liquors, whereby
they arrive at the highest perfection their several natures are capable of; and
of whose effects and consequences, in diverse diseases, we shall treat in the
following section.

SECT. VII. Of the operation of the Fasting Saliva, when inwardly taken, and
mixed with the pancreatic and bilious juices, in the scurvy, gravel,
rheumatism, and diverse other diseases incident to obstruct the blood, and
vitiate the secretions in the internal habit.
WE have now seen in the fourth section what this fasting spittle will do
alone, and when outwardly applied in diverse external diseases: I come now to
speak of its effects and virtues, after it is mixed with diverse secreted
liquors, in its passage from the mouth, till it becomes a secreted liquor into
the mouth again. If the fasting spittle, after the bread has been well
moistened with it in the mouth, is charged into the stomach, it then, in its
passage, meets with the lubricating lymph of the gula, which, from its
spirituous, active qualities, very much improves the fasting saliva: and after
its descent into the stomach, there the stomachic juices are continually
secreting from their respective glands; continually mixing with the ingested
spittle conveyed into the stomach with the meat we eat, till digested into a
thin, light, volatile spume or froth, they, from their lightness and tenuity of
parts, flow over the pylorus into the intestines, where all these various
fluids of the saliva, of the secreted liquor issuing from the glands of the
oesophagus and stomach, are united in the duodenum, and intimately combined
with the bilious and pancreatic juices, discharged from their respective pipes,
into one uniform mass or soap.

And having brought the fasting saliva through a course of digestions to mix
with the bile, and pancreatic juice in the intestines; it appears to me, from
the very nature and properties of the bilious humors thus new-modelled, from
the access of the various secretions, that we have generally confined the gall
and pancreatic juices to answer very imperfect purposes of life; as if they
were secreted for little else, but by their bitter and acid salts, to dissolve
our aliments into the stomach and intestines, to facilitate the descent of the
foeces, and give the depurated chyle a passage into the lacteals. But upon a
more attentive view of things, we shall perceive that the bilious humor serves
very great and important ends of life in the animal-oeconomy; for were this
liquid, volatile, animal soap, of a very active, cleansing, penetrant and
abstersive nature, by the largeness and union of salts of various natures, as
of bitter, sweet, salt, acrid, alcalious, and muriatic, all combined into one
substantial fluid; it will necessarily happen, that such a uniform liquor will
be able to dissolve all manner of viscous humors, and sabulous concretions,
that furr up the mouths of the lacteals, obstruct the passage of the chyle, and
dispose all corrupt humors to discharge by stool, urine, and insensible
perspiration.

This fluid the saliva, by the improvements it receives, as above described,
being admitted with the chyle into the lacteals, attenuates, dissolves, and
liquisies any furr or coaculum, that may stick or adhere to the coats of the
lacteals, or obstruct in the vessels of the receptaculum chili, or ductus
thoracicus: for the fine, thin, depurated chyle contains globles of a larger
size, than any to be found in the blood itself: and therefore are apter to
stagnate in these fine, white tubes, called venae lacteae primi and secundi
generis, than in the vessels of any other parts of the body.

Therefore if it enters the lacteals, and gets into the blood, it purifies that
fluid, dissolves all preternatural lentours, scours the glands, and cleanses
their emunctories, whereby the veins, nerves, and arteries, are cleared of all
embarrassing obstructions, and the course of nature carried on with the
greatest harmony and accord.

In the kidneys, ureters, and bladder, it is known to increase the separation
and secretion of the fluids in the urinary passages; so that a man may observe
himself to discharge more urine after he has eat his crust in a morning
fasting, than at any other time of the day: again, this noble fluid, by its
oleous and balsamic qualities, abates pain, and asswages the inflammation of
the parts, as is very usual where either much gravel or large stones have
frequently passed these several organs: as this fine, balsamic, liquid,
compound soap is endued with soft, oleous and balsamic properties, whereby it
may sheath the asperities of the acrimonious salts, and attemperate all sharp
humors; so it abounds also with sharp, acid, inciding salts, both volatile,
essential, and fixed; whereby it attenuates, breaks, and dissolves, all
sabulous concretions, rectifies the intemperature of the blood, that may
intercept the motion of the fluids in every part, and carries its virtues to
the extremest organs of the body: nor does it only contribute to destroy the
most stubborn diseases, but also mightily serves to preserve the body in
health; for where the circulation of the blood, the secretion of the juices,
and discharge of the excrementitious foeces and fluids are constant, regular,
and uniform: there the health is in the highest perfection a man can possibly
arrive at, in this imperfect state of nature.

SECT. VIII. Of the force and efficacy of fasting and abstinence, under the
operation of this fine, penetrating, abstersive, animal soap.
I Do not presume here to treat these subjects of sasting and abstinence as a
divine, who intends, by his advice and counsel, to mortify the body or soul,
and better the conscience; but as a physician, who is desirous to preserve the
strength, health, and motions of the body of his patient, steady, uniform, and
regular.

Every one must be sensible, what great things have been promised from
quicksilver, tar-water, Mrs. Stevens's medicines, and diverse other quack pills,
powders, and elixirs, in the gravel, gout, dropsy, and various other diseases:
but I declare, that if the advice I offer for the benefit of mankind, be but
carefully observed, and punctually put in practice, that many will not only
receive great relief, but an entire exemption, from the most obstinate and
stubborn diseases.

For we ought ever to consider, that nature is always on the side of health,
and continually striving to restore the constitution, whenever borne down by
the force of a disease; so that seldom can any-obstructions happen to the body,
but that repletion or gorging more than nature can digest, is the cause; and
which, when often repeated, brings on indigestions in the stomach, windiness or
flatulencies in the bowels and intestines; a corruption of humors in the
blood, and various obstructions in different organs of the habit: these are the
parents of most diseases, that are incident to affect us in life; for what is
the scurvy, but a thick, viscid, ropy blood, unable to pass the finest
strainers of the several organs; and how comes it by these properties, but by
the indigestions of our aliments? The same we may observe of cholic pains, the
asthma, and dropsy; their original cause undoubtedly arises from indigestions;
nor is the generation of gravel and stone less owing to the same causes; for
when our foods escape the force of the stomach, not thoroughly digested, they
never after can receive the assimilating power from any after impressions the
subsequent organs can lay upon them, but become the cause of various
obstructions in the small organs of the body: hence arise wind in the stomach,
pains in the intestines, rheumatisms in the limbs, and schirrous tumors in the
liver, spleen, and diverse other parts.

Now, under these circumstances, to bring nature home to herself, the first
thing must be to prescribe abstinence from all flesh meats, for the compass of
a week, if the disease be recent; three weeks, or a month, if the same has been
of any long continuance: this will give nature time to recover herself; what I
mean by nature recovering herself is that there are certain restitutive powers
in every organ and fiber of the body, whereby nature, when any organ is
obstructed or oppressed, strives to recover its former tone. And this
self-restoring power is partly the effects of the fluids, and partly lodged in
the organs themselves, and the mechanism that constitutes their powers of force
and motion.

Now in any great pressure, from a load of foods charged into the stomach,
there is nothing that gives so sure a relief, as fasting and abstinence; for
these vacations from aliments, enables the fibers of the stomach, vicera, and
other organs, to resolve the obstructions, to break the conesions of the blood,
and enables nature to root out the most stubborn diseases, by flinging their
causes off by either stool, urine, or insensible prespiration, or sometimes a
profuse sweat: nor can there be a more noble, safe, and efficacious remedy to
rid us of either stone, gravel, or gout, than what I now offer for the relief
of mankind; that is abstinence, fasting, and a Crust of Bread eat early in a
morning fasting; or rather the fasting saliva charged into the stomach, by the
assistance of a piece of bread: and in these cases, it is necessary that we
take nothing of aliments for two or three hours after.

Give me leave here to recapitulate, as briefly as I can, the virtues of one of
the greatest dissolvent medicines in nature; and at the same time one of the
safest, that ever was communicated to mankind; a remedy that, if steadily
pursued, will cure both the gout, the gravel, the stone, the asthma, and
dropsy. Would you know this invaluable secret, -- It is abstinence. -- I say
abstinence; the most effectual cure in all diseases: but by the word
abstinence, I do not mean a mere negative remedy, as if fasting was to do all
the work, by suffering nature, at her leisure, to attenuate the fluids, resolve
the obstructions, and digest off the obstructing matter: nothing like it; for
we have given you the form of this medicine above, told you the ingredients,
and whereof this excellent remedy, so assisting to nature, is composed; and
must leave yourself to judge of its efficacy and operation.

However to make some pertinent reflections upon this subject, I beg leave to
observe, that after the whole quantity of chyle is digested into the stomach,
and conveyed into the intestines; thereupon the fasting saliva, the lubricating
lymph of the gula, the fluids secreted from the fine velvet coat of the
stomach, are all continually separating from their respective glands;
continually digesting in the stomach, and continually flowing over the pylorus
into the duodenum; there they are mixed, united, and intimately combined with
the pancreatic and bilious juices, and which, by their conflicts, tumults, and
conquasations, produce a most fine, thin, attenuated fluid: this fluid being
admitted into the lacteals, resolves the obstructions of the mesentery glands,
every where seated near the lacteals; attenuates, dissolves, and liquifies any
furr or coagulum, that may adhere, or stick to the sides of the lacteals, and
prevent its entrance into the receptaculum chili, or ductus thoracicus. In a
word, this fine, volatile, saline fluid, from the various secretions mixing
with it, becomes a universal dissolvent; and is intended and separated by
nature, to break the cohesions of the obstruent matter, that may cleave to the
coats of the vessels in every part of the body: and from this natural
observation, we may learn the great benefit of frequent fasting, not only to
preserve the body under a sound state of health, but also how mightily
serviceable it is in relieving diverse diseases; and how efficacious it is in
the gravel, stone, rheumatism, and diverse other diseases, that have
obstructions for their parent.

You see now, that, after all, we discover this to be no imaginary medicine,
formed upon the negative principles of fasting and abstinence, as if they were
to do all the work themselves, but on the solid grounds of the fasting saliva,
combined and united with the liquors secreted from almost every organ of the
body, whereby it is empowered to dissolve all unfriendly cohesions in the blood
and animal juices; force open, break down, and unbind those stubborn
obstructions, that impede the motion of the fluids, in their first passages; so
that there is scarce a nerve, vein, artery, or gland, in the whole animal
economy, but what must necessarily receive some benefit, from the daily
operation of this fine, liquid animal soap.

SECT. IX. Of the air, diet, exercise, and other requisitorial rules, necessary
to be observed, in order to facilitate the operation of this liquid soap, I
esteem a most invaluable remedy.
THUS we have discovered the operation of this noble and most sovereign remedy
in the scurvy, gravel, rheumatism, and diverse other diseases; which leads me to
speak a few things of the air, diet and exercise, necessary to be observed, in
order to facilitate the relief it gives in the most stubborn diseases.

But before we can expect to accomplish all these fine effects, enumerated in
the foregoing pages, I hold it highly necessary that a proper air, a regular
diet, and a well adjusted exercise, should be enjoined the patient: as to the
air, which is the first thing we ought to consult about, I judge it highly
necessary, that the patient should sojourn in a soft, free, open air, on a
ground rather rising; in a place free from woods, sens, or high mountains, that
may intercept the pure, balsamic properties of this healthful, enlivening
fluid, the air. By all means, if he is subject to either the gravel, asthma or
rheumatism, let him avoid living in great cities, which are pernicious to those
incident to the foregoing diseases; and therefore my advice is, that he take
the medicine in the country, if possible, as the goodness of the air will
assist its operation: but if his business calls him to the city, and he cannot
possibly stay in the country, he must not, by any means intermit the medicine,
but pursue its use a month or six weeks in the best manner he can, without
intermission; from which, in most diseases, that are lodged within the compass
of the circulation, he will receive considerable benefit.

Having done with the air, the next thing to be observed, is the patient's
diet: and I choose to begin with his diet in the morning, because there are
several nice circumstances, necessary to be adjusted, in order to facilitate
the operation of this sovereign remedy, we call the fasting spittle. And
therefore I advise the patient to eat his breakfast about ten of the clock in
the morning: and, under a fit of the gravel, I would advise him to drink three
or four dishes of tea, made either of mallow flowers, or, if the season does
not permit them to be had, let him use the mallow leaves, sweetened with honey,
with a slice or two of bread and butter, as the best breakfast he can have.

An hour or two after breakfast, let him exercise; and of all exercises, I
prefer that on horseback; but if the weather happen to be hazy, and not
promising, he may then, for two or three hours, take the air in a chariot,
close chaise, or coach. When I speak of exercise, I always suppose the patient
is entirely free from any pains of the gravel or stone.

After his return, if he finds himself refreshed, he may take a walk in the
garden, or about the house, or busy himself for the remainder of the time
between that and dinner, in his study: but above all things, let him take care
he does not habituate himself to drink wine, or any thing that is strong, in
the morning, before dinner; for many, by that means, have destroyed their
appetite, and for ever after spoiled a good digestion; so that whatever they
have eat at noon, has turned to wind and crudities, and subjected them to
severe cholic pains.

When he sits down to his great meal, or dinner, I permit him to eat of every
thing, so it be not too salt; for salts, of all kinds, are undoubtedly
ingredients of both the gravel, stone, and rheumatism; and these ingredients
furnish out the cause of frequent fits in these diseases: and therefore the
young, of all animals, are to be chosen, as they consist of the lightest salts,
and such as are easily dissipable by urine, sweat, and perspiration; and seldom
concrete, as they are not endued with that degree of attraction as are the
salts of older animals.

Between dinner and supper, I would not advise him to touch any thing, unless a
dish or two of tea or coffee, with a slice of bread and butter; for the great
point is so to order the air, diet, and exercise, as to be able to bring all
the motions of the animal organs to a due temperature, and then we shall
greatly promote the operation of this salutary remedy, and render its virtues
highly efficacious.

His supper I would advise him to take about six or seven in the evening, and
by no means later; and as milk is phlegmatic, so, if he pleases, he may take
half a pint, or more, of white wine whey, with a sea biscuit; or, if it pleases
him better, he may take a slice of new cheese, and drink a few glasses of old
port, or a pint of fine, soft ale, with about six ounces of the crust of a
French role or minchet.

After these things are done, I advise him not to eat any thing till about six,
seven, or eight of the clock the next morning, which is the time of his taking
the grand medicine: this consists of half an ounce or six drachms of the
fasting saliva, pressed or squeesed out from the salival glands into the mouth,
by the pressure of the jaws and teeth, in eating an ounce or ten drachms of the
crust or heel of a loaf made of the purest wheat; for the crust occasions so
much the greater pressure from the teeth, whose greater force occasions a
greater discharge of this salival fluid, and which will answer all the purposes
we declared in the preceding sections.

And, though of late years, we have heard of mighty feats done by crude
mercury, tar water, and other quack medicines, sold up and down the town,
supported by royal patents, and dignified titles: yet I question, whether in
the gravel, stone, and rheumatism, there ever yet was discovered, or at this
time is discovered, or any remedy, in future times, shall be discovered, that
in its virtues and efficacy, comes up to this invaluable medicine, I now offer
for the benefit of mankind: and the patient may assure himself, that if these
rules and cautions and some others, that does not properly come within the
narrow compass, I here have set myself, are but rightly pursued, they will not
only mightily contribute to preserve him in health, but also be extremely
efficacious, to restore this invaluable blessing, whenever overpowered by the
force of a disease: and in all these the patient will find little occasion for
taking of medicines, provided he is observing of these rules, and careful,
every day, to adjust his air, diet, and exercise.

Now, though I will not pretend, like our modern quacks, to cry up this
medicine, as a universal catholicon, and promise the world, that it will never
fail to cure all diseases it is applied to; yet I will boldly venture to
declare a solemn truth, that no quack can, with justice, affirm in favor of
his medicine: that it never was known to do any harm to man, woman, or child,
notwithstanding the many thousands of people, that have experimentally made use
of it.

FINIS.
Explanation of the abstruse Terms used in the foregoing Treatise.
RECREMENT, a superfluous matter in the blood or body. Secretion, the
separating one fluid from another. Alimentary, nourishing. Fluid, a ready
flowing. Maceration, the digestion of certain ingredients. Attenuation, a
thinning any thing. Liquidation, making moist or clear. Chyle, a whitish juice
into which the food is converted by digestion. Fusion, a melting or solution.
Folliculi, the gallbladder. Excrementitious, of the nature of excrements.
Excretion, a putting forth of the excrements. Saliva, fasting spittle. Bile,
the gall. Concrete, a body made up of different principles. Urinary, something
belonging to the urine. Gula, the throat. Complex, compounded of many parts.
Tube, a long hollow pipe. Viscous, clammy. Conglobated, heaped or gathered
round together. Perforation, an erosion or eating of the bones through them.
Mastication, a breaking of food in one's mouth with the teeth. Oleose, oily.
Penetrant, sharp. Abstersive, medicines used to clear the skin. Unctious,
greasy. Adheasive, a sticking close together. OEsophagus, the gullet. Pulpous,
full of substance. Mensiruum, a dissolving liquor. Glandular, something
compounded of glands. Cohesion, a sticking together. Stomachic, good for the
stomach. Spumose, full of froth. Saline, brinish. Lubricating, smooth. Lymph, a
clear humor. Duodenum, the first of the thin guts. Conquassation, a dashing or
breaking to pieces. Ramification, a collection of small branches issuing out of
large ones. Vena porta, the vein which enters the liver through two eminences
called portae, i. e. gates. Mesentereck, belonging to a membranous part situate
in the middle of the belly. Concave, hollow on the inside. Lobe, a body turned
of a roundish shape. Unequal, bending down on every side. Detersive, of a
cleansing nature. Colliquative, a profuse sweating. Accrimonious, full of
sharpness. Jejunum, the second part of the intestines. Insertion, a grafting
in. Muriatick, briny.

