THE FOOL of Quality, OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY EARL of Moreland.

VOL. III.

By Mr. BROOK.

DUBLIN: Printed for the AUTHOR, By DILLON CHAMBERLAIN, in Dame Street, facing
Fownes's Street. MDCCLXVIII.

THE FOOL of Quality, OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY EARL of Moreland.
CHAP. XIII. STORY of the Hon. Mr. CLINTON.
THE WORLD, my lovely Cousin, the World is to Man as his Temper or Complexion.
The Mind constitutes its own Prosperity and Adversity; Winter presents no Cloud
to a cheerful Spirit, neither can Summer find Sunshine for the Spirit that is
in a State of Dejection. In my Youth every Object presented me with Happiness;
but alas, the Time came when the Universe appeared as a Vault wherein Joy was
entombed, and the Sun himself but as a Lamp that served to show the Gloom and
the Horrors around me.

As my Father and Mother died before I was taken from Nurse, I knew none of
those parental Tendernesses and Endearments that serve to humanize the Soul and
give it the first Impressions of social Attachment; neither were those
Sweetnesses in any Degree supplied to me by the Behavior of an imperious
Brother or of a magisterial Guardian. As I was naturally, however, of a
benevolent Cast, I sought for those Affections and Amities among Strangers
which I had not found in the Bosoms or Faces of Kin.

I pass over the immaterial Parts of my Life at School and College, and hasten
to the more important Period of my Apprenticeship.

Your Father bound me to Mr. Golding, a very wealthy and eminent Merchant, who
lived over against the Exchange. He had been some Years a Widower, and his only
Child, a Daughter, was then at the Boarding-school.

Mr. Golding, with a plain Understanding, was a Man of exceeding Honesty and a
susceptible Heart. At first Sight he conceived a partial Affection for me,
whereof he gave me very frequent and very tender Proofs; and, as he stood to me
in the Place of a Patron and a Father, I felt for him all the Fondness and
Attachment of a Child.

In the fourth Year of my Apprenticeship he called me to his Closet, and,
taking me kindly by the Hand, Harry, says he, I love you, your Interest lies
near my Heart, for though you are not the begotten of my Body you are the Child
of my Affections -- be quiet, Harry -- let me speak -- I have to talk to you of
Matters of Consequence. -- I went Yesterday to your Uncle Goodall to know how
Accounts stood between ye -- though he is but a cold Kinsman he is a very
faithful Guardian -- He has just married a very lovely young Woman, and I would
have you go and pay your Compliments to them on the Occasion. -- Your Uncle has
laid out your little Penny to good Advantage, and your 12000 l. is now nearly
doubled -- And now Harry, as your Father did not behave like a Father toward
you, in the Dividend which he made between you and your Brother, I propose in
some Measure to supply his Place, and I make you a Present of this Note of
12000 l. which added to your little Patrimony may enable you -- O, Sir! I
cried. -- Be quiet, Child, I say again, till you find whether or no you shall
have Reason to thank me. -- I am growing old, my Harry, and by a long Course of
Industry have earned a kind of Title to some little Rest; I would therefore
gladly make a Composition between your Application and my Repose. I shall not
be so often in the Counting House as usual. I propose to take you into
immediate Partnership. But as I also propose that you shall be at three fourths
of the Trouble, it is but just that I should offer you a proportionable
Advantage. -- Now as my Capital, Harry, is more than five times as much as
yours of 36000 l. I offer to your Acceptance a full Moiety of all the Profits
in Recompense of your extraordinary Attention and Application. -- Hear me out
-- I do not think that I shall lose by this Bargain. The Affairs of Potiphar
prospered under the Hands of Young Joseph; and I believe that you, also, are a
Favorite of your God.

I could not speak. The good Man perceived my Oppression, and catching me in
his Arms, and pressing me to his Bosom, he shed a silent Tear of Satisfaction
upon me, and withdrew without saying another Word.

For several Days following Mr. Golding was employed in advising his
Correspondents that I was now become his Partner and equal in Trade, and I was
wearied with Congratulations on my being one of the principal Merchants in
London before I had attained my twentieth Year.

The Obligations and Advantages which this good Man thus delighted to heap upon
me, incited me to double Application and Sagacity, and all the Eyes of Argus
were opened within me for superintending and guarding the Interests of my
Patron.

I have often thought it somewhat romantic that I should win both my Wives by a
matter of Adventure, so that their Partiality in my Favor ought perhaps to be
ascribed to a Sentiment of Gratitude rather than to any liking which they might
take to my Person.

On a Day in Summer I rode to Barnet to settle Accounts with Mr. Fradgil, a
Correspondent of my Master's, who was said to be indisposed at his Country
Seat. As I approached the Town, I observed an elderly Gentlewoman walking
leisurely toward me, attended by an orderly Train of young Maidens. I observed,
at the same Time, two Men in glistering Apparel who hastily followed, and,
coming quickly up, put all the Females to a Stand, and caused them to gather in
a Group, as for mutual Defense. One of the Men, however, no way daunted by the
Opposition of so numerous a Company, rudely caught one of the elder Misses in
his Arms, and repeatedly kissing her, thrust his Hand into her Bosom. Mean
while the young Lady shrieked and cried aloud for Help, when, riding suddenly
up, I struck the Ruffian to the Ground, with the Heavy End of my Whip. His
Companion hereupon drew his Sword and turned upon me, but, pushing my Horse at
him, I cast him also to the Earth, then alighting, I broke their Swords, and,
leaving my Gallants in a Plight not suddenly to be dreaded, I led my Horse by
the Bridle till I saw my Fair Wards all safe to their Dwelling.

Some Months after this Incident, Mr. Golding called me aside. Harry, says he,
my Daughter is now drawing to Woman's Estate, and should learn something more
substantial than Needle Work, and Dancing, and Harpsichords, and frenchified
Phrases. I therefore propose to take her Home where, by the Help of our Cook
and Housekeeper, she may be taught how to make a Sunday's Pudding, and to
superintend a Family.

I regularly go to see her, once in every Month, accompanied by some Male or
Female Acquaintance, but never called you to be of the Party, as we could not
so conveniently be both from Home.

My Child, though a plain Girl, is very dutiful and good-natured. Her Fortune,
as you are sensible, will entitle her to the first Lord of the Land; yet, I
know not how it is, I would rather that my Girl should be happy than great. I
do not wish to have her a fine titled Dame. I would rather, I say, see her
married to some honest and tenderhearted Man, whose Love might induce him to
domesticate with her, and to live peaceably and pleasingly within his
Family-circle, than to see her mated with a Prince of the Blood.

Now, Harry, as this Affair, of all Affairs, sits nearest at my Heart, it is
greatly in your Power to oblige me beyond Expression. On my Daughter's coming
home, I conclude we shall be beset by a Number of Courtiers; such an Argo, when
freighted with such a Fleece, will unquestionably be held in Chase by many a
Pirate. Wherefore, my Son, I would have you keep a sharp and inquisitive Eye
about you, and to take good Note, of the Manners and Dispositions of such
Suitors as my Daughter shall appear to regard. As also to enquire minutely into
their Circumstances and Characters. Your Vigilance and Penetration may save us
from Ruin. Should my Child be made Unhappy, your Friend must be most miserable.
But I depend, my dear Harry, that while I live you will prove a kind Brother to
her; and that you will prove a Father to her in case of my Mortality. Here the
good Man, no longer able to restrain his Passion, put his Handkerchief to his
Eyes and quitted the Chamber.

Within a few Days Mr. Golding set out, accompanied by a Number of his
City-Friends, in order to conduct his Daughter Home. On their Arrival, I was
deeply engaged in the Counting House, and it was near the Time for Supper
before I could attend. As I entered, Mr. Golding presented me to his Daughter,
saying, this, my Dear, is Mr. Clinton, my Partner, my Friend, my Son, and your
Brother. Hereupon Miss Golding colored, and drawing back as I approached to
salute her, if I am not mistaken, Sir, says she, he is something more to us
than all you have mentioned, it would ill become me to forget that he is the
Deliverer of your Daughter. -- Your Deliverer, my dear Matty! how, where, when?
-- Why pray, Papa, did Mr. Clinton never tell you of his Adventure at Barnet?
-- No indeed, my Dear. -- It is not every one who would be silent, Papa, where
so much was to be said to their own Honor. I remember that your Knights in
Romance, when too modest to boast of their own Achievements, used to permit
some Friend or Squire to deliver down to Posterity the History of their
Adventures, and I take the Liberty to be Squire to Mr. Clinton on the like
Occasion.

Here Miss Golding began to give a Narrative of the Matter already recited, but
in Terms of high Phrase and aggravated Encomium. While all abashed and
confused, I withdrew, saying, that I did not remember of any Knights who staid
to hear their own Story.

In Truth I was much surprised to hear Miss Golding mention the Adventure of
Barnet, for I did not recollect that I had ever seen her, and had taken much
more Note of two or three other Misses than I had of her.

Being resummoned to Supper, Mr. Golding met me as I entered and clasping me in
his Arms, O my Harry, he cried, how wonderfully gracious has God been to me in
sending my best Friend to the Rescue of my only Child, in sending at so
critical and very fearful a Conjuncture, perhaps the only Person who had either
Gallantry or Humanity enough to preserve her. Indeed Sir, I replied, you owe me
nothing; I did not even know that the Lady was your Daughter, and I could not
pride myself, in any Degree, on an Action which I thought incumbent on every
Man to perform.

During Supper Miss Golding was very cheerful and agreeable. Her Face indeed
could not be numbered among the Beauties, but her Person was Grace and Majesty
though in Miniature, her Conversation was pleasing, and when she sung or
touched her Instruments, for she was Mistress of several, her Mien and Motions
were Music, each Note seemed a Sentiment, and we felt her Fingers playing on
the Chordage of our Heart.

For the first three Months after Miss Golding's Arrival, all was crowding and
Gaiety, Assembly and Festival at our House. She was as a Magnet that drew and
grouped all the Peerage and Gentry of England together. But as Business
happened to be very throng at that Season, I was not at Liberty to partake of
their Amusements, and I resigned to Mr. Golding the Commission which he had
given me respecting the Parties who declared themselves Suitors.

As those Suitors, in a daily and numerous Succession, applied to Mr. Golding
for his Consent, his general Answer was that his Good-liking was inseparable
from that of his only Child, that he would, if they pleased, consult her on the
Occasion, and faithfully report to them her Approbation or Dissent. In the like
conclusive Manner, when Mr. Golding repeatedly questioned his Daughter, she
would take his Hand between here is and kissing it, say, O no, my dear Papa, this
is not the Man.

One Day, as I sat alone in the Counting-Room, Miss Golding entered and
presented me with an Order from her Father for L250. And pray Madam, said I,
why this Ceremony, this Matter of Form? sure Miss Golding may, at any Time,
command twenty Times this Sum without any Order save her own Intimation. --
Indeed! are you serious Mr. Clinton? I am very proud I assure you to have so
much Credit with you -- But, Mr. Harry, how comes it to pass that we have so
little of your Company? -- Your Father's Business, Madam, deprives me of the
Pleasure I should otherwise have in attending you. -- Again, Sir, I am quite
proud that it is your Attention to my Father, alone, which prevents your having
any Attention for his Daughter -- so saying, she vanished.

Immediately I was struck with a Glimpse of some uncommon Meaning in the Words
and Behavior of Miss Golding, but as I never had looked toward the Way of her
Affections, I passed it lightly over as some Matter of Whim or Caprice in the
Sex.

Among the brilliant Concourse of Suitors that frequented our House there was
one Mr. Spelling, a young Gentleman highly accomplished in his Person and
Manners, and of a most amiable Countenance and Disposition. His Father, like
Miss Golding's, had been a Merchant, and like him too had amassed an excessive
Fortune. As he was modest, as I may say, to a Degree of Shamefacedness, he did
not declare himself a Lover, till nearly the whole Multitude of Competitors had
been discarded. Then, with a blushing Diffidence, he avowed his Passion to Mr.
Golding, and earnestly besought his Consent and Intercession in his Favor. You
have not only my Consent, replied the good old Man, you have also my best
Wishes, and shall have my best Endeavors for your Success: However I must warn
you at the same Time, Mr. Spelling, that I will not do any Violence to the
Inclinations of my Child, although there are not two in the World whom I would
prefer to you.

I was writing in my Closet when Mr. Golding came in, with an anxious
Importance in his Countenance, and told me what passed between him and Mr.
Spelling, and asked if I did not approve the Match. I do not know Sir, said I,
that Man in England who is so deserving of your Daughter as Mr. Spelling. Then,
my dear Harry, I have a Commission to give you, Matilda has a great Respect for
your Judgment, I beseech you to make Use of your Influence with her, and to
exert all your Oratory in Behalf of this young Man. -- But, Sir, will not Miss
Matilda look on this as a Matter of high Presumption in one who has no Manner
of Right to advise. -- No Matter, you may tell her that you did it by my Desire
and that we are both of a Mind with Regard to this Business. -- Well Sir, said
I, since you are bent upon it, I will obey you, but it is the first Time that
ever I obeyed you with Reluctance.

Soon after Mr. Golding left me his Daughter entered, with a Countenance
visibly inquiet and confused. My Papa, Sir, said she, informs me that you have
a Business of Consequence to impart to me. -- I hope, Madam, pray be seated a
Moment. -- Indeed, my dear Miss Golding, this Office was not of my choosing, and
I hope, I say, you will be so good as to pardon my Presumption, in
Consideration of my acting by your Father's Command. -- You alarm me, Mr.
Clinton, pray proceed. -- Mr. Spelling, Madam, at length has had the Assurance
to declare his Passion for you. Your Father highly approves of Mr. Spelling for
a Son-in-law; and indeed, Miss, might I dare to speak my Judgment, I know not
where you could choose to better Advantage. -- If that is the Case, Mr. Harry, I
wish that I also could be of the same Opinion -- And are you not, Madam? what
Objection can you form, what Exception can you have to my Friend Spelling? -- A
very simple one, Sir, and no better than this, that he is not the Man who can
make me happy. -- I am sorry for it, my dear Miss Golding, I am truly sorry for
it; were I to pick from Mankind, were I to choose throughout the World, if any
One can deserve you, it is surely this same Spelling -- And yet, Mr. Harry, I
remember to have seen the Man who, in every Grace and Merit, is infinitely
preferable to your Favorite Spelling. -- Where, when, my dear Miss? -- When I
am brought to the Torture, I may possibly be under the necessity of confessing.
-- Pardon, pardon, sweet Madam! I meant no Offense; and yet I wish to Heaven I
knew -- But that you never shall know, Mr. Harry. -- Pray then, Madam, if I may
adventure on one Question more, has the Party so highly favored any Knowledge
of his own Happiness? -- I hope not, Mr. Harry, but of what Advantage could his
Knowledge prove to me I beseech you? can you suppose that such a Person as I
have described could deign to look with Favor on such a one as I am? -- I do
not believe, Madam, that the Man is in England who would not think himself
highly honored, highly blessed by your Hand. But then are you assured, Miss,
that this Man is worthy of it? -- Ah, there lies my Misfortune! he is too
worthy, too noble, too accomplished, too lovely, too much every thing for my
Wishes to leave any thing to my Hopes. And now, Mr. Harry, that I have
entrusted you with my Secret, I hope you will not betray my Confidence and
reveal it to my Papa. I rather trust and request that you will use some other
Color for reconciling him to my Refusal of Mr. Spelling. And to make you some
Amends for the Mortification I have given you, by rejecting your Advocation in
Behalf of your Friend, I here engage never to marry without your Approbation,
though I do not promise, Sir, that you shall dictate to my Choice. There is one
Thing further, Mr. Clinton, in which you may oblige me, it is to prevail on my
Father to dismiss these Assemblies and Revels that pester our House; indeed,
they never were to my Taste, though, by their Novelty, at first they might have
helped to amuse a little Matter of Melancholy that hung upon my Mind, but now
they are grown quite insufferable to me. -- Here her Eye began to fill, and,
heaving a gentle Sigh, she curtsied and withdrew.

Immediately my Heart was softened and affected, I saw the Child of my Friend
and Patron, the one in whom his Hopes and Fortunes and very Life were wrapped up,
I saw that she was unhappy, that she was very unhappy, at a Time that she had
forbidden me to attempt her Relief, though I would gladly have parted with Half
my Fortune to have been enabled to give the Object of her Wishes to her Arms.

In the mean while, my dearest Madam, it was the farthest of all Things from
entering into my Imagination, that I was the very Person who sat so near her
Heart. I daily saw the loveliest Youths and titled Chiefs of the Land attendant
on her Words and Smiles, and humbly suing for her Favor. I saw also that her
immense Fortune and rare Attractions justly entitled her to their Homage, and I
was neither vain enough nor base enough to attempt a Competition.

As in myself I was wholly devoid of Passion, I had neither Eyes nor
Apprehension for the Discernment of hers. Though I had often seen, I seldom had
any Kind of Converse with her, and where the Head is engaged and in a Manner
absorbed by Business, there is neither Leisure nor Room for Love to enter the
Heart. On the other Hand, a Person affected can instantly penetrate the Bosom
of the Party beloved, and there discern a vacant and insensible Heart as
legibly as a Priest of Isis could decypher Hieroglyphics.

One Day, as I happened to pass near her Antichamber, I heard the warble, as I
thought, of distant and aetherial Music. I approached towered the Sound, the
Door was on the jar, and, gently opening it, I entered and stood behind her
unperceived. She sat and sang to her Lute. The Words were Shakespeare's, but
sweetly set by herself. They expressed that Passage in his Play of Twelfth
Night, where it is said of Viola, She never told her Love, but let Concealment,
like a Worm in the Bud, feed on her damask Cheek, etc. Ah, how affectingly did
her Instrument answer to her Voice, while she gently tuned her Sighs to the
soft and melancholy Cadences. My Breast was so swelled by a Mixture of Anguish
and Compassion that I could no longer wholly suppress a rising Groan. Hereat
she started and turned, and rising suddenly, her Eyes shot Fire, and her Face
glowed with Indignation and Resentment. But, observing the Tears that still
trickled down my Cheeks, her Countenance was as suddenly changed into Kindness,
and she cast upon me a Look of inexpressible Complacence.

Ah, Mr. Harry, says she, I see, I see that you have a gentle and a kindred
Kind of Heart, and that, if ever you happen to love, you will love with great
Tenderness. -- Have you ever loved, Mr. Harry? -- Indeed, Madam, I cannot say,
my Commerce has been very little among the Ladies. If I met Love on my Way, or
even found it in my Heart, perhaps I should not rightly know what to make of
it. But, my Matilda, my charming Sister, (your Father has honored me with the
Privilege of calling you by that dear that tender Name) why will you not
entrust your best your truest Friend with the Secret of your Disquiet? whoever
the Object of your Esteem may be, I here solemnly engage, at the Risque of my
Life and the Loss of my Fortune, to bring him voluntarily to pay his Vows at
your Feet. O, my Sister, I would to Heaven that he had now been present, as I
have been present, to have his Soul melted and minted as mine has been; his
Heart must have been harder than the Stones of Thebes, if you did not attract
it and move it, at pleasure, by the Touch of those Fingers and the Bewitchment
of those Accents. -- Ah, you Flatterer, she cried, with a Voice tuned to
Harmony, and a Face formed of Smiles, you almost tempt me to tell you what, for
the World, I would not wish that any one in the World should know. But, I must
snatch myself from the Danger. -- So saying, and casting at me a vanishing
Glance, she was out of sight in a twinkling.

As our Suitors had now been dismissed and our Assemblies discontinued, Miss
Golding seemed quite pleased with our Family-abridgment; it gave us frequent
Occasions of being together; I endeavored, by a Variety of tender Offices and
little Amusements, to dispell or divert the Melancholy under which I thought
she labored; I was greatly surprised at my own Success on this Occasion; her
Cheerfulness returned; she discovered new and striking Graces in her Manners
and Conversation, and in a little Time did not appear to want any Consolation.

One Day, being on the Exchange, I was accosted by a Jew, who told me that he
wanted a Sum of Money and would either sell or pawn to me a Jewel of great
Price. It was a Solitaire composed of Oriental Pearls, with a Diamond of the
first Water and Magnitude in the Center: After some chaffering, we agreed for
three thousand Pieces, and I put it into my Pocketbook. As my Business detained
me on the Exchange till it was late, I dined with two or three Acquaintance at
the Chop-House and did not return till the Evening was advanced.

On my entering, I was told that Mr. Golding was abroad, and that Miss Matilda
had just ordered Coffee for some Ladies in her Dressing Room. Immediately I ran
up and opened the Door without Ceremony, but was instantly struck with the Look
which she turned towered me, a Look that at once intimated Dejection and
Disgust. During Coffee, I endeavored to behave with my usual Unconcern, but
found it impossible to avoid sharing in that Constraint under which Miss
Matilda most evidently labored; in short, a gloomy Stiffness spread through
the whole Conversation, and I believe no two Persons in Company were rightly
satisfied with each other.

As soon as the Cups were removed, the fair Visitants got up; and, as Miss
Golding pressed them to stay, in a Manner that rather denoted her Desire of
their Absence; they feigned a further Engagement, and very formally took their
Leaves.

When she had seen them to the Door, and that I had handed them into their
Carriages, she turned without speaking to me and withdrew toward her own
Apartment. I followed, and, as she was about to enter, my Matilda, my Sister,
said I, with a Voice of cordial Tenderness, do your Harry the Favor to accept
this Trifle, as an Instance of my Regard for the Daughter of my Friend, for the
dearest Object, upon Earth, of my Esteem and Affection. So saying I presented
her with my recent Purchase; she did not, however, even deign to look at it;
but, surveying me from Head to Foot with an Eye of strange Passions, she took
it and dashed it against the Floor, and, rushing into her Chamber, she shut to
the Door upon me, without speaking a Word.

I stood in an inconceivable Astonishment and Concern. In vain I searched and
researched my Memory for the Recollection of some Instance wherein I might have
offended her; but, not presuming to obtrude upon her in order to question or
expostulate with her, I retreated to my Apartment under the deepest Dejection
of Spirits.

Mr. Golding did not return till it was late in the Evening. He immediately sent
for me. Harry, says he, what is the Matter, has any Thing happened amiss? I
never saw you look so discomposed. Indeed, Sir, I am not as well as I could
wish. Bless me, we had better send for a Doctor. No, Sir, I am in Hopes it will
soon be over. -- Where is Matilda? -- In her Chamber, Sir, I believe. -- He
then called Mrs. Susan, and bid her tell Matilda that he desired to speak with
her, but she answered that her Mistress was gone to Bed indisposed, and
requested that she might not be disturbed.

Supper being served up, we sat down in Silence, and as neither of us offered
to taste a Bit, I rose, wished Mr. Golding a good Night, and retired to my
Chamber.

After a sleepless Night, my Servant entered in a visible Alarm, and told me
that Miss Golding was extremely ill, and that almost all the Physicians in
London had been sent for.

Very unhappy were many succeeding Days. I saw my Friend, my Father, the Man I
loved above the World, I saw him in a Depth of Distress that bordered on
Distraction, and I found my Heart wrung with inexpressible Anguish.

Though I was constant in my Enquiries after Miss Golding, yet I purposely
avoided appearing in her Presence, lest the Sight of one so obnoxious should
add to her Distemper. At length the good old Man came to me, wringing his
Hands, will you not go Harry, says he, will you not go and see Matilda before
she dies? The Doctors tell me they have tried all the Powers of Medicine, but
that they do not yet know what to make of her Sickness.

My dear Sir, said I, it is then no longer time to conceal from you what I know
or conjecture concerning this Matter. Miss Matilda, herself, entrusted me with
the Secret, but under the strictest Injunctions of Silence; the Extremity of
her Case, however, ought to dispense with all such Engagements. Your Daughter
loves, Sir, she loves with Passion, but who the Object of her Affections is I
cannot imagine. Let it be your Part to discover what she so industriously hides
from the World, she will refuse nothing to the Authority or rather to the
Tenderness of such a Parent.

Here Mr. Golding left me, but returned in about an Hour. His whole Frame
seemed to labor with something extraordinary. You were right, Harry, he cried,
you were right in your Conjectures; my Prayers and my Tears have at length
prevailed, with difficulty I have wrung the Secret from her. O, my Son! it is
greatly in your Power to befriend us. Would you not do something for the Relief
of a Family who dote upon you as we do? would you not do something for your old
Friend who loves you as fondly as ever Father loved a Child? Something for you,
Sir, said I, yes, every thing, all things that are possible to be done. But,
pray Sir, do I know the Party? You do, Harry, you do, he cried, for, as the
Prophet said unto David, thou art the Man.

Me, Sir! I exclaimed, impossible! she cannot bear my Sight, she hates me, she
detests the Ground I go upon. Not so, said he, not so, she loves the very Dust
upon which you tread. Something surely is due in Mitigation of the Calamities
which you have occasioned. We lie at your Mercy, Mr. Clinton, my precious
Daughter and myself, it is yours to bid us live or die at your Pleasure, to
crush us into nothing, or to restore us to Existence, to Health, to Enjoyment.
Will it hurt you, my Son, to do us these great Benefits? is it a Matter
grievous to you to give Happiness to those, whose Excess of Love for you is
their only Misfortune? A princely Fortune attends you. We and all we have are
yours, Mr. Clinton. We are desirous of depending on your Bounty alone. Let the
Extremeness of my Daughter's Affection for you excite something more kindly
than Hatred in your Breast. If not for her Sake, yet for mine, my beloved
Harry, let me beseech you to constrain yourself before her, to affect some
little Tenderness, some Appearance of Regard, that may revive her, awhile at
least, from the deplorable State under which she languishes.

While he spoke I was agitated by unutterable Emotions, and he might have
proceeded much further, before I should have had the Power to reply. At length
I cast myself on my Knee, and catching his Hand to my Bosom, Ah, my Friend, my
Father, my dear Father, I cried, am I then no better than a Barbarian in your
Sight? To me would you impute such Sentiments of Cruelty and Ingratitude? Take
my Hand, Sir, take my Heart, dispose of them as you please. All that I have,
all that I am is yours and your Daughter's, without any kind of Reserve for any
other Person breathing.

The good Man caught me in his Arms, and pressed me to his Breast in a long and
speechless Ecstasy; then, taking me by the Hand, he led me in Silence to his
Daughter's Apartment.

As we entered she turned her Eyes toward the Door, and her pale and languid
Countenance was straight suffused with a short lived Red. I was so affected by
the Condition in which I beheld her, that I scarcely was able to reach her
Bedside, where kneeling down I gently took one of her Hands, and pressing it
between mine, I bathed it in a silent Shower of Tears.

Ah, my Papa, she faintly cried, I fear you have betrayed me, Mr. Harry is
certainly informed of my Weakness. I am informed, said I, my lovely, my
all-beloved Sister, I am informed that I am permitted to hope for a Happiness
that is infinitely above my Merit, but it shall be the delightful Business of
my Life to deserve it.

My Dear, said Mr. Golding, I perceive you are something fluster'd, your
Constitution is too weak for such Emotions as these. For the present your
Brother Harry must leave you. Tomorrow, I trust, you will be better able to
support our Company.

Hereupon I took her Hand, and, impressing upon it a tender and warm Kiss, I
just ventured to look up, and saw her fine Eyes suffused with a glittering
Tear, and her Countenance bent upon me with a Look of indescribable Sweetness
and Delight; but Mr. Golding, to prevent the Effects of too tender a Scene,
instantly took me by the Arm and led me away.

As he perceived that my Spirits had been much disturbed, he ordered a Bottle
to his own Chamber, and told me that he requested some further Converse with
me. As soon as we had taken our Seats, he looked earnestly upon me, then seized
me by the Hand, and looked at me again. But suddenly getting up, he turned and
stepped to the Window, and, breaking into Tears, he there wept and sobbed for
good Part of an Hour.

As soon as he was somewhat composed, he resumed his Seat. Mr. Clinton, says
he, are you really sincere in your Professions with Respect to my Daughter?
Shall I be rid of my Doubts at once? May I venture to ask you a Question, on
which my own Life as well as that of my Child may depend? Should it please the
Almighty to raise her from her present Bed of Sickness, is it actually your
Intention to make her your Wife?

Here, I demanded with some Warmth, is that a Question, Sir, at this time? What
Reason have I given you to suspect my Honor or my Truth? -- I do not suspect
you, my Harry, I do not suspect you; I know you would not deceive me, but you
may have deceived yourself. Your Nature is tender and full of Pity; and, in the
deplorable Estate in which my Girl lies, your great Compassion may have easily
been mistaken by you for Love. Your Friendship for me also may have helped to
impose upon you, and you may have construed your Regard and Attachment to the
Father into a Sentiment of Tenderness and Affection for the Child. But O, my
Harry, should any other Woman be preferable in your Eyes; or should it not be
in my Girl's Power to win and wear your Affections, I shall then have been
instrumental in making you wretched, and my Heart may as well be broken the one
way as the other. -- No, my Father, no. I have no foreign Dalilahs, no secret
Amors, no Pleasures that shun the Light. My Heart is a virgin Heart, and my
Matilda possesses it without a Rival.

From the Time that I was sensible of my Father's Partiality, a little Matter
of Ambition, whether laudable or otherwise, incited me to attempt a Distinction
that would raise me toward a Level with an only Brother who looked down with
Neglect and Contempt upon me. Thence I became indefatigable in my Studies at
School and College, as also in my Application under you, Sir, during the first
Years of my Apprenticeship, and this left me no Manner of Leisure for female
Attachments. Indeed I dreaded the Appearance of any Advances from the Sex, and
turned from them as I would from so many Gins or Pit-falls purposely dug for my
Destruction. My Conversation, Sir, has been very little among the Fair, and,
excepting my natural Propensity to the Sex, I never, till very lately,
conceived a Liking for any Woman. In Truth, my dear Father, that Lady is not
alive whom my Judgment or Inclinations would prefer to your Matilda. You need
not fear my being wretched, I think myself most happy in her Affections.

Then, said he, I pronounce her the happiest of Women. And now, my Harry, I
will tell you a Secret. From the first time that I beheld you, I wished you for
my Daughter, I wished that she might have Charms to attract and fix your Heart;
but, as I feared, and was persuaded that this was not the Case, I forbore to
indulge myself in such flattering Expectations. You know I never took you with
me to see her at the Boarding-School, the true Reason was that I dreaded
exposing her young and inexperienced Heart to such a Temptation, lest she
should conceive and languish under a hopeless Passion.

On her Return to Town, my Apprehensions, on your Score, were much abated, as I
imagined that the great Number of her gay and glistering Suitors would divide
or at least divert her Attention from you; and I purposely laid all the
Business of our House on your Shoulders, that she might have as little of your
Company as possible.

I further had the Precaution to warn my Child against the Danger of any
Affection for you. Matty, said I, one Day, among all this Assembly of fair and
fortunate Youths you are free and welcome to choose your Companion for Life,
there is only One who stands excepted, One only whom you must not look upon
with any Eye of Expectation. Who is that, Papa? My young Brother and Partner in
Trade, said I. He looks much higher, Matty, than to the Daughter of a Merchant.
His Prospects are immense. He is only Brother and Heir to the Earl of Moreland
who is now on his Travels, a dissolute young Man, whose Vices in all likelihood
will quickly carry him off, and, in such a Case, our Harry Clinton would be
considered as the first Person in the Land.

Ah! Sir, I cried, I may bless your Prohibition with regard to me, it was
certainly the happy, the only Cause of my Matilda's Partiality in my Favor.
The good Man smiled and proceeded. Notwithstanding what I said to Matty, I had
not given up all Thoughts of you myself. While she talked or sung in your
Presence, I often turned my Eye upon you, and thought, at times, that I
perceived a growing Tenderness in your Behavior, which, further Acquaintance,
I trusted, might ripen into Love. But when, in order to try you, I proposed
your Advocation in Behalf of Spelling, and that you appeared to undertake it
with Readiness and Pleasure, I at once dropped all my fond and flattering Hopes
concerning you, and I heartily wished that my Child had accepted that modest
and worthy young Man. Blessed, however, be the favoring Hand of that
Providence who, so unexpectedly, has conducted Matters to the Issue of this
Hour, and fulfilled the capital Wish of my Life. But, I will no longer delay
carrying to my dear Child the glad Tidings of your Affection; it will prove the
best of Balms to her wounded Mind, and will close her Eyes, for this Night, in
Rest and Peace of Heart.

I was scarce dressed the next Morning, when Matilda's favorite Maid entered
my Chamber and bid me good Morrow. Mrs. Susan, said I, your pleasant
Countenance bids me presume that Miss Golding is better. -- O, vastly better,
vastly better, Sir, I assure you; she slept sweetly all the Night, and did not
want for happy Dreams either, I warrant. -- Here is something for your good
News -- No Sir, no, I never take Money from Gentlemen; my Mistress's Generosity
does not leave me to the Temptation. I love my Mistress, Sir, and I think we
ought all rather to join and fee you, Mr. Harry, as well for Yesterday's Visit,
as for another which I hope you will pay her to Day. A Fiddle for these old
Doctors, one pretty young Doctor is better worth than a Score of them. --
Susan, as it should seem, had been an Observer, and did not want for
Penetration in such Matters. -- Mr. Harry, she continued, I Would give my last
Quarter's Wages to know what Charm it is that you carry about you, to make all
the pretty Ladies so fond of you. -- In Truth, Mrs. Susan, I am equally a
Stranger to the Charm and to the Fondness that you talk of. -- Don't tell me,
Sir, don't tell me. The very Day of that Night on which my Mistress fell sick,
here was a Lady in her Chariot to enquire for you, one of the loveliest young
Creatures I ever set my Eyes on. I know she asked very particularly and very
affectionately for you; for though it was my Mistress to whom she spoke, I
stood within hearing. -- It must, I cried, have been some Mistake or some
Imposture, for I assure you, Mrs. Susan, that I know of no such Person. But
pray be so good as to bear my Compliments to your young Lady, and tell her that
I wait her Permission to attend her.

I forgot to tell you, Madam, that, agreeable to the Advice which Mr. Golding
had given me, I went to felicitate my Uncle Goodall on his Marriage with your
Mother. He had already been informed of my recent Admission into Partnership,
and thereupon received me with very unusual Marks of Esteem and Affection.

Your Mother, at that Time, was exceeding lovely in her Person and Manners, at
every Season of Leisure I frequented their House, and she conceived a very
tender and warm Friendship for me, but, during Miss Golding's Illness, I had
not been to visit them.

Susan was but just gone, when Mr. Golding came and told me that he believed
his Matty would be pleased to see me. I instantly obeyed the Summons. As I
entered I observed that she sat up in her Bed, a Morning Gown was wrapped about
her, and Susan with the Help of Pillows supported her behind. On my appearing
her Spirits again took the Alarm. She scarce ventured a Glance toward me. I was
greatly pained by the Abashment under which I saw she labored, and I hastened
to relieve myself as well as her from the Distress.

I sat down by the Bedside, and gently taking one of her Hands, without
looking in her Face, my dear Miss Golding, said I, I hope you will not be
jealous of your Papa's Affection for me. He has, indeed, been too partial, too
generous toward me, and has approved himself more than a Father to me. He is
not satisfied with allowing me to call you by the tender Name of Sister, he
further gives me Leave to hope that I may be united to you by the nearest and
dearest of all Ties. Nothing but your Consent is wanting, my Sister, to make me
the happiest of Mankind. You are silent, my Matilda, may I venture to call you
mine? Blessed be your Silence, my Angel, I will dare then to interpret it in my
own Favor? -- Indeed I should long since have made the present Declaration, I
should long since have avowed my Inclinations, my Affection, my Passion for
you; but I did not presume to listen to my own Heart on the Occasion, I did not
suffer it to tell me how much you were beloved. Amidst so many Suitors of the
first Rank and Merit, who were justly called together by your numberless
Attractions, I deemed it a Flight by much too high for me to aspire at a
Competition for the Happiness of your Hand.

Here, venturing to look up, I perceived that she had put her Handkerchief to
her Eyes. Ah! Mr. Clinton, she cried with a trembling Voice, you are very
delicate, you are sweetly delicate indeed; but ought I to take the Advantage of
this Delicacy? I see that you would save me from the Confusion of an Avowal,
you would save me from the mortifying Sensibility of my own Weakness. But, Sir,
you ought not to esteem that a Weakness in me, which I account my chiefest
Merit and which is my chiefest Pride. I am proud of my Gratitude, I am proud of
my Discernment. From the Moment that you preserved me, against Arms and against
Odds, at the great Peril of your own Life, in you, and you alone, I saw every
thing that was amiable, every thing that was excellent. But then I dreaded lest
all Women should behold you with my Eyes; and, above all, I doubly dreaded and
was fearfully assured that you never would have any Eyes or Attention for me.
You have at length seen, or are rather informed concerning my Malady. You pity
me, you wish to relieve me, and you would love me if you could. It is enough,
Mr. Harry, even this perhaps is quite as much of Happiness as I can bear.

Here, again, I began to profess and to protest the Sincerity and Ardour of my
Affections; but she cut me short and said, I know your Sincerity, Sir, you are
persuaded that you love me, because as yet you know not what Love is. True
Love, Mr. Harry, by its own Light, sees into and throughout the Bosom of the
Party beloved: I am very sensible of the Tenderness of your Friendship for me,
and that Sensibility constitutes the Whole of my Happiness. I trust also that
it is all the Happiness I shall ever desire. To see you, to hear you, to have
you with me, to gaze upon you while you are looking another Way, to be
permitted to attend, to serve you, to conduce to your Satisfactions, it is a
Lot that will lift me above that of Mortality, that will cause me to account
myself the first among Women.

Ah, I cried, can I say nothing, can I do nothing to convince you how dear, how
exceedingly dear you are to me? I certainly loved you, long before I knew what
it was to be a Lover. I now feel the united Force of those imperceptible
Degrees by which the pleasing Intruder daily stole and grew upon me. Believe
me, my Matilda, when I presumed to present you with this as a Token of my
Affection, I held it for a Trifle altogether unworthy of you; accept it,
however, I beseech you, for the Sake of the Giver!

And, is this the Gem, says she, which I cast from me with such Disdain? --
Forgive me, my Brother, it is just so that the World casts from them the Pearl
of much mightier Price. I would to Heaven, that I could reject all the Pomps,
Pleasures and Vanities of this transitory World with the same Aversion that I
spurned from me this estimable Jewel; but there is very little Hope of that,
Mr. Harry, while you yourself may be partly numbered among transitory Things.

Here I was quite overcome by the Affection of the dear Girl, and, urged on by
a sudden Transport, I caught her to my Bosom with a Force that was something
too much for her Weakness. On Recollection, I attempted to apologize for my
Indiscretion, but she sweetly cried, Ah! Mr. Harry, never repent of such
Faults, may I often, may I daily tempt you to be guilty of them. But tell me,
and tell me truly, Mr. Clinton; these Gems, when you first purchased them, were
they actually intended for me? were they not rather intended for your Fanny,
for your own Fanny, Mr. Clinton? What can you mean? I exclaimed, I know of no
Fanny in the Universe, with whom I have any Acquaintance. That is strange! she
replied, very extraordinary, indeed! but, lest you should think me of a jealous
or whimsical Temper, I will relate the Affair to you precisely, as it happened.

On the Day, in which I took to my Bed, I was looking out at the Parlout
Window, when a Chariot and six Horses whirled up to our Door. I observed a
single Lady in it, whom I supposed of my Acquaintance, and instantly sent Susan
to request her to walk in. On her entering, I was greatly struck by the Beauty
of her Figure, and eyed her very inquisitively from Head to Foot. Having
curtesied gracefully to me, can you tell me, Miss, says she, is Mr. Clinton at
Home? No, indeed, Madam, said I; but if you will be pleased to entrust me with
your Commands -- It is only, Miss, that I request to see him as soon as
possible -- And, pray Madam, where shall he attend you -- O, he will know that
instantly, when you tell him it was Fanny Goodall, his own Fanny Goodall who
was here to wait upon him. -- Good Heaven, I cried out, my Aunt, my Aunt
Goodall, my very Aunt I assure you! -- What do you say, what do you tell me,
your Aunt, Sir, can it be? Ah, she is too young, and too lovely to be an Aunt,
Mr. Harry. -- The very same, indeed, Madam, there is no other Fanny Goodall. I
admit, as you say, that she is young and exceeding lovely, but still she is a
Wife, and likely soon, as I think, to be a Mother. Alas, says my Matilda, what
a doleful Jest is this! a cruel Aunt she has been to me I am sure, what Days of
Sighs and Nights of Tears she has cost me! Ah, that heartbreaking Term, his
own, his own Fanny; I think I shall never be able to forgive her that
Expression!

As Mr. Golding just then entered, we dropped the Subject we were upon. Why,
Matty, says he, you are quite another Creature; I think I never saw you wear so
happy a Face. I know you are come to chide me, says she, for keeping your
Partner from Business; but pay me down the Portion you intended for me, Papa,
and I will reimburse you the Damage of every Hour of his Absence. Yes, my Love,
cries the tender Father, if Wealth might serve, for Wages, to a Heart like that
of my Harry, he shall be very amply paid for every Act and Instance of his
Affection and Attention to you. Every Hour of my Life, I cried, is already her
Due; she has nothing to pay to One who is her Debtor beyond Account.

During several following Days, Miss Golding recovered with amazing Rapidity.
In less than than five Weeks she looked plumper and fairer than ever. Peace
smiled in her Countenance. Joy laughed in her Eyes. Her whole Frame appeared as
actuated by some internal Music. And thus, all lovely and beloved, she was
given up to my Arms, in the Presence of my Uncle and Aunt and of a few City
Friends.

Friend. As I wish that none of your Faults should pass by me unnoticed, so I
am willing to allow you all your just Praises. Your Story of your old Friend
is, hitherto, very simple, natural, and domestic; and to a Mind, yet
undebauched, exceedingly interesting and affecting; for it opens and
investigates a Number of little Passages and Mazes in the Heart, which are
quite closed, or imperceptible to Persons of hard Nerves and callous
Conceptions. I am free, however, to tell you that I felt myself offended by the
Compliments which Mr. Clinton pays to himself through the Mouth of your
Matilda. It is, indeed, a very rare Matter for People to speak of themselves
with due Decency and Delicacy. I wish you could have procured some other
Conduit for conveying to us the History of your Knight. Caesar, I think, is the
only Person who, with an easy though modest Confidence, has successfully
adventured on a Detail of his own Exploits.


Author. I have not a Word to say in Mr. Clinton's Defense, perhaps he may
offer something for himself on the Occasion.


CHAP. XIV.
HERE the Countess, for the first Time, broke in upon her Cousin's Narration.
Happy Matilda, she cried, how distinguished was thy Destiny! were it but for a
Year, were it but for a Day, for that Day thou did yet enjoy the Consummation
of all thy Wishes, a Lot rarely allowed to any Daughter of Adam. I was not then
born to envy her State. Sweet Girl, she deserved you, she was after my own
Heart, the Excess of her Passion for you made her truly worthy of you. But tell
me, my Cousin, how could you be so long ignorant of the dear Girl's Affection
for you? The Language of Love is so very intelligible, so expressive through
every Motion and every Organ, as must, with sufficient Clearness, have opened
your Eyes to the Object. Indeed, Madam, replied Mr. Clinton, she herself led me
away from any such Apprehension, by drawing so many Pictures of the Man whom
she said she loved, all copied from the Creature of her own Brain, and covered
and disguised with such imaginary Excellencies as must have prevented myself,
as well as every one living, from perceiving therein the smallest Trace of my
own Resemblance. Don't tell me, cried Lady Maitland, she was a true and a sweet
Painter, and I should have known you by her Portrait in the Midst of a Million.
But proceed, I beseech you, my whole Soul is in your Story.

Within a few Months after my Marriage, continued Mr. Clinton, you, my Cousin,
first opened your fair Eyes to the Light, and my Matty and I had the Honor of
being your Sponsors.

Within the first Year of my Marriage, my Girl, also, brought a Son into the
World, and within the two Years following was delivered of a Daughter.

The Joy of the Grandfather, on those Events, was indescribable. Alas, good
Man! he thought that he perceived, in their infant Aspects, a thousand happy
Promises and opening Prospects. He saw himself, as it were, perpetuated in a
descending and widening Progeny, who, like their native Thames, should roll
down in a Tide of expanding Wealth and Prosperity. He wanted that all the World
should participate of his Happiness, and our House once more became the House
of Festivity.

A Number of external Successes, also, assisted to persuade us, in those Days,
that Felicity was to be attained and ascertained upon Earth. The Regency of
Cromwell was administered with the strictest Justice at Home, while, at the same
Time, it became revered and formidable abroad, and extended its Influence to
Regions the most remote. Under the Protection of the British Flag, we sent our
Ships out to the East, and to the West, and Wealth came pouring in upon us from
all Quarters of the Globe.

In the mean while, my Wife and I lived together in perfect Harmony. Though my
Commerce and Acquaintance was greatly extended, I had yet formed no
Friendships, from Home, that partook of heartfelt Tenderness, except for your
Mama. All my Pleasures and Desires, all my World was, in a Manner, confined and
absorbed within the Compass of my own Walls. In the good old Man and his
Daughter, and in the Pledges of their endearing Attachment to me, every Wish
that my Soul could form was centered. Mutual Joy sat round our Board, mutual
Peace prepared our Pillows, and, during a swimming Period of six Years, I
scarce remember to have experienced the smallest Discontent, save what arose
from the Inordinancy of my Wife's Affection for me.

While she continued to bless my Arms, I thought that no one had ever loved
with greater Warmth than I loved her; and yet, at Times I remarked a very
striking Difference between the Manner and Effects of our Feelings for each
other. If Business detained me an Hour extraordinary abroad, the panting of her
Bosom, that Eagerness of Look with which she received me, was to me a painful
Evidence of her Anxiety during my Absence. One Evening I found her in fainting
Fits, merely because she was told that a Duel had just happened between Lord
Mohun and a Person who had much the Resemblance of her Clinton. In short, if my
Head or my Finger ached, I found myself under the Necessity of concealing my
Ailment, and of assuming a Cheerfulness disagreeable to the Occasion, to
prevent the worse Consequences of her ready Alarms. On the other Hand, my
Affection was tranquil and serene; it was tender and fervent, indeed, but
without Tumult or Disturbance; a Species of Love which I afterward found to be
by far the most eligible; for every kind of Passion is unquestionably a kind of
Suffering; Love in God, therefore, must be wholly an Action, it acts infinitely
upon Others without any Possibility of being acted upon.

Thus the Years of my Life moved onward upon Down, when the Smallpox, that
capital Enemy to Youth and Beauty, became epidemical in the City. Our Children
caught the Contagion. All possible Care was taken, and all possible Art
employed. A Number of Physicians was kept constantly about them. Fifteen Days
of their Illness were already elapsed, and the Doctors pronounced them out of
Danger; when the Distemper took a sudden and malignant Turn, and, in one and
the same Minute, both my Babes expired in the Arms of their Mother.

I was in the Room, at the Time, and as I knew the extreme Tenderness of my
Matty's Nature, all my Concern, as well as Attention, was turned upon her. I
took her fondly by the Hand, and, looking up to her Face, I was instantly
alarmed and shocked by that placid Serenity which appeared in her Countenance,
and which I expected to be quickly changed into some frantic Eruption. But,
first dropping a smiling Tear on her Infants, and then lifting her glistening
Eyes to Heaven, I thank thee, I thank thee, O my Master, she cried, thou have
made me of some Use, I have not been born in vain; thou have ordained me the
humble Vehicle of two safe and certain Angels, living Attendants on thy Throne,
and sweet Singers of thy Praises in the Kingdom of little Children, for ever
and for ever. I have yet sufficient left, more Blessings remaining than suit
the Lot of Mortality; take me from them, I beseech thee, whenever it is thy
good Pleasure, for I fear there are some of them, which I could not, I could
not bear to have taken away from me. So prayed the dear Saint, and looking
eagerly at me, no, my Harry, she cried out, I fear, I fear I could not bear it!
So saying, she suddenly cast herself into my Bosom, and grasping at my Neck,
and gushing into a Flood of Anguish, we mingled our Sobs and our Tears together
till no more were left to be shed.

You are affected, my dearest Cousin, I had better stop here. If you are moved
by small Matters, how would your Heart be wrung by some ensuing Distresses; I
must not venture to proceed.

Go on, cried the Countess, go on, I insist upon it. I love to weep, I joy to
grieve, it is my Happiness, my Delight to have my Heart broken in Pieces.

We were, both of us; much relieved by the vent of our mutual Passion, for,
though my Wife still continued to keep to me and cling about me, she yet seemed
to be sweetly composed, and sunk, within my Arms, as into a Bed and Depth of
Peace.

At length, I listened to a Kind of Murmur and Bustle in the Hall, and I heared
some one distinctly cry, O my Master, my Master!

We started up at the Instant. Mr. Golding had been from Home at the time of
the deadly Crisis of my two darling little Ones, and had quieted all his Fears,
and renewed all his Prospects, in the View and full Assurance of their Life and
quick Recovery. We had been too much engaged and occupied, in our own personal
Griefs, to give to our Servants the seasonable Precaution of breaking the
Matter to our Father by unalarming Degrees; and a rude Fellow, at his Entrance,
bluntly told him that the Children were both dead; whereupon he clapped his
Hands together, and, casting himself into a Chair, remained without Sense or
Motion.

When we ran up, we were greatly terrified by the Manner of his Aspect, though
his Eyes were closed, his Brows were gloomy and contracted, while the nether
Part of his Face looked quiet and composed.

I instantly sent for a Surgeon, and recalled the Physicians who had but lately
left us; while my Matty stood motionless, with her Hands closed together and
her Eyes fixed upon her Father. At length she cried out, my Papa, my Papa, my
dear Papa, I would I would I had died before I came to this Hour! but, blessed
be thy Will since it is thy Will, O God! when all other Props are sapped and
plucked from under me I trust to fall into thee, my Father which art in Heaven!

Being put to Bed, and bled, he recovered Motion and Speech, and we got him to
swallow a composing Draught, though he did not yet recollect any Person or
Thing about him.

Notwithstanding our late Fatigues, Matty and I sat up with him most of the
Night; and then, ordering a Pallet to be brought into the Room, we lay down to
take a little Rest toward Morning. Alas, said I to myself, how rich was I
Yesterday, how is my World abridged! these narrow Walls now contain all that is
left me of all the Possessions that I value upon Earth.

Poor Mr. Golding was but ill qualified to bear Calamity. His Life had been a
Life of sound Health and Successes; and he never had been acquainted with
Sickness, or with Affliction, save on the Death of his Wife whom he had married
for Money, and on the Illness of his Daughter as already related.

As he had taken an Opiate, he did not awaken till it was late in the Day.
Turning his Head toward me, is it you, Harry, says he? How do you find
yourself, Sir, said I? -- Why, has any thing been the Matter with me? Indeed I
don't feel myself right; but, send my Children to me; send my Jacky and my
little Harriet; the Sight of them will be a Restorative beyond all the Cordials
in the World. -- You are silent, Harry -- What is the meaning? -- O, now I
begin to remember -- my sweet Babies, my little Play-fellows, I shall never see
you any more!

Here, he burst into the most violent Gush of Passion. He groaned, he wept, he
cried aloud with heart-piercing Exclamations, while I caught up Matty in my
Arms, and, running with her to a distant Apartment, catched a Kiss and locked
her in.

I returned, but found him in the same Violence of Agitation. I spoke to him, I
would have comforted him; but he cried, be quiet, Harry, I will not be
comforted. I will go to my Children, they shall not be torn from me, we will
die, we will be buried, we will lie in the same Grave together.

As I found myself sick, and ready to faint under the Oppression of his
Lamentations, I withdrew to the next Chamber, and there plentifully vented the
contagious Shower.

After some time I listened and perceived that all was quiet, and returning, I
found him in a kind of troubled Doze, from whence he fell into a deep and
peaceful Sleep. Thus he continued, for three Days, wailing and slumbring by
Fits, without tasting any Matter of Nourishment, though his Daughter and I
implored him, on our Knees, and with Tears. No Reasonings, no Entreaties could
avail for appeasing him, it was from the Association of our Sorrows alone that
he appeared to admit of any Consolation.

At length his Passion subsided into a sullen and silent Calm; he would speak
to no body, he would answer none of us except by Monosyllables.

Within a few following Weeks, News was brought me that our Ship the Phoenix
was arrived in the Downs, safe and richly laden from the East Indies.

Immediately I carried the Tidings to the old Man, in the pleasing Expectation
that they would serve to divert, or, at least, to amuse his Melancholy. But,
fixing his Look upon me, wherefore, Harry, do thou tell me of Ships and
Indies, he cried; both Indies are poor to me, they have nothing that they can
send me. I have no Road to go upon Earth, no Way upon Sea to navigate, I am
already become a wild and wasted Babylon, wherein the Voice of Music shall
never more be heared. O ye old and unblessed Knees, where are now your precious
Babies, who were wont to play about ye, and to cling and climb upon ye? gone,
gone, gone, gone, never, never to return.

Here, breaking into Tears, I cried, we are both young yet, my Father, we may
yet have many Children to be the Comfort of your Age. No, my Harry, no, he
replied, you may, indeed, have many Children but you never will have any
Children like my darling Children.

Love, as it should seem, my Cousin, like Bodies, has its Weight, and gains
additional Velocity in the Descent. It descends from God to his Creatures, and
so from Creature to Creature, but rarely knows a due Return of Affection or
Gratitude. It is therefore incomparably more intense in the Parent than in the
Child, and still acquires increasing Fondness toward the Grandchild and so
downward. Nay, you may, almost universally, observe it more warm in Patrons
toward their Dependents, than in those who are benefitted toward their
Benefactors.

Mr. Golding, from this Time, no more entered his Counting House, nor paid nor
received Visits, nor kept up any Correspondence. Even my Company and that of
his Daughter appeared to oppress him, and he rarely left his Apartment, where
an old folio Bible was his only Companion.

Hereupon I began to withdraw our Effects from Trade, and having called in the
best Part of them, I lodged near Half a Million in the Dutch Funds. When I went
to advise with my Father on the Occasion, what, my Child, said he, what have I
to say to the World, or to the Things of the World? Do just as you please with
the one and with the other; and never consult a Person on any Affair wherein
the Party consulted has no Interest or Concern.

One Morning, as I lay in Bed, Matty threw her Arms about me, and hiding her
blushing Face in my Bosom, my Harry, says she, if you could handsomely bring it
about to my poor Papa, perhaps it would be some Matter of Consolation to him to
know that I am with Child.

When I broke the Matter to him, he did not, at first, appear to be sensibly
affected; in time, however, the Weight of his Affliction seemed considerably
lightened, and, as my Wife advanced in her Pregnancy, he began to look us in
the Face, he sat with us at one Table, and became conversable as formerly.

One Day I went to dine with Mr. Settle, a Hardware Merchant, who had appointed
to pay me a large Sum of Money. On my Return in the Evening, through
Moor-fields, attended only by my favorite Irishman, a very faithful and active
Fellow, though it was yet fair Day, I was suddenly set upon by a Posse of
Robbers, who rushed on me from behind a Cover. The first of them, running up,
fired directly in my Face, but did me no further Damage than by carrying away a
small Piece of the upper Part of my left Ear. Had the Fools demanded my Money,
I would have given it to them at a Word; but, finding them bent on Murder, I
resolved that they should have my Life at as dear a Rate as possible. I
instantly drew my Sword, and run the first through the Body; and then, rushing
on the second Assailant, I laid him also on the Ground, before he had Time to
take his Aim, so that his Pistol went harmlesly off in his Fall.

In the mean while, my brave and loving Companion was not idle; with two
Strokes of his oaken Cudgel he had levelled two more of them with the Earth.
Hereupon the Remainder halted, retreated into a Group, and then stood and fired
upon us altogether; but, observing that we did not drop, they cast their Arms
to the Ground, and run off several Ways as fast as they could. My good Friend,
Tirlah O'Donnoh, then turned affectionately to me; are you hurt, my dear
Master, says he? I believe I am, Tirlah, let us make Home the best we can. O,
cried the noble Creature, if no body was hurt but Tirlah, Tirlah would'nt be
hurt at all.

Here, taking me under the Arm, we walked slowly to the City, till coming to a
hackney Coach he put me, tenderly, into, it, and sitting beside me, supported
me, as I began to grow weak through much Effusion of Blood.

As soon as we got Home, the Coachman, as is their Practice, thundered at the
Door, and my Matty, according to Custom whenever I was abroad, was the readiest
of all our Domestics to open.

By this Time I had fainted, and was quite insensible, but when my tender and
true Mate saw me borne by two Men into her Presence, all pale and bloody, she,
who thought she had Fortitude to support the Wreck of the World, gave a Shriek
that was enough to alarm the Neighborhood, and instantly falling backward, got
a violent Contusion in the hinder Part of her Head.

Immediately we were conveyed to separate Beds, and all requisite Help was
provided. It was found that I had received six or seven flesh Wounds, but none
of them proved dangerous, as they were given at a Distance and by Pistol Shot.
But, alas, my Matty's Case was very different, she fell into sudden and
premature Labor, and, having suffered extreme Anguish all the Night, during
which she ceased not to enquire after me, she was with Difficulty delivered of
a male Infant, who was suffocated in the Birth.

In the mean while, the good and tenderhearted old Gentleman hurried about,
incessantly, from One of us to the Other, wringing his Hands, and scarcely
retaining his Senses.

As soon as my Wounds were dressed, and I had recovered my Memory, I looked
about, and hastily enquired for my Wife; but they cautiously answered me, that
she was something indisposed with the Fright which she got at seeing me bloody,
and that her Father had insisted on her going to Bed.

On the second Dressing of my Wounds, I was pronounced out of Danger, and then
they ventured to tell me of my Matty's Miscarriage, and of the Bruise which she
had got in her Fall when she fainted. On hearing this my Heart was cleft, as it
were, in twain; I accused myself of the Murder of my Wife and Infant; and I
accused All, without Exception, of their Indiscretion in not concealing my
Disaster from her.

At Times I began to fear that my Wife was either dead, or much worse than they
represented. On my third Dressing, therefore, I peremptorily insisted on my
being carried into her Chamber. I sent her Notice of my Visit, and, on entering
the Room, he lives then, she cried, my Husband, my Harry lives, it is enough, I
shall die happy, I shall now depart in Peace.

Here I ordered myself to be laid by her Side, when taking a Hand, which she
had feebly reached out, and pressing it to my Lips, you would forsake me then,
my Matty, you die, you say, and you die happy in leaving me the most wretched,
the most desolate of Men. You die, my Love, you die; and I, who would have
fostered you and your Babe with my Vitals, it is I who have dug a Grave for the
One and for the Other. But, you must not forsake me, my Matty, I will not be
forsaken by you. Since we cannot live asunder, let us die, let us die together!

Here, a passionate Silence ensued on either Part. But, my Wounds growing
painful and beginning to bleed afresh, I was obliged to be carried back to my
own Apartment.

Within a few Days more, I was so well recovered as to be able to walk about,
from which time I was a constant Attendant on my Beloved, and became her most
tender and assiduous Nursekeeper.

You must have heard, my Cousin, that the Customs and Manners of those Times
were altogether the Reverse of what they are at present. Hypocrisy is no longer
a Fault among Men, all now is avowed Libertinism and open Profaneness; and
Children scoff at the Name and Profession of that Religion which their Fathers
revered. On the contrary, in those Days, all Men were either real or pretended
Zealots; every Mechanic professed, like Aaron, to carry a Urim and Thummim
about him; and no Man would engage in any Business or Bargain, though with an
Intent to overreach his Neighbor, without going apart, as he said, to consult
the Lord.

My Matty, at the same Time, was the holiest of all Saints, without any Parade
of Sanctification. Here Is was a Religion, of whose Value she had the daily and
hourly Experience; it was indeed a Religion of Power. It held her, as on a
Rock, in the Midst of a turbulent and fluctuating World. It gave her a Peace of
Spirit that smiled at Provocation. It gave her Comfort in Affliction, Patience
in Anguish, Exaltation in Humiliation, and Triumph in Death.

In about five Weeks after her unhappy Miscarriage, she appeared on the
Recovery, though by very slow Degrees, and with Assistance, at Times, sat up in
her Bed; when her oldest Physician, one Morning, called me apart, I am loath,
Sir, said he, very loath to acquaint you with my Apprehensions. I wish I may be
mistaken, but I fear greatly for you, I fear that your dear Lady cannot
recover. By the Symptoms I conjecture that an Abscess, or Impostume, is forming
within her; but a few Days will ascertain Matters either for us or against us.

Had all Sorts of evil Tidings come crowding One upon Other, I should not have
been affected as I then was affected. I could not rise from my Seat to bid the
Doctor adieu. My Knees trembled under me; a Swimming came before my Eyes; and a
sudden Sickness relaxed and reversed my whole Frame. Alas, I had not, at that
Time, the Resource of my Matty; I had not on the Armor with which she was
armed to all Issues and Events. I, however, raised my Thoughts to Heaven, in a
kind of helpless Acquiescence rather than confident Resignation. I struggled,
not to appear weaker than became my Manhood; and I said to myself, Doctors have
often been mistaken.

Having recollected my Strength and Spirits the best I could, I adventured to
enter my Wife's Apartment. She was just raised in her Bed, from whence her pale
and emaciated Countenance looked forth as the Sun, toward his Setting, looks
through a sickly Atmosphere, in Confidence of his arising in the Fullness of
Morning Glory.

Having cautiously and dejectedly seated myself beside her, she reached out
both her Hands, and, pressing one of mine between them, I love you no longer,
my Harry, she cried; I love you no longer. Your Rival, at length, has
conquered. (...) am the Bride of Another. And yet I love you in a Measure,
since in you I love all that is him, or that is his, and that I think is much,
a great deal, indeed, of all that is lovely. O, my dear, my sweet, mine only
Enemy, as I may say! Riches were nothing unto me, Pleasures were nothing unto
me, the World was nothing unto me; You, and you only, Harry, stood between me
and my Heaven, between me and my God. Long, and often, and vainly, have I
strove and struggled against you; but my Bridegroom, at length, is become
jealous of you; my true Owner calls me from you, and takes me all to himself!
Be not alarmed then, my Harry, when I tell you that I must leave you. You will
grieve for me, you will grieve greatly for me, my Beloved! but, give way to the
kindly Shower that your Lord shed for his Lazarus, and let the Tears of
Humanity alleviate and lighten the Weight of your Affliction. -- Ah, my Harry,
I tremble for you; what a Course you have to run! -- what Perils! what
Temptations! deliver him from them, my Master, deliver him from them all: --
Again what blissful Prospects -- they are gone, they are vanished! -- I sink, I
die under the Weight and Length of succeeding Misery! -- Again it opens, all is
cleared, and his End, like that of Job, is more blessed than his Beginning. --
Ah, my Harry, my Harry, your Heart must be wrung by many Engines, it shall be
tried in many Fires, but I trust it is a golden Heart, and will come forth with
all its Weight.

You have been dreaming, my Love, I said, you have been dreaming; and the
Impression still lies heavy and melancholy on your Memory.

Yes, she replied, I have been dreaming indeed; but then my Dreams are much
more real then my waking Visions. When all Things sensible are shut out, it is
then that the Spirit enlarges, grows conscious of its own Activity, its own
Power and Prescience, and sees by a Light whose Evidence is beyond that of the
Sun. I will tell you a Secret, my Harry, there is nothing in the Universe but
Littleness, and Greatness, the Littleness of the Creature and the Greatness, of
God, and in the Sense of this lies the Essence of all Philosophy and of all
Religion. Be content, then, with your Lot, my Husband, be content to be little,
if you wish to be great. Become a Nothingness, an Emptiness, and then your God
will bring the Fullness of his own Immensity upon you, and will open a World in
your Spirit more expanded and more glorious than this surrounding World with
all its Luminaries.

O, my Angel, I cried, should any thing happen to you, I should then be little
indeed. But, I dare not look that Way, for I know, I find, I feel that I could
not survive you.

You must survive me, my Harry, nay you will once more be married. I beheld
your Bride last Night. Even now she stands before me, the Sister of my Spirit,
and one of the loveliest Compositions of Sin and Death that ever was framed for
Dissolution. Her, also, you will lose; and you will think, nay, you will assure
yourself that no Powers in Heaven or Earth can avail for a Ray of Comfort. In
this Life, however, you will finally, unexpectedly, and most wonderfully be
blessed; and, soon after, we shall all meet and be more intimately and more
endearingly wedded than ever, where yet there is neither marrying nor giving in
Marriage.

While she yet spoke, her Pains, as the Pains of Labor, again came upon her,
and went off, and again returned, after intermitted Swoonings.

O, my Cousin, what a solemn, what a fearful Thing is Death! all our Inlets of
Knowledge and Sensation closed at once! the Sound of Cheer and the Voice of
Friendship, and the Comfort of Light shut out from us for ever! Nothing before
us but a Blackness and Depth of Oblivion, or, beyond it, a doubtful and
alarming Sensibility, strange Scenes, and strange Worlds, strange Associates
and strange Perceptions, perhaps of horrid Realities, infinitely worse than
Nonentity; such are the brightest Prospects of Infidelity in Death.

Where, at that Time, are your Scoffers, your Defiers of Futurity? where your
merry Companions, who turn their own Eternity into Matter of Laugh and
Ridicule? dejected and aghast, their Countenance wholly fallen, and their Heart
sunk within them, they all tremble and wish to believe, in this the Hour of
Dissolution. They feel their Existence sapped and sinking from under them; and
Nature compells them, in the Drowning of their Souls, to cry out, to Something,
to any thing, save, save, or I perish!

Far different was the State of my little and lowly Matty, my Saint of Saints,
at that tremendous Period; where all Others would have sunk, there she soared
aloft; and she dropped the World and its Wealth, with her Body and all the
sensible Affections thereof, with the same Satisfaction that a poor Man, just
come to a great Estate, would drop his tattered Garb to put on gorgeous Apparel.

Oh, my Beloved! she would cry in the Midst of her Pains, I have been weakly
through Life, I have been Weakness itself, and therefore not able to take up
thy Cross; but be thou Strong in my Weakness, show thy Mightiness in me, and
then lay it upon me with all its Weight!

Again, after a Swoon, and when her Pangs became excessive, I refuse not thy
Process, my Master, she cried. Thy Cross and thorny Crown they are all my
Ambition. Point thy Thorns, twist them harder, let them pierce into my Soul, so
thou suffer me not to fail or fall from thee, I care not.

Think, my Cousin, what I endured upon that Occasion, my rending Heart shared
her Sufferings, and felt Pang for Pang. Nay, I was not far from murmuring and
questioning with my God on his putting to such Tortures the most guiltless of
his Creatures. If the Lambs of thy Flock, I secretly said, if thy Lambs are
appointed to such excruciating Sensations, what must be the Portion of such
Sinners as I am?

When she drew near the Goal of her blessed Course upon Earth, O my almighty
Samson! she faintly cried, thou shakest the two Pillars of my frail and sinful
Fabric; finish then thy Conquest in me; down, down with the whole Building
appointed to ruin! let no one, O Lord, of mine Enemies or of thine Enemies
escape thy victorious Arm! but slay all those by my Death, with whom I have
been vainly combating during my Lifetime! So saying, her Pains in an Instant
forsook her. The Form of her Countenance was suddenly changed from the
Expression of Agony into that of Ecstasy. She raised her Hands on high, and
exerting herself to follow them, she cried, I come, I come! then sighed and
dropped over. -- The Muscles of her Face still retained the Stamp of the last
Sentiment of her Soul, and while the Body hastened to be mingled with Earth, it
seemed to partake of that Heaven to which its Spirit had been exalted.

You may think it odd, dearest Madam, that, for some time past, I have taken no
Note of the Man to whom I was tied by every possible Band of Duty, Gratitude
and Affection. The Fact is, that, during the latter Part of my Wife's Illness,
and for some Weeks after her Death, Mr. Golding was confined to his Chamber by
a severe Fit of the Gout, and the Acuteness of his Pains scarce permitted him
to attend to any other Concern. While my Matty lived, therefore, I divided my
Time and Assiduities as equally as I could between the Daughter and Father,
and, at any Intervals of Ease, I used to read to him his favorite Passages in
the Bible.

As soon as my Saint had expired, I charged the Servants not to give any
Intimation of her Death to their Master, but alas, our Silence and our Looks
were too sure Indicators of the fatal Tidings; for, from the highest to the
least, my Matty had been the Idol of the whole House, and her Death appeared to
them as the Loss of every earthly Possession.

Having looked, several times, intently and inquisitively in my Face, well,
Harry, says Mr. Golding, all is over then, I see, we must go to her, but my
Child shall no more return to us. -- You are silent, my Harry. -- O thou fell
Glutton, Death! I had but one Morsel left for the whole of my Sustenance, and
that too thou have devoured. Here he gave a deep Groan, and sunk into a State
of Insensibility, from which, however, he was soon recovered by the Return of
an anguishing Fit of the Gout.

When I look back, my fair Cousin, on the Passages of my Life; it is a Matter
of Amazement to me, that a Creature so frail, so feebly and so delicately
constituted as Man, with Nerves so apt to be racked, and a Heart to be wrung
with Anguish, can possibly endure under the Weights of Calamity that, at times,
are laid upon him.

I had not yet dropped a Tear. I was in a State of half stupid and half flighty
Insensibility; as One who, having lost every thing, had nothing further to look
for, and therefore nothing to regard. But, when I saw my dear old Man, my best
Friend, my Father, whelmed under such a Depth of Affliction, all the Sluices of
my Soul and inmost Affections were laid open, and I broke into an avowed
Passion of Tears and Exclamations, till, like David in his Strife of Love with
Jonathan, I exceeded. I accused myself of all the Evils that had happened to
his House; and I devoted the Day to Darkness and the Night to Desolation,
wherein, by my Presence and Connections, I had brought those Mischiefs upon
him. The good Man was greatly struck, and, I think, partly consoled by the
Excess of my Sorrows, and, all desolate as he was, he attempted to administer
that Comfort to me which he himself wanted more than Any who had Life.

Break not your Heart, my Harry, break not your Heart, my Child, he cried!
deprive me not of the only Consolation that is left me; you are now my only
Trust, my only Stay, upon Earth. A wretched Merchant I am, whose whole Wealth
is cast away, save thee, thou precious Casket, thou only Remnant of all my
Possessions! My Girl, indeed, was thy true Lover, the tenderest of all Mates;
her Love to thee, my Son, was passing the Love of Woman; but we have lost her,
we have lost her, and Wailing is all the Portion that is left us below.

As soon as the Family heard the Voice of our Mourning, they too gave a Loose
to the Impatience of their Griefs, and all the House was filled with the Sound
of Lamentation.

On the following Day I summoned the chief medical Artists, and got the
precious Remains of my Angel embalmed. She was laid under a sumptuous Canopy
with a Silver Coffin at her Bed's Foot, and, every Night when the House was at
Rest, I stole secretly from my Bed and stretched myself beside her. I pressed
her cold Lips to mine. I clasped her Corse to my warm Bosom, as though I
expected to restore it to Life by transfusing my Soul into it. I spoke to her,
as when living, I reminded her of the several tender and endearing Passages of
our Loves; and I reminded her also of the Loss of our little Ones, by whom we
became essentially One, inseparably united in Soul and Body for ever.

There is surely, my Cousin, a Species of Pleasure in Grief; a Kind of soothing
and deep Delight that arises with the Tears which are pushed from the Fountain
of God in the Soul, from the Charities and Sensibilities of the human Heart
divine.

True, true, my precious Cousin, replied the Countess, giving a fresh Loose to
her Tears; O Matilda, I would I were with thee! true, my Cousin, I say, even
now I sink, I die under the Pleasure of your Narration.

Upon the ninth Night, continued Mr. Clinton, as I lay by the Side of all that
remained of my Matty, overtoiled and overwatched, I fell into a deep Sleep. My
Mind notwithstanding, at the Time, seemed more awake and more alive to Objects
than ever. In an Instant she stood visible and confessed before me. I saw her
clearer than at noon Day, by the Light which she cast with Profusion abroad.
Every Feature and former Trace seemed heightened into a Luster without a Loss
of the least Similitude. She smiled ineffable Sweetness and Blessedness upon
me. And stooping down, I felt her Embrace about my Heart and about my Spirit,
while, at the same Time, I saw her bent in Complacence before me. After a
Length of ecstatic Pleasure, which I felt from her Communion and Infusion into
my Soul; my Harry, says she, grieve not for me; all the Delights that your
World could sum up, in an Age, would not amount to my Bliss, no, not for an
Hour; it is a Weight of Enjoyment that, in an Instant, would crush to nothing
the whole Frame of your Mortality. Grieve not then for me, my Harry, but resign
my beggarly Spoils to their beggarly Parent, Ashes to Ashes and Dust to Dust!
In my inordinate Fondness for you, I have at length obtained a Promise that my
Master and your Master, my Beloved and your Lover shall, finally, bear you
triumphant through all the Enemies that are set in fearful Array against you.
Having so said, I felt myself as it were compressed within an Engine of Love;
and again, losing the Remembrance of all that had passed, I sunk, as into a
State of utter Oblivion.

Toward the Dawning, I was awakened by the clapping of Hands and the Cries of
Lamentation. Starting up, I perceived Mr. Golding at the Bedside, suspended
over his Matty and me, and pouring forth his Complaints.

There was a favored Domestic of his, a little old Man, who had always kept a
careful and inquisitive Eye over every Thing that was in or concerned our
Household, This Argus, it seems, at length suspected my nightly Visits to the
Dead, and, lurking in a Corner, saw me open and enter the Chamber where the
Corpse was deposited. As he lay in his Master's Apartment, he took the first
Opportunity of his being awake to impart what he thought a Matter of
extraordinary Intelligence to him. Sir, says he, if I am not greatly deceived,
my young Master is this Moment in Bed with his dead Lady. What is this you tell
me? cried Mr. Golding. No, John, no, what you say is impossible. All who live
love that which is living alone; whatever savours of Death is detestable to all
Men. As I am here, replied John, I am almost assured that what I tell you is
Fact. Peace, Peace, you old Fool, said Mr. Golding, think you that our Harry is
more loving than Father Abraham, and yet Abraham desired to bury his Dead out
of his Sight. I know not how that may be, said trusty John, but, if you are
able to stir, I will help you to go and see, I am sure the Thought of it melts
the very Heart within me.

Accordingly, Mr. Golding, like old Jacob, strengthened himself and arose, and,
pained as he was, he came with the Help of his John to the Place where I lay.

Having for some Time looked upon me, as I slept with his Matty fast folded in
my Arms; he could no longer contain his Emotions, but he and John broke forth
into Tears and Exclamations. O, my Children, my Children, my dearest Children,
he cried, why did ye exalt me to such a Pitch of Blessedness? was it only to
cast me down into the deeper Gulf of Misery, a Gulf that has neither Bank nor
Bottom?

As I arose, all ashamed to be detected in that Manner, the good Man caught me
in his Arms. My Harry, my Harry, says he, what shall I pay you, my Son, for
your superabundant Love to me and to mine? could my Wretchedness give you
Bliss, I should almost think myself blessed in being wretched, my Harry.

I now prepared to execute the late Command of my Angel, and to consign to
Earth the little that was earthly in her. But, when our Domestics understood
that all that was left of their loved Mistress was now going to be taken away
from them for ever, they broke into Tears anew, and set no Bounds to their
Lamentations.

Her desolate Father was desirous of attending the Funeral, but, on my Knees, I
dissuaded him from it, as I was assured it would burst in twain the already
overstretched Thread of his Age and Infirmities. He then insisted on having the
Lid of the Coffin removed, and bending over, he cast his old Body on the Corse;
again he rose and gazed upon it, and clapping his Hands with a Shout, Is this
my World, he cried, the Whole of my Possessions? Are you the one that was once
my little prattling Matty, the Playfellow of my Knees, the Laugher away of
Care, who brought Cheer to my Heart and Warmth to my Bosom? Are you the one for
whom, alone, I spent my Nights in Thought and my Days in Application? Is this
all that is left, then, of my Length of Labors? O, my Spark of Life is
quenched; in thee, my Matty, my Matty, the flowing Fountain of my Existence is
dried up for ever.

There is something exceedingly solemn and affecting, my Cousin, in the
Circumstances and Apparatus of our Funerals; they are oppressive even to Minds
that are no way concerned or interested in the Death of the Party lamented.
Though I grieved no more for my Matty, though I was as assured of her Bliss as
I was of my own Being; yet, when the Gloom of the Procession was gathered
around me, when I heard the Wailings of the many Families whom her Charity had
sustained; when I heard the bitter Sobbings of the Servants, whom her Sweetness
had so endearingly attached to her Person; when all joined to bewail
themselves, as lost in her Loss; my Heart died, as it were, within me, and I
should have been suffocated on the Spot, had I not given instant Way to the
Swell of my Sorrows.

The Tempest of the Soul, Madam, like that of the Elements, can endure but for
a Season. The Passion of Mr. Golding, on the Interment of every Joy and of
every Hope that he could look for upon Earth, within a few Weeks subsided, or
rather sunk into a solid but sullen Peace, a Kind of Peace that seemed to say
there is nothing in this Universe that can disturb me.

Harry, said he, one Evening, I have been thinking of the Vision that I have
had. Vision, Sir, said I, has my Matty then appeared to you? Yes, he answered,
she was the principal Part of my Vision for these twenty Years past. The Vision
that I mean, my Harry, is the Dream of a very long and laborious Life. Here
have I, by the Toil of fifty Years Application, scraped together and
accumulated as much as, in these Times, would set Kings at Contention, and be
accounted a worthy Cause for spilling the Blood of Thousands; and yet what are
these Things to me, or of what Value in themselves, more than the Stones and
Rubbish that make our Pavement before the Door? I have been hungering and
thirsting after the Goods of this World, I have acquired all that it could give
me, and now my Soul, like a sick Stomach, disgorges the Whole. I then took one
of his Hands, and pressing it tenderly between mine, O, my Father, I cried, my
dear, dear Father, O, that I might be made Sons and Daughters and every Sort of
Kindred to you! all that I am and have should gladly be spent in bringing any
Kind of Comfort to you, my Father!

In about a Fortnight after, as I entered his Apartment to bid him good Morrow,
I observed that his Countenance had much altered from what it was the Evening
before, that he looked deeply dejected and seemed to breathe with difficulty.

Are not you well, Sir? No, says he, my Spirits are greatly oppressed. I find
that I must leave you shortly; I believe that I must go suddenly, but where to?
that is the Question, the very terrible Question; the only Question of any
Importance in Heaven or on Earth. Sure, Sir, said I, that can be no Question to
you, whose whole Life has been a continued Course of Righteousness, of daily
Worship to God, and good Will to all Men. If you have any Sins to account for,
they must be covered tenfold by the Multitude of your Charities.

Talk not, Harry, said he, of the filthy Rags of my own Righteousness. I am far
from the Confidence of the boastful Pharisee; alas, I have not even that of the
poor and humbled Publican, for I dare not look up to say, Lord, be merciful to
me a Sinner! wherefore then do you speak of having finished my Course toward
God and toward Man? It is but lately, very lately that I set out upon it, and I
am cut short before I I have got within Sight of the Goal. Yes, Harry, I fear,
I know, I feel that there is no Salvation for me.

You amaze me, Sir, said I, you terrify me to Death. If there is not Salvation
for such as you, what a Depth of Perdition opens for the rest of Mankind.

I would you could convince me, he cried, I want to be comforted, I desire
Comfort, any Kind of Consolation. But I feel my Condemnation within myself;
moreover, I see every Text of the Gospel of the Words of Life terribly
marshalled and set in broad Array against me. What Text, Sir? said I; I am sure
I know of no Texts that bring Terror or Condemnation to the Just. Ah, Harry, he
replied, Justice is of the Law and the Circumcision, and has nothing to do with
the new Covenant or the new Man. For, what says the great Apostle? Circumcision
avails nothing, neither Uncircumcision, but a new Creature. For Christ
himself had said, Except a Man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
Again, the same Apostle says, I delight in the Law of God after the inward
Man. And again, my little Children of whom I travel in Birth again, until
Christ be formed in you. Now, if all these corresponding Expressions of being
born again, a new Creature, a new Man, an inward Man, Christ formed in us, etc.
are to be glossed and explained away, as meaning little more than a State of
moral Sentiments and moral Behavior, there can be nothing of real Import in
the Gospel of Christ.

Again, hear what the Redeemer says. Except ye be converted and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Again, If any
Man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his Cross and follow
me. Again, Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he
cannot be my Disciple, etc.

If these Things, I cried, are to be taken according to the apparent Sense and
Import of the Letter, neither the Teachers of the Gospel, nor those who are
taught, can be saved.

Therefore, replied he, it is said that, Many be called but few chosen. And
again, Enter ye in at the Strait Gate, for wide is the Gate, and broad is the
Way that leads to Destruction, and many they be which go in thereat: Because
strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads unto Life, and few
there be that find it. O, my Harry, my Harry, our Lives have been employed in
seeking and loving the World and the Things of the World, therefore the Love of
the Father could not be in us. O, that I had never been born! O thou God, whose
Tribunal, at this Hour, is set up so tremendously against me; at length I feel
the Propriety of thy Precepts, in rejecting the World and all that is therein,
for what can they yield, save a little Food and Raiment to bodily Corruption,
or Incitements to that Pride which cast Lucifer into a Gulf that now opens
before me without a Bottom.

As I trembled and had nothing to answer, I proposed to bring some of our
Clergy to him. No, Harry, no, says he, I will have none of their wordy
Comforts, I will not cast my Soul upon bladder'd Expectations. Can they
persuade me that I am one of the Few who are chosen; can they tell me wherein I
have striven to enter at the strait Gate, where many shall seek to enter but
shall not be able?

Here he sunk into a a Fit of agonizing Desperation, so that a cold Dew broke
forth from all Parts of his Body, and fell, Drop after Drop, down his ghastly
and fearful Countenance. Never, Madam, never did I feel such a Kind of
anguishing Horror as I then felt, I was affrighted and all frozen to my inmost
Soul. Haste, my dear Sir, exclaimed Lady Maitland, make haste through this Part
of your Narration, I beseech you! I also feel for myself, I am terrified to the
last Degree.

At length, continued Mr. Clinton, I recollected myself a little. My Master, I
cried, my Father, my dearest Father, since you will not take Comfort in your
own Righteousness, take Comfort in that of Him who was made Righteousness for
you. Do you not now reject the World, do you not now deny yourself? I do, I do,
he said, I detest the one and the other. And do you not feel that you're wholly
a Compound of Sin and of Death? Ay, he cried, there is the Weight, there is the
Mountain under which I sink for ever. Come then to Christ, my Father, heavy
laden as you are, and he will, questionless, embrace you and be Rest to you, my
Father! I would come, Harry, he cried, but I dare not, I am not able. Strive,
my Father; do but turn to him, and he will more than meet you. Cry out, with
sinking Peter, Save, Lord, or I perish! and he will catch you with the Hand of
his ever ready Salvation.

Here, his Countenance began to settle into an earnest Composure; and his Eyes
were turned and fixed upward; while his old and enfeebled Body continued to
labor under the Symptoms of near Dissolution. At length he started, and,
seizing my Hand with a dying Pressure, there is Comfort, Harry, there is
Comfort! he cried, and expired.

I WAS now cast, once more, upon a strange and friendless World. All the
Interests of my Heart were buried with this Family; and I seemed to myself, as
without Kindred or Connections in the Midst of Mankind. Your dear Mama, indeed,
sometimes called to condole with me, and water my Losses with her Tears; and in
her, and you, my Cousin, young as you then were, was locked up and centered the
whole Stock that I had left of endearing Sensations.

As the Scenes of my former Happiness served, daily and nightly, to render me
more wretched by a sad Recollection; I determined to quit my House and to take
private Lodgings. For this Purpose I summoned Mr. Golding's Domesties, and, as
he had made no Will, I first paid them their Wages, and then gave them such
pretended Legacies as brought their Tears and their Blessings in a Shower upon
me.

As soon as I had discharged all, except the two favorite Servants of my
Master and my Matty, I desired that John, our little old Man, should be sent to
me.

John, said I, as he entered, here is a Bill for five hundred Pounds, which our
good old Master has left you, in Token of his Acknowledgment of your true and
loving Services, and to help, with what you have saved, to soften and make easy
the Bed of Death in your old Age. Do you mean to part with me, Sir, said John,
seemingly thankless and unconcerned about the Gift which I had offered him;
Indeed, John, said I, in my present State of Dejection, Attendance of any Kind
would but be an Encumbrance to me. Then, Sir, you may keep your Bounty to
yourself, for I shall break my Heart before five and twenty Hours are over.
Nay, John, said I, I am far from turning you from me; stay with me as my Friend
and welcome, but not as my Servant, and I shall see the Comfort of old Times in
always seeing you about me. Thank you, thank you, Sir, he cried, I will not
disturb you with my Tears; but, I should die unblessed, I should die unblessed,
if I died out of your Presence, so saying, he rushed from me in a Fit of
restrained Passion.

I then sent for my Wife's Maid, whom I formerly mentioned. She had just heard
of my discharging the other Servants, and entered with a sad and alarmed
Countenance. Come near, Mrs. Susan, I am going to part with you, said I, come
to me and give me a farewell Kiss. She approached with downcast Looks, when,
taking her in my Arms, I pressed and kissed her repeatedly, and scarce witheld
my Tears. O, my Girl, my Matty's precious Girl, I cried, I am not forgetful of
your Love, your Honor, and your Disinterestedness toward us. Here, my Susy,
your darling Mistress presents you with this Bill of a thousand Pounds, and, if
you choose, I will give you Cash for it within a Quarter of an Hour. This,
however, does not discharge me from my Regard and Attention to you; you are of
a helpless Sex, my Susy, that is subject to many Impositions and Calamities;
wherefore, when this Sum shall fail you, come to me again, come to me as to
your Friend, as to your Debtor, Susy, and I will repeat my Remembrance, and
repeat it again, as you may happen to have Occasion; for, while I have Sixpence
left, the favorite Friend of my Matty shall not want her Proportion.

Here, the grateful and amazed Creature threw herself on the Floor. She cried
aloud, while the Family heard and echoed to her Lamentations. She clasped my
Knees, she kissed my Feet again and again. I could not disengage myself, I
could not force her from me. O, my Master, she cried, my all that is left to me
of my adored my Angel Mistress, must I then be torn from you, must you live
without the Service of the Hands and Heart of your Susy? But, I understand your
Regard and Care for me, my Master! it is a cruel and naughty World, and must be
complied with.

Here I compelled her to rise, and kissing her again, I turned hastily to the
Chamber where my Matty's Corpse had been laid; and bolting the Door, and casting
myself on the Bed, I broke into Tears, and at length wept myself to sleep.

While I was preparing to leave the once loved Mansion, I found, in Mr.
Golding's Cabinet, a Parchment that much surprised me. On my Marriage, he had
proposed to make a Settlement of his Fortune upon me, which, however, I
obstinately refused to accept; whereupon, without my Privity, he got this Deed
perfected, which contained an absolute Conveyance to me of all his worldly
Effects and Possessions; and this again renewed in me the tender and endearing
Remembrance of each of those Kindnesses and Benefits which he had formerly
conferred upon me.

I now found myself in possession of near a Million of Money, which, however,
in my Disposition of Mind at the time, appeared no worthier than so much Lumber
in a waste Room. And I know not how it was that through the subsequent Course
of my Life, although I was by no Means of an oeconomical Turn, though I never
sued for a Debt, nor gave a Denial to the Wants of those who asked, nor turned
away from him who desired to borrow of me, yet uncoveted Wealth came pouring in
upon me.

It was not without some Sighs and a plentiful Shower, that I departed from the
Seat of all my past Enjoyments. I took Lodgings within a few Doors of your
Father; and my little Household consisted of my favorite Irishman, my little
old Man, two Footmen, and an elderly Woman who used daily to dress a plain Dish
of Meat for us.

It was then, my fairest Cousin, that your opening Graces and early Attractions
drew me daily to your House; my Heart was soothed and my Griefs cheared by the
Sweetness of your Prattle; and I was melted down and minted anew, as it were,
by the unaffected Warmth and Innocence of your Caresses.

As I had no Faith in Dreams, not even in that of my Matty, I thought it
impossible that I should ever marry again. I therefore resolved, in my own
Mind, to make you my Heir, and to endow you, in Marriage, with the best Part of
my Fortune -- But, you are a little pale, Madam, you look dejected and
fatigued. If you please, I will suspend my Narration for the present; and in
the Morning, if you choose it, as early as you will, I shall renew and proceed
in my insignificant History. -- Here he pressed her Hand to his Lips. She
withdrew with a tearful Eye and a heaving Heart; and, the next Day, he resumed
his Narration, as follows.

CHAP. XV.
THOUGH you, my Cousin, at that Time, were a great Consolation to me, and a
sweet Lightner of my Afflictions; yet the Griefs of Heart which I had suffered
were not without their Effect; at length they fell on my Constitution, and
affected my Nerves or Spirits; I think our Doctors pretty much confound the One
with the Other. Accordingly, I was advised to travel for Change of Air and
Exercise; and I was preparing for my Journey, when there happened in my Family
the most extraordinary Instance of an ever watchful Providence that occurs to
my Memory.

My little old Man John began to decline apace, and at length took to his Bed;
and, having a tender Friendship for him, I went to sit beside him, and to
comfort him the best I could. John, said I, are you afraid to die? No, Sir, not
at all, not in the least. I long to be dissolved and to be with our loving
Lord. Indeed, John, said I, I am inclined to think you have been a very good
Liver. A Dog, Sir, a mere Dog, desperately wicked, the vilest of Sinners! I am
a Murderer too, my Master, there is Blood upon my Head. Blood? said I, and
started. Yes, Sir, replied John, but then the Blood that was shed for me is
stronger and more precious than the Blood that was shed by me. Blood, however,
John, is a very terrible Thing; are you not afraid to appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ? By no Means, my dear Master, I have long since laid
the Burden of my Sins before him, for I had nothing else to bring to him,
nothing else to offer him, and he has accepted them and me, and my Conscience
is at Rest in him. Then, John, there may yet be Room for Hope. There is
Assurance, my Master, for I have laid hold upon the Rock, and cannot be shaken.

But how do you intend to dispose of your worldly Substance? All that I have,
Sir, I got with you and my old Master, and, where I found it, even there I
resolve to leave it. Indeed, John, I will not finger a Penny of your Money. How
much may it amount to? Eight Hundred and Thirty Seven Pounds, Sir, or
thereabout. And have you no Relations of your own? Not one living that I know
of. Then think of some one else, for no Part of it shall lie on my Conscience,
I assure you.

I have read somewhere or other, Sir, of a great King who was advised of God,
in a Dream, to take the very first Man, whom he should meet the next Morning,
to be his Partner in the Government. Now, if it pleases you, my Master, I will
follow the like Counsel, and whosoever shall be first found before our Door,
let that Person be the Owner and Inheritor of my Substance! It shall be even as
you say, I will go and see whom God shall be pleased to send to us.

Accordingly I went and opened our Door, when a Woman, who had nearly passed,
turned about at the Noise, and perceiving me, came up and said, a little
Charity, Sir, for the sake of him who had not where to lay his Head!

I was strongly affected by the Manner in which she addressed me, and, eyeing
her attentively, I observed that she was clean though meanly apparelled;
wherefore, to make a further Trial whether our Adventure was likely to prove
prosperous or not, I slipped a Guinea into her Hand, and desired her to go about
her Business. Accordingly, she courtesied and went from me a few Steps, when,
looking into her Hand, she turned suddenly back; Sir, Sir, says she, here had
like to have been a sad Mistake, you meant to give me a Shilling, and you have
given me a whole Guinea; it was, says I, a very great Mistake, indeed; but, be
pleased to come in, and we will try to rectify our Errors.

Here, I took her into the Chamber where John lay, and, having constrained her
to sit down, I put my Hand in my Pocket. Here, good Woman, said I, here are Ten
Guineas for you, to make you some Amends for the Mistake I was guilty of in
giving you but One. The poor Creature could scarcely credit her Senses, but,
raising her Eyes in Ecstacy, and dropping from the Chair upon her Knees, she
was proceeding to bless me; but I peremptorily insisted on her retaking her
Seat. Mistress, said I, be pleased to stay your Prayers for the present; what I
want from you is the Story of your Life; tell me who and what you are, without
suppressing any Circumstances, or concealing the Faults of which you have been
guilty, and I will make you the Mistress of twenty Guineas, that shall be added
to what you have already received.

Sir, said she, you frighten me; my Story is a very unhappy and a very foolish
Story, and cannot be of the smallest Consequence to you. Sure, you are too much
of the Gentleman to desire to ensnare me; and, indeed, I know not of any Thing
whereby I may be ensnared. Wherefore, bountiful Sir, unto you, as unto Heaven,
I will open my whole Soul, without seeking to know why you look into the
Concerns of such a Worm as I am.

I was the Daughter of a Farmer in Essex, my Maiden Name was Elenor Damer. I
was married, early in Life, to a Man who kept a Chandler's Shop in a little
Lane that led to Tower Hill, his Name was Barnaby Tirrell. Barnaby Tirrell?
exclaimed John, are you very sure that his Name was Barnaby Tirrell? Peace,
John, I cried, whatever you may know of this Man, or of any other Matter, I
command you not to interrupt the Woman till she has finished her Story. -- She
then continued.

I had neither Brother nor Sister, Sir, but one Brother, a Twin Brother, and we
loved one another, as though there was no Body else in the World to be loved.

About three Years before my Marriage, my Brother Tommy, then a sweet pretty
Lad, took to a seafaring Life, and went from me, I knew not where, upon a
Voyage that I was told was a very great Way off, and so I cried, Day and Night,
as many Tears after him as would have served me to swim in.

My Husband was very fond of me, and, when he used to see me cry, while I spoke
of my Tommy, he would kiss me and try to comfort me, and say, that he wished
for nothing more than his Return to Old England, that he might welcome him and
love him as much as I did.

One Night, on the ninth Month of my Marriage, as I sat moping and alone, my
Husband being abroad upon some Business, I heard a knocking at the Door, which
was opened by our little Servant Girl. And then, before you could say this, in
leaped my Brother, and catched me fast in his dear Arms.

I gave a great Shout for Joy, you may be sure; and pushing my Tommy from me,
and pulling him to me again and again, we embraced, and cried, and kissed; and
embraced and kissed again, as though we never could be tired.

In the mean while, the Door being open, my cruel Barnaby entered, unperceived
by either of us; and seeing a strange Man so fond and familiar with me, he
opened a long hasped Knife which he had in his Pocket, and rushing up, he gave
my darling Brother three Stabs in the Body, before he could speak a Word or
turn about to defend himself. Then, casting down the Knife, in a Minute he was
out of the House, and I never saw him more.

For a Time, I stood like a Stone, and then giving a great Shriek, I fainted
and fell on my Brother as he lay weltring in his Blood.

Our little Mary, in the while, being frighted almost to Death, ran about like
a wild Thing, and alarmed the Street. Our Neighbors crowded in, and sent for
the next Surgeon. My Brother's Wounds were probed and dressed, and he was laid
in our spare Bed.

Mean time, being forward with Child, I fell into strong and untimely Labor,
and after very grievous Travail, was delivered of a Boy, who was christened and
called James, after my dear and lately deceased Father.

No Pains of my own, however, kept me from enquiring after that dear and
lamented Brother who had been killed, as I supposed, for his Love to me. But
his Youth and natural Strength carried him through all Dangers. In three Months
he was up and about as well as ever. And, in less than three more, he set out
on another Voyage, from whence he never, never, O never returned.

Before he went abroad, my dear and sweet Fellow had left me a Note of Hand for
the Receipt of his Wages. But, in five Years after, I heard that he was cast
away, or killed by the Barbary People; and, though I went and went again, in
the middle of my Wants, and in the the middle of my Sorrows, to ask and to
petition for his Pay from the Admiralty, I never could get an Answer of any
Profit or any Comfort.

My little Jemmy, however, grew and throve and prated apace, and was my only
Prop under all my Afflictions. My Husband, indeed, had left me in pretty
Circumstances, and, had he but stayed with me, we should have prospered above
our Fellows. But, what can a Woman do, single, weak, and unprotected? I was
imposed upon by some; by others I was refused Payment for the Goods that I had
given, and at length I was reduced to Poverty, and obliged to shut up Shop.

Mean time I had spared no Cost on the bringing up of my Jemmy. I had given him
School Learning, and he now was grown a very towardly and clever Boy. And,
having taken to Messages, my sweet Fellow, over Night, used to bring to me
whatever he had earned in the Day Time.

In the Loss of my Husband and Brother; in the Loss of my Barnaby, and in the
Loss of my Tommy, to be sure I had Grief upon Grief; so that my Health went
from me, and next my Strength went from me, and I was not able to work at the
washing Business as before. But this didn't signify much, while my Child had
his Health; for he had now got a Porter's Place in the Custom-house, and, young
as he was, he willingly carried heavy Burdens to have the Pleasure of bringing
Home his hard Earnings to his Mammy. But, about six Weeks ago, may it please
your Honor, my dear Boy fell ill of a Quartan Ague, as they call it, under
which he, and his Mother's Heart still continue to Labor.

As soon as she had ended her short Narrative, well, John, said I, methinks
this Business will do; in my Opinion you have got a very worthy Inheritor of
your Fortune; what say you to it, John? First, Sir, let me ask her a Question
or two, if you please. Honest Woman, draw your Chair a little nearer to me, I
pray you. And now, tell me the Truth; did you ever Love your Husband? Yes,
dearly, indeed, very dearly did I love him; for he had loved me very dearly,
till that miserable Night. But when, as I thought, he had killed my Brother, I
hated him as much as I had ever loved him before. But then again, when my Tommy
had recovered of his Wounds, I sent far and near to enquire after him and find
him out; and when I could learn no Tidings of him, I put it into all the
printed Papers, that Thomas Damer was well recovered, and that Barnabas Tirrel,
who had wounded him, might return, without Danger, to his Wife and Infant.

And he is returned, shouted John, he is returned, my Nelly; your barbarous and
bloody Husband, who stabbed your Brother, and left you and your Infant to
famish, he is returned to you, my Nelly! and, in his Death, he shall make you
Amends for all the Sufferings which he brought upon you, during his Lifetime.
But, my Master, my dearest Master, send immediately for my Child, my Jemmy, I
beseech you, that, bad as I am myself, I may give him a Father's Blessing
before I die!

I was surprised and affected, Madam, beyond Expression, by Incidents that were
at once so wonderful and so tender; and I directly sent Servants and a
Sedan-Chair for James, with Orders to have him carefully and warmly wrapped up;
for, what his Mother told me of him had, already, given me a very strong
Prejudice in his Favor.

Mean while, Mrs. Tirrel had sunk on her Knees by her Husband's Bedside, and
was plentifully pouring forth her Tears upon him; partly for Joy of having
found him, and partly for Grief of having found him in that Condition.

O, my Nelly, my Nelly, cried Barnabas, had I known who the Person was whose
Blood I drew that terrible Night, I would sooner have thrust my Knife into my
own Heart, than into any Part of the Body of that dear Brother of yours. But I
was old and ugly, you know; and you were young and handsome; and Jealousy is a
mad Devil that rages in the Breast like Hellfire; it never knew how to spare,
but tears and consumes every thing that comes within its Reach.

At length James was brought to us, and, as we were in his Father's Apartment,
a Chamber no way adorned, James entered without any Respect to Persons. He was
a tall and comely Youth, but very pale and lean, and, as it was one of his well
Days, he walked in without Help. He had barely been told that his Mother sent
for him in a Hurry; so that he entered with a visible Alarm in his Countenance.

What is the Matter, my dear Mother? says he; alas, I am little able to help
you at present. I hope nothing has happened that is suddenly distressful.
Nothing amiss, my Child, more than that your dear Father, for whom I have
sought and been sighing this many a Year, your Father lies dangerously ill in
this very Bed, my Jemmy. Am I then so blessed, cried the Boy, as to see and
embrace a Father? O my Child, exclaimed the old Man, and eagerly stretched his
Arms toward him, come to my Bosom, thou only Offspring of my Bowels! I may now
say, with blessed Jacob, let me die, let me die, since I have seen thy Face,
and thou art alive, my Son!

I would at any Time give a thousand Pounds, my Cousin, for a Tenth of the
Enjoyment that I then had, in the Feelings which God poured into the Hearts of
this little Family, on their so very unexpected and mavelous a Meeting. It
appeared to me, however, that young James even exceeded his Parents in Love;
and this gave me such a cordial Attachment to him, that from that Hour to this
we have never been sundered. He never failed nor forsook me; and, at this very
Day, he is my respected Friend, and the Superintendant of my Family.

John, otherwise Barnabas, continued to linger, for about a Fortnight longer,
and then departed quite happy, and without a Groan. During the same Space also,
James was daily attended by my own Physician, and was nearly reestablished in
his Health.

Being then intent on my Departure, I sent for Mrs. Tirrel. Mrs. Tirrel, says
I, I should be much inclined to take your James along with me, if I did not
think you would grieve overmuch in his Absence. No, no, Sir, said she, I would
to Heaven I were, myself, a young Man for your sake. I desire no better either
of him or for him, than that he should live and die faithfully and lovingly in
your Service.

The next Day I went down the Thames in a Barge, partly for Recreation, and
partly to speak to the Captain of the Vessel in which I proposed to embark. As
I drew near to the Custom-house Wharf, I observed a Wherry, crowded with Men
whom she was about to land at the Stairs; and, on Enquiry, I was informed that
they were Slaves, whom our Consul at Algiers, by his Intercession or Bounty,
had ransomed and sent Home.

Immediately, Compassion rose powerfully in my Bosom. Alas, said I, to myself,
I see that I am not without Companions in Affliction. I, indeed, have now,
neither Wife nor Children; nor Father nor Mother; nor Brother, as I may say,
nor Sister; nor any Connection with the World in which I live. I am shut out,
as it were, from every Enjoyment upon Earth. Let me not however be envious; let
me rather wish, and give, and dispense Enjoyment to others; since, to give Joy
to others is all the Joy, in this World, that is left to myself.

Here, I ordered my People to land, and, coming up to the late Captives, My
Friends, said I, you are welcome once more to Old England! I am fond of hearing
Adventures; You, also, may have got your Appetites; and, if you will favor me
with your Company, I will order a Dinner for us at yonder Tavern.

I need not tell you, Madam, that the Parties were soon agreed. While a
plentiful Dinner was providing, I met Alderman Bicker, a City Magistrate and an
old Acquaintance of mine. Sir Thomas, said I, I insist on your dining with me,
to Day, at the Phaenix there. Perhaps your Companions will not appear to you of
the most honorable Sort. They are, however, good Gospel Guests, Sir Thomas,
and consist of the Halt, the Lame, the Maimed, and the Beggar. In short, I have
invited all yonder ragged Regiment, being about five and thirty Slaves from
Barbary, to Dinner; and, after I have filled their Bellies, I intend to give
them a hundred Pounds, per Man, to help them to begin the World again, and to
keep them from being an Encumbrance on their Country.

Five and thirty hundred Pounds! exclaimed Sir Thomas Bicker, five and thirty
hundred times twenty Shillings of Sterling English! Its well for you, Harry
Clinton, that old Golding was born before you; but nothing can hold you long at
this Rate. To whom, again, do you propose to give this unmeasurable Bounty? to
the Excrements of the Public, to Nuisances and Offenses against Society; to
Wretches whom England has spewed forth from a sick and debauched Stomach. But,
I suppose you expect to purchase extraordinary Glories in Heaven, as the Reward
of these very extraordinary Charities on Earth. No, indeed, Sir Thomas, said I,
I shall never crave nor look for any Thing, at the Hands of the Son of David,
save only Mercy from him, and Justification in him. However, my good Friend, if
you will indulge me with your Company, you yourself shall be Judge of the Merit
of the Parties, and I will wholly be guided by your Advice. Then, says he, do
you saunter here a few Minutes; while, in order to open the Hearts of your
Guests, I go and give them a Priming before Dinner.

As soon as Sir Thomas had executed his Purpose, he came forth, and, beckoning
me to him, put his Mouth to my Ear. Don't be offended, says he, at some free
Expressions that I may happen to let loose, in order to encourage these Fellows
to the like Liberty, and show you what Metal your Companions are made of.

Dinner was now served up on a Range of joined Tables, and Sir Thomas, with an
easy and cheerful Familiarity, desired that they would seat themselves without
Ceremony. This many of them did with a Freedom not far from Impudence, while
others drew back abashed, and begged Permission to stand.

At the Head of the first Sort was seated a Fellow whose first Sight gave my
Nerves a Thrill of Horror. His Countenance was of that Cast in which any one
would place an implicit Confidence who wanted an Associate for any dark,
traitorous, or bloody Purposes.

When the Cloth was removed, my Friend pushed the Bottles about very jovially,
and began to talk as an utter Latitudinarian in Morals, whereby he gained the
Confidence of every Rogue in Company.

As soon as most of them were well warmed, for some drank but sparingly, Sir
Thomas took out his Purse, and, tossing a Guinea to each of them, Now, my brave
Friends, says he, if you desire any more Favors, you must tell me openly and
honestly the jolly Use you intend to make of your Money to Night. Why, Master,
answered the ill looking Villain, as for me and my six Companions here, we have
had a long Lent, and a Wench is the Word! That Is gallantly spoken, cried out
Sir Thomas, here are three Guineas more, apiece, for you Seven. And now, my
brave Friends, I shall not be backward of another Bounty, if you will give me a
short History of your Adventures.

That is soon done, my Master, answered the Spokesman. We seven were taken
Prisoners by an Algerine Corsair, after an Engagement in which seven and twenty
more of us lay in Blood upon Deck. We were sold to one Pedro Paolo, a Renegade,
who, having been of all Religions in Christendom, had at length turned Turk. We
were used very severely, and, after sweating all Day, were made to sweat Blood
at Night with the Stripes which they gave us. However, we were hardy Dogs, and
did not matter this very much; when one of their Priests came privately to us,
and promised that, if we would forsake Christ, and turn to Mahomet, he would
ensure us Liberty and Riches here, and Paradise hereafter. These, Sir, as you
well know, were very tempting Things. But, as soon as our Master understood
that we had complied with the Terms; he hurried us, by Night, into one of his
Galleys, where we were chained to the Oar, our Ears were lopped as you see,
and, at every Meal of Bread and Water, we received ten Lashes. At length his
Honor, the Ambassador, I forget how they call him, found us out and redeemed
us, and so you see us here.

Pray, my Friend, said Sir Thomas, are there any more in this Company whom you
could recommend to me, as being of the same Gallantry of Spirit with yourself?
Yes, said he, there are the two John's, and the two Andrews yonder, who are none
of the Saint John's or Saint Andrews, I promise you. But yonder sits our Saint
Thomas, a canting Son of a Bitch; he wanted, truly, to preach to us, during our
Voyage; and, in the last Storm, he would have persuaded us, forsooth, to join
with him in Prayer. Here then, cried Sir Thomas, you two no Saint John's, and
you two no Saint Andrews, here are three Pieces a Man for you also; and that
Money, I hope, Gentlemen, will be sufficient to maintain you in Gaol, till we
can hear a better Account of you. Ho, Drawer! are the People I sent for in
Waiting? They are, please your Honor. Desire them to step in.

Here entered a Sergeant at Mace with a great Posse of Constables. Sergeant,
said Sir Thomas, take these seven and these four into your Custody, and keep
them in close Durance till you hear further from me; I would rather open the
Tower Cages, and let all the wild Beasts abroad through the Streets, than loose
such Reprobates as these among Mankind.

At this Instant, as a Constable was laying hold on our gallant Spokesman, he
suddenly drew an Instrument that was half Knife and half Dagger, and leaping
across me, he caught Sir Thomas by the Throat, and raising his Arm, would have
plunged the Steel into his Bosom; but, at the same Moment, I seized his Hand,
and throwing up his Heels, I cast him on his Back, and wrenched the Weapon from
him.

As soon as we were thus rid of eleven of our Guests, a young Man came
earnestly up to us: Gentlemen, says he, till those seven Hell Hounds were
secured, I did not dare to open my Mouth. I know them all right well, and, had
they known me, there is not one of them but would have thrust his Knife into my
Heart.

About eleven Years ago, I was taken as cabin Boy, when they, with many more,
were taken as Sailors on Board the good Ship Saint Catharine, Mr. William
Tomson, Master, bound for the West Indies. As soon as we came along side the
Canaries, this big Villain, Patrick Mc. Douel, prevailed on most of the Crew to
enter into a Conspiracy, whereupon they barbarously and sportingly murdered the
Master, the Officers, and all who were not of their own Gang, except myself,
being then about ten Years of Age. But they did not prosper long, for, the very
next Morning, we were held in Chase, and then they wished for the Help of those
Hands whom they had cut off. So, as Mc. Douel told you, after a very bloody
Battle, we were boarded and taken, and those seven Confederates were sold to
one Master; and, well as it happened for me, I was sold to another; and all
this and more, I am ready to witness in any Court, provided I am kept safe from
the Clutches of those Devils.

Ay, exclaimed Sir Thomas, these are your Charities, Mr. Clinton; and such the
Objects of whom your Judgment has made Choice. Ah, my Friend, I replied, that
Charity must be very tardy, which waits to be assured of the Merit of its
Object. Christ himself cured ten Lepers, while he knew that nine of them were
unworthy of his Graciousness.

On the Entrance of the Constables, I had cast my Eye round the Room, and
remarked that most of our Mess-mates seemed much alarmed, and turned pale on
the Caption of their late Comrades, which rendered their Characters, also,
somewhat suspected to me. Wherefore, lest I should cast my Seed on a wholly
barren Soil, I wished to get some further Intelligence concerning them. Where,
said I, is the Person whom they call Saint Thomas? I desire a few Words with
him.

Here a Man approached, respectfully, from the farther End of the Table, to
which, through Modesty, he had retreated with his few Companions. Mr. Thomas,
said I, looking earnestly at him, have I not seen your Face before? No, please
your Honor, I think that must be impossible. It is now upon eighteen Years
since I set a Foot in this Kingdom, and your Honor, must then have been but as
a Child. Do you know any Thing, Mr. Thomas, of these People or their Affairs?
Nothing of their Affairs, Sir, and little more of their Persons, than that they
are, all, Men of very profane Lips; except the Lad who spoke to you last, and
my five Mess-mates yonder, the only People who, during our long and dangerous
Voyage, would return Thanks to God for any of his Mercies, or pray him to avert
his just Judgments from them.

Then, said I, we will proceed between Extremes. On the one Side, we will not
minister Fuel to the Lusts of these unhappy Creatures: neither will we leave
them to perish; or tempt them, through Want, to Robbery, on the other Side.
Here, Landlady, take this Bill. Give twenty Pounds to each of these seventeen
Fellows, and, if any of them, within a Month, shall bring you a Certificate of
his good Behavior, give him twenty Pounds more. Now, Sir Thomas, I may hope,
that I do not exceed your good Pleasure. Not much, Harry, not much, in Time you
may be tractable.

Here the poor Wretches looked amazed, and scarce crediting the Reality of the
Bounty that was ordered for them, they cried, thank your Honors, thank your
Honors! and withdrew. One of them, however, seemed to linger after the rest,
and, going out last, he returned again quickly, and threw himself at my Feet. I
am a Reprobate, Sir, a mere Reprobate, he cried, and am not worthy of your
Charity. Does your Conscience condemn you then, said I? It does, Sir, it does.
Then I condemn you not; rise, rise, and give me your Hand, my Brother!

Mr. Clinton, said Sir Thomas, now that I have kept you from casting so much
Money on the Quicksands, you can afford to be the more generous to these worthy
Fellows. You will allow me then, said I, to order our Landlady to pay them a
hundred Pounds apiece. With all my Heart, says he, and if you will be so honest
as to reimburse me the sixty or seventy Pieces, which I threw away, for your
Use, upon the other Villains, I will add something to that, also, and divide it
among them.

Then, Sir Thomas, if you will indulge me with your Company for an Hour or two
longer, let us send for an Undertaker to put our Friends here in decent
Apparel; while we listen to what they shall be pleased to tell us of their
Fortunes. Agreed, Harry, agreed. So, let us resume our Seats, and have the
other Bottle.

Mister Thomas, said I, pray what may be your Surname? Damer, Sir. Damer,
Damer! have you any Relations in this Kingdom? Alas, Sir, I fear not; my
Father, Christopher Damer of Essex, died a little before I set out on my last
Voyage. And had you no Relation beside? O, Sir, that is it, which brought the
Tears so suddenly into my Eyes! I had a Sister, an only Sister, a Sister that I
loved dearer than Health or Safety. But -- I fear -- I fear -- here his Speech
was stopped by his Emotion; while I was ready to leap up and catch him in my
Arms; but I suppressed my Inclinations, for the present, that I might heighten
the Surprise and Pleasure which I foresaw there would be at the Meeting of the
Twins.

While all Materials were providing, from the several Ware Houses, for the
Clothing and Accommodation of our Guests; they, successively, gave us an
Abstract of their respective Lives and Histories, wherein were many Incidents
extremely interesting and entertaining. Let us have them, let us have them, by
all Means! cried Lady Maitland. My dear Madam, said Mr. Clinton, were I to
relate to you the several affecting Stories that occurred to me, throughout my
Travels, from Prisons, from the Depth of Dungeons; from Captives, and from
Persons redeemed from Captivity; from Wretches wrecked at Sea, or wrecked by
Fortune; from those who survived the Calamities of Warfare and Famine, I should
never make an End.

But then, said the Countess, the poor Creature who felt so sudden and
affecting a Compunction; I have a Friendship for that Fellow, and I am deeply
interested in all the Concerns of my Friend, I must tell you. Well, Madam, you
shall have his Story, then, as nearly as I can recollect at this Distance of
Time.

CHAP. XVI. The HISTORY of a REPROBATE.
I Know not, Gentlemen, said he, who my Parents were. I was found, when an
Infant, wrapped in Rags on a Cobler's Bulk, in Westminster. The Wardens sent me
to the Parish Nursery for Foundlings; and, when I was capable of Instruction,
they sent me to the Charity-School.

When I had learned to read and write, I was bound, a Servant Apprentice, to
Mr. Skinner, a neighboring Attorney. My Mistress grew fond of me; she was a
very holy Woman; she taught me my Prayers and Catechize, and made me read to
her every Night, and repeat Chapters and Psalms, till I had nearly got Half the
Bible by rote.

As my Master used to send me on many Errands and Messages, and to entrust me
with little Matters of Money on such Occasions, on finding me always punctual
and honest to him, he began to love me almost as much as my good Mistress did.

But now came on my first falling away from all Goodness. I was about twelve
Years old, when, in a cursed Hour, my Master sent me to a distant Part of the
Town, with a Bill to pay some Money, and to bring him back the Change. The
Change amounted to about four Pounds in glittering Silver. It appeared a Mint
of Money. I had never been in Possession of so large a Heap; and I sighed, and
said to myself, how blessed must they be who are become the rich Owners of so
much Money. Then, some one seemed to whisper me that I was the Owner; and again
some one seemed to whisper me that I was not the Owner. Then, I would go
forward toward my Master; and again I would stop and go aside. Then, I would
thrust my Hand into my Pocket, and feel the Greatness of my Treasure, then turn
to the Wall, and lay the Brightness of it before my Eyes. Then I would run a
Piece off, as hurried away by the Force of the Temptation; and again, I would
delay, and stop, and turn, and strive to force myself homeward. Till, what with
doubting and delaying, and struggling off and on, and going backward and
forward, I considered that, if I went home, I should now get nothing but Blame
and Beating, and so I took a head, and ran into the Country as fast as my Feet
could carry me.

As I ran myself out of Breath, from time to time, I would look back and look
back, and run on and run on, in the Thought that my Master, or some one from
him, was at my Heels. But, often since, I have reflected and was persuaded in
my Mind, that my kind Master and Mistress had not the least Suspicion of me,
but rather enquired and sorrowed after me, as being murdered or kidnapped from
them, and this also was, at times, a great Grief of Heart to me.

When I was quite tired and jaded, and Night came on, I turned up to a
Carrier's Inn, where was written dry Lodgings over the Door. But, as I feared
every thing, I had the Cunning to conceal my Treasure, and taking a Penny from
my Pocket, I begged the Woman of the House, for that and Charity's Sake, to
give me a little Bread and Milk, and some Hole to lie in.

Having finished my Supper, I was shown to a kind of Hovel that lay under the
Stairs, where, throwing myself on some Straw, with a Piece of a Blanket over
me, I fell fast as a Rock. Awakening, however, about Midnight, or somewhat
after, and seeing all dark about me, and no Creature near Hand; I began to
tremble greatly; and then I wished to say my Prayers, but I did not dare to
pray; and so I lay sweating and trembling, and trembling and sweating, till the
Dawning of the Day brought some Relief to my Spirits.

Having breakfasted at the Cost of a second Penny, I set out, though not with
my former Speed; for, reflecting that I had not my Livery on, but a small Frock
Coat, I was under the less Fear of being known. However, I pushed on as well as
I was able, wanting still to get as far from Danger as possible. And, indeed, I
hoped, by going on still further and further, to get away from my own Fears and
from my own Conscience.

O Gentlemen, what Misery did I not endure, at that Season! the Trust I had in
my Treasure began now to abate, the Dread of losing it also brought new
Troubles upon me; Peace was banished from within me; and without, there was no
Place whereto I might fly for Rest.

On the fifth Morning of my Travels, having expended what Halfpence and small
Silver I had; I took out Half a Crown, and offered it to the Man of the House,
desiring him to return what was over the Reckoning. As he took it, he gave me a
Look that I thought went through me, and continuing to stare me in the Face, he
shamed me so, that I was constrained to turn aside. He gave me the Change,
however, and I set forward on my Journey, all trembling and apprehending I knew
not what.

I had not gone above a Mile, when, meeting a dirty Road, I turned over a Style
that led to a Path through the Fields. Here I walked on a Piece, when, turning,
I saw my Landlord making long Strides after me, whereupon my Heart beat, and my
Knees grew so weak under me that I stood as still as a Stone.

He came quickly up with me, and, seizing me by the Neck, he cast me on my
Back. Ha! you young Rogue, says he, let us see what Money you have got. Then,
diving into my Pockets, he pulled out the whole Stock in which I trusted for
Happiness. O, you little Dog of a Villain, from whom have you stolen all this
Treasure? but, I must go and return it to the right Owner. O, good Sir, good
Sir, I roared out, will you not leave me a little? ever so little, dear Sir, to
keep me from starving? but he was deaf to my Cries and Prayers, and away he
went.

Hope, the last Comfort of the Miserable, now forsook me. I cursed, at my
Heart, the Day in which I was born; and I lay a long Time, as one who had no
Use for Limbs, nor any further Way to travel upon Earth. At length I broke into
Shouts and a great Gush of Tears; and having got some Ease by venting my
Sorrows, I rose, by a Kind of Instinct, and went on I knew not whither.

Growing hungry after Noon, I would willingly have begged the Charity of
Passengers, but this I did not dare to do, for fear they should ask me whence I
came, and who I was, and whereto I was going, Questions to which I could give
no very honest Answer. So, I bore my Hunger as well as I could, till coming
over Night to a Hovel where a Farmer kept his Pigs, I made way for myself among
them, and slept in the Straw till Morning.

The Day following, as I passed slowly and half famished through a small
Village, my Eye catched at a Penny Loaf that lay on a little Shop Window which
jutted into the Street. I looked here and there, and peered into the Shop, and
was just going to seize the ready and tempting Spoil; when something whispered,
at my Heart, don't touch it for your Life, starve, starve, rather than offer to
steal any more, and so I tore myself away, and, running as fast as I could, for
fear of turning back, I at last got clear off from the Reach of this Temptation.

When I had traveled something further, I got into an enclosed Country, where
there were Hedges on every Side, with Plenty of Haws and Bramble Berries on
every Bush. And here I filled my Belly with Berries to serve me for Dinner; and
I stuffed my Pockets with Haws against I should want. Upon this I grew
wonderful glad that I had not taken the Loaf; and Peace again began to come
upon my Mind; and, about Night-fall, having reached a Copse on one Side of the
Road, I crept, like a Hare, under the Shelter of the Bushes; I then supped upon
my Haws, after which I kneeled down and half ventured at a Prayer to God; and
gathering up in my Form, I slept happily till Morning.

Having lived thus for some Days, I came into an open Country, where there was
scarce any Path, nor any Haw or Berry within many a Mile. I now began to grow
sick and faint with Hunger; and again my Sickness went off, and I became so
greedy and ravenous that I was ready to eat my own Flesh from the Bones. Soon
after, I spied, at a Distance, a confused Heap of something at the Root of a
great Tree that grew in the open Fields. I made up to it in Expectation of I
knew not what, and found an old Beggarman fast asleep in his patched Cloak,
with a Bundle of somewhat lying beside him.

Instantly I opened his little Baggage, when, to my inexpressible Transport, a
large Luncheon of brown Bread, with some Halfpence, struck my Eyes. I did not
hesitate a Moment about seizing the Bread, for I could no more withstand the
Cravings of my Appetite, at the time, than I could withstand a Torrent rushing
down a Hill. Having appeased my Stomach, I began to demur about what I should
do with the Remainder of the Bread, and felt a Motion or two inclining me to
leave it behind me. But, no, said I to myself, this is all the Bread that I
have, or may ever have during Life, and I know not where to get a Bit in the
whole World; beside, I do this Man no Harm in taking it away, since I leave him
Money enough wherewith to buy more. So I put the Bread in my Pocket, and went
on my Way, leaving behind me about four or five Pence in the Wrapper.

I had not gone far, however, before I said to myself again, this Man is a
Beggar by Trade, and gets Halfpence from every Passenger that goes the Road.
But alas, no one living has any Pity upon me, and so, to starve alive, or take
the Money, is all the Question. So saying or so thinking, I went back on
Tiptoes, and stooping and seizing my Prey, I flew away like Lightening.

As soon as I had got out of the Reach and Sight of the poor Man, the first
Motion I felt was the Joy of having such a Prize; but I had not gone far till
this Joy was much abated, my Sighs began to heave, and my Tears to flow apace.

That Night, I took up my Lodging in a little waste Cabin that lay a Piece off
the Road. But though, as I thought, I had Plenty of Bread, and Money enough
about me, yet I found myself exceeding heavy, and I was not able to pray, as I
did the foregoing Nights.

During all this time, I neither knew where I was, nor whereto I was going, nor
any thing more of my Travels than that I came from London. When I had spent to
my last Penny, and was walking, slow and melancholy, on a By-path that led
through some woody Lawns, I heard the Voice of Merriment, and, quickly after,
perceived a Group of Gypsies that came from behind some Trees.

As I saw that I could not escape them, I gathered Courage and went forward,
when coming up, they stopped and eyed me with much Attention, and made a Ring
about me. Where are you going, my Child, says a Man with a broad Girdle and a
very formidable Beard? Indeed, Sir, said I, I cannot tell. And where did you
come from then? From London, Sir, so please you. From London, Child? why that
is a very great Way off. And pray what made you leave London? To get away from
my Master. But, I hope you did not come away empty, you brought something from
him, didn't you? Some little Matter, good Sir, but I was robbed of it on the
Way. Hereupon, this venerable Regent smiled, and turning to his Dependents, as
far as I see, said he, this Chap will answer our Purposes to a Hair.

Here, one of the Females asked if I was hungry, and, on my Answer in the
affirmative, they all invited me with a jovial Air to Dinner. We then turned a
Distance off from the Path wherein we had met, and gradually descended into one
of the pleasantest Spots in the World. It was a Dell surrounded with Hills,
some of which were slanting, some headlong and impending, and all covered or
spotted with Groups of Trees, of different Heights, Sorts, and Colors; through
which there descended a gurgling Rivulet, which, having rolled over Stones and
Pebbles, grew silent in a small Lake, that reflected the circling Objects from
the Vale below.

Immediately, Nature's Carpet was covered with a large Cloth of fine damasked
Linen. The Baggage was taken from the Shoulders of the Bearers; and, before I
could take note of what they were about, there was spread, as by Art magic,
before my Eyes, the most various and sumptuous Banquet I had ever beheld. Down,
instantly, sunk the Guests; some sitting, like the Turks, crosslegg'd; while
others lolled, like the Romans, along side of each other.

As they had traveled far that Day, they all eat in Silence; and, in a short
Space, the Burden of the Luggage-carriers was pretty much lightened. In the
mean time, some arose, and unladed two Asses of the Creels which they carried.
The Cloth then was quickly emptied of the cold Fowls and baked Meats, with the
Loins of Beef and Mutton; and leathern Jacks, that contained Plenty of the best
Wines and other Liquors, were set before us. These, again, were decanted into
clean japanned Pitchers; and a japanned Cup, of equal Measure, was given into
every Hand.

Then began Mirth and Jollity to flow round with the Cups; never did I see so
pleasant, so gleeful a Company. Joke and Banter, without Offense, were bandied
from every Side; and Bursts of Laughter were echoed from the answering Hills.

As soon as I was warmed and my Heart opened by what I drank, they all
expressed a Liking and Kindness for me, and requested that I would tell them my
Story, without Disguise. Accordingly, I made an ingenuous Confession of all the
Matters related. But, instead of meeting those Reproofs which I expected for my
Wickedness, they jointly began to ridicule my Scruples, and put to shame the
little Shame that I had of my evil Deeds.

My Child, said their ancient Governor, when you have been a sufficient time
with us, you will then learn what it is to be wise and to be happy. You will
then know that Religion is nothing but Hypocrisy or Fashion. There are
Thousands and ten Thousands of Religions upon Earth, all contrary, and fighting
the one against the other. People pretend to fear God, when it is the Fear of
the Laws, alone, that is before their Eyes. God is not to be feared but to be
loved, my Son, for he is a very gracious and a bountiful God: He gave the
Heavens, in common, to the Birds of the Air. He gave the Seas and Rivers, also,
in common to the Fishes. And he gave this whole Earth in common to Mankind.
But, great People and People of Power have seized it all to themselves, and
they have made to themselves Possessions and Properties by Fences and
Enclosures; and they have again enclosed those Enclosures by Laws of their own
making, whereby the Poor are to be punished when they attempt to reclaim any
Part of the natural Rights with which God had gifted them. But, when the Poor,
without Fear of the Laws, can gain any thing from the Rich and the Mighty who
have robbed them of their Rights, they may surely do it with a safe and an
honest Conscience. And now, know, my Child, that you are come among those who,
of all People can best defend you and make you happy. We are of that Sort of
the Poor who are above the Rich and the Mighty, by being above the Laws; for
they can frame no Laws which are of any more Force to us than the Web of a
Spider.

So spoke this formidable Sage; and indeed, Gentlemen, however strange it may
seem, I saw the latter Part of his Assertion fully verified by Practice. I
continued among this very singular and wonderful People, near the Space of
three Years; during which time they initiated me into all the Arts and
Mysteries of their manifold Iniquities. No Fetters could hold them; no Prisons
could contain them; no Bolts or Locks could secure the Treasures of the Wealthy
from them. By the means of Spells or certain Odours, as it were by Enchantment,
all Beasts became subject to them; the wildest Horse would stand for them; the
fiercest Mastiffs did not dare to bay or growl at them; so that all
Bleachgreens, Yards, and Gardens were as open to their Invasion as the Highway.
They assumed all Sorts of Shapes, and almost all Sorts of Sizes. They became
visible and invisible, known or unknown at Pleasure; for every different Dress
they had a different Countenance and Set of Features; so that their daily
Intimates could not know them, except by appointed Words or Tokens. And thus,
without Violence or apparent Fraud, without Bustle, Indictment, or Accusation
on any Side, they overruled the Government, and held, as it were, the Purses
of the whole Nation in their Hands.

You will wonder, Gentlemen, by what Policy these People could maintain their
Influence and Depredations, undetected, throughout the Kingdom. I will account
for this Matter as clearly and as briefly as I can.

Though they never appeared, by Day, except single or in small Parties of ten
or fifteen at most, yet they kept their State entire, by quick and constant
Intelligence. Beside, their Prince or principal Potentate, who was the Person
that first accosted me, they had a deputy Governor for every Shire; and, in
every Parish, they had a House of common Use and common Resort to the
Fraternity. Here their Victuals were dressed and their Provisions laid in; and
here also were deposited the Spoils of the Public, which, when converted into
Money, was locked in a strong Box, one tenth for the use of the Society on any
Emergence, and the other nine for the Benefit of the Spoilers, in Proportion to
their respective Ranks and Merits.

Before we rose from our late mentioned Festival, an ancient female
Fortune Tellers chucked me under the Chin and said, do you know, my Dear, where
this same kind Landlord lives who robbed you of your Money? All I know, said I,
is that he lives in a little Town at the Sign of a white Cross, and near to a
great Windmill. What, cried one of the Men, my old Host Jerry Gruff? he hates
that any, except himself, should prosper by their Ingenuity. I owe that Fellow
a Fling, cried another, for once attempting to circumvent me in his own House.
Well, my Lad, says Geoffry, the old Governor, his House lies directly in the
Way of our Circuit, and, for your Encouragement, I promise you that he shall
refund you every Penny of the Money he took from you.

The Luggage being now up, we set back on the Field Path by which I came; and,
coming to a great Road, we divided into small Parties, who were appointed to
meet at the Parish-house, where we supped merrily and slept soundly for that
Night.

We set out, the next Morning, by Dawn of Day, and entering soon after upon a
Common, we saw a Parcel of Horses feeding without a Keeper. Immediately, three
of the likeliest were taken from the rest. Out came Scissars and other
Implements, with Phials of coloring Essences, and to work went many Hands,
when, in less than five Minutes, had the Owners come up, they could not have
found a single Mark of their own Property upon them. And, indeed, I have
frequently known some of those, my ingenious Brotherhood, so very audacious as
to sell, in public Marker, the Cattle, which they had stolen, to the very
Persons from whom they were taken.

As these People were never unprovided of their Conveniences, the Horses were
quickly bridled and dispatched, by several Emissaries, several Ways, to summon
the neighboring Brotherhood, on the third Night, to meet near the white Cross
with their appointed Apparatus.

Accordingly, on the Evening of the Night required, we arrived on a little Hill
that stood opposite to the House of my conscientious Landlord; and, soon after,
we were joined by several Parties, from several Sides, amounting to about a
hundred and twenty Persons, with Parcels of I knew not what upon Asses, etc.

The Packs were quickly opened, and from thence were produced black and flame
colored Gowns, Flambeaux, Hoofs, and Horns, and Vizards of horrid Aspect and
terrific Dimension. In a Hurry, we were all fitted with our respective Dresses
and Characters. A large pasteboard Coffin was covered with a white Sheet, and
exalted upon the Shoulders of four fiery Devils; and, as Night began to fall
dark and heavy upon us, a Light was struck, the Flams were lighted, one was put
into every right Hand; speaking Trumpets, with other Instruments of
heart-sinking Sounds, were put to many a Mouth, and we directly set out on our
diabolical Procession. Some roared like Bulls, others houled and bayed like
Dogs at a midnight Moon, while others yelled articulately in the catterwawling
Gibberish; in short, the Sounds made such a Complication of Horrors as no
mortal Ears could abide, nor mortal Courage support.

Mean while the Town took the Alarm and began to be in Commotion. Old and young
quitted their Houses, and hurried hither and thither through the Street. But,
as we advanced, they made backward, and running, or climbing, or scrambling up
Hill, they gathered all in a Body before the Windmill. In the Interim, we
pushed forward, and entered the Inn, where neither Cat nor Dog, nor living
Creature was left, save Goodman Gruff, who lay impotent, of the Gout, in an
upper Chamber.

While most of the Company staid, routing and searching the House below,
Signior Geoffry led a few of us* up Stairs. He represented the Person of
Lucifer, whose Name was impressed in flaming Characters on his Cap. On entering
the Room where Landlord Gruff lay, Hark ye, Jerry, says Lucifer, you sneaking
Thief, you mean petty-larceny Villain! how came you to rob a Child, the other
Day, of the Money which he gained under my Influence and Encouragement? I have
a mind, you Scoundrel, to strike you out of my List of Innkeepers. O, my good
Lord Lucifer, cries Gruff, with a trembling Voice, in my Conscience, now, I did
not think that any kind of Robbery would be an Offense to your Honor. You lie,
you Rascal, you lie, cries Lucifer, the Devil is a Gentleman, he loves those
who rob the Great, who have robbed the Little; but he hates your low spirited
Scoundrels, who rob the Widow, and the Fatherless, and take from the little
Ones the little that they have. Why, pray, my Lord Lucifer, are you a
Christian, cries Gruff? A better one, Rascal, than you or any of your Tribe;
for, though I tremble, yet I believe. And I tell thee, Jerry, that I will make
this Generation to tremble; but, as I think, the Devil himself cannot bring
them to believe.

During this Confabulation, the whole House, Drawers and all, was gutted as
clean as a Fowl for Supper. So, without entering into any other Habitation,
away we marched as in our former tremendous Procession; till, coming to some
standing Water, we halted, and, at a given Word, we altogether plunged our
Torches in the Pool, and instant Night fell upon all the World.

Thus, from Day to Day, and Year to Year, while I continued with this People, I
was witness to a Variety of Slights, Deceits, Impostures, Metamorphoses, and
Depredations, without any Instance of their being brought to condign
Punishment. One of them, however, within my Time, was detected, taken,
imprisoned, brought to the Bar, tried, and brought in guilty; and yet found
Means to evade Justice by the most mavelous Piece of Stratagem that ever was.

He was spied in the Act of stealing a bay Horse. Fresh Suit was made. He was
seized and loaded with Irons in the Dungeon of the County Gaol. On the Day of
Trial the Fact was proved by incontestable Witnesses; and the Jury, without
quitting the Box, pronounced the fatal Word, Guilty. Have you any thing to say,
cried the Judge, why Sentence of Death should not be pronounced against you? I
can truly affirm, exclaimed the Culprit, that I am as clear as the Light, of
this Matter; that the Beast which I took, then was, and, to this Hour, is my
own Property; and that there must be some wonderful Mistake in this Business;
wherefore, my Lord, as I am upon Life and Death, I trust that your charitable
Indulgence will order this same Horse to be brought into Court. The Horse
accordingly was brought, and the Culprit continued, Now, my Lord, be pleased to
order the Witnesses to say whether this be the same Horse that I stole or not?
The same, the same, cried the Witnesses, by Virtue of our Oaths. Be so good
then, my Lord, to ask them of what Age this Horse was, at the Time that I stole
him? By Virtue of the same Oath, four Years old rising five. Now, my Lord, if
you will continue your gracious Indulgence, be pleased to order his Mouth to be
examined by some People skilled in such Matters. This also was done by two or
three Jockeys, of acknowledged Judgment, who instantly cried out, why, my Lord,
this Horse is quite passed Mark of Mouth.

Hereupon, every Person that was present looked astonished, and Silence was in
Court for some Minutes; till the Culprit resumed. There is but one Request more
with which I shall trouble your Lordship; it is, that you would be pleased to
send and examine whether this same Horse be a Horse or a Mare. This lastly was
done, when the Examiners cried out, a Mare, my Lord, a Mare, without any
Question!

Here, the Surprise and Amazement of the Court was redoubled. The Jury looked
down abashed; the Witnesses slunk away in utter Shame and Confusion; and his
Lordship instantly ordered that the Prisoner should be dismissed without Fees,
and that the Mare should be restored to him as his proper Goods.

Now, the whole Mystery of the Affair was merely this, that some of the
Fraternity, the very Night before the Trial, had picked the Lock of the Stable,
and, in the Place of the Horse, had substituted this Mare, whom they found or
formed to so perfect a Resemblance of him, that no Eye could discern the
smallest Distinction.

During my Sojourn with these Wretches, may it please your Honors, I found by
dear Experience, that, between the Birth and the Grave, there are but two Sorts
of Happiness, of which Man is capable. The one is, that of a Conscience void of
giving Offense; the other is, that of a Conscience that cannot be offended. I
was therefore perpetually miserable, because neither the one nor the other was
my State; for, on the one Hand, I was conscious that I gave daily Offense to
God and Man; and, on the other Hand, my Conscience was daily offended thereby.
I was merry, indeed, though not happy, when in Company, but ever dejected when
left alone; so that during my three Years Incorporation with this Fraternity, I
never once lifted my Heart in any Appeal to God, nor ventured to petition for
any Kind of Favor from him.

Though these Reprobates, as I have intimated, continued to perpetrate, and to
glory, with a merry and satisfied Conscience, in their daily Iniquities; yet,
hitherto, they had not proceeded to Blood.

On the Night, wherein I left them, we we were overtaken, and cut short of our
intended Rest, by a sudden and violent Tempest of Wind and Hail, whereupon we
took Shelter in a waste Barn that had belonged to the late Farmer of the Place.

When we had struck on our Tinder and lighted a Candle, we set together what
Straw and Combustibles we could find in the House, and had just kindled a Fire,
when one of the Company came and whispered that there was a Man asleep in the
far Corner. Hereupon, they took the Candle, and, with softly and cautious
Steps, found a Pedlar stretched along, with his Head on a Wisp of Straw, and
his Box close beside him. They immediately lifted the Box, and brought it away,
in Silence, to the Place where I was sitting. On opening it, with as little
Noise as possible, they found therein a large Quantity of Silks, Linens, and
Laces, with a rich Variety of hard Wares; and, at the Bottom, a little
padlocked Chest, full of English and Spanish Pieces of Gold; in all Likelihood
the whole Amount of the Labors of his Life.

This was a Prize not to be thrown down the Stream. Immediately all was in a
kind of underbreathing Bustle, and whispering Commotion. The great Question
was, how to possess themselves of such a Prey, with Safety to their Persons. It
was objected that the Man might waken; they were unluckily seen coming that
way, and, it may be, entering into that House; the Country might be alarmed and
rise upon them; they might be overtaken; they might be seized in the very Fact.

At length, a bold Villain proposed directly to cut his Throat, and that, then,
there could be no witness to testify against them; but to this it was again
objected, that the Blood itself would be the fearfullest and surest of all
Witnesses. Whereupon, another proposed to suffocate or strangle him and bury
his Corpse on the Spot; to which Scheme, though many were silent, yet no one
expressly excepted.

During this deadly Consultation, notwithstanding my long Course of evil Habit,
and evil Example, my Blood curdled throughout my Body, and Fear, Horror, and
Detestation arose in my Bosom. But, when they went, as I supposed, to put the
deed of Death into instant Execution, I crouched and shrunk inward; and
creeping out at the Door, the Dread of being, also, seized and murdered, gave
me Strength to get on my Feet, and, feeling along by the Wall, I got away from
the House, and made off I neither knew nor cared where or whereto.

The Tempest still continued; the driving of the Clouds added to the natural
Horrors of Night; I could scarcely discern that I had a Road under my Foot.
But, though I could not see my Pursuers, I yet feared that their Eyes were
better than mine; and I still turned and listened, to try if the Foot of the
Murderer was behind me.

Having traveled all Night as fast and far as I could from the Scene of my
Terrors; on the Rising of the Day I saw a large Town before me, and, for the
first time of three Years, I lifted up my Eyes, and inwardly blessed God for
his Mercy in my Escape from so great a Wickedness. Thereupon I felt a Pleasure
that I had never felt before; and I said in my Heart, if you will once more be
my God, I will be your true Servant, and will never offend or transgress any
more.

I then walked on leisurely, and my Fatigue went from me, and I seemed quite
lightsome to myself. On entering the Suburbs I met a Gentleman taking his
Morning's Walk out of Town. I stopped and looked him wistfully in the Face,
whereupon he also stopped and eyed me with much Attention. Who are you, my
pretty Lad? says he. An unhappy Stranger, Sir, who wants a Service, or any
Means of earning a little honest Bread. And pray what Service can you do? Not
much, Sir, I fear, but my Good Will shall strive hard to make up my Lack of
Ability. Then, cried he, you shall be my Servant. All the Servants I ever had
promised every thing, but did little; I will now try what may be done by one
who promises nothing. What is your Name, my Boy? David Doubtful, Sir; for that
was my true Name, though I had gone by several others. And what Wages must I
give you, David? Just as much, Sir, or as little as you shall please to think I
deserve.

Here he took me to a handsome House, where he kept a Mercer's Shop in
Plymouth. His Name was Felton; he had been a Widower, of some Years; and had an
only Son who was then at Westminster School in London.

My Master, at first, set me to the most servile and vile Offices, such as
cleaning his and the Servants Shoes; sweeping the Street before his Door, and
carrying out the Dirt of the House; but all this I did with Willingness, and
even with Pleasure, as some little Matter of Penance for my long Course of evil
Deeds.

On my separating from my Brethren in Iniquity, as I have told you, I was the
Proprietor of one hundred and seventy odd Pounds, which was locked up in the
Parish Chest, being my allotted Dividend of the Fruits of our common Knavery,
for three successive Years; but, in my present Turn of Mind, I would no more
have accepted any Part thereof, than I would have taken a Bar of red hot Iron
into my Hand. I had also, in my Pocket a few Crowns with some smaller Silver,
but these I secretly distributed among the Poor, that no Part, as it were, of
Achan's accursed Thing might remain about me.

In about three Weeks, my Master again changed the whole Manner of my Service,
and set me to brush his Clothes, dress his Wigs, whet the Knives, lay the
Cloth, and attend at Table; but these were Matters in which I was quite expert,
as I had not yet forgotten my Employment with my first Master.

In some Time after, Mr. Felton asked me if I could read; a little in the
Bible, Sir, said I. And, can you write too, David? If you please I will try,
Sir. Why, David! this beats the Hand of my Clerk; where in the World did you
come by all this Learning? From a very good Master to a very bad Servant; but,
pray Sir, do not enquire the Particulars of my Naughtiness; for, indeed, you
could not desire a severer Monitor than my own Conscience is to me. Well, my
Child, said the good Man, I will not put you to Pain; and so, giving me a
Squeeze by the Hand, he went out with a glistening Eye.

From this Time my Master showed an uncommon Respect and Attention to me. He
discharged me from all the menial Offices of his Household; he gave me his
Burdens of Silks, and other Wares to carry to his several Customers; and he
desired me to take particular Notice of the Nature and Values of what I carried.

On this Encouragement I became vastly more apprehensive and assiduous than he
looked for. I attended the Shop closely, and took Notice and private Notes of
all that was estimated or transacted therein. My Master looked quite amazed, on
asking me some Questions with respect to his Affairs. His eldest Prentice, soon
after, set up for himself. He then placed me behind the Counter, over his
younger Apprentice, and in joint Authority with his Journeyman. And, soon
after, he gave me the Key of his Till, and the Trust of all his. Treasure. I
now dined with him at the same Table, and consulted and conversed with him as
his Friend and Companion. He gave me frequent Pocketmoney, which, he told me,
he would not charge to the Account of my Wages. I walked with him every
Evening, went to Church with him every Sunday, and read to him, in the Bible,
every Night. I was now wholly reconciled to my God, and felt him in my Soul as
a Friend and Benefactor. Pleasure played about my Heart, Peace lay under my
Pillow; and my Happiness seemed as a Ship that, after a long and desperate
Voyage, had anchored in a calm and secure Haven.

I had now been something upward of a Year in the Service of Mr. Felton, when,
one Day, I heard a bustling Noise in the Street, and saw People running hither
and thither across the Window. I stepped to the Door, and, looking to the Left,
saw a great Crowd about a Cart, wherein were five Criminals going to Execution.
I staid till they came just opposite to me, when, to my utter Astonishment and
Terror, I I saw five of my old Acquaintance, and, in the Front of them, the
bloody Villain who had proposed cutting the Throat of the unfortunate Pedlar.
Instantly I turned all pale as my Shirt, and, dreading that they would know and
claim Acquaintance with me, I shrunk in, and, running backward, threw myself
half fainting into a Chair.

I now reflected that it was happy for me that no one was in the Shop to take
Note of my Confusion; and endeavoring to assume some Courage, on the Entrance
of our Journeyman, I put on the most unconcerned Appearance that I could.

Mr. Felton happened to dine abroad that Day, and did not return till the Cloth
was laid for Supper. He took his Chair at Table, and desired me to sit beside
him. David, said he, is it not wonderful that People should continue so
incredulous, notwithstanding the frequent and daily Proofs of an all-seeing and
an all-detecting Providence? If a Sparrow falls not to the Ground without the
Notice of our God, how much more will he take Account of the Life of him whom
he formed in his own Image. The Villain trusts to hide his Villainy, and dares
to affirm (with the first Murderer) in the Face of God and of Man, I know not
where is my Brother. But Blood has a Voice, a crying Voice, David; it cries
aloud to Heaven, from the very Bowels of the Earth. No Depth can cover it, no
Darkness can conceal it, for the Light that shines in Darkness will bring it
forth to the Day.

About twelve Months ago, a Pedlar, or itinerant Merchant, was murdered in a
waste House, called Fielding's Barn. The Murderers were of the People whom they
call Gypsies, the most subtle and evasive of all Sorts of Reprobates, so that
the Fact lay a long Time in Silence. This Pedlar, as it seems, had an only
Brother, to whom the Reversion of his Substance belonged; and this Brother, not
seeing or hearing from him of a long Time, went throughout the whole Country,
and through many Parts of the Kingdom, enquiring after him. At length he
arrived, over Night, at an Inn some Miles from hence, where he found, in the
Kitchen, seven Men jovially seated over a Bowl of Punch; he quickly accepted
their Invitation, and having spent the Time pleasantly, and the House being
throng, he and one of the Company were shown to the same Bed.

About Midnight, his Companion began to moan most piteously, when, jogging, and
asking him why he groaned? O, Fielding's Barn, he cried, Fielding's Barn,
Fielding's Barn! Again, lying still awhile, he started, and cried, you cannot
say it, you cannot say that my Hand was in the Murder. Again he would mutter,
with a half smothered Voice, see, see, how he struggles, see how he kicks; put,
put him out of Pain, O, put him out of Pain!

Hereupon, the Brother rose and dressed as quietly as possible, and, making way
to the next Magistrate, he returned and seized and carried off his Bedfellow
before any of his Comrades were apprized of the Matter.

What have you done, you Villain, said the Magistrate without Preface, what
have you done with the Body of the Pedlar whom you murdered in Fielding's Barn?
On this Question, the Wretch, thinking that all was detected, instantly fell on
his Knees. I had neither Hand nor Heart in the Murder, Sir, he cried; and, if
you will get me a Pardon, I will faithfully tell you the whole Affair. On his
Confession, the five principal Rogues were arrested before they were out of
Bed. And, on his Evidence, and that of their seventh Companion, they were
sentenced, and this Day executed, and are to be gibbeted in the Morning.

During this Narration, I could not refrain from expressing, by my Countenance
and Gesture, the strong Compunction I felt on recollecting my long Association
with those Reprobates; but my good Master, as I suppose, ascribed my Emotions
merely to the Detestation which I had of their Deeds.

I had been close upon two Years in the Service of Mr. Felton, and he had
lately agreed with me at 25 l. yearly, whereof he paid me the last Year's Wages
in Hand; when, one Evening, as I stood behind the Counter, a young Woman came
in and desired to see such and such Goods. While she was cheapening on the one
Hand, and I setting forth the extraordinary Value on the other, several
intelligent Glances were exchanged between us. Whenever her Eyes met mine, she
instantly cast them down with a blushing Modesty; and, yet, whenever I looked
at her, I saw that her Eyes had been fixed upon me. At length, having bought
some little Matters, she made me a bashful Courtesy, and going out at the Door,
she turned upon me with a significant Glance and departed.

All that Night I felt myself as I had never felt before; I turned, and turned
again from the Image of this Girl, and yet she seemed to stand before me, and
to look, and to look upon me, as she had done the Day before.

For five tedious Days she witheld herself from my Sight, and I feared that I
should never behold her any more. At length she came, and I strove in vain to
conceal my Joy on her Appearance. After cheapening and paying for some little
Matters, she cast her Eye on a Piece of Silk, which, she said, she fancied
greatly, but feared that her Pocket would not reach so far. O Miss, said I, we
shall not quarrel for such a Matter, provided I know where to call for the
Money. On Sarah Simper, Sir, said she, at such a Sign in such a Row.

As I had three or four spare Hours from Business every Evening, I gladly laid
hold of the Occasion I had gotten for spending that Time in Visits to my
Beloved. I went, indeed, without forming any Purpose or Intention, save the
Pleasure of seeing her. Her Fondness seemed, at least, to equal my own; and,
though we proceeded, at Times, to Toying, and Dallying, yet, for three Weeks we
kept within warrantable Limits. But this was not always the Case. Our first
Transgression was succeeded, on her Part, by Tears and Reproaches, and, on
mine, by a Depth of Sorrow and Remorse.

As this was my first Fault, with respect to Woman, my Conscience was yet
unsteeled. I spent the Night in Sighs and Tears of Contrition; and I repeated a
thousand Promises and Vows to my God that I never would be guilty of the like
again.

For five entire Days I kept from going to her. At length I considered, that,
as I had injured her, I ought to make her such Recompense, as was in my Power.
I put about twelve Pounds into my Pocket, being all that I had left of my last
Year's Salary, and went and told her that I was come to take my leave of her;
then, pouring the Money into her I ap, I promised to give her what I should
earn from Time to Time, and to marry her whenever I should be enabled to
maintain a Family. Here we both fell into Tears, and, from Tears we proceeded
to Caresses, and so forth, till, at last, we became as guilty as we had been
before.

In like Manner, for the six ensuing Weeks, I kept on in a Course of repenting
and sinning, and of sinning, and again repenting. Every Night, I formed
Resolutions which I imagined would be stronger than any I had made before, but,
whatever Force I put on myself, whatever Strength I exerted, I never was able
to persevere for three Days together. When I felt myself drawn to her, as by
some irresistible Chordage, I vowed, and flattered myself, on the Way, that I
would return without transgressing; but when I came to her, I found it quite as
impossible to keep from sinning with her as it was to keep from her. Thus, by
frail, and falsified Vows, I daily continued to add to the Heap of my Guilt;
till, at length, I became hopeless of any Ability to resist Temptation, and
sinned on with my Eyes open, and yet with less Remorse than before.

As I was sitting with her one Evening, a Bailiff entered suddenly, and laid an
Action upon her for fifteen Pounds, which, he said, she promised to pay for her
Mother, in her last Illness. Whether the Debt was feigned, and the Caption
preconcerted between them, I know not; but I, afterward, recollected that she
did not seem to be so alarmed, as one would have expected on such an Occasion.
On the other Hand, my Soul was filled with bitter and distracting Thoughts. I
could not think of suffering my Love to be confined, among Fellows, in a common
Prison; and yet, how to come by the Money I knew not.

offered the Man my Note payable when my Salary should be due; but he refused
to depart without instant Payment. Hereupon I hurried Home, and taking out 15
l. of my Master's Money, I returned and discharged the Action.

From this Time, my fair one began to extend her Appetites, and to rise in her
Passions. Under Color of being with Child, her Longings and Fits came frequent
upon her; and I was in a Manner constrained to indulge her, till I had taken of
my Master's Money to the amount of fisty Pounds.

David, said she, one Day, it is Time to tell you, that I must soon quit my
Mantuamaking Business, for I am growing too big to appear with Decency among my
Customers. So you must take other Lodgings for me, and provide a sufficient
Fund to defray the many necessary Expenses of Childbirth. And where, my
dearest Sally, may such a Fund be provided? I have already gone Lengths for you
that may bring me to the Gallows. If you had not been a poor spirited Fellow,
says she, you could not bear to live in the Fears that haunt you so; you would
long since have made away with that old Scoundrel your Master. Here, throw this
little Dust into his Broth, or his Posset, and then you may wallow in Money
without Fear of Account.

Here, I looked her full in the Face, when, every Beauty, that had once
enchanted me, suddenly vanished from my Sight, and I saw nothing, but the dire
Head of a sneaky Medusa. However, I suppressed my Horror as well as I could;
and, putting back the Paper, No, no, no no, Sally, said I, I would rather die
the worst of Deaths, myself, than have a Hand in making away with my kind old
Master. And die you shall then, she cried, for I. will not perish alone. She
then dropped on her Knees and vowed, with fearful Imprecations, that she would
go directly to Mr. Felton and make a Discovery of my Robberies; that she would
also go to the next Magistrate and swear a Rape against me; and that she would
poison herself and the Bastard within her, that she might not bring into the
World any Part of such a Villain.

While she spoke, her Aspect looked livid and deadly, and Wrath and Desperation
flashed in Fire from her Eyes.

My dear Sally, said I, lower your Passions a little, give me that Paper again;
we shall see what may be done. And here I leave you my Watch, as a Pledge of my
Return by to morrow at Noon. This I did, however, not with the smallest
Intention of keeping my Promise; for I determined never more to look her in the
Face. But I bequeathed to her, as it were, the only Stake of Value which
remained to me, that the Wretch whom I had ruined might not be left,
altogether, without Means of Life.

When I got into the Street, I hastened homeward, without deliberating a
Moment, on what I was about, or on the Consequences that might ensue. My Master
was in a back Chamber, looking over some Letters, when I rushed in
precipitately and shut the Door behind me. What is the Matter, Child, says he,
are you not well? you look pale and affrighted, what is the Matter, David? O
Sir, O Sir! and I sunk upon my Knees, I bring to you a Villain, a Reprobate, a
Thief, a Robber, a Betrayer of Trusts, also, the vilest Sinner that ever sinned
against God and against Man. I got in League with a bad Woman who seduced me,
by her Beauty, and then prevailed upon me to defraud and rob you, and would
have persuaded me to murder you, but there I stopped short; I could not be
prevailed upon to murder you, my Master. Pray then, said he, somewhat sternly,
to what Intent are you come? to demand Justice, Sir, I cried, and to appease my
own Conscience by suffering for my Faults. Tell me then, said he, mildly, and
tell me truly, of how much Money have you defrauded me? Of fifty Pounds, Sir, I
answered, a few Shillings under or over. Rise then, pray rise, my David, he
cried; I would not bring you to Shame, and much less to Punishment, for five
times the Value of fifty Pounds. I owe you, for your Services, very nearly that
Sum, and I forgive you the Remainder with all my Heart. No, Sir, I cried aloud,
and burst into Tears, you do not forgive me, you cannot forgive me, for this
your Goodness does but heap the heavier Guilt upon my Soul.

He then got up, and came to me, and raising me to his Bosom, he embraced me
and cried, I rejoice over thee, my David, I rejoice over thee, my Child, as
Heaven rejoiceth over the one Sinner that repents, more than over the ninety
and nine that have no need of Repentance. You now know your own Frailties, you
are sensible of your Lapses, you will be cautious of future Falls, and you
stand upon firmer Ground than ever.

You know me not, I exclaimed, you know me not, my good Master. I am wholly
irreclaimable. The Devil has taken Possession of me, and reigns through all my
Members. I find it quite in vain to strive or struggle against him. I have no
more Strength than a Midge against Temptation; no more Power than a weak and
fainting Man against a Torrent that, already, has borne him far away.

I will pray for you, my Son, said the good Man vehemently, I will wrestle with
my God for you, and his Grace shall be sufficient. No, Sir, I replied, after
that which has happened, I never shall be able to look you in the Face, I will
not trust myself. I know that I should fall on the first Trial. Will you leave
me then, he cried, will you leave me, my Son David? and he took out his
Handkerchief and wiped away the falling Tear. I must, I answered, I must leave
you, my dearest Master, I should be miserable if I staid. I will go directly to
Sea, I will confine myself in some Ship, where I shall be shut from any
Commerce or Communication with Mankind, and not have it within my Reach to
wrong or damage any Person. And, indeed, I could not bear to stay in one Town,
or even in one Kingdom with that bad Woman. Where may she be found, David? said
Mr. Felton. Ah, Sir! I exclaimed, leave her to God, and to her own evil
Conscience, I beseech you. I believe she is with Child by me. Do not desire, my
Master, to hurt a little Innocent that has not yet seen the Light! No, my
David, no; I mean nothing but Comfort to her. I mean to supply her Wants and to
soften her Distresses. She will not then be tempted to wish Hurt to her
Benefactor, and I will take Care of the little Wretch which she carries in her
Body, for your sake, my David.

There was something so affecting, Gentlemen, in such a Proof of wonderful
Goodness, as must have struck to the Heart of the most abandoned Reprobate. I
was quite overcome thereby. I fell suddenly at his Feet, and I wished to pour
out my very Soul, in the same Manner as I poured my Tears upon them.

As he now found that I was bent and determined on departing, David, says he,
since you will go, you must not go unprovided. A Sailor ought to have with him
his Chest, and Cheques, and Jackets, with his Books and Instruments of
Navigation, and so forth; and, if you will give me your Company for three or
four Days longer, I will look out to procure you some little Matter of Station,
and get you a good Birth in some Ship or other. Mean time, I would advise you
to set about your Preparations, for which Purpose you must accept these fifty
Guineas, which you may please to return me, when some happy Adventure shall
furnish you with Means. No, no, Sir, I cried, putting his Purse back with my
Hand, your Plan is not the Plan of your reprobate Servant; your good Stations
and good Births are not at all for my Purpose. I will go as a common Sailor;
the meanest Offices and the greatest Drudgery will be a Penance, too little,
much too little, for my Transgressions. And, so saying, I turned, and went
hastily out.

I made directly to the Quay, where I saw a Crowd of Citizens intermixed with
Sailors. On going up, I found that they were enlisting Volunteers, to whom they
offered from one to three Guineas per Man. And what will you give me, Captain,
if I go with you? He then looked earnestly at me, and, having eyed me, several
times, from Head to Foot, I will give you my Lad, said he, five Guineas in your
Fist, the best Mess of Pottage, the snuggest Hammoc to lie in, and here is my
Hand for a hearty Welcome into the Bargain. If your Honor then will be pleased
to order those five Pieces to be laid out for me, in Cheques and Trowsers, and
such Necessaries as you think fitting; I live at such a Place, and shall be
ready at a Call. Enough, said the Captain, our Ship is a thirty Gun, called the
Centurion, and your Friend David Jenkins, the Commander of her. We set out by
Morning's Tide, between ten and eleven; and if you come without a Call you will
be the more welcome. So saying, he gave me a familiar Shake by the Hand, and we
parted.

I then went directly home, and, calling Mr. Pelton aside, I told him of my
Success and Engagement in the Centurion, suppressing only the Time of my early
Departure; for I felt that I could not stand the parting with him, and I
thought it best to make it as little painful to him and myself, as might be.

During Supper, I endeavored to chat, but I could not. And, as Mr. Felton, at
Times, looked affectionately upon me, I turned my Head aside, and a silent Tear
stole down my Cheek.

I spent the Night in Sighs and Tears, and, getting up before Day, I took my
Shoes in my Hand, and, stepping softly down Stairs, would have stolen out at
the Street Door; but, in that Instant, the Door of a side Parlour was opened,
and, before I could look about, my Master had me in his Arms. Will you leave
me, then, David, will you indeed leave me? he cried. O, David, David, I love
you next to my only Child. Stay with me yet, my Son, O, stay with me, my David,
and I will do every thing, I will do all things that may be done for you.

Here I sunk, and was just fainting, under the Pressure of his Goodness. Do not
kill me, my Master, do not kill me outright, I cried. You must no longer be
burdened by my Body of Sin and Death; as God has forsaken me, I must leave you,
my Master! let him do with me as he will, and if I perish, I perish. So saying,
I broke from him, and away I rushed; weeping and sobbing all the Way, as though
my Heart would cleave in sunder.

The Captain received me with great Cordiality, and, at times, called me his
Namesake, and was very familiar with me. The Sailors also, after his Example,
began to affect me without any Appearance of Envy; for, though I had not been
exercised in their Profession, yet I was strong and hale and active, and ready
to assist them at every Turn.

In the mean time, please your Honors, it may appear very extraordinary, that,
though I felt daily Compunction, and nightly wept many Tears for having
offended my God throughout the Course of my Life; yet, I neither prayed to him,
nor besought Pardon from him, nor applied to him for any kind of Support or
Assistance.

I was now incorporated with a Fraternity whose Wickedness was of a Species
quite different from that of my former Brotherhood. Our Sailors were so far
from cheating or defrauding, that they scarce seemed to have any Regard for
Property; and they were as brave a Set of Fellows as ever trod a Deck. But
then, they were as hardened to any Sense of Religion or Piety as the nether
Millstone; and the sacred and tremendous names of God, and his Christ, were of
no other Import to them than as the Balls of a Billiard Table, to be tossed,
and stricken, and bandied about for Sport.

At first, this was a Matter of great Offense and Horror to me. Can there be a
God, I would say to myself, and can he suffer his tremendous Name to be
insulted and blaspherned, as it is by these Wretches? But, alas! I was not as
one of the three Captives at Babylon; I could not be cast into the Furnace and
come forth without a Singe. In time, this Profaneness became less irksome to my
Ears; and, by Degrees, I began to relish, and to catch the common Contagion.

At times, however, some Thoughts of God and a Savior would come into my Mind,
and the pious Impressions of my Infancy would return upon me; but I did my best
to banish them, as they served but to torment me.

At times, again, I would silently expostulate, as it were, with God. It is
true, I would say to him, I have been wicked, desperately wicked, through a
long Course of sinning; but, did I not long strive, and struggle, and fight
against Temptation? If you meant me for yourself, why did you not make me with
less Proneness to Evil; or why did you not give me greater Strength to resist?

Again, shocking and blasphemous Thoughts would enter into my gloomy Soul: As
though the Gospel were all a Fable, and Religion nothing but Priestcraft. That
all Events were of Chance. That Men were good or evil, merely according to
Constitution; and that, either there was no God, or he was too great, or too
distant to concern himself with the insignificant Affairs of Mortals. But these
Infusions of the Tempter were never of long Continuance; and again I would
return to believing and trembling.

Our Ship had been destinated to protect the Trade in the Levant. Within the
Space of five Months, we had rescued, from their Captors, six Vessels of
English Built and English Property; and we had made prize from time to time of
three stout Frigates, of those African Pirates who war upon the World; when the
Boy from the Mast Head cried out a Sail! We immediately made chase, and found,
by Evening, that we had gained considerably upon her; but, as the Night came on
thick and hazy, we slackened our Course, and, in a manner, lay by till Morning,
but hung out no Lights.

At Dawn of Day, we renewed the chase, though no Sail was then in sight; but we
had not continued our Course above four or five Leagues, when we clearly
discerned the said Vessel, and perceived that she had tacked about and was
bearing down toward us.

Hereupon, we slacked our Sails and waited for her. But, we had not waited
long, till we perceived a second Vessel that seemed in chase of the First; and,
some time after, saw a Third that seemed in chase of the two former.

On this, the Mate, an old and experienced Sailor looked somewhat blank, and
desired that the Captain would instantly call a Council of War. Gentlemen, says
he, the many Captures we have lately made could not fail of informing our
Enemies that we are in these Seas; and I apprehend, with great Reason, that
they have made choice of their best Means to overreach and overmatch us, and to
fall with their united Forces upon us. And, indeed, ye may already perceive
that the Ship which we had in chase, has slackened her Sails, and waits to be
joined by her two Consorts, whom she seemed so lately to fear. I think, as the
Jockeys say, that we have more than Foot for them; and all the Question is,
whether old England shall make use of her Feet to fly, while she has any Hands
left wherewith she may fight. At this, they cried, with one Voice, no flying,
no flying! let them come on, the circumcised Dogs, as many as may be of them;
we will neither take nor give Quarter, they or we must to the Bottom! To work
then, my brave Lads, cries Captain Jenkins, for we are likely to have as warm a
Bout on it as we could wish.

To bustle went all Hands. Every Sail was fitted, the Ropes and Pullies were
made pliable; and, for the first Time, we interlaced and bedded our Nettings.
The Captain then ordered all the small Arms to be gathered, and cleaned, and
loaded, and laid upon Deck; and choosing, from the Company, a Dozen of the best
Marksmen, he disposed them round the Ship, under the Shelter of the Gunnel,
with Orders to bring down every Enemy, who mounted any Shroud within the Reach
of a Musket Ball.

Our Ship, at this time, was full manned with about two Hundred and seventy
Spirits, all as ready and desirous to go and meet Death, as a Beau to go to a
Ball, or an Alderman to a Festival.

The three Consorts were now joined, as our Mate had foreseen, and came down in
full Sail and a sweeping Course upon us; and then it was that my Sins came
crowding into my Mind, and I believe I was the only Person of the Ship's
Company who trembled.

They all came up with a desperate Boldness; and, while one attacked us in
Front, the others run, along side, almost close to our Gunnel, and, expecting
instantly to sink us, poured the Thunder of their Cannon, on either Side, upon
our Timber: While we raked the Ship, astern, with our chase Guns, and shower'd
upon them, on either Side, the burning Hail of our small Arms. This put them
into some Confusion, and they sheered off a little Space; when, in our Turn, we
saluted them with a Broadside, on either Hand, which went over the Heads of
their Men, but much damaged their Rigging. To repair this, they ran up the
Shrowds, as thick as Bees upon a Branch, but our Marksmen brought them down in
a Shower upon their Decks, and, as we plentifully supplied them with new-loaded
Arms, in a short time there was not a Man to be seen among their Sails.

Our Ship was of English Oak, and stood their Shot to a wonder; our Metal was
also much weightier than theirs; but then they outnumber'd us three to one, in
Men and in Guns.

Having got out of the Reach of our small Shot, they moved off, as intending to
make their Escape; but, having repaired their Tackle, as well as time would
allow, they returned upon us with twofold Resolution and Fury.

Then it was, Gentlemen, that such a Scene was opened, as was sufficient to
strike Hell itself with Horror.

They now entertained us with a new Kind of Warfare. For, getting up within
Pistol shot, they tossed their Grenadoes or Hand Shells among us, that were
filled with broken Bottles, and with rusty and ragged Pieces of old Iron. These
did fearful Execution, and our Deck was quickly covered with Blood, and Brains,
and Pieces of human Flesh, while the Noise of the Cannon could scarcely drown
the Screams of the wounded and the Groans of the dying.

All enraged and desperate, we now tore away the Beds and Netting, that
confined their Shells to our Deck, and, heaving them overboard, we lowered the
Level of our Cannon, and poured our Grape-shot into the Midst of their Ships on
either Side, which made horrible Havoc and Uproar among them; whereupon, two
of them sheered away as fast as their tattered Cordage would permit, while the
third kept playing upon us at a Distance.

We now had Leisure to clear our Deck, and, with sorrowful Hearts threw our
dead and our dying Companions overboard, as also all whom we judged to be past
Recovery. Among, our wounded was one Daniel Mc. Daniel, who had lost his right
Hand by the bursting of a Shell; and, while we meant to spare him, heave me
over, heave me over, my Lads, he gallantly cried, since I no longer can help
you, let me not be your Hindrance! No, Daniel, no, I cried, you shall not be
heaved off. Such a Heart, with a left Hand, may be better to us, one Day, than
the two Hands of a Goliath.

Having, once more, set all to Rights, we moved toward the Vessel that
continued to annoy us, whereupon she veered away and joined her Consorts. We
then bore down on all three, but they gave way before us and maintained a
running Fight; and as they levelled their Shot almost wholly at our Rigging, by
Evening we were incapable of further Pursuit, for we had scarce a Yard of
entire Shrowding left, and our Sails fluttered in the Wind and fell along by
their Masts.

Mean while, we had plied them with our Cannon as fast as we could load; and,
as it began to wax duskish, we perceived the Crew of the hindmost in much
Confusion, and they repeated the Signals of Distress to their Consorts. Soon
after, we saw them heave out their Boat, and they had scarce crowded in and
moved off a Piece, when their Ship sunk outright and went plum to the Bottom.
Hereon, we gave a great Shout, which we repeated on seeing their Boat overset.
But, as the Moors are excellent Swimmers, I suppose most of them got safe, and
were taken in by their Companions. In the mean Space, our brave Daniel Mc
Daniel was put out of Pain by a Grape-shot in the Temple; and our most gallant
Captain Jenkins had his right Leg carried off half way up his Thigh, by a
Cannon Bullet; I think it was the last Shot the Enemy fired.

As I stood by my Captain's Side, I catched him in my Arms before he fell to
the Board, and cried out for the Surgeons; but the Effusion of Blood was so
great, and so impossible to be stanched, that we quickly despaired of any Life
for him.

As I supported him on Deck with my right Arm, he found himself growing faint,
and turned his Face to me. David, said he, I am not afraid to die, for I am a
Christian. I believe, as surely as I am here, that Christ came into the World
to save Sinners, of whom I am chief; and he is so great and so gracious, that
he will not suffer Hell or the Grave to disappoint him of an End for which he
paid so dear a Price. Here, my David, here is my Purse and my Watch, which I
bequeath to your Love as my last Legacy; and here is my Diamond Ring with which
I entrust you, as a Token to my dear Daughter, if ever it shall be your Fortune
to revisit old England. And, if you should go to London, my dear David, enquire
out my good old Friend, Alderman Bicker; tell him of my Behavior during your
Service with me, and that I beseech him to use his Interest with our Protector
in procuring my Pay for my poor sweet Child.

And that I will, right heartily, cried out Sir Thomas. I will also speak a
Word for yourself, my Lad; the Protector cannot refuse his Favor to one who
has had the Honor of serving in the Action of the Centurion, whose Fame our
very Enemies have spread through Europe. But, pray, proceed in your Narration;
I long to hear of the Event, and of your future Successes.

Though we greatly grieved for our Captain, we were still more concerned for
the Honor of England, lest our good Ship should fall into the Hands of the
Barbarians. For she now lay like a Hulk on the Face of the Water. She could
neither pursue nor avoid an Enemy; and, though she had been in Plight, we had
not Hands left sufficient to work her.

Night came on apace, Hostilities ceased on both Sides; the Pirates hung out
Lights to prevent, as we supposed, their parting from each other; and we
mournfully called a Muster of our Men, in the dark; whereon we found that, of
two hundred and seventy odd Men, we had but fifty remaining, twenty of whom
were wounded, though not disabled.

Come, my Lads, cried the old Mate, it is as good to be merry as sad. We have
wrought enough to Day to give us an Appetite. Let us have a Piece of Pork and a
Bowl of Punch; and, if we die by Morning, let us not die with cold Hearts and
empty Stomachs. Moreover, for your Encouragement, I take upon me to promise
that, if you will be guided, I will make you the Masters of one of yonder
Vessels before Sunrise.

We engaged Compliance to a tittle; and, after Supper and a plentiful Draught,
he ordered our Boats to be heaved overboard and let drive with the Wind. We
then set our Watch, and went down to take a few Hours Repose.

Two Hours before Day we were roused by our Mate, and, the first thing we did
was to bore a large Hole in the Side of our Ship, about a Foot below Water, for
which we had an occasional Plug prepared.

As soon as the Day dawned, we set Watches at the Cabin Windows, to give us
timely Notice of the Enemy's Approach; and we lay down on our small Arms,
withinside the Gunnel, quite out of Observation.

The Pirates, as we presumed, held up their Glasses, but, seeing neither Men
nor Boats in our Ship, they concluded that we had made an Elopement by Night,
and came on without Precaution or Preparation.

As soon as they had arrived within about Half a League, our Watchmen,
according to Order, drew forth the Plug, and, getting up Stairs, crouched down,
and joined us.

The Consorts had agreed to board our Ship on each Side, in Confidence of a
rich and unresisting Prize. But, the Moment that we heard the first of them
rustling along-side, and perceived that they were beginning to ascend our
Gunnel, we jumped up, as one Man, and setting up a great Shout, and,
overturning all we met, leaped into their Vessel.

Never was Amazement like that of the Enemy, they scarce made any Resistance,
and, in less than a Minute, not a Moor was left upon Deck.

Mean time, the other Pirate had boarded our late Vessel, and nearly all the
Crew had now got upon Deck. They had heared, indeed, the Shout, with the
Clamor and Groans of their Fellows, but did not rightly know what to make of
it; till, moving close round the Head of our former Ship, we shot the few who
were left in the second Frigate; then, throwing out our Grapplings, we towed
her a Piece off, and then bored and sunk her in the Face of her Owners.

They, thereupon, set up such a Yell of Despair and Horror as was affecting,
even to the Hearts of their Enemies. At length they turned the Cannon of the
Centurion upon us; but, every Moment, we got further and further from their
Shot; till, having reached to a Distance of about three Leagues, we saw our
good Centurion go to the Bottom, the glorious Tomb of her noble Captain who had
fought her to the last.

We now thought that, of about a thousand Assailants, there was not one left to
carry Tidings to their native Country of their Defeat. But, going down to the
State-Cabin, I saw a young Man richly dressed, and of a noble Aspect, leaning
wounded upon a Couch, with three Attendants about him.

As I entered, he gave me a Look that seemed compounded of Apprehension and
Courage, and accosted me in mixed English, for he had traveled much, and
resided for a Season in London.

I know, said he, that I am your Prisoner; I also know what I am to expect.
Draw your Cutlass then, and let me join my Countrymen! No, Sir, I replied, you
have nothing to fear from me. A Man, who deserves that Name, owes nothing but
Love to Man, except when he is assaulted; the Brave see no Enemy in the Feeble
or the Conquered.

Where have you learned, he cried, the Sentiments of my own Soul? but, your
Generosity shall lose you nothing; demand what Ransom you please and it shall
be paid you. I am not Commander in chief, I answered, but, as far as my
Influence reaches, you are free as Air, and shall be bound to us by nothing but
your Affections. Then, stretching forth his Arm, your Hand, my Brother! he
cried, and giving me a kind Squeeze, the Tear came into his Eye.

I went directly on Deck and informed our little Crew, now reduced to thirty
three, of what had passed between the noble Moor and myself, and told them, I
hoped they would be so generous as to make my Promise good. To this the greater
Number gladly assented, but some of them murmured. Hereupon, I remonstrated
that we were already rich enough, for we had taken all the Plate and Money,
with what was most valuable and portable, out of our own Ship, beside the
Treasure in the pirate Frigate which we had not yet divided. I further
represented, that we knew not what the Events of War or Fortune might be; and
that it would not be imprudent to make a Friend on the African Coast, who, in
all Appearance, was a Person of high Consideration; and, with these Reasons, at
length, all appeared to be satisfied.

I then carried the pleasing Tidings to my new Friend, and took with me our
only surviving Surgeon, who dressed the Wound in his Thigh, which had been made
by a Musket Ball.

As soon as the Surgeon had withdrawn, the noble Osmyn of Petra, for so he was
called, presented me with his Purse, and a Carbuncle Ring of extraordinary
Value, and pressed them earnestly upon me; but I as peremptorily refused them,
and this Refusal appeared to distress him greatly.

During the five Days in which we continued together, I had him as tenderly and
as honorably attended as our Circumstances would admit; and I spent with him
all the Time I could spare from my Duties and great Fatigues upon Deck, as all
the Hands we had were kept busily employed in splicing the Ropes, refitting the
mangled Sails and Rigging, and in repairing the Breaches of the Vessel; for our
Cannon had bored her Sides quite through in several Places.

On these Accounts we sailed but heavily, still making toward the Straits, and
daily wishing to meet or be overtaken by some English Ship of Force, to which
we might safely confide ourselves and our Treasures.

On the sixth Morning, having arrived within twenty Leagues of the Mouth, the
Day discovered to us that we were almost within Shot of a Ship of English
Built, and that carried English Colors. Hereat we rejoiced with exceeding
great Joy, and slackening our Sail, and heaving out a small Boat, ten of us
slipped into it, and away we rowed with all our might. As we approached, we saw
Numbers, in English Dresses, walking to and again on Deck; and, getting
alongside, they threw Ropes over to us, and we mounted with great Alacrity.

Hitherto we were so intoxicated with Joy, that we had not the Precaution to
hail them, till we found ourselves in the very thick of our Enemies. I looked
round, and, seeing none but tawny and hostile Faces about me, I civilly
demanded who, and of what Country they were; when a Ruffian, gathering his
Spittle, spirted it full in my Face, and, at the same time, gave me a Buffet on
the Side of my Cheek. Then, I did not once reflect either where or among whom I
was, but, with one Stroke of my Fist, I stretched him stiff along the Deck:
Then, throwing up the Heels of another, who had raised his Arm against me, he
fell with his Head foremost across his Fellow; and twisting round on a third,
who had seized me behind by the Shoulder, I dragged him under me, and we fell
together upon the Board. Here a Crowd of them gathered over me, and, each
helping to hold a Leg or an Arm, I was bound with Cords that crushed my Flesh
to the very Bone, and then tumbled with Kicks, like a Dog, along the Deck.

Mean time, my nine Companions, who had offered to interpose, were also seized
and bound, and cast into the Hold.

For about three Hours I lay in excessive Anguish, though, through a Sort of
stubborn Pride, I endeavored to suppress my Groans. In the Interim I felt the
Ship begin to move, and, soon after, I perceived all in Bustle about me, for I
could see nothing that happened withoutside the Gunnel. Again I heared, from
within and without, several Discharges of small Arms, and, as I saw several
Moors fall lifeless or convulsed and biting the Deck around me, I rightly
concluded that the Ships were engaged. I gave a long and deep Groan, and I
cried aloud, O, my Countrymen, my brave Countrymen! why am I not with you, why
have I not the Happiness of dying with you and for you? and my Heart was so
wrung that I fainted quite away.

I afterward learned that my true and valiant Fellows had refused to submit
upon Summons. That the Pirate, seeing them so few, and being desirous of saving
the Frigate for their own Use, had attacked them with small Arms, which were
warmly answered, on our Part; when, having dropped or disabled above Half of
our brave English, with two of Osmyn's Attendants who happened to be upon Deck,
they entered and mercilessly butchered the Remainder, among whom was our old
Mate and Surgeon.

Mean space, I lay insensible to all that passed, till a Ruffian, seeing me
pale and lifeless, in all Appearance, gave me a Wring by the Nose. Hereupon I
awaked to the bitterest Sensations. I remembered me of my gallant Messmates,
who had so loved and caressed me above my Merits; and my Tears, without Sigh or
Groan, went in a River down my Cheeks.

At length, I heared a Voice, a known Voice as I thought, crying, where is my
Friend, where is my Brother David? and, turning my Head a little, I saw my
noble Osmyn just entering the Ship.

O, Gentlemen! be not apt to judge hardly of all who have not learned Christ,
by the Form and by the Letter. Osmyn, my Osmyn proves that he may be in the
Heart of those who never acknowledged his Name, although they have felt his
Power. And, indeed, as the Apostle writes, those, who never learned his Law,
yet, having his Law, or rather Himself, in their Hearts, shall be justified.

Having instantly cast an Eye of searching Love around, he spied where I lay,
and coming, and throwing himself beside me, he put one Arm about me, and cried,
O, my Brother, my Brother David, is it thus that my People use you? I grieve
that you, Christians, should beat us, all to nothing, in Honor and Humanity.
He then took out his Knife, and having tenderly cut my Cords, he strained his
own Ability, to help me to rise.

He then called for the Captain who came, bowing to him with great Respect.
Their Discourse was long and earnest. At length Osmyn rose high in Passion, and
gave the Captain a back Stroke with his Hand across the Face. I observed his
Choler swelling, almost to Suffocation, but he suppressed his Indignation, and
retired in Silence. I heard Osmyn then giving some Orders to the Men, but, as I
was a Stranger to their Language, I knew not the Purport of any thing that
passed. Soon after, however, I saw my nine Companions brought from the Hold,
and unbound. And Osmyn, turning to me, desired me to tell my People that they
were all free, and that, as soon as we landed in Barbary, he would take the
first Means of sending them with Honor to their native Country. Ah, my Lord, I
cried, I am sorry that you struck the Captain, he has many Adherents here, and
will certainly seek some Method of Revenge. He dare not, he dare not, replied
my Friend; the Villain would have disputed with me the Property of my own
Frigate, which I manned, and fitted out, at my own Expense. But, if I hear or
see any more of his Insolence, as soon as we land I will complain to the Dey my
Uncle, and have the Rogue impaled alive.

He then ordered out the long Boat, and turning to me, said, I am going, David,
to take an Account of what Effects are left in my Ship; and, I would take you
with me, if you were in a Condition to go; but I will soon return, and, in the
mean Time, order the Surgeon to do his best for allaying the Swelling in your
Limbs.

During his Absence, the Ship's Company and even the Captain, whose Name was
Barbar, behaved themselves toward me and my Fellows with great, though silent,
Civility; and a plentiful Mess was served up to us for Dinner. But, during our
Repast, I observed that the Captain called such and such of his Men to the
Quarter Deck, where he held with them a long and whispering kind of
Conversation.

These Fellows, as it seems, were the most barbarous and bloody of all their
barbarous and bloody Countrymen. Having taken the Ship wherein we then were, a
Merchantman, carrying about twenty Guns, they had massacred every Creature on
board, and then dressed themselves in the Clothes of the English, in order to
inveigle others into the like Calamity; while they dispatched their own Frigate
back to Tunis to get Recruits.

My noble Friend did not return till late in the Evening. He then ordered
Supper to be got ready, and the State-Cabin to be prepared for him and I to lie
in; but I whispered and besought him to excuse me for declining that Honor, as
I perceived that the Favors which he did me, had, already, given much Umbrage
and Offense to his Countrymen.

I know not whence, or for what Purpose, Forebodings may come; but, all that
Night, my Spirits were exceedingly sad and depressed; and, though my Fellows
and I were put to lie in a Part of the Ship, the most remote from my Friend;
yet, I imagined that I heard secret Treadings and Mutterings; and again, at
dead of Night, that I heard the distant Sound of trampling and struggling, as
of People in doing and receiving Violence.

I was still sore, from the Tyings and the Bruises which I had received; when,
toward the End of a sleepless Night, a Gang of armed Ruffians entered the Place
where we lay, and loaded us with Irons. They then took away all our Clothes and
Treasures, and threw to each of us, a Canvas Shirt and Drawers, as Slaves
prepared for the Market.

The Moment they laid their Hands upon me, it occured that they would not have
dared to do it, if they had not first made away with my dear Friend and Patron;
at which Thought, my Soul grew instantly sick, and a dark Cloud of Sorrow fell
heavily upon it.

Sore and shackled as I was, I got immediately on Deck, and looked wistfully
out to Sea, but could discover no Frigate. I then shuffled along, as fast as I
could, to the Cabin where I had parted the Night before with my Osmyn, and,
looking in at the Door, I cried aloud, where are you Lord Osmyn, where are you,
my Master, my Friend, my dear Osmyn, where are you, where are you?

When no Answer could be had, I returned, wild with Rage and Grief, and
notwithstanding my Chains, had I not been disabled by my Contusions, I should
have done my best to throttle every Man I met. But all I could do was, to wring
my Hands, and roar aloud to all around, yet Butchers, ye Cutthroats, ye
Villains of all Villains! what have ye done with your Lord, what have ye done
with your Master, what have ye done with my Friend, with my Osmyn, my Osmyn?

For two Nights and two Days, I tasted nothing but Water, which I drank in
large Quantities, as my Soul, as well as Body, was in a Ferment and a Fever. On
the third Day, the Captain, fearing that I would die of Grief, and that he
should lose what he proposed to get by my Sale, sent a kind of Interpreter to
me, to let me know, that, on the Night in which I parted with Osymn, he and the
Captain, soon after, had some warm Words concerning their Rights in the
Frigate, and in the English, now on board; whereupon Osmyn swore that he would
not remain any longer in his Ship; and that, taking with him a Number of Hands,
he reimbarked in the Frigate, and directly set Sail.

As this Tale carried with it some Face of a Fact, I grew easier in my Mind;
and, on the very Day following, having anchored in the Bay of Algiers, my
Fellows and I were taken into the Town, and sold at public Market.

I happened to be bought by one of the Dey's Factors, who immediately sent me
to the Work at his Country Palace.

This Work was a most stupendous Undertaking. Above five hundred Men had been
daily employed in it for two Years past, and yet a third of it was not done
when I arrived.

A large Lawn extended itself in the Front of the Palace, and here the Dey had
ordered a great Canal to be dug, and, from its Excavation a Mount to be raised,
whose Base measured three hundred Yards in Circumference. The Ascent was easy
and spiral, much resembling the Prints you have seen of the Tower of Babel. The
Border of this Ascent was adorned, all the way, with lofty Cedars interlaced
with all Sorts of aromatic and flowering Shrubs; and, from the top, before I
left it, was to be seen the Bay, the Shipping, the City, and Country all
around, while distant Mountains, on the one Hand, and an Extent of Ocean, on
the other, alone bounded the Prospect.

You will think it very extraordinary, Gentlemen, when I assure you, that, till
I was in a State of Slavery, my Mind never was free. Hitherto I had been the
Slave of Sin, and of Appetite, of Passions, and of Fears. But, here I counted
to set up my Rest for Life. I had no Parents, no wealthy Kindred, no Friend
upon Earth, to whom I might look for a Pennyworth of Ransom. There was,
therefore, no further Prospect for me, there was nothing further left to excite
my Desire, or to excite my Concern; and I sunk gradually, as it were, down into
the Peace of my own nothingness.

I had been lately the Possessor of the Value of some Thousands, and, now, I
had not wherewithal to purchase a Morsel of Bread. But, I looked back on the
many Scenes of my very many Wickednesses, and I did not look up, but looked
down to my God, and cried, Not enough, it is not yet enough, O Lord! something
sharper, something heavier! some Punishment that may expiate, and reconcile me
to my God!

One Night, as I lay on my Bed of Stubble, I looked up to God, through the
Cloud of my own Iniquities, and said, In Life, O my Lord, lay what thou
please upon me, but, in the Hour of Death, save, save me from the Judgment!
whereupon, something within me, said, Fear not, thou vile Wretch, fear not thou
Worm David, for nothing shall be able to pluck thee out of my Hands. This gave
me great Consolation, and Consolation was followed by Peace, and Peace was
followed by Pleasure; insomuch, that I possessed more of the Sweetness of
Heartfelt Enjoyment, than came to the Share of twenty Sensualists.

The Dey or Regent, then being, was called Ali Eben Buchar. He was a great
Warrior, and yet a Man of an amiable Character, which is rarely the Case with
Moorish Governors. He had been at Constantinople when I was enslaved; and, on
his Return, he was so solicitously engaged in Matters of State, that he was not
at leisure to come and see our Works. Toward the End of the second Year of my
Servitude, he arrived with a pompous Train, and in a Chariot drawn by Tigers.
He was a portly and comely Personage, though his Complexion was a deep olive.
He expressed high Delight, on surveying what we had done; and he ordered a
Festival, of three Days, to be proclaimed for his Laborers, with Sports, and
martial Exercises, and Prizes for the Victors.

Great Preparations were made for this Entertainment. In a Plain, on the left
of the Palace, a Square of half a Mile Diameter was enclosed with Pales; within
which none were permitted to enter, save the Dey and his Train, with those who
labored in his several Works, amounting to about a thousand Men. On one Side,
within the Pales, a Throne was erected with two Seats, and lower Benches were
placed on either Hand.

Early on the Morning of the first appointed Day, the Festival was opened by
the Sound of Trumpets and Horns, and other martial Instruments.

It had been a Custom, among us of the Laborers who were young and active,
when the Day's Work was over, to divert our Fellows with various Exercises and
Feats, such as Wrestling, Running, Leaping, and tossing or trundling Leaden
Balls, and so forth; I was, therefore, up among the soonest, in hopes of
distinguishing myself on the Occasion.

By the Dawning, the City was emptied of its Inhabitants, and Crowds came on,
after Crowds, from all Parts of the Country, so that the Pales were soon
circled by an innumerable Concourse.

Then came Ali, with his Attendants, and, entering the Pale, ascended his
Throne. His favorite Sultana was placed on his left, and his Concubines took
their Places on either Side, and his Courtiers and Guards arranged themselves
behind.

Then were exalted, on Poles, the Prizes that were to be given to such of the
Slaves or Laborers as excelled in tossing the Javelin, or in hitting a distant
Mark with the Bow or with the Sling. But, as I had not been practiced in these
Matters, I contented myself, for this Day, with being a Spectator. Some of the
Candidates, on this Occasion, were extremely expert, and would send an Arrow or
sling a Stone more directly to the Mark, than any European could shoot a Musket
Bullet; accordingly, the generous Ali added Freedom to the Prizes which they
had won, and immediately preferred them among his Troops.

After this, Ali, to entertain his People, ordered a Dozen of his Courtiers to
run at the Ring. Immediately a Number of neighing Steeds, richly caparison'd,
were led by Lackeys into the Lists. The young Nobles, without Stirrup or
Saddle, vaulted lightly into their Seats, and turning, and winding their fiery
Horses, with wonderful Command and Address, gave high Delight to the
Spectators. Each of them then caught a Javelin which was tossed to him by an
Attendant; and, setting out, successively, almost at their Speed, three of
them, in mid Course, bore off a small Ring of Brass, from the Thread by which
it hung, on the Point of his Lance.

After this, again, a great Number of burlesque Comedians entered the Pales, in
order to act one of their African Drolls or Pantomimes; some of them
represented Men, some Tigers, Hogs, and Bears; others Ghosts, and others
Goblins. But I could make nothing of such a Jumblement of Intention, although
it gave great Diversion to the Populace. And thus ended the Sports of the
present Day.

While the People retired homeward, several Wagons were drawn in, heavy laden
with Victuals and Liquors, wherewith all the Slaves and Laborers were
plentifully regaled.

The second Day was ushered in with the like Pomp, as the former; and Prizes
were set up for lifting the Weight, for tossing the Colt, and for pitching the
Bar.

At a little Distance from the Front of the Throne, a Ring was fastened to a
leaden Mass, that weighed about five hundred Pounds, and above fifty
Adventurers successively attempted to lift, but, not a Man of them could move
it. I then advanced, bowing lowly toward the Throne, and putting my right Hand
in the Ring, and exerting my Powers, I raised it fairly from the Ground,
whereupon a great Shout was suddenly given by all my Companions who wrought
with me at the Mount. Hereupon a Black came up, of Herculean Bulk and Brawn,
and, desiring that fifty Pounds more should be added to the Lead, he lifted and
swung them in the Air with apparent Ease, and the Prize was accordingly
adjudged to him.

A large Iron Coit was then given to the Competitors, and, about a Dozen of
them tossed it to a Distance that was thought extraordinary. I then took it up,
and threw it three Foot beyond the furthest. But again, the black Slave came
up, who was not of our Company, and tossed it two Foot beyond my Cast, and
consequently achieved the second Prize.

A long and massive Bar was then presented to us, but all refused to take it in
Hand, till the same Black seized it, and, putting one End to his Foot, pitched
it off to a Distance that raised a Cry of Admiration. I then took my Turn, and
giving my whole Strength and Action to this single Cast, I pitched it some
Inches beyond the Throw of my Rival, whereupon another Shout was given and
repeated. The Black, then, was wholly enflamed by Envy and Resentment, and
reclaiming the Bar, and exerting all his Force, he threw it to a Length, that,
on Admeasurement, was judged to exceed my Cast, and he proudly laid hold on the
third Prize.

The great Ali then ordered me to be brought before him. I went, and, bending
on my Knee, laid my Head to the Earth. Rise, said he; I obeyed, and he surveyed
me with long and earnest Attention. Young Man, he cried, you have been this Day
something unfortunate, but you have not the less Merit; put this Ring on your
Finger, it discharges you, henceforth, from all Kind of Labor; but it does not
enfranchise you, because, for the present, I do not choose to part with you. I
respectfully took the Ring, and, again bowing to the Ground, retired in Silence.

A Tournament of the young Nobles then ensued, wherein great Feats of Action
and Prowess was shown. And the Day ended with another Droll to which I gave no
heed.

The Morning of the third Day was opened as usual, and Prizes were exhibited
for Wrestling, for Running, and for Leaping.

Immediately the black Champion stepped formidably forth, and challenged any to
approach, who desired to be crushed to Death, but not a Man accepted this
charitable Invitation. Unwilling, then, that this Boaster should carry off the
Prize, without a Contest, I stepped from my Rank, depending more upon Action
than Force to cope with him. We both stripped to our Canvas Drawers, and his
Looks and Gestures menaced me with instant Destruction. I advanced, however, to
essay him, and he stretched his Arms toward me, as a Vulture would reach his
Pounces to seize upon a Chicken; when, springing instantly up to him, I put a
Hand upon each of his Shoulders, and, vaulting lightly over his Head, I turned
nimbly upon him, threw up his Heels, and laid him sidelong on the Earth.

As the Contrast of our Colors had rendered us remarkable to all the
Spectators, a Shout was set up that rent the very Elements. But the Black rose,
and roared aloud, with his Lion-like Voice, for Justice; and the Judges, on
weighing the Matter, appointed me to another Trial, forbidding further Fraud.

Again we prepared to engage, and again my black Adversary stretched forth his
Arms, with Eyes flashing Fire, and Features distorted with Rage; when, retiring
from him, as if dismayed, I shot forward like Lightening, and, springing from
the Ground, I pitched the whole Weight of my Body into his Bosom. This
staggered him some Steps backward, when, continuing to press upon him, I put
one Foot behind, and he fell under me, with a horrible Squelch, upon the Sand;
and, dashing my Hand against his Forehead, I sprung up lightly on my Feet.

Here, the People repeated their Clamours, which were echoed for a long Space
from Side to Side; while I proposed to the Judges that, if my Rival was not yet
satisfied, I would give him the other Venture. But the Black was so far from
being in Plight for a third Engagement, that he could not rise without Help on
either Hand; and the Prize, being a fine Turban with a Diamond Button, was put
upon my Head.

The Competitors for the Race then came from among the Crowd, being fifteen in
Number, lightly equipt for the Purpose; and I also put on a thin Canvas
Waistcoat that came close to my Body.

In the Front of the Throne, a long Pole was set up, from whence we were to
start; and another Pole was erected on the further Side, round which we were to
run, and so return to the Post from whence we set out.

We were all arranged in a Line, and Ali himself was to give the Word, when one
of our Fellows, either thinking or pretending to think that the Word was given,
started away, the rest followed, and I was left alone, quietly standing by the
Post. Why don't you set out? said Ali; when your Highness shall be pleased to
give the Word. Away then! he cried, and away I sprung.

As I found that I was gathering them up very fast, I suspended my Speed, and
lingered behind the hindmost, till they had all turned the Post, and extended
in a long Line before me. I then started away, and passed one, and then
another, till, having passed them all, I left the oremost at a Distance behind
me, and seized the Goal; whereon Ali himself gave a Cry of Admiration, which
was answered, from all Sides, by all his People.

I was then presented with a Velvet Tunic, embroidered with Gold; and some
smaller Matters were given to the two who came next to me in Speed.

The Candidates for the third Prize then rose from the Ground where they had
sat to repose themselves; for they were the same Persons who had been
Competitors in the Race. A scarlet Girdle was stretched along the Grass, as a
Mark from whence the Rivals were to set off on their Leap. And each of them
took a Run, till they came to the appointed Limit, and then sprung forward with
their utmost Agility.

As this, of all others, was the Article of bodily Exercise wherein I excelled,
I stood by, as an unconcerned Spectator, till the Contest was over. I then
measured with my Eye the Length they had passed. Then, taking two Men, I set
them in Mid-space, and, placing a Pole upon their Heads, I took a run, and,
throwing myself Head foremost over the Pole, I turned in the Air, and alighted
six Inches beyond the furthest Leap; whereupon I was presented with a Collar
adorned with Gems of great Luster.

Ali then ordered two Troops of his lightest Horse to come forward. Accordingly
they entered the Pale, and dividing, they retired to opposite Sides of the
Lists. The Populace then fell back and cleared the mean Space, and the young
Officers set forward, on a half Gallop, at the Head of their Troops.

Never did I see such Action, such Horsemanship. The Officers, as they rode
swiftly forward, would toss their Lances aloft and then catch them in mid Air;
and again they would cast them to a Distance before them, and stooping, take
them from the Ground in the Midst of their Speed.

The Troops then met, as should seem, in mortal Opposition; and, breaking their
frail Lances against each other, they drew their Wooden Sabres, and each,
passing his Adversary, gave a back Stroke to his Neck, with such Force and
Agility as was truly alarming. Their Ranks then appeared to be broken on either
Part. And, instantly, forming themselves into little Rhombs, or Squares, or
Wedges, they fought and mixed together, as in a Country Dance, with the most
regular Confusion that ever was beheld.

This was justly delightful to all the Spectators; and I regretted their
Departure, with the ridiculous Entrance of a third Pantomime.

While this Droll was preparing, I received an Order from Ali, to dress myself
in the Prizes which I had won, and to attend him.

I obeyed, and presented myself before him. What is your Name, young Man?
David, so please your Highness. Are you of Christ or of Mahomet, David? My Will
is with Christ, so please you, but, while I confess him with my Lips, my whole
Life has denied him. Then, David, if you will but forsake Christ, and turn to
Mahomet, you shall be the Friend of Ali, and he will heap Treasures, and
Titles, and great Honors upon you. Ah, my Lord! I cried out, though I hold my
Christ but by a frail and feeble Thread, yet I would not quit that Thread for a
Chain of golden Links that should bind the whole Wealth of the World to my
Possession. And, why would your Highness desire the Service of a Traitor? He,
who proves a Traitor to his God, so please you, can never prove true to any
Master.

Well, David, said he mildly, we may talk of these Matters hereafter. In the
mean Space, before I do you any Grace, I ought at least to do you Justice. You
have already received the Rewards of your Valor and your Action, but you have
not yet received the Reward of your Obedience. You were the only one, brave
David, who, at the Risque of your own Honor, attended on my Word, and here I
give you an Earnest of the Recompense that I intend you.

So saying, he presented me with a large and massive Sabre, whose Handle was
studded with Gems of great Value. I received it on my Knee, and he then
continued, Ask me now, David, what further Gift you demand, except your
Dismission, and it shall be granted you, to a Tenth of the Treasure in my
Coffers.

When he had spoken, my Eye was caught by one of his Retinue, and immediately I
recollected the Features of the Pirate Barbar.

I, instantly, cast myself prostrate before his Throne, and cried aloud, Ah,
generous Ali! may God multiply to you Treasures and Blessings a thousand fold!
I ask none of your Treasures or Possessions, O Ali! I only ask the Head of that
Traitor, the Head of Barbar; I ask but Blood for Blood: Let him restore to me
my Friend, my Brother, my Lord Osmyn; he is a Murderer, a Traitor, and such I
will prove him, by Night or by Day, by Sea or by Land, at any Weapons, against
any Odds, I will prove him a Traitor.

While I spoke, thus impassioned, all about appeared under the utmost
Consternation; and Barbar trembled and turned pale, but did not dare to quit
his Station.

Rise, David, said Ali, and tell me what Friend, what Osmyn thou do mean? All
I know of him, my Lord, is that his Name was Osmyn of Petra, and that he was
Nephew to some great Prince in this Part of the World.

Why, you dream surely, David, replied the Regent, Osmyn of Petra was my own
Nephew; and he perished, with all his Crew, by the Hands of the English.

He did not perish by the Hands of the English, I cried; the English were his
Preservers, his Friends, his Attendants, and he perished by the Hands of his
own Countrymen, and more especially by the Hands of this Traitor Barbar.

Well, said Ali, we have not Leisure, at present, to examine into the Truth of
these Allegations; Guards, take that Barbar into safe and close Custody till we
are better informed, touching the Facts with which he is charged. Mean time, do
you, David, follow in my Train, for you must take up your Lodging with me, this
Night.

The Place, though it appeared one uniform Edifice, was divided into two by an
impassable Barrier. The one was the occasional Habitation of Ali and his
Attendants: And his Wives, with their Eunuchs, were lodged in the other, where
it was Impalement for any Man, save Ali himself, to enter.

The generous Ali was not of a jealous Temper. He gave his Women uncommon
Liberties, as you have seen; for though they were kept, by their Veils, from the
Eyes of the Vulgar; yet those Veils were of so very thin a Gauze, that they
could clearly discern every Object about them.

For three Days and Nights, after I entered his Palace, though I was treated
with an Attention that gave me much Uneasiness, yet I had not the Honor of
being called to his Presence.

At length I was conducted by a private Door to his Cabinet. My Friend David,
said he, what have thou to tell me, concerning my dear and brave Nephew Osmyn?
I then minutely, and at large, recited to him the Particulars above related And
we shed many Tears, that were mutually provoked by the Tears of each other.

Having closed my Narration, he cast his Eyes down, awhile, as in deep
Meditation; and raising them again, he said, the Presumptions are strong, very
strong against this Man, and yet there is a Possibility that he may be
guiltless. And though Osmyn is my Nephew, my Blood, and almost my Bowels, yet
Honor, Humanity demands of us, David, that nine Criminals should escape the
Punishment they deserve, rather than one innocent Person should perish in his
Righteousness. But, the great Alla may give us further Lights in this Business.

In about five Days after, a Convict was to be gaunched for the Rape and Murder
of a free Woman. He was to be thrown from the Top of a high Tower, from whose
Walls projected several sharp and shagged Instruments, resembling Hooks,
Scythes, Tenters, etc. at certain Distances, some below others.

He fainted several times as he was carrying to Execution; and then, being in
an Agony, he said he had a Matter of the highest Consequence to impart to the
great Ali, and prayed to be brought directly into his Presence.

I was on the Spot when he was led in, and, looking earnestly at him,
recollected that he was the Ruffian who had spit in my Face and given me a
Buffet when I entered Barbar's Ship.

Wretch, cried the Dey, what have thou to say to Ali? That I am guilty,
answered the Convict, of Crimes more heinous and capital than that for which I
am to suffer, of Crimes that nearly concern yourself, O Ali, but which you
shall never know, unless you swear to me, by Mahomet, to mitigate the Manner of
my Death. I do swear it, said the Regent, provided the Discovery which you make
shall be found of due Import.

He then deposed that, on the Night, in which Osmyn disappeared, the Captain,
with ten confederated Ruffians, of whom he was one, entered the Prince's Cabin,
and, having muffled the Faces of him and his Attendant, to prevent their crying
out, bound them Hand and Foot and heaved them, through the Window, into a Boat
that waited for them. That then, getting into the Frigate, they massacred the
seven Moors to whose Care she had been left, and rifling her of all the Money
and Plate and Valuables that they could find, they got into their Boat, and,
sinking the Frigate, with Osmyn and his Attendant in her, they made Way, with
Oar and Sail, to the nearest Shore, where they divided their Plunder, and,
staving the Boat, made separately off to different Regions.

Here Barbar was sent for, and came in Chains, and attended by Guards, into the
Presence. But, as soon as he saw the Face of the Convict, without waiting to be
confronted by his Evidence, he rushed violently, with his Head foremost, toward
the opposite Marble, and, if a Man, who was at Hand, had not caught him by the
Chain, he would instantly have dashed his Skull to Shivers.

Ali, hereupon, without further Examination, ordered the Head of the Convict to
be struck off in the Morning, and Barbar to be impaled in the Face of the
People.

Never was Joy like mine, on hearing this Sentence pronounced against Barbar;
and I rose early the next Morning in order to have the Pleasure of being at his
Execution.

He was so enfeebled by his Panicks, that they were obliged to draw him on a
Sled to the Stake; and the muscling of his Countenance had all the Impressions
of Death, Despair and Hell represented upon it.

This, however, did not affect me with any other Sensation than of that Delight
which is naturally felt on the Gratification of Revenge, till the Executioners,
with unfeeling Hearts and merry Tauntings, began to take the Wretch in Hand.
But, when I saw them, with Difficulty and great Violence, thrusting the Stake
through his Body, which they run up withinside the spinal Bone and so out at
the Back of his Neck, in order to avoid his Bowels and keep him the longer in
Anguish; when I saw him writhing in Agony, and heared his horrible Roars and
Groanings, all my Revenge was quickly turned into Terror and Compassion; his
Pangs and Sufferings, as it seemed, were transferred to my own Person, and, had
I not turned away, I should have fainted on the Spot.

The Dey, from this time, became extremely fond of me and familiar with me. He
allotted me an affluent Pension, with Slaves, Horses and Attendants. He said I
should be to him in the Place of a Nephew and of a Son, and he called me by the
Name of David-Osmyn.

Some time after, Tidings were brought that Caled Amurath of Fez was making
mighty Preparations to invade his Dominions. We will more than meet him Half
way, cried the gallant Ali; perhaps we may even prevent his threatened
Expedition. He then summoned his Forces from all Quarters. I was present when
he made a general Muster of them. His Foot were more formidable for their
Numbers than their Discipline; but his Horse were perfectly trained, and made a
most brilliant Appearance.

The Day before he set out, I threw myself at his Feet. I will go with you, my
Master, I will go with you, I cried. I will not have any Command or Post of
Preference or Honor; I only desire Permission to fight by your Side, that you
may witness how greatly I shall dare in your Cause; how ready I shall be to
take, to my own Bosom, all the Weapons that shall be aimed at your Bosom, my
Father!

No, David, he replied, my People know you are still a Christian. I could not
refrain from showing the Love I have for you; and that might be Matter of
Jealousy and Discontent to my Captains. I will leave you here a Band of
Soldiers, with whom you are to encamp within Sight of my Palace, and to keep
these Walls from Violence, and my Women from Pollution. But, while you are
their Guardian, beware that you do not turn an Invader, David! I would pardon
you any thing but this; I would not pardon you the Invasion of my Bed,
David-Osmyn! No, my Lord, I cried aloud, I cannot prove ungrateful. Though your
Women were as obvious to my Walks as yonder Pavement, and though adorned with
more Graces than their first Mother in Paradise, they should have no Temptation
for me, my Master!

The next Morning Ali began his March; and having escorted him a Piece on his
Way, I returned to my Charge.

That Night, as I lay in my Tent, I began to call myself to Account. David,
said I to my Soul, thou have now gotten Preferment, and Riches, and Honors;
thou art, as it were, the second Man in the Realm, and all this People have
thee in high Estimation: But, art thou the better or the happier Man for all
this, David? Far otherwise, far otherwise. O frail and vain Heart! these Gauds
and these Glories have taken hold upon thee, and they have drawn a painted Veil
between me and my God. To my Chain, and my Straw, and my Nakedness, return me
to them, O Lord! return me to my Slavery, return me to my Labors! I was not
then, indeed, gaining Conquests and winning Prizes; but I was near to obtaining
the Prize of the High Calling. My Body was not then adorned with Gold and
Pearl; but my Spirit rejoiced in the Pearl of mighty Price!

In about five Weeks after, as I was taking, by Moonlight, my Evening's Walk of
Meditation, on the Marble that checquered the Pavement before the Palace,
Muley, an old Black, and Chief of the Eunuchs of the Seraglio, came up and
accosted me. Osmyn, said he, taking a Bundle from under his Arm, I have here a
Present for you, that would make proud the greatest Emperor upon Earth. It is a
complete Suit wrought, purposely, for you by the Fingers of the Sultana, as
also by the Fingers of her fair and princely Sisters. They saw your great
Atchievments during the Festival, and they send you this in Return for the
Pleasure which you gave them.

So saying, he unfolded the Robes to the Moon. They were flowered with needled
Gold, and inlaid with Pearl and Gems of such a vivid Luster as reflected her
Beams with tenfold Brightness.

And what is required of me, Muley, I demanded, in Return for this inestimable
Honor and Bounty? Nothing, said Muley, but a single Hour's Attendance, to give
them a short Sketch of your Life and Adventures. Take back your Presents, I
cried, there is Poison and Death in them; I will not betray the Trust that our
Master has reposed in me. Nay, said Muley, I affirm to you that there is no
such Intention. Our Ladies are all Women of the severest Chastity. I will
undertake to conduct and reconduct you back in safety. Neither can our Master
be betrayed in any Degree. They all live together, they love like Sisters, and
no one keeps a Secret from the other. However, they desired me to tell you
that, if you are of a fearful Temper, they will not insist on the Favor so
much expected.

Here, I felt myself piqued: No, Muley, I cried, I am no Coward. I can dare all
honest Dangers. I will attend you. But, I will not stay, Muley. I will let your
Ladies know, that, in the Cause of Honor and Virtue, I can resist all
Temptations.

I then called a distant Slave, who waited my Orders, and, giving him the
Bundle, desired him to lay it within my Tent. Where now, Muley? said I. I will
show you, said Muley.

He then led me to a large Bucket, wherein Water was accustomed to be raised,
by Pullies, to the Balcony, and there to be emptied into Vessels that stood
upon the Leads.

You must not enter any Door of the lower Story, said Muley; for there our
Domestics inhabit, and might, probably, observe you. But, if you get into this
Bucket, in a Minute or two after, I will raise you by the Pullies, and take you
gently in.

Muley then went from me, and was admitted, on striking at a distant Door;
while I stood by the Bucket, and, observing its first Motion, jumped in and was
conveyed to the Top of the Palace.

Muley there received me in Darkness and Silence, and, taking me by the Hand,
led me down by a few Steps, into a narrow Apartment that was scarcely
enlightened by a glimmering Lamp. He there left me again, giving me only a
whispering Promise that he would quickly return. I waited for him long,
however, under great Impatience of getting speedily back again. At length he
came, and, taking me by the Hand, without speaking a Word, he led me through a
long and dark Entry, till, coming to a folding Door, he touched a Spring,
whereupon the Door flew open on either Side, and threw a sudden Blaze upon my
dazzled Eyes.

The Saloon, upon which it opened, was profusely illuminated, and most
sumptuously furnished; but my Attention was quickly called from such inferior
Objects. In the Midst, a Board was covered with an elegant Collation of little
Matters. Around it were placed a great Number of small Sofas; and, behind each
Sofa, stood a Lady richly adorned, but veiled from the Head to the Waist.

Again, Muley led me to the further End, while I made low Obeisance as I passed
the Company. He then compelled me to sit, where, by a small Turn of my Head, I
could have a full Prospect of each Fair-one at Table. Then, as by one Motion,
they were all instantly seated; and again, as by one Motion, they all,
instantly, threw up their Veils, and I had like to have fallen backward with
the Suddenness of the Luster that flashed upon my Spirit.

All the Ladies smiled, and seemed delighted at my Astonishment. The Sultana
Adelaide, sat nearest to me, on the Right; and was no way distinguished from
her Sisters, but by a small Coronet of feathered Diamonds that was inserted in
her lovely Locks. Osmyn, said she, you seem something surprised; were you never
in a Seraglio before? Have you no Seraglios in your Country, Osmyn? No, Madam,
I replied, we have no Seraglio in our Country; but sure, no Seraglio, upon
Earth, ever produced such and so many Beauties as now strike my Eyes. Heaven,
alone, can exhibit such a Constellation of Luminaries.

Would you not wish then, said Adelaide, to have such a Seraglio of your own?
No, Madam, I answered; without Love, in my Judgment, there can be no true
Enjoyment; if ever I love, it can be but the one Object, and her I shall love
with my whole Heart; true Love will admit of no Division. Here, she looked at
me, with a Tenderness that sunk into my Soul, and, taking out her Handkerchief,
she wiped away a swelling Tear.

Another Lady then demanded if we had not a Woman Market, and if they were not
Slaves in my Country as they were here? No, Madam, I replied, our Fairones ones
there, are not the Subjects of Merchandise, but the Objects of Admiration. No
Woman in England can be bound to any Lover, save by her own Affections. There,
it is Death for any Man to have more than one Wife, and that after a Suit,
perhaps of several Years. A Lady there of equal Beauties to the least excellent
in Company, would be followed by Hundreds of humble and sighing Adorers. In
England, our Actions are as free as our Hearts; and the Sensibilities of mutual
Love, between those of the Sexes, who feel the tender and enchanting Passion,
constitute the principal Happiness of which Life is capable.

Happy Englishwomen, happy Englishwomen! was echoed all around.

Alas, cried the lovely Adelaide, how very different is our Fate! we are sold,
like servile Brutes, to any Brute of a Master. We neither love nor are beloved;
as you now have convinced me, Osmyn. We are subjected to vile Desires, which we
at once detest and suffer; and, when those Desires are gratified, we are cast
away as common Lumber, to make Room for some new Comer. Even high as I sit
here, the favored Sultana of my Lord, I may Tomorrow be appointed to the
meanest Offices of his Household. This, surely, cannot be a Marriage; for, as
you have intimated, Osmyn, and as I feel in my own Soul, Marriage can only
consist in an Union of Hearts. Love cannot be bought or sold; it is of too
precious a Nature; nothing can purchase, nothing compensate, save its Value in
Love alone.

Here they pressed me to tell them my Story; and here I confess, to my Shame,
that, however vile I appeared in my own Eyes, I was ambitious of appearing as
honorable and deserving as possible in the Eyes of the fair Adelaide. I,
therefore, suppressed what was black, glossed over what was offensive, and
enlarged on every thing that I deemed advantageous in my own Character.

The Night was far spent, by the Time I concluded; and the Sultana, arising,
proposed to show me the Curiosities of an adjoining Cabinet. I accordingly
attended her, and was astonished at the Luster, the Richness, and Profusion of
the Jewels, as well as at the Miracles of Art that she displayed before my Eyes.

On our Return, we perceived that our Company had absconded. Adelaide grew all
Crimson, and cast down her Eyes. I, also, was confused, my Heart began to
throb, and I looked about for some Pretense to make a quick Escape. But -- but
-- In short, Gentlemen, neither my Resolutions, nor Religion, nor Honor, nor
Gratitude were of any avail against such a Temptation; they fell together, an
easy Victim to the all-conquering Adelaide.

Adelaide was the first to press my Retreat. It was not yet Day. I found Muley
in Waiting. We came by the Way we went, I stepped into the Bucket, and he let
me gently down.

As I approached the Pavement, I felt a Hand, behind, that seized me violently
by the Shoulder. I sprung out, and, seizing the Wretch by the Throat, would
instantly have plunged my Poniard into his Bosom; but some Power as suddenly
arrested my Arm, and said to my Heart, beware that thou add not Murder to
Adultery, David!

While I hesitated, a Number rushed upon me unaware, they griped me by each
Arm, and, wresting the Poniard from me, they bound my Hands behind, and led me
to the Cells of the Imams that stood something aloof from one End of the Palace.

As soon as they had brought Lights, what, Osmyn! exclaimed their Chief, can
this be our renowned Osmyn? Is it thus that you repay the Favors of your
generous and kind Master? You are a Christian, cried another; has your Christ
then taught you to betray the Confidence and Trust that is reposed in you? This
was a home Stab; it went through my Heart; but I stood in a shamefaced
Sullenness, and opened not my Lips.

Here they went apart, and, having consulted awhile, returned. Osmyn, said
their Chief, you are a brave and a wonderful Man, and it is a pity to lose you.
Your Secret is yet with us; and, we swear to you, by our holy Prophet, and by
the terrible Alha, that if you perform the single Condition we enjoin, we will
bury what we know, in a Depth below the Grave, and we will recommend you to the
Love of Ali, and the Acclamations of all the People, and we will have you
loaded with Preferments, and Riches, and Honors. Name it quickly, I cried,
whatever it may be, at the Risque, at the Loss of my Life, I will perform it.
It is, said he, no more than to abjure Christ, and to confess Mahomet, whose
Priests we are, and all the Blessings of his Paradise shall be shower'd down
upon you.

Here I gave a deep Groan; and casting down my Head, and shedding a silent
Tear, without daring to lift my Thoughts to Heaven; No, no, I cried, though
Christ is nothing to me, though I have no Interest in him; though he spurns and
has rejected me, for Time, and for Eternity; though I have daily denied him by
every Action of my Life; yet my Tongue shall never deny him. In Poverty and
Nakedness, in Dangers and in Dungeons, in Death here, and in Hell hereafter, my
Mouth shall confess him.

Here, they went apart again, and, returning, told me, that I should have two
Days to deliberate on their Proposal; but that, if I did not comply, I should
be impaled alive on the third Morning, with all the additional Tortures that
Art could invent.

They then put me into a covered kind of a Wagon and conveyed me to --, where
I was cast into a noisome Dungeon, bolted down to the Ground with Irons,
sustained with coarse Bread and Water, and not allowed a Ray of Light to divert
my Thoughts from the Darkness and Horrors of my Situation.

Mean time, I endeavored to reinforce my Resolution, by repeating to myself
the sacred Promise, where Christ says, whosoever will confess me upon Earth,
him will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven. Mine, indeed, said I,
is but a verbal Confession; but, even that, with what I am about to suffer for
his Sake, may serve to make me less criminal, if not acceptable in his Sight.

I then longed to be brought to the Test, while I shuddered at the Thoughts of
it. At length the Day arrived. The Imams came, and once more repeated the
Question; but I still persisted, though in Terms that were scarcely
intelligible, for my Tongue cleaved, with Terror, to the Roof of my Mouth.

They then stripped me to these Drawers, out of which, also, they took my Money
with other Valuables, and every thing except this insignificant Walnut, and,
having tied me to a Sled, I was dragged to the Place of Execution.

The chief Imam once more asked if I would renounce the Son of David? but I
made him no Answer, for I was unable to speak. I had seen the Preparations; the
Stake in the Hands of the Executioners; the Fires kindled about me, with horrid
Instruments ready to be put therein, for the tearing of my frying and quivering
Flesh from the Bones.

Could I then have had the Confidence to have turned my Soul to God, and to
have besought his Assistance in that trying and terrible Hour, I make no
Question but he would have given me Strength from on high, to defy all that Man
or Devils could do unto me; and, I might now, in the Regions of his Bounty and
his Blessedness, have been pouring forth my Existence, in the grateful and
astonished Sense of his Mercy to such a Sinner.

But, when I reflected on the Wrythings of Barbar, the bare Sight of which my
Spirit was not able to support; when I saw such an Apparatus of additional
Torments; and when they took me in Hand, for instant Execution, I utterly lost
my Senses; I shrunk inward with Fear, my Hairs stood on End with Horror; my
Tongue found sudden Utterance, and, I cried, Stay, stay, I will say, I will do
whatever you enjoin.

The Imam then began to pronounce a Form of Renunciation, which he ordered me
to repeat after him; but, I was so panting and breathless, that they were
obliged to get a Cordial for me to keep me from swooning.

As soon as my Spirits were something restored, the Imam again began his
impious Ceremony, and I make no Question but I should have gone through it,
however abhorrent to my Soul; but, in that Instant, we heard distant Shouts
and Cries, as of many People; the Sound of the Clamours drew nearer and nearer;
and, soon after, we saw Numbers hurrying to and hurrying from the City. Their
Words became, now, as distinct as they were audible; Ali is slain. Ali is
slain! was all the Cry; and Amurath comes in full March upon us.

Here, all turned suddenly from me, and, flying several Ways, left me unbound
and alone, sitting close by the Stake. Seeing this, I began to recover from the
fearful and faint Condition in which I was; and, rising, I made the best of my
way to the Port. There I saw a long Boat just about to set off with a Number of
Fellows, much in my own Plight, and, taking a Run, I sprung from the Beach into
the midst of them.

A Man then demanded, in English, if I was one of the Ransomed? Yes, ransomed,
ransomed, I cried, wonderfully ransomed indeed; whereupon, without further
Question, they set up their Sail, and, in about two Hours, we reached the Ship
which the Consul had appointed to take them in.

For the Remainder of that Day, I continued in a State that is hard to be
conceived. My Head and Stomach, at times, were disordered by sick Fits; and my
Soul hovered in an astonished and fearful Kind of Doze; as one not rightly
awaked from a Dream of Horror.

Toward Evening I threw myself down in the Hold, and sunk into a State of utter
Oblivion, as I had not slept for the three foregoing Nights and Days.

The Day following I found my Body something refreshed, but the Situation of my
Mind was like that of a disturbed and tumbling Sea after a raging Storm. I
looked around for Comfort, but no Comfort was near; I looked afar off for Hope,
but no Hope came in Prospect. The Sense of Existence became a Misery under
which I was not able to bear up; and, could I have had my Wish, Creation would
again have been uncreated.

During the Whole of our Voyage, I continued, very nearly, in this Distemper of
Spirit. For, though, at Times, I would enter into the Frolics and jovial
Humors of the Crew; yet my Merriment, at such Seasons, was a Merriment to
Madness; and I would again sink, precipitately, into a Depth of Despondence,
whose Darkness would admit no Ray of Consolation.

The Tempter would then urge me, by Dagger, or by Drowning, or by any Means, to
get rid of a Being that only served to torment me: But again, the Dread that I
might not get rid of that Being, and that Death might plunge me into a
Perpetuity of those Pangs in which I saw the wretched Barbar agonizing, this
deterred me from hastening the Day of my horrid Doom, and so I waited in a
gloomy and fearful looking out for Judgment.

I would then call myself, at Dead of Night, before that terrible Judgment.
Thou Fiend David, I would say, wherefore art thou sunk in Guilt above all that
ever were guilty? It was thy Fortune to get three good and kind Masters, good
and kind above thy Wants, and even up to thy Wishes; and all these thou have
deceived, thou have spoiled and betrayed them. Even the Master of all Masters,
the Master who was my Freedom in the Midst of my Captivity, I was on the Brink
of denying the Jesus also; nay, I did reject, I did deny him, I promised, I
engaged, to reject and deny him; and he will reject thee; through Time, and
through Eternity, he will deny thee, David!

One Evening a fearful Tempest arose; and, while most of the Crew gave some of
their little Matters to the Providore for Liquors, and sat, drowning the Sense
of Danger, and profanely carousing, at one End of the Ship; my Companions, who
are present, were praying or singing Glory to God, in the other. Both Parties
invited me to join them, but I refused to be Partaker with either; for I could
not abet, in others, that Wickedness which I condemned and detested in myself;
and I could not think of taking, into my execrable Mouth, the sacred Name of
that Christ, to whom I had so lately turned a false Apostate. In the mean time,
I held myself as the Refugee Jonas, whose Crimes had brought Perdition on all
in the Vessel; and I was on the Point of advising the Mariners to cast me out.

At length the Tempest abated, but my Perturbations did not abate. I wished to
repent, but I deemed myself past the Possibility of Repentance; and thus I
continued in a State of Dissatisfaction and Enmity against myself, against my
God, against Man, and Woman kind.

When the Constables entered, and, by the Order of Sir Thomas, laid hold on
such a Number of my late Associates; though I thought that I did not care what
became of me, yet Nature began to reassert her Rights; I trembled and turned
exceeding pale, as I suppose; all my Crimes came rushing together into my
Memory; I imagined that they were exposed before your Eyes also; and I
expected, each Moment, to be seized, like my fellow Culprits, and thrown into a
Dungeon. But, when I found that, instead of Punishment, you proposed to load me
with your Bounties; all my Sins appeared to me the more exceedingly sinful;
your Goodness came, in a Heap, upon the Heap of my own Guilt; and I fell
prostrate at your Feet, as under the Weight of a Mountain.

AS SOON as he had closed his Story; take Courage and Comfort to you, David, I
cried. Your Case is not near so desperate as your conscientious Fears have
formed it. Your Error lay in trusting to your own Sense of Duty, and to the
Strength of your own Powers for resisting Temptation; and, the best Man that
ever breathed, with no better a Dependence, must inevitably have fallen, as you
did, David. You now know your own Weakness; you are taught, by repeated
Experience, that, in or of yourself, you no more can stand against the Enemies
of your Soul, when they assail you, than a Tree severed from its Root, and
barely set on End, can stand the Assaults of a coming Tempest. Keep therefore
to your Root, David. Never dare, in your own Strength, to oppose yourself to a
Reed. Apply to the Rock, my Friend, from whence you were hewn. Cling to him,
repose upon him, put your whole Confidence in him; and then your Weakness shall
become stronger than an Army with Banners; and neither Life nor Death, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, shall be
able to separate you from the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus.

While I spoke, his Eyes began to glisten, the Cloud of his Countenance
cleared, his Aspect assumed a cheerful Serenity, he could scarce have been
known for the same Person; and he cried, I will, I will, once more seek to my
God; do you, my Master, pray him to permit my Approach; and in Life, or in
Death, I never will let go my Hold of him any more. He then would, again, have
cast himself at my Feet, but I hastened to prevent him.

David, said I, I am going for France, and before I set out, I should be
greatly pleased to see you in some decent Way of Livelihood, Now, instead of
the twenty Pounds, of which you held yourself so unworthy, here are two hundred
to make a kind of Beginning for you, and I should be glad to know the Use you
propose to make of this Money.

In the first Place, Sir, said he, I will refund, to my two Masters, all the
Money of which I defrauded them, with full or double Interest, amounting, as I
suppose, to seventy or eighty Pounds. And, in the next Place, I will return, to
your Honor, every Penny of the Remainder; for indeed you shall not persuade me
to trust myself with it. In my present Way of thinking, it would be of no more
use to me than the Stones or Dirt of the Street. My State of Slavery and Labor
was the only State of Happiness that I have known since my Birth; and I dread,
I shudder at the Apprehension of Affluence. I am already but too rich, in
having my Liberty. I am now in a free Country, and, therefore, Lord of my own
Earnings. Matter of Labor is but Matter of Play to me. The Pay of a Porter, on
the Spot where I am, will be too much of Opulence; it will give me a further
Sufficiency to supply the Wants of the Needy, and the Cravings of the Beggar.

My good David, my beloved Penitent, said the worthy Sir Thomas, and so saying
he took him most cordially by the Hand, how came you by that same Walnut, the
only Remnant of all your Treasures, which you called insignificant, and have
yet retained to this Day? You are as Pharaoh to his chief Butler, Sir, said
David, you bring my Faults fully into the Remembrance of your Servant.

While the Sultana, as I told you, was showing and displaying to me the
Treasures of her Cabinet, she desired me to take, thereout, whatever I held
most rare or most estimable. But, as my covetous Fit was not then upon me, I
turned my Eye on a few Walnuts that I saw in a Corner, and, taking one of them,
said, that I would keep it for her Sake. Swear to me then, she cried, that you
will never break or open it, till you get into your own Country. This was an
easy Condition, and I instantly complied with it.

Did you love the Sultana, David? Yes, Sir, to excess, as I am also persuaded
that she loved me; and we vowed to intermarry, if ever it should be our Fortune
to regain our Liberty; and, bound or free, never to marry another.

Let me look at your Walnut, David, said Sir Thomas, you are now under no
further Injunction concerning it. Do not break it, I beseech you, then, Sir,
said David, because I intend never to part with it. I will not break it, David,
I will only open it with my Knife, and a little Matter of Isinglass may soon
repair the Breach.

Sir Thomas then took the Walnut, and having poised it, for some Time, in his
Hand; I will give you a hundred Guineas, David, said he, for your Hazard of
what this Shell contains. I would take a hundred Pence, Sir, said David, if I
was inclined to take your Money without giving Value. Sir Thomas then took his
Knife, and, dividing the Shell with the utmost Caution, I have a strong Fancy,
David, said he, that I must soon raise the Market; and instantly produced a
Diamond of the first Water and Magnitude.

We all started back and looked astonished; and David was the only Person in
Company who, neither by Word or Look, expressed the smallest Joy or
Satisfaction on the Occasion.

Sir Thomas, who was a Jeweller, having inspected the Stone awhile with much
Delight and Admiration, Mr. David, said he, I would offer you seventeen hundred
Pieces for this Diamond, if I did not think my Offer considerably under the
Value, but I shall be a better Judge when I have put it in the Scales. Keep it,
keep it, Sir, cried David, and heartily welcome, return me only the Shell, it
is all I will accept of. Then, turning to me a pale and alarmed Aspect, Ah!
Sir, said he, this is questionless another Device of the Tempter, I fear that I
am not to get quit of my old Associate so soon as I looked for. I do not think
with you, David, in this Matter, I replied. I rather conceive that Providence
has sent you this Treasure at a Time that he sees you will make a worthy Use
of it. Oh, Sir, he cried, if it shall ever, again, be my Case to fall off from
my God, I shall certainly run mad, or make away with myself. Why so, David?
said I. You must not expect, all on a sudden, to jump into a sinless State.
Such a State is only for those who have already fought the good Fight, who have
finished their Course, who have kept the Faith. Such a State is only for those,
in whom the Babe of Bethlehem is not only conceived, but grown up and become
mature: These, indeed, cannot sin, but run, with a joyful and free Will, into
all Sorts of Goodness, as a Stream is prone to run to its kindred and parent
Ocean. But, as for such as you and I, Brother David, we must be content to
struggle on, and to fall and rise by Turns. And, though we should fall an
hundred times a Day, yea, and be sore wounded also, my David, yet we should not
despond, but turn as often to our Helper, in total Diffidence of ourselves, and
full Confidence in his Mightiness. For he is almighty to lift us up whenever he
thinks good, and the Balm of Calvary is better than the Balm of Gilead, to heal
all our woundings.

I will tell you another Secret, David, which I learned from a Saint who is now
deceased. That the humbling State of frequent and conscious Lapses is more
eligible, and tending to higher Blessedness for Man, than the Firmness and
Rectitude of an unfallen Angel, because it saps Self-confidence and creaturely
Dependence, and throws one wholly on the Base that pillars up Eternity.

Here he catched at my Hand, and pressing his Lips upon it, what shall I render
you, my Master, what shall I render you, he cried, for the Peace and Comfort
which you have shed abroad through my Bosom? I may now draw near to the Throne
of Compassion, heavy laden with all my Sins, that is to say, with all myself;
and I will trust to free Mercy for removing the Burden, and to free Grace alone
for any good that shall ever be in me.

As it now grew late, we agreed that Sir Thomas should take David home in his
own Coach, and that I should take Thomas with me in a Hackney; and I gave their
remaining Comrades an Order for a hundred and fifty Guineas per Man.

When we were just upon separating, Thomas caught David about the Neck. O my
dear David, said he, I shall surely never dare to judge any Man again; for I
held you to be a very Reprobate, when you were, fifty times over, a better Man
than myself. Hereupon I wished Sir Thomas and David a good Night, and, making
Tirlah and Thomas go into the Coach before me, my two Servants lighted us Home
with, each, a Torch in his Hand.

As I entered the House, Mrs. Tirrel met me with a sudden Joy in her
Countenance. My dear Sir, she cried, I began to be in Trouble about you; I have
kept Supper back this long Time. Then, said I, let us have it as soon as you
please; for I have here brought a dear Friend home with me.

I placed the Twins directly opposite to each other at Table, and I made Tirlah
and young James sit down along with us.

While I was pleasingly employed in observing the mutual Emotions of the
Brother and Sister; they looked eagerly at each other, they both changed
Countenance, and neither of them offered to taste a Bit. Mr. Thomas, said I,
why don't you eat? Thomas! Thomas! cried the Sister, in a quick and passionate
Accent; it may be -- it may be -- O! -- my Brother!

So saying, she gave a Jump which, for the World, she could not have done at
any other Time. Over tumbled the Table, Meat, Dishes, and Plates; while she
catched and clung about her Brother, without casting a Thought away upon the
Ruins that she had wrought. O my Tommy, O my Nelly! my Tommy, my Nelly! was all
that was uttered in the Midst of their Caresses. They saw no one but each
other; they heard no one but each other; and I would gladly lose or give a
thousand Suppers, to be feasted as I was at that Season.

When Mr. Clinton came to this Part of his Story, a Messenger entered in
fearful Haste, and delivered a Letter to Lady Maitland. As soon as she had run
it over, my dearest Sir, she cried, I must leave you this Instant. I lately
made you an Offer of a hundred thousand Pounds, and now I know not that I have
so many Shillings upon Earth. I am here informed that the Trustee of all my
Affairs has absconded and made his Escape to France; but I must hurry to Town,
and enquire into this Business. So saying, she courtesied and suddenly
withdrew, without giving her Cousin Time to make a Tender of his Services.

The next Morning, Mr. Clinton ordered his Chariot to the Door, and hastened to
attend her Ladyship at her House in London; but, there he was told that she had
set out for Dover about an Hour before, and he returned, much dejected and
grieved on her Account.

In about three Weeks after, Mr. Clement, with his young Pupil, came home,
quite lightened of the Money they had taken abroad. Mr. Fenton, for so we shall
call him again, gave Clement a friendly Embrace, and took Harry to his Caresses
as though he had returned from a long and dangerous Voyage.

Well Clement, said Mr, Fenton, what Account have you to give us of your
Expedition? An Account, Sir, that would be extremely displeasing to any Man
living except yourself, in short our young Gentleman, here, has plunged you
above a thousand Pounds in Debt, over the large Sums that we carried with us. I
hope the Objects were worthy, said Mr. Fenton; wonderfully worthy, indeed, Sir;
I never saw such tender and affecting Scenes. Then I shall be overpaid and
enriched by the Narration.

Here, Harry enquired impatiently for Mrs. Clement and his Friend Ned, and
being told that they were on a Visit to the Widow Neighbourly, he took a hasty
Leave for the present, and away he flew to embrace them.

As soon as he was gone, Sir, said Mr. Clement, I cannot think that there is,
in the World, such another Boy as yours. I will leave to himself the Detail of
our Adventures in the several Prisons; they had such an Effect on his Heart,
that they cannot but have made a deep Impression on his Memory; so I shall only
tell you of what happened in our Way to London.

As we were chatting and walking leisurely along the Road, a poor Man before us
happened to drop in a Fit of the Falling Sickness. When Harry saw the Writhings
and Convulsions in which he lay, he turned pale and looked vastly frightened,
and, seizing me under the Arm, he cried, come, come away! and hurried me off as
fast as he could. But we had not gone far, till his Pace began to abate, and
stopping, and hesitating, let us turn, let us turn, Mr. Clement, he cried, let
us go back again and help the poor Man! We then returned hastily, and, raising
his Head, we kept him from bruising it against the Ground. I then forced open
his clenched Hands, and, having chafed the Palms awhile, he began to recover,
and soon came to himself. Meanwhile Harry's Fright was not yet quite over. He
seemed willing to get away from the Object of his Terror, and, putting his Hand
in his Pocket, and giving him all the Silver he had, he wished him better
Health, and away we went.

We had not gone above Half a Mile further, when I saw a little Girl, in a
Field on the right Hand, endeavoring to drive a Cow through a small Gate into
the Road, in Order to be milked, as I suppose, by her Mother; but the Cow
kicked up her Heels and proved wanton and refractory, and ran hither and
thither, and would not be guided. The poor Child then set up a Cry of as bitter
Distress, as if all that was valuable in the World was going to ruin. Harry
gave a ready Ear to the Sound of Lamentation, and seeing the Plight that the
poor Thing was in, he suddenly crossed the Road, above Ankle deep in Dirt, and,
leaping the Ditch, he proved nimbler than the Cow, and, driving her through the
Pass, he turned her into the Way that the Child would have her go.

That Morning, indeed, was to Harry a Morning of petty Adventures. By the time
that we approached the Suburbs, we had nearly overtaken a grown Girl who
carried a Basket of Eggs on her Head. A great lubberly Boy, just then, passed
us by at a smart Pace, and, tripping up to the Girl, gave the Basket a Tip with
his Hand, and dashed all the Eggs into Mash against a stoney Part of the Road,
and, again taking to his Heels, run on as before. Immediately Harry's
Indignation was kindled, and, setting out at top Speed, he soon overtook him,
and gave him several smart Strokes with his little Cane, across the Shoulders.
The Fellow then turned upon Harry and gave him a furious Blow with his Fist
over the Head, while I hastened to his Relief, as I perceived that the other
was quite an Overmatch for him. But, before I arrived, our Hero had put a quick
End to the Combat, for, springing from the Ground, he darted his Head full into
the Nose and Mouth of his Adversary, who instantly roared out, and, seeing his
own Blood come pouring down, he once more took to Flight, while Harry continued
to press upon him, and belabored him at Pleasure, till he judged that he had
beaten him to the full Value of the Eggs.

Meanwhile the poor Girl, wholly unmindful of what passed, remained wailing and
wringing her Hands over the Wreck of her Merchandise. The Voice of a Siren
could not so powerfully have attracted and recalled Harry from the Length he
had gone; he returned with Speed to her, and I followed. My poor Girl, says he,
where were you going with those Eggs? To Market, Master, says she: And what did
you expect to get for them? About five Shillings, Sir, and I had promised my
Daddy and Mammy to lay it out in Shoes and Stockings for my little Brothers and
Sisters; and so, I must now hear all the Blame of the poor Things going
barefoot. Here, she again set up her Wailings, and her Tears poured down afresh.

Harry then desired me to lend him ten Shillings, and turning to the Mourner,
hold out your two Hands, my poor Girl, he cried. Then, putting five Shillings
into each Hand, here is the Payment for your Eggs, said he; and here are five
Shillings more, though I fear it is too little, to pay you for all the Tears
they cost you.

Never did I see so sudden, so great a Change in any Countenance. Surprise,
Gratitude, Ecstasy flashed from her Eyes, and gave a joyous Flush to the
muscling of her Aspect. She hurried her Money into her Bosom, and dropping on
her Knees in the Dirt, and seizing hold of Harry's Hand, she squeezed and
kissed it repeatedly, without being able to utter a Word. While Harry's Eyes
began to fill, and, endeavoring to disengage himself, he made off as fast as
he could, from such Thanks as he thought he had no Way deserved.

This, Sir, was the last of our Adventures going to London. But, had you seen
us, on our Return, about two Hours ago, you would have wondered at the mirey
Plight into which we were put, by helping Pasfengers up with their Bundles,
that had tumbled into the Dirt; or by assisting to raise Cattle that had fallen
under their Carriages; for Master Harry would compel me to be as busy and
active, in Matters of Charity, as himself.

However, Sir, I am to tell you, that Master Harry, with all his Excellencies
of Person, Heart, and Understanding, will be accounted a mere Idiot, among
People of Distinction, if he is not permitted to enter into some of the
fashionable Foibles and fashionable Vices of the Age.

We were taking a Walk in the Mall, when we were met by the Earl of Mansfield,
who expressed great Joy at seeing Master Harry, his old Acquaintance, as he
called him, and he pressed us so earnestly to Dinner that we could not, in
Manners, refuse him.

There was a vast Concourse of Company, more especially of the little Quality
of both Sexes, who came to pay their Respects to young Lord Bottom and his
Sister the Lady Louisa.

Harry was received and saluted by Lady Mansfield and the young Lord, without
any Appearance of the old Animosity. Some time after Dinner, a large Packet of
Letters was brought into the Earl, and, making his Excuse to Harry alone, he
rose from the Table and retired to his Closet.

Lord Bottom and his Sister then led the young Males and Females to an
adjoining Apartment, where several Card-tables were laid; and I began to
tremble for the Credit of my Pupil, on the Occasion, as I knew him to be a
Novice in such Matters.

In the mean time, the remaining Ladies and Gentlemen divided into two or three
Parties at Ombre; and I saunter'd about the Room, admiring the Prints of the
Ariadne, and the Aurora that were taken from Guido, as also some capital
Paintings that the Earl had brought from Italy.

I had spent above an Hour in this pleasing Amusement, and had nearly made the
Tour of the whole Dining Room; when, as I stood, at a little Distance behind my
Lady's Chair, seemingly inattentive to any thing that passed, Lord Bottom
entered on Tiptoe, and, tripping up to his Mother and tittering and whispering
in her Ear; what do you think, Mamma, said he; sure, Master Fenton is a Fool, a
downright Fool, upon my Honor. He does not know a single Card in the whole
Pack, he does not know the Difference between the Ace of Hearts and the Nine of
Clubs. I don't think either that he knows any thing of the Difference or Value
of Coin; for, as we passed through the Hall to Day, a Beggar asked for a
Halfpenny, and I saw him slip a Shilling into his Hand. Indeed, Mamma, he is
the greatest Fool that ever I knew; and yet, poor Fellow, he does not seem to
know any thing of the Matter himself.

During this Oration of Lord Bottom, on the Virtues of his new Friend, I felt
my whole Body glow and tingle with Concern; and, soon after, Harry entered with
the rest of the small Quality. Master Fenton, cries my Lady, I beg to speak
with you. Don't you know the Cards, my Dear? No, indeed, Madam. Cannot you play
at Dice? No, Madam. Can you play Draughts, or Polish, or Chess? Not at all,
Madam. Why then, my Dear, I must tell you, that all your Father's Fortune will
never introduce you among People of any Breeding or of any Fashion. Can you
play at no Kind of Game, Master Harry? A little at Fox and Geese, Madam: And
pray, my Dear, said my Lady smiling, which of the Parties do you espouse? The
Part of the Geese, Madam. I thought as much, pertly cried out my Lord Bottom,
whereupon a loud Laugh was echoed through the Room.

Here, my Lady chid the Company, and calling Harry to her again, for he had
gone something aloof, Tell me, I pray you, said she, why you espouse the Part
of the Geese? Because, Madam, I always wish that Simplicity should get the
better of Fraud and Cunning.

The Countess here looked astonished, and having gazed awhile at him, and
caught and kissed him eagerly; You are a noble Fellow, she cried, and all must
be Fools or mad that ever shall take you for the one or the other.

The elder Gentry, here, laid their Cards aside, and desired the young Ones to
set about some Play. Lady Louisa proposed Draw-Gloves, or Questions and
Commands, and to it they went.

Among the Females was one Miss Uppish, sole Heiress to a vast Fortune. Though
her Person was deformed, her Face was the very Picture of confident Disdain;
and scarce any one could speak to her, or look at her, without being told of
the Contempt she had for them, by the Side-Glance of her Eye, the Writhing of
her Neck, and tossing up of her Head.

In the Course of the Play, our Harry was commanded to put the Candle into the
Hand of Miss Uppish, and then to kiss the Candlestick, which Command he obeyed
literally, by giving her the Candle and kissing the Candlestick which he held
in his own Hand.

Hereupon, a great Shout was set up in the young Assembly, and, O the Fool, the
senseless Creature, the Fool, the Fool, the Fool, was repeated throughout;
while Lord Bottom laughed, and danced about in the Impatience of his Joy.

I was amazed that Harry's Countenance seemed no Way disconcerted by all this
Ridicule. At length Lady Mansfield called him to her. How, my Dear, could you
be guilty of such an Error, she said; did not you know that, when you gave the
Candle into the Hand of the young Lady, she became the Candlestick, and it was
her you should have kissed. Harry then approached to her Ladyship's Ear, and,
in a pretty loud Whisper, said, I did not like the Metal, Madam, that the
Candlestick was made of. Again Lady Mansfield looked surprised, and said, you
are a sly Rogue, a very sly Rogue, upon my Honor, and have Sense enough to
dupe the wisest of us all.

Jemmy Bottom, cried my Lady aloud, come here! I cannot but tell you, Jemmy,
that you have behaved yourself extremely ill to your young Friend here, who
might have improved you by his Example as much as he has honored you by his
Visit. I must further tell you, Jemmy Bottom, that, whenever you pique yourself
on degrading Master Fenton, you only pride in your own Abasement, and glory in
your Shame. Hereupon, I got up and, leaving our Compliments for the Earl, I
carried off my young Charge, for fear of our falling into any further Disgrace.

While Harry is abroad, said Mr. Fenton, be pleased to give me a general Sketch
of the Manner in which you disposed of your Money. In the first Place, Sir,
answered Clement, you will find, by this List, that, for little more than the
five hundred Pounds allotted, we released ninety five Prisoners, whose Debts
amounted from forty Shillings to about twelve Pounds per Man. These, in the
general, had been Journeymen Tailors or Weavers, or Professors of other
inferior Crafts; and, as they wanted Means or Encouragement for exercising
their respective Occupations in Gaol, they subsisted on the Pence which they
got by begging at the Grates, or on their Dividends of occasional Sums, which
were sent for their Relief by charitable Individuals. Nearly all of them were
thin in Flesh, and extremely shabby in Clothing, and yet they could hardly be
said to excite Compassion, as they appeared so cheerful, and unfeeling of their
own Wretchedness. Neither was there one of them, that I could learn, a single
Circumstance of whose Story was worth reciting.

Some, however, were of a Quality much superior to this Class. Among others,
there was a French Marquis and a German Prince; the Prince had been put under
Arrest by his Caterer, and the Marquis by his Tailor; so that, something less
than fifty Pounds set them both at Liberty.

While the Keeper of the Fleet Prison was making out a List, for us, of the
principal Debtors, Harry and I took a Turn about the Court, and observed two
Fellows, in Liveries, bearing several smoking Covers, up the Stone Stairs, to
a front Dining Room. This surprised me, and gave me the Curiosity to enquire
what Prisoner it could be who lived in so expensive and superb a Manner. Sir,
said the under Keeper, there are few Men, now at Liberty, near so wealthy as
this Gentleman, who has done us the Honor to set up his Staff of Rest in our
House. His Name is Sink. He is an Attorney and an old Bachelor, turned of sixty
Years of Age. He is in for several Sums, amounting to upward of nine thousand
Pounds, and he is reputed to be worth above double that Money.

During the last twenty Years, he behaved himself with the strictest Probity
toward all Men, and with the strictest Appearance of Piety toward God. In the
dark, in Frost and Snow and all Inclemencies of Weather, he never missed
attending Morning Service at Church. He was equally solicitous to be at Evening
Prayer; and, whatever Company he chanced to have with him, or, how important
soever the Business in which he was engaged, the Moment he heard the Bell
ring, he would huddle up his Papers and break away without Ceremony. He was
eager in his Enquiries to know where the Sacrament was soonest to be
administered, and he never missed Receiving at least once in the Week. Whenever
he heard any Profaneness or Obscenity in the Streets, he would stop to reprove
and expostulate with the Offender. In short, he so perfectly counterfeited or
took off, as they call it, the real Christian, that many looked to see him,
like Enoch or Elijah, taken alive into Heaven.

This perpetual Parade of Sanctity gave him such an Eclat and unmeasurable
Credit, that he was left Trustee and Executor in a Multitude of Wills; and
Numbers also deposited their Substance in his Hands, in order to be laid out at
Interest on Securities, and so forth.

Three Months since, about the Dawning, as his Butcher happened to pass by his
Door, he heard it open, and turning, saw a Number of Porters come out heavy
laden. This gave him a Kind of Suspicion. He let them all pass, and, walking
softly after, he stepped up to the hindmost and offered him Half a Crown, on
Condition of his telling him where they were carrying those Parcels. That I
will, said the Porter, for the Secret, if such it is, is nothing to me you
know. In short we are carrying them to the Wharf to be put on board a Boat that
waits to take them in.

The Butcher said no more, but hurried away to the Baker, and, as they both run
to the Office, they met the Brewer by the Way. They took out their respective
Actions, and, taking a Constable with them, they seized on good Mr. Sink, as he
was stepping into a Coach and Six to make the best of his Way to Dover. He
would have paid them their Money and discharged their Actions on the Spot; but
here the Master, in whom he trusted, happened to leave him in the lurch. As he
had turned all his Effects into Money, and his Money into Paper, he had not at
Hand wherewith to pay his instant Creditors. So they hurried him to Gaol, and,
before the Banks were open, the Matter was blown, and Action after Action came
pouring fast upon him.

When he found himself thus at Bay, he cast aside his Disguise and set them all
at Defiance. His Creditors have since offered to accept ten Shillings, and some
of them to accept five Shillings in the Pound; but he swears that he will never
pay them a Groat; for he is now as liberal of his Oaths and impious
Execrations, as he was lately of his more impious Profanation of Gospel
Phrases. And thus he daily revels in the sensual Consumption of those Wretches
whom he has so inhumanly defrauded, while Hundreds of Orphans and Widows, and
other Miserables perish for want of the Sustenance, which one infernal Appetite
devours without Remorse. Nay, several of his Creditors are, at this very time,
famishing in this Prison, while they see him feasting so lavishly upon their
Spoils.

The Gorge of my Soul, cried Mr. Fenton, the very Gorge of my Soul rises
against this Demon. Can nothing be done to bring him to Punishment? Our
Parliament will surely interfere in such a calling Exigence; they will send to
the several Banks, and take up all the Deposits that have been made in his
Name. Alas, Sir, said Clement, he was already aware of such Possibilities, and
has entered all his Lodgments in feigned Names, and to Bearer upon Demand.

Indeed, continued Clement, I heartily wished, at the time, that the Laws of
the Grecians and Romans had been in Force among us, where the Debtor was given
up to be set to Labor, whipped or tortured at the Pleasure of the Creditor.

God forbid, God forbid, exclaimed Mr. Fenton.

When we see Mankind divided into the Rich and the Poor, the Strong and the
Weak, the Sound and the Sickly, we are apt to imagine, that Health, Strength,
or Opulence, was given to Those; and Infirmity, Want, or Weakness appointed to
These, as Marks of the peculiar Favor or Disfavour of Providence.

GOD, however, knows that there is nothing permanently good, or evil, in any of
these Things. He sees that nothing is a Good but Virtue, and that nothing is a
Virtue, save some Quality of Benevolence. On Benevolence, therefore, he builds
the Happiness of all his intelligent Creatures; and, in this our mortal State,
(our short Apparatus for a long Futurity) He has ordained the relative
Differences of Rich and Poor, Strong and Weak, Sound and Sickly, etc. to
exercise us in the Offices of that Charity, and those Affections, which,
reflecting and reflected like mutual Light and Warmth, can alone make our Good
to all Eternity.

BENEVOLENCE produces and constitutes the Heaven, or Beatitude of GOD himself:
He is no other than an infinite and eternal GOOD WILL: Benevolence must,
therefore, constitute the Beatitude or Heaven of all dependent Beings, however
infinitely diversified through several Departments and Subordinations,
agreeable to the several Natures and Capacities of Creatures.

GOD has appointed human Power and human Wealth, as a ready and sufficient Fund
for human Want and Weakness; to which Fund, therefore, they have as good a
Right to resort, as any other Creditors have to respective Trust or Deposits;
for, though Poverty and Weakness are not Creditors, by the Laws of Man, they
are Creditors by the eternal Laws of Nature and Equity; and must, here, or
hereafter, bring their Debtors to account.

Every Man, when he becomes a Member of this or that Society, makes a Deposit
of three several Sorts of Trusts, That of his LIFE, that of his LIBERTY, and
that of his PROPERTY.

Now as every Man, in his separate or independent State, has by Nature the
absolute Disposal of his Property, he can convey the Disposal thereof, to
Society, as amply and absolutely as he was, in his separate Right, entitled
thereto.

This, however, cannot be said of his Life, or of his Liberty. He has no Manner
of Right to take away his own Life; neither to depart from his own Liberty: He
cannot therefore convey to others, a Right and Authority which he has not in
himself.

The Question then occurs, by what Right it is, that the Legislative and
executive Powers of Community, appoint some Persons to Death, and others to
Imprisonment? My Answer is short, and follows:

It is the Right, perhaps the Duty, of every Man, to defend his Life, Liberty,
and Property, and to kill or bind the Attempters. This Right he can, therefore,
convey; and, on such Conveyance, it becomes the Right and Duty of the Trustees
of Society, to put to Death, or imprison all who take away, or attempt the
Life, Liberty, or Property of any of its Members.

This Right, however, extends to Criminal Matters, only; and it does not, yet
appear to me, upon what Reason, or right Rule, founded in Nature or Policy, the
several Societies of Mankind have agreed to deliver up their Members, to
Slavery, to Stripes, Tortures, or Imprisonment, for Matters merely Civil, such
as Debts.

Several of the States of Greece, though accounting the rest of the World as
Barbarians; and even the Roman Republic, during the Times of its most boasted
Policy and Freedom, gave up Insolvent Debtors (without enquiring into the
Causes or Occasions of such Insolvency) as Slaves, or absolute Property, into
the Hands of their Creditors, to be sold at Will, or put to Labor, or starved,
macerated or tortured, in order to give Value, in Vengeance, which they could
not give in Coin, or other equivalent Commodities.

The Jewish or Mosaic Law, though allowing sufficiently, as CHRIST says, for
the Hardness of that People's Hearts, yet gave perfect Enlargement to all Jews
who were Bondmen, and perfect Remission to all Jews who were personal Debtors,
on every seventh or sabbatical Year: And on every seventh sabbatical Year, or
Jubilee, all Prisons were thrown open; all Slaves, though Foreigners or Aliens,
set at Liberty; and even the Lands were enfranchised, however mortgaged, or
laboring under Debt and Execution; that all Things, animate or inanimate,
might have an Earnest of that Immunity, and perfect Freedom, which God
originally intended, and keeps in Store for his Creatures.

The Laws of Egypt permitted no Member to deprive the Public of the Life,
Liberty, or Labor, of any other Member, except he were a Criminal, not fitting
to live, or to be suffered to walk at large. In all Cases of Debtor and
Creditor, they equitably appointed Value for Value, as far as the Substance of
the Debtor could reach; and, in Case of Insufficiency, the insolvent Party was
obliged to leave, in Pledge, the Mummies, or preserved Bodies of his deceased
Ancestors, till, by Industry or good Fortune, either He, or his Posterity,
should be enabled to redeem them. A Matter of refined, as well as charitable
Policy; as nothing was held more infamous, among the Egyptians, than their
Inability to produce the Mummies of their Forefathers.

The Laws of Holland, by their late Qualifications, seem to acknowledge the
Iniquity, or Inadequateness, of depriving a Man of the Possibility of earning,
merely because he has not an immediate Ability to pay. Sensible, therefore,
that all Men are Debtors to GOD, and reciprocally Debtors and Creditors to each
other, they have ordained, that He, who imprisons an insolvent Debtor, shall
pay the proper Penalty, of his Malevolence or Indiscretion, by maintaining the
Party, from whom he takes the Ability of maintaining himself.

It must be admitted, that, were our Laws less severe with Respect to Debtors;
were People less afraid of a Jail on failure of Payment; there would be less
Credit, and, consequently, less Dealing, in this, so wonderously wealthy, and
trading a Nation. But if our Credit were less, should not our Extravagance
lessen also? Should we see such princely Tables among People of the lower
Class; should so much Claret, Spirits, and Ale, intoxicate a Kingdom; should we
see the Value of a German Prince's Ransom gorgeously attiring each of our Belle
Dames, if neither Merchant, Butcher, Brewer, Laceman, Mercer, Milliner, nor
Tailor would trust?

Many of our poor City Dealers are yearly undone, with their Families, by
crediting Persons, who are privileged not to pay, or whose Remoteness, or
Power, places them beyond the Reach of the Law. For, by the Return of non
invent. generally made upon Writs, one would be apt to imagine, that no single
Sub-Sheriff knew of any such Thing, as a Man of Fortune, within his respective
County, throughout the Kingdom of Great Britain.

When I was last at Paris, I had the Honor to be introduced to Messieurs
Thimble and Goose, two Tailors of Quality. In the Course of Conversation, it
happened to turn, as usual, on the Dullness of the Times, the Deadness of Trade,
and Delays of Payment. Says Monsieur Thimble, I had the Misfortune to make
Interest for the new Clothing of the last Regiments that were transported to
Canada. But Interest was, again, to be made for the Payment; and, before that
could be done, the Officers were shipped off, with greater Value of my Gold and
Silver on their Backs, than, I am sure, they carried of their own in their
Pockets. Ambition, cried Monsieur le Goose, Ambition has brought me to the very
Brink of Ruin: I scorned to work for any thing under the Degree of Nobility,
and be pox'd to me! and the Nobility are a Sort of People, whom we can never
set our Eyes on, except at the Time we are fitting on their Clothes.

Before Money became the Medium of Commerce, the simple Business of the World
was carried on by Truck, or the Commutation of one Commodity for another. But,
when Men consented to fix certain rateable Values upon Money, as a ready and
portable Equivalent for all Sorts of Effects, Credit was consequently
introduced, by the Engagements of some, to pay so much Money in lieu of such
Commodities, or to deliver such or such Commodities on the Advance of so much
Money; and States found it their Interest to support such public Credit, by
enforcing the Performance of said Engagements.

By the Common Law of England, no Person, except the King, could take the Body
of another in Execution for Debt; neither was this Prerogative of the Crown
extended to the Subject till the Statute of Marlbridge, chapter 23. in the Reign of
Henry III.

Many contract Debts, through Vanity, or Intemperance; or borrow Money, or take
up Goods, with the Intention of Thieves and Robbers, never to make Return. When
such suffer, they suffer deservedly, in Expiation of their Guilt. But there are
unavoidable Damages by Water, by Fire, the Crush of Power, oppressive
Landlords, and more oppressive Lawsuits, Death of Cattle, Failure of Crop,
Failure of Payment in others; with thousands of such like Casualties, whereby
Men may become bankrupt, and yet continue blameless. And, in all such Cases,
one would think that the present Ruin was sufficient Calamity, without the
Exertion of Law to make that Ruin irreparable.

As all the Members of a Community are interested in the Life, Liberty, and
Labors of each other; He, who puts the Rigor of our Laws in Execution, by
detaining an insolvent Brother in Gaol, is guilty of a fourfold Injury; first,
he robs the Community of the Labors of their Brother; secondly, he robs his
Brother of all Means of retrieving his shattered Fortune; thirdly, he deprives
himself of the Possibility of Payment; and, lastly, he lays an unnecessary
Burden on the Public, who, in Charity, must maintain the Member whom he, in his
Cruelty, confines.

However, since the Severity of Law is such, that He, whose Misfortunes have
rendered him insolvent, must make Satisfaction, (for so the Savages esteem it)
by surrendering his Body to Durance for Life; it is surely incumbent on our
Legislators and Governors to make the Condition of the unhappy Sufferers as
little grievous as may be.

But this most Christian Duty, this most humane of all Cares, is yet to come.
When a Debtor is delivered up into the Phangs of his Jailer, he is consigned to
absolute and arbitrary Slavery; and Woe be to the Wretch whose Poverty may not
have left him a Sop for Cerberus. How more than miserable must be the State of
those unhappy Men who are shut in from all possible Redress or Appeal against
the despotic Treatment of their savage Keepers, whose Hearts are habitually
hardened to all Sense of Remorse, and whose Ears are rendered callous by
incessant Groans.

We are credibly informed, that it is usual, with such Keepers, to amass
considerable Fortunes from the Wrecks of the Wretched; to squeeze them by
exorbitant Charges and illicit Demands, as Grapes are squeezed in a Vine Press,
while one Drop remains; and then to huddle them together, into naked Walls and
windowless Rooms; having got all they can, and nothing further to regard, save
the Return of their lifeless Bodies to their Creditors.

How many of these Keepers exact, from their distressed Prisoners, seven and
eight Shillings per Week, for Rooms that would not rent, at a Third of that
Sum, in any other Part of this City. At times, Nine of those wretched Prisoners
are driven to kennel together in a Hovel fit only to stable a Pair of Horses,
while many unoccupied Apartments are locked up from use. Even a Sufficiency of
the common Element of Water is refused to their Necessities, an Advantage which
the Felons in Newgate enjoy. Public and private Benefactions are dissipated or
disposed of, at the Pleasure of the Keepers, regardless of the Intention or
Order of the Donors. And the Apartments, appointed to these miserable Men, are
generally damp or shattered in the Flooring, and exposed, by Breach or Want of
Windows, to the Inclemency of Night Air, and all the Rigor of the Seasons.

But what avail their Complaints, if the Legislature have not authorized, or
made it the Duty of some especial Magistrates to examine into and redress these
crying Abuses?

But, tell me, continued Mr. Fenton, were there any Prisoners of Consideration
among the confined Debtors? A few, Sir, of Note, and many who had been well to
pass in the World. Among these, indeed, it was, that every Scene and Species of
Misery was displayed. There you might see, as you have said, numerous Families
of Wretches, whose thin and tattered Garments but ill defended their shivering
Bodies from the Inclemency of Elements, that blew through shattered Windows, or
came pouring from unstaunched Roofs.

These People fared incomparably worse than those of the vulgar Herd; for,
being ashamed to beg at the Grates, they had nothing to subsist on, save their
scanty Portion of such Charities as happened to be sent in, from Time to Time,
and this scarcely supplied them with a sufficiency of Water, black Bread, and
Offal; while the Recollection of their former Affluence added sharp and bitter
Poignancy to the Sense of their present Wants. -- But, here comes my Pupil, he
will be more particular, on Scenes with which his Heart was so meltingly
affected.

Harry then entered, with Mrs. Clement caressing him on the one Side, and his
old Dependant Ned hanging about him on the other.

As soon as Clement and his Arabella had embraced, and that all were settled
and seated. Well, Harry, said Mr. Fenton, will you favor us with some Account
of your Expedition? Have you ever a pretty Story for me, my Harry? Several
Stories, Sir, said Harry, that were sweet pretty Stories, when I heard them;
but, Mr. Clement had better tell them; they would be sadly bungled if they came
through my Hands, Dada. The Company will make Allowances, replied Mr. Fenton;
let us have these Stories in your own Way, Harry, just as your Memory may
happen to serve you.

On the second Day, Dada, as my Tutor and I were walking in the Court Yard of
the Fleet Prison, who should I spy but my old Master, Mr. Vindex, walking, very
sad, to and again by the Wall. He was so pale and shabby, and so fallen away,
that I did not rightly know him, till I looked at him very earnestly. My Heart
then began to soften and warm toward the poor Man; for it told me, that
something very sorrowful must have happened, before he could have been brought
to that Condition. So, I went up to him, with a Face, I believe, as melancholy
as his own.

How do you do, good Mr. Vindex? said I. I should be glad to see you, if I did
not see you look so sad. He then stared at me for some Time, and, at length,
remembering me, he looked concerned, and turned away to shun me; but I took him
lovingly by the Hand, and said, you must not leave me, Mr. Vindex; will not you
know your old Scholar, Harry Fenton? Yes, says he, casting down his mournful
Eyes, I know you now, Master; I know I used you basely, and I know why you are
come; but, reproach me, and insult me, as much as you please, all is welcome
now, since I cannot lie lower, till I am laid in the Earth.

I do not mean to insult you, this Tear will witness for me, that I do not mean
to insult you, my dear Mr. Vindex, and so I wiped my Eye. Here are twenty
Guineas, to put warm Clothes upon you in this cold Weather. Little and low as I
am myself, I will try to do something better for you, and so give me one Kiss
in Token that we are Friends.

The poor dear Man then opened his broad Eyes, in a wild Stare upon me, with a
Look that was made up, Half of Joy, and Half of Shame. He then kneeled down, as
I supposed, that I might reach to kiss him, and taking me into his Arms, you
are not born of Woman, you are an Angel, an Angel, he cried; and so he fell a
crying, and cried so sadly, that I could not, for my Heart, but keep him
Company.

I did all I could to pacify and make him cheerful, and getting him up at last,
you must not part with me Mr. Vindex, said I, we must dine and spend the Day
together. Here is Mr. Clement, my Tutor, you and he too must be Friends.

I then led him, by the Hand, into a large ground Room that Mr. Close, the
chief Keeper, had appointed for us; and I ordered Dinner to be hastened and
brought up. As soon as we were all seated, I began to laugh and joke, after my
foolish Way, in order to make poor Mr. Vindex merry. When I found that it would
not do, Mr. Vindex, said I, be so kind to let me know what the Money may come
to for which you are confined? A terrible Sum, indeed, my Darling, said he, no
less than a hundred and fifty two Pounds. I then put my Hand in my Pocket, and,
taking out two Bills and a little Matter of Money that made up the Sum, I put
it into his Hand, saying, my Friend shall never lie in Gaol for such a Trifle
as this.

Having looked for some Time at the Bills, with Amazement, he turned to my
Tutor with a doubtful and shamed Face; is this young Gentleman, Sir, said he,
duly authorized to dispose of such vast Matters as these? He is, said Mr.
Clement, he is the Carver and Disposer of his Father's Fortune at Pleasure; and
I am confident that his Father will think himself doubly paid in the Use that
his noble Son has made of his Privilege this Day.

A Gleam then, like that of Sunshine, broke through his sad Countenance, as
through the Clouds of a dark Day; and, are you the one, he cried, are you the
one, Master Harry, whom I treated so barbarously? You may forgive me, my little
Cherubim, you, indeed, may forgive me, but, I never, I never shall forgive
myself. O, Mr. Vindex, said I, I would very nearly undergo the same Whipping
again, to do you twice the Kindness, and make you love me twice as much as you
now love me.

Dinner was now served, and, calling for Wine, I filled him a Bumper, in a
large Glass, which he drank to the Health of my glorious Dada, as he called
you, Sir. Upon this, we grew very merry and friendly among one another, and,
when Dinner was over, I begged him to tell me how he came to be put into
Confinement.

O, Master Harry, he cried, I have suffered all that I have suffered, very
justly, very justly for my harsh and cruel Usage of you, Master Harry.

After the Affair of the Hobgoblins, as you know, the Shame to which I was put
by my Fright and by my Scourging, began to be whispered, and then to be noised
about the Town. The Boys, at length, catched the Rumor, and began to hoot at
me; and the more I chastised them, the more they gathered about me, and shouted
after me, a Rod for the Flogger, a Rod for the Flogger!

No Disease is so deadly, no Blasting so baneful, as Contempt to a Man, in the
Way of his Profession. My Boys grew disorderly, and behaved themselves, in
School, without Respect to my Person, or Regard to my Government. Even my
Intimates shunned me, and would cast at me a side Glance of smiling Scorn as
they passed. My School then melted from me like Snow in a Fog. Even my Boarders
forsook me. I stood at a high Rent; my Effects were seized by the Landlord. It
was in vain that I solicited Payment from the Parents of my Scholars. No one
who was indebted to me, would give me a Penny; while all that I owed came like
a tumbling House upon me; and so I was cast into this Prison, from whence your
Bounty has set me free.

My poor broken hearted Wife would have accompanied me to Gaol; but, as I had
not wherewithal to give her a Morsel of Bread, I sent her to an old Aunt who
had the Humanity to take her in.

Alas, alas, poor Mr. Vindex, said I, had I guessed any Part of the Mischiefs
that our unlucky Pranks have brought upon you, I would have put both my Hands
into the Furnace of Nebuchadnezzar, rather than have Act or Part in such a
Wickedness. For, herein we acted the Fable of the Frogs and the Boys, that
which was Play to us, was Death to you, Mr. Vindex.

In Conscience, now, we are indebted to you for every Misfortune we caused you;
and, as you are not yet paid for the Half of your Sufferings, I here give you
my Hand and Word to make up a hundred and fifty Pounds more for you; and, for
this, I will not accept the smallest Thanks, as I think it is no more than an
Act of common Honesty. And I, cried Mr. Fenton, I hold myself indebted to you a
thousand Pounds, my noble Harry, for that single Sentiment. That Is well, that is
well, Dada, cried Harry, (leaping up and clapping his Hands) I shall now be
clear in the World with all my poor Creditors.

Thus, Dada, continued he, it rejoiced my Heart, greatly, to send poor Mr.
Vindex away, in such Triumph; while my Tutor and I went two or three Doors off,
to see a mighty pretty young Creature who was said to be confined with her
ancient Father. And I will tell you their Story, with two or three other
Stories, more on account of the Incidents that happened while we were there,
than of any Thing else that was wonderful or uncommon in them.

On tapping at the Door, we were desired to walk in, and saw a Female, with her
Back to us, waving Bone Lace on a Cushion; while an elderly Man, with
Spectacles on, read to her in Thomas a Kempis. They both rose to salute us. Mr.
Clement then stepped up, and, seeing what they were about, cried, God cannot
but prosper your Work, good People, since you employ your Time to his Purposes,
both on Earth and in Heaven. As an Earnest of his Kindness to you, he sends
you, by us, a considerable Charity, which you shall receive as soon as you
inform us who, and what you are, and how you came here? Blessed be the
Messengers of my God, cried out the Father, whether they come with happy or
with heavy Tidings, I say with old Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good.

O Dada, I was quite charmed, when the Daughter turned to me. There was such a
Sweetness, such a heavenly Harmlessness in her Face, that I could have kissed
her, and kissed her, again and again.

As I had brought a Glass and the Remainder of our Bottle with me, we all got
about a Board that was Half Stool and Half Table, and, after a Round or two,
the good Man began his Story.

My Father's Name was Samuel Stern. He had a clear Estate of nine hundred and
fifty Pounds a Year in Sussex, and had, by my Mother, three Daughters and four
Sons, of whom I was the second.

My Father, unhappily, was a Loyalist, and when the Troubles broke out between
King Charles and the Parliament, he took up all the Money he could, at any
Interest, and raised a Company, at his own Cost, which he headed on the Part of
his Royal Master.

After some successful Skirmishes, his Head was split in two by the Broad-sword
of a Trooper, at the Battle of Naisby. Immediately, all our Servants forsook
us, each carrying away with them whatever came to Hand; and, quickly after, the
Soldiers of the Commonwealth came, carried off all the Cattle, and left nothing
of our House, except the bare Walls.

In the mean time we, poor Children, huddled together into the Garden, and,
there separating, ran and crept under Bushes and Hedges, as so many Chickens
endeavoring to gain Shelter from the Kite.

As soon as the Noise of the Tumult was over, we rose and looked about
fearfully, and, getting together again, we helped one another through the
Garden Hedge, and made, as fast as we could, to the Cottage of a neighboring
Farmer who had been our Father's Tenant. Here we were received coldly, and
fared but very hardly for that Night. On the next Day however, in order to get
quit of us, as I suppose, the Man went among our Relations, and prevailed on
one to take a Son, and on another to take a Daughter, till we were all divided
among them; and so we entered on a kind of Service to our Kindred, a Service,
as I believe, that is found, on Experience, to be much harder and more
insulting than any Service to a Stranger.

I forgot to tell you, Gentlemen, that our Mother deceased before our Father
engaged in Arms, insomuch that we became Orphans in all Respects. I fell to the
Share of an Uncle by my Mother's Side. He had a small Estate of about a hundred
and twenty Pounds yearly Income, with one Son, and a Daughter whom I thought
very lovely.

My Uncle appointed me Overseer of his Laborers, as also his occasional Clerk,
for casting Accounts, and inditing his Letters, etc. but, when it was intimated
to him that there was a secret Liking between his Daughter and me, he called me
aside, and, taking up a Book of profane Poems, he kissed it and swore, by the
Contents thereof, that, if ever I married his Daughter, he would not give us a
Groat.

If you ever knew what Love was, said he to Mr. Clement, you must know that it
breaks over stronger Fences than these. In short, we were wedded and turned out
of the House, without any thing to live upon, except about the Value of twenty
Pounds, in small Matters, which had been given to my Wife, from Time to Time,
by lady Goodly, her God-mother.

We made the best of our Way to London. My Wife understood Needlework, and, as
I knew that my Father-in-law was quite irreconcilable, I joined myself to a
House Painter, to whom I gave my Time for nothing, on Condition of his giving
me a Sight into his Business.

In the third Year, my dear Wife brought this poor Creature into the World;
but, happily, she did not encumber Mankind with any more of our wretched and
depending Progeny.

All our Care and Delight was fixed on this our little Daughter, and we thought
nothing of any Pains or Labors that might serve to introduce her, like
herself, into the World.

As soon as Charles the IId. had ascended the Throne, our Relations were fully
assured that we should be restored to our ancient Rights and Possessions; and
they contributed, as it were for their own Credit, to set us forth in a
suitable Manner for appearing at Court. There accordingly we attended, from
time to time, for the Space of twelve Months, and got a Number of woeful
Memorials presented to his Majesty; but his Majesty was so deeply engaged in
his Pleasures, or so fearful of offending the Enemies of his House, that he
gave no Attention to our Wrongs. There may also be something in the Breasts of
the Great that excites them to Acts of Bounty, rather than Acts of Justice; for
these, as they apprehend, might be accepted as Matter of Debt and not as Matter
of Favor.

Being tired of a fruitless Suit, I returned to my former Employment, and, by
Industry and Frugality, I lived with my little Family quite happy and contented.

About ten Months ago, two Men came to our Lodgings. The one was in a rich
Livery, and, having enquired for my Daughter, presented her with a Note to this
effect, -- Lady Diana Templar sends Diana Stern the enclosed Bill of twenty
five Pounds, in order to put her into some little Way of Livelihood. -- As my
poor dear Child had no Cause to suspect any Fraud or evil Intention in the
Case, she desired the Men to return her most humble Thanks and Duty to her
Ladyship, and away they went.

As this Lady was a distant Relation of my Wife's Father, my Daughter, in a few
Days, dressed herself in her best, and went to return Thanks to her Ladyship in
Person, but was told that she was gone to her Seat in the Country.

In the mean time she laid out her supposed Bounty in furnishing a little front
Shop with some millinary Wares, and was already beginning to get some Custom,
when, one Evening, two Bailiffs entered laid an Action upon her, and, taking
her up in their Arms, hurried her into a Coach that drove up to the Door.

My Wife and I had rushed out, on hearing our Child shriek, and seeing a Coach
set off with her at a great Rate, we ran after as fast as we could, shouting
and screaming, and crying, stop the Coach, stop the Coach, a Rape, a Rape! At
length a bold Fellow, who was passing, caught one of the Horses by the Bridle,
and, while the Coachman lashed at him, he took out his Knife and cut the Reins
in two. A Mob then began to gather, whereupon a well dressed Man, who was in
the Coach, leaped out and made his Escape; but the Coachman was not so lucky,
the People pulled him from the Box, and having beaten and kicked him, they
dragged him through the Kennel.

Mean while we got our Child out, and then the Mob overturned the Coach, and,
jumping upon it, broke and dashed it all to Pieces. We then thought that we had
nothing further to apprehend, and, taking our Child between us, we turned back
and walked homeward; but alas, we were not permitted to enter; the two Bailiffs
met us, and, producing their Writ, again arrested our Daughter at the Suit, as
they said, of Jonathan Delvil, Esquire for the Sum of twenty five Pounds which he
had lent her on such a Day. So they conducted her here, while my Wife and I
accompanied her, weeping and sobbing all the Way.

I then took these poor Apartments to cover us from the Weather, and as my Wife
grew suddenly sick and faint, I hastened back to our Lodgings, and had our
Bedding brought hither.

It was now evident that the pretended Gift of Lady Templar was no other than a
diabolical Scheme of the Villain Delvil, to get the Person of my Darling within
his Fangs; and I cursed my own Stupidity for not perceiving it at first; but
blessed be my God however, in all Events, that my Lamb was still innocent, was
still unsullied.

What with Grief and the Fright together, my dear Wife took to her Bed, from
whence she never rose, but expired on the fifth Day, blessing and pressing her
Daughter to her Bosom. My poor Infant then fell as dead beside her Mother, and
could not be recovered from her Fit in many Hours; and, indeed, it was then the
Wish and the Prayer of my Soul, that we might all be laid and forgotten in one
Grave together.

As soon as my Darling was recovered however, I again wished to live for her
sake, that I might not leave her without a Comforter or Protector, in the midst
of a merciless and wicked World.

In order to pay the Nursekeeper, the Doctor, and Apothecary, as also to defray
the funeral Expenses, I left my Child with the Nursekeeper, and, going to our
former Lodgings, I sold all her millinary Matters at something under a third of
prime Cost; and having discharged the Lodgings and paid my Gaol Debts, I
prepared to lay my precious Deposit in the Womb of that Earth which is one Day
to render her back, incorruptible to Eternity.

When the Corpse was carrying out at the Door, my Child fell once more into
Fits, and I was divided and quite distracted about what I should do, whether to
stay with the Living, or pay my Duty to the Dead. But I will no longer detain
you with melancholy Matters, since all worldly Griefs, with all worldly Joys
also, must shortly be done away.

As soon as I understood that Lady Templar was returnned to Town, I waited upon
her, and giving her an Abridgment of our manifold Misfortunes, I produced the
Note that had been written in her Name; but she coldly replied, that it was not
her Hand, and that she was not answerable for the Frauds or Villainies of others.

Meanwhile, my dear Girl accused herself as the Cause of all our Calamities,
and pined away, on that Account, as pale as the Sheets she lay in. She was also
so enfeebled, by her faintish and sick Fits, that she was not able to make a
third of her usual Earnings; and as I, on my Part, was also disqualified from
laboring in my Profession, since I did not dare to leave my Child alone and
unsheltered, we were reduced to a State of the greatest Extremity.

One Day, Word was brought me that a Gentleman, a few Doors off, desired to
speak with me; and as they, who are sinking, catch at any thing for their
Support, my Heart fluttered in the Hope of some happy Reverse. Accordingly I
followed the Messenger. His Appearance, in Dress and Person, was altogether
that of the Gentleman.

He ordered all others out of the Room, and requesting me to sit beside him, in
a half whispering Voice he began: I am come, Mr. Stern, from one whom you have
great Reason to account your greatest Enemy, I come from Mr. Delvil, at whose
Suit your Daughter now lies in Prison. I started -- Be patient, Sir, he said.
He knows your Distresses, he knows all your Wants, he knows also that he is the
Author of them; yet I tell you that he feels them, as if they were his own, and
that it was not his Enmity, but his Love that occasioned them.

He depends on his old Uncle Dimmock for a vast Fortune in Expectation. He saw
your Daughter and loved her; he saw her again and loved her to Madness. He
enquired her Family, her Character, and found that he had nothing to expect
from any licentious Proposal. He feared, however, that all must love her, as he
did, and, to prevent other Pirates, he made use of the Stratagem which,
contrary to his Intentions, has brought you here. He never meant any thing
dishonorable by your Daughter. Had he carried her clear off, you might all
have been happy together at this Day; and, if you consent, he will marry her
here, in the Presence of a few Witnesses, who shall be sworn to Secrecy till
his Uncle's Death; and he will instantly pay you down three hundred Pounds, in
Recompense for your Sufferings, and will settle one hundred Pounds Annuity on
your Child for Life.

I must own that, to one in my Circumstances, this Proposal had something very
tempting in it. But who is this Mr. Delvil, said I, I know him not, I never saw
him? -- I am the Man, Sir, said he. I would have discharged my Action as I came
to this Place; but I dare not permit your Daughter to get out of my Custody;
for, at the Loss of my Fortune, at the Loss of my Life, I am determined that no
other Man living shall possess her. I then promised him that I would make a
faithful Narration to my Child of all that had passed, but told him, at the
same time, that I would wholly subscribe to her Pleasure; and so we parted.

As soon as I represented this Matter to my Diana, O no, my Papa, she cried, it
is impossible, it never can be, I would do any thing, suffer any thing, but
this, for your Relief. Would you act the Marriage of the Lamb and the Wolf in
the Fable? If such have been the Consequences of this Gentleman's Affection for
us, what have we not to expect from the Effects of his Aversion? I would prefer
any Kind of Death to a Life with such a Man. And then, my Mother, she cried,
and burst into Tears) my dear Mother whom he has murdered! though he were worth
Half the World, and would marry me publicly in the Face of the other Half; it
will not be, it cannot be, indeed, my Papa!

Hereupon I writ Mr. Delvil almost a literal Account of my Daughter's Answer.
It is nearly five Weeks since this happened, and we have not heard any thing
further from him.

In this time, however, we got acquainted with a Family at the next Door, whose
Converse has been a great Consolation to us. There is a Father and Mother with
seven small Children, Boys and Girls; they are very worthy People, and of noble
Descent, but how they contrive to live at all I cannot conceive, for they have
no visible Means of making a Penny. Had we not known them, we should have
thought ourselves the poorest of all Creatures. We must own them more deserving
of your Charity than we are.

Here poor Mr. Stern ended; and you cannot think, Dada, how my Heart leapt with
Love toward him, on his recommending others as more deserving than himself. So
I resolved, at once, what to do, and taking two 50 l. Notes from my Pocketbook,
you shall not be under the Necessity, Mr. Stern, says I, of marrying your
pretty Lamb here to the ugly Wolf, so here is fifty Pounds to pay your Action,
and Fees, and other small Debts.

On taking the Note, Dada, he looked at it very earnestly, and when he saw it
was a true Note, he opened his Eyes and his Mouth so wide, and stood so stiff,
without stirring Hand or Foot, that he put me in mind of Lot's Wife who was
turned into a Pillar of Salt. However, I did not seem to mind him, but turning
to his Daughter, and showing her the other Note, Miss Diana, says I, here is
fifty Pounds for you also, in order to set you up in your little Shop again,
but you shall not have it without a certain Condition; what Condition, Master,
said she smiling; the Condition, says I, of putting your Arms about my Neck,
and giving me one or two sweet Kisses. She then looked earnestly at me, with
Eyes swimming in Pleasure, and starting suddenly to me, and catching me to her
Bosom, she kissed my Lips, and my Forehead, and my Head, again and again, and
then set up as lamentable and loud a Cry, as if her Father had lain a Corpse
before her.

Mr. Stern, then, lifted up his Eyes, and dropping on his Knees, O my God, he
cried, how bountiful art thou to a Wretch who is not worthy the least of all
thy Mercies! hereupon, the Daughter turned, and, seeing the Posture of her
Father, she fell on her Knees before him, and throwing her Arms about him, he
folded her in his also, and they wept plentifully upon each other.

How comes it, Dada, that Crying should be so catching? However it be, Mr.
Clement and I could not contain, and I shall love him the better during Life,
for the Tears that he shed on that Occasion.

On hearing a smart Rapping, Mr. Stern rose and opened the Door, where a
Footman, almost breathless, delivered him a Letter. The Letter was to the
Purpose that Mr. Delvil was ill of a Quinsy, that he had but a few Hours to
live, and requested Mr. Stern to bring his Daughter to him, that, by Marriage,
he might give her a lawful Title to his Fortune. No, Papa, cried Diana, living
or dead, nothing shall ever bribe me to give my Hand to a Man who has had a
Hand in the Death of my dearest Mother.

Mr. Clement, however, thought it advisable that Mr. Stern should attend the
Messenger, to see if Mr. Delvil was really ill, or whether this might not be
some new contrived Treachery.

This was a Day of Successes to poor Mr. Stern. We had promised to stay with
his Diana till his Return; and he had not been long gone till some one tapped
at the Door. I opened it, and saw an exceeding old and reverend Man; he was
dressed all in black, and his white Head looked like Snow on the Feathers of
the Raven. Is Tom Stern here? said he. No, Sir, said I, he is gone into Town. I
thought he was a Prisoner; no, Sir, it is not he, but his Daughter, who is
under Confinement. Will you give a feeble old Man leave to sit with you,
Gentlemen? and so down he sat. Come here to me, Child, says he to Diana, are
you a Daughter of Tom Stern? I am, Sir, so please you. And what was your
Mother's Name? Anne Roche, Sir; but, alas! she is not living, I was the Cause
of her Death; she broke her Heart, good Sir, on my being put to Gaol. I hope,
Child, said the old Gentleman, that you were not imprisoned for any thing that
was naughty. No, Sir, no, cried Mr. Clement, it was her Honesty alone that
brought and kept her here; had she been less virtuous, she might have been at
Liberty and flaunting about in her Coach.

The old Man then put on his Spectacles, and ordering her to draw nearer, he
took a Hand in each of his, and looking intently in her Face, what is your
Name, my Dear? said he; Diana, honored Sir. That is a pretty and chaste Name,
for an unchristian Name. Indeed, Diana, you are a sweet Babe, and the prettiest
little Prisoner that ever I saw. I will pay all your Debts, and give you a
thousand Pounds over, if you will come along with me, and be my Prisoner,
Diana. Ah, Sir, cried the Girl, it is too much to have broken the Heart of one
Parent already; I would not leave my dear Father for any Man with all the Money
in all the World. You do not leave your Father, he cried, by going with me,
Diana. I am your true Father, the Father of Nanny Roche, the Father of her who
bore you, your own Grandfather, my Diana.

Here she sunk on her Knees, between his Knees, begging and beseeching his
Blessing; while his Hands and Eyes were lifted in Prayer over her. He then
raised her, and placing her gently on his Knee, clasped her in his aged Arms;
while she threw hers about his Neck, and joining her Cheek to his, sobbed aloud
and poured her Tears into his Bosom. The old Gentleman, however, did not
express his Concern by Word, or Sob, or even any Change of his Countenance, and
yet his Tears fell fast, down his reverend and delighted Features, upon his
Grandchild.

This, Dada, was a very pleasing, though a very affecting Sight. As soon as the
Height of their Passion was something abated, Miss Diana turned her Eye toward
me, and said, You were pleased, my Grand-Papa, to promise that you would pay my
Debts; but that is done already. This Angel here was sent to prevent all
others, and he further presented me with this Bill of 50 l. to set me up in a
better Shop than I kept before.

I rejoice, cried the old Man, I rejoice to find that so much of Heaven is
still left upon Earth. But you, my Diana, are now in a Condition, rather to
give Charity than receive it from any. Your dear Uncle Jeremy, who traded to
the West Indies, lately died of the Smallpox on his Passage homeward. You are
the Heir of his Fortunes, and the Heir of my Fortune; you are the whole and
sole Lady of all our Possessions. But, tell me, how much did this young
Gentleman advance in your Favor? A hundred Pounds, Sir.

He then took out a Bank Note of a hundred Pounds, and having offered it to me,
I did not dare to refuse it, for fear of offending the Honor of the
respectable old Gentleman; so I held it in my Hand after a doubting Manner. My
dear Miss Diana, says I, I will not be put to the Pain of taking this back
again, but on the Condition of your telling me to whom I shall give it? O, she
cried out instantly, to the Babies, to the sweet Babies at the next Door; I
wish to Heaven I had as much more to add to it for their Sakes.

I then enquired the Name of her favorite Family at the next Door, and being
told that it was Ruth, I looked over my List, and found that Mr. Ruth was in
for above seven hundred Pounds. This grieved me very much, as such a Sum nearly
amounted to the Half of our whole Stock. However, I comforted myself with the
Hope that God would send some one else, to make up to this poor Family what
should be wanting on my Part.

Mr. Stern just then returned. I beg Pardon, said he, Gentlemen, for detaining
you so long, but I could not avoid it. The unhappy Man is actually dying, a
very terrible Death, indeed, in his full Strength, and almost in his full
Health, stifling and gasping for Air, which the swelling of his Glands will not
suffer to pass.

As soon as I entered, he beckoned to me, and put this Paper, sealed, into my
Hand. And again, observing that I was agitated and deeply concerned for the
State under which he labored, he reached out his Hand to me, and, grasping my
right Hand, put this Ring upon my Finger. -- This Paper contains, under his
Hand and Seal, a Discharge of the Action which he laid upon my Daughter, as
also a Conveyance to us, of the Cash Notes enclosed, amounting to three hundred
Pounds, in Consideration, as he recites, of our Losses and unjust Sufferings.
And so, my dear Master Fenton, I here return you your 100 l. with all possible
Acknowledgments, and a Sense of the Obligation that will never leave me, during
Life.

Sir, said I, you must excuse me, I am already paid. That Gentleman, yonder,
compelled me to accept of the very Sum you offer.

Mr. Stern then started, and, turning, he saw his Uncle; and, eying him
inquisitively, at length recollected who he was. He then stepped up and,
falling on his Knees before him, O, Sir, he cried, your Pardon, your Pardon!
It Is all I presume to ask, I dare not hope for your Blessing.

Tom, said the old Gentleman, I wanted to be even with you, I wanted to seduce
your Daughter, as you seduced mine. But your Daughter, Tom, though come of very
rebellious Parents, would not be seduced. Howsomever, as I have taken a liking
to her, she must come along with me, whether she will or no. And, as Jacob said
to Joseph concerning Ephraim and Manasseh, she shall be mine and not thine,
Tom; and my Name and the Name of my Fathers shall be named upon her, according
to her Inheritance. But, if you have any Affection for this my Child, Tom, and
are unwilling to part with her, you may follow her, and welcome.

Soon after, we got up, and, having congratulated this happy Family on the
Blessing of their Meeting and Reconciliation, I stepped to the old Gentleman,
and, catching him about the Neck, tenderly took my Leave of him, as I did also
of Mr. Stern. But, when I went to take leave of the fair Diana, she drew some
Steps backward, and, her Eyes and sweet Features beginning to swell, she again
run forward, and catching me in her dear Arms, O, my Darling, my Darling, my
Darling, she cried, am I then going to lose you, it may be never to see you
more! were it but once in a Week, in a Month, in a Year to behold you, even
that would keep me alive for all the Remainder. O my best, my most generous, my
first Preserver, it is you who might be the Seducer, who might make me and
others to run after you barefoot. But if we must part, my little Angel, do but
promise to know me in Heaven, and there your poor Diana will meet you, never to
part any more.

What could I say or do, Dada, in answer to the dear Girl? my Heart swelled,
almost to bursting, while she caressed and wept over me. At length, with Words,
as well as my Tears would give me leave to pronounce them, I demanded the Name
of the Place to which she was going, and promised to pay her a Visit as soon as
possibly I could. We then parted very melancholy, notwithstanding all our
Success; and, going out, I wiped my Eyes, and begged Mr. Clement to order Tea
and Coffee, with a comfortable Entertainment for the Family, at the next Door,
while I should go in and introduce myself as well as I could.

Having tapped gently at the Door, it was opened by a little ragged Boy of
about five Years old. Mrs. Ruth sat full in my view, and her three little
Daughters stood before her, while she examined them in the Old Testament
Questions of who was the first Man, and the wisest Man, and the strongest Man,
and the oldest Man, and above all, the Man after God's own Heart?

Mrs. Ruth was a fine Woman, and had a great deal of humbled Dignity about her.
I bowed to her as I entered, and, going familiarly up, I took her by the Hand
and kissed it. Allow me, Madam, said I, to introduce a little Neighbor to you;
I lodge within a few Doors, and shall think myself happy in being acquainted in
your Family. Alas, my Dear, says she, there are very few who seek acquaintance
with Calamity. They, who wish to relieve it, seek acquaintance with it, Madam.

Having eyed me all over, with an earnest Kind of Surprise, you look, my Love,
said she, to be very Good-natured, and I dare say will be very charitable when
you come to have the Ability. The little Ability I have, Madam, shall be
strained for your Service. In the mean Time, pray pardon the Freedom I have
taken in ordering Tea and Coffee into your Room, with some Cakes and Sweetmeats
for these pretty Misses. I will only trouble you, Madam, with one Guest more,
it is Mr. Clement, my Tutor, who, good Man, has been no Stranger to Poverty or
Distress.

Here she called Mr. Ruth from an inner Room, give me leave, my Dear, says she,
to introduce a young Stranger to you, from what World he comes I know not, but
I am sure that he is not wholly of the World that we have lived in.

Mr. Ruth's Countenance spoke at once the Meekness of Moses and the Patience of
Job. Having saluted, we both sat down. Mr. Ruth, said I, I have a Message to
you and your Lady from your sweet pretty Neighbor, Miss Diana Stern. In Token
of her Respect and Affection for you, she presents you with this Cash Note of a
hundred Pounds. Diana Stern! cried out Mr. Ruth, why, Master, she is nearly as
poor as ourselves. By no Means, Sir, I assure you; her Grandfather is come to
Town, she is worth several Thousands, besides a considerable Estate to which
she is Heiress. O, the dear Creature, the dear Angel, cried Mrs. Ruth, I will
instantly go and pay her my Acknowledgments; so up she got and out she run,
before I could prevent her.

As soon as she was gone, Mr. Ruth, says I, my Dada is much fonder of me than I
deserve. He has given me a little Money to dispose of, at pleasure, among the
confined Debtors, and though I may not have enough to answer your Occasions,
yet my Dada is so very good and so very generous, that if you give me the Sum
of your Debts, with the Story of your Distresses, his Heart, I am sure, will
melt, and he will set you clear in the World.

He made no Answer, however, to this my Offer, but, lifting up his Eyes, he
cried, well might thou say, great Savior of the Simple, suffer little
Children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. O, thou Babe of
the Manger, thou first born of many Brethren, here, indeed, is a dear and true
little Brother of thine, but he speaks in his Simplicity, and not according to
Knowledge. Then, turning toward me, can you guess, my Darling, said he, what
you undertake to do for me? I question if the Charities of all this Nation
would be sufficient, when united, to effect my Deliverance. Nothing, nothing
but the Arm of the Almighty can do it. He will do it, indeed, in Death; but
what then shall become of my Wife and seven Infants, that truly is terrible, is
worse than Death to think of.

While we were speaking, two sweet little Fellows came in, the eldest very
nearly of my Size, but both clad in very thin and poor-looking Apparel. Having
kneeled for their Father's Blessing, they slipped behind us, and, turning my Head
to observe them, I was quite ashamed, and drew it back again, on perceiving
that the poor Things were unlading their Pockets of old Crusts and broken
Meats, which I supposed they had begged for the Family.

Mrs. Ruth just then returned, and her Countenance looked something dejected.
She took her Seat by her Husband, and, continuing a while silent, she put her
Handkerchief before her Eyes, and began in broken Words, Can you guess, my
Dear, said she, what Sort of a Creature this is whom we have got among us? This
little heavenly Impostor, to lighten our Obligation, would have persuaded us
that the hundred Pounds was the Gift of another, but it is all his own Bounty,
it is all his own Graciousness. Come, my Daughters, come, my Children, kneel
down and return your Thanks to this your Patron, your Benefactor, your little
Father here!

O Dada, you would have pitied me sadly, had you seen me at that Time. The poor
dear Things came, all in a Cluster, pressing, and catching, and clasping, and
clinging about me; while my Love, and my very Heart was torn, as it were to
Fritters among them. So I took them, one by one, in my Arms, and kissed and
embraced them, very cordially, calling them my Brothers and Sisters. I then
took out another hundred Pound Note, and, giving it to the eldest of the
Daughters, here, my Dear, said I, I always loved the little Misses better than
the little Masters; here is for yourself and your Sisters to clothe you in a
way more becoming your Family. And then taking a Note, of equal Value, I gave
it to the eldest Son, for himself and his Brothers, as I said, to help to
educate them in a Manner, more agreeable to the House from whence they came.

Mr. and Mrs. Ruth looked so astonished at me, and at each other, that, for a
while, they were not able to utter a Syllable. And, just as they began to make
their Acknowledgments, I cried, hush, hush! here comes my Tutor.

Mr. Clement just then entered, followed by several Servants, who carried a Tea
Equipage, cold Fowl, baked Meats, with other Pastries, and some Wine.

Having introduced Mr. Clement, we all got round the Table, and, after Tea and
a further Regale, I besought Mr. Ruth to give us the Story of his Misfortunes.

My Father, said he, was Baron of Frankford. He left my Brother, with the
Title, four thousand five hundred Pounds a Year, entailed however upon me, in
case of his dying without Male Issue. And he left me a small Inheritance of
four hundred Pounds yearly, to support, in some Measure, the Appearance of a
Gentleman.

As my Concern bordered on my Brother's Estate, we saw one another every Day,
and continued, for several Years, in strait and tender Amity.

Being both invited, one Day, to dine with other Company, at the House of a
Neighbor called Mr. Heartless, a Question happened to be started over the
Bottle, whether the Method of setting an Egg on End was originally the
Invention of Columbus, or whether it was communicated to him by some other; and
I unhappily espoused the Opinion that was opposite to that of my Brother.

Now, though the Question was not worth the very Shell of the Egg about which
we debated, yet we entered as warmly into it as though a Province had lain at
Stake; for it is not Truth or Instruction that Disputants seek after; it is
Victory alone, that is the Object of their Contention.

After some warm Words, and personal Retorts had passed between my Brother and
me, he started into sudden Passion and gave me the Lie; whereupon, reaching
across the Table, I gave him a Tap on the Cheek with the flat of my Fingers:
Then, rising furiously from his Seat, he swore a fearful Oath, and cried, I
will ruin you, Harry; though it cost me my Estate, I will ruin you, Harry Ruth,
with all who are yours.

The very next Day he mustered his Tenants and Laborers, and coming upon me
with a little Army, he laid most of my Fences level with the Earth.

When I complained of this Violence to my next Neighbors, Mr. Heartless, and
Mr. Hollow, they protested they would stand by me against such outrageous
Proceedings to the last of their Fortunes. They then advanced me, between them,
five hundred Pounds for the Purpose. I immediately commenced Suit against my
Lord's Tenants. But, though I cast them all with Costs, I unhappily found that
nearly all my Money was sunk in the Contest.

Meantime, scarce a Day passed wherein I was not served with a Subpoena from
Chancery, to answer such or such a Bill, to which my Brother had procured me to
be made a Party. And he also entered a Suit against me, himself, in order to
invalidate my Father's Will, whereby I claimed my little Patrimony.

When I told this to my Friend Mr. Hollow, he broke into a loud Laugh. Your
Title? cried he; the World cannot invalidate your Title, Mr. Ruth; I will let
you have a thousand Pounds upon it To morrow; and this I was under the
Necessity of accepting soon after.

Contention serves, with mutual Hands, to shut every Door against
Reconciliation. The more I had loved my Brother, the more I now detested him.
Instead of any Submission or Overture to appease him, my Lips uttered, in daily
Invectives, the Overflowings of my Heart; as I also was assured that, on his
Part, he wished me nothing less than eternal Perdition. Thus we burned, on both
Sides, with unquenchable Fire, and the Kingdom of Satan was fully opened within
us.

At length, my Body was imprisoned, at the Suit of my Neighbor Heartless, for
750 l. and my Lands were taken under Execution, at the Suit of my Neighbor
Hollow, for the Sum of 2000 l. But, I soon was informed that all this Money was
my Brother's, who had advanced it, from Time to Time, to those his clandestine
Correspondents, in order to hasten and deepen my Destruction. When I understood
this, I raged, I was all on Fire; and I took a horrid Pleasure in the Notion of
having the Fangs of a Tiger, that I might tear my Brother Piecemeal, and my
false Friends, Limb from Limb, and feast my Spirit on their Pangs, and mine
Eyes on their Carnage.

But when I turned a Look on my Wife and seven Infants, Grief joined with Rage
to tear me by a double Distraction. I cursed the Lot to which I was appointed
upon Earth; and I should have sought some desperate Means of putting an End to
my Torments and Existence together, but that I dreaded, by my Death, to give
Pleasure to my Brother, ten times more than I dreaded the Pain of Death itself.

O, my Friends, had all that ever were sainted come and preached to me, the
Peace of our Lord Christ, at that Season, it would have been no more than
beating the Air, or striving with so many Spunges, to make an Impression on a
Block of Marble. It is Distress alone that, by Oppression, makes Impression;
that preaches the internal Doctrine of sensible Mortification, and humbles a
proud Spirit, by plucking away all its Props.

At first, I was as a Worm under the Foot of my God. I turned, and struggled,
and writhed, and fought with all my Force against the Crusher. But, alas! all
was in vain; he was too mighty for me; and Opposition served only to add to my
Anguish.

At length, I was compelled to acquiesce, rather through the want of Power than
the want of Will to resist. And I lay, as it were, without Motion, under his
Dispensations; at the same Time that my Heart reproached him, in secret.

Having sold all our Movables, and even our wearing Apparel for Sustenance, we
were reduced to the Necessity of sending our eldest Boys to beg Fragments of
Victuals at Kitchen Windows, to keep us from utterly famishing. This I held to
be such a further Shame and Disgrace as stung my Soul to the quick; I therefore
began to kick against these Pricks also; but finding that, the more I spurned,
the stronger I was held and pressed into the Dust, I gave up all Resistance,
and contented myself with grieving and weeping under the Hand of the Almighty.

From hence I gradually sunk into a State of resigned Serenity which, although
without Sunshine, was yet without Disturbance. My Fury smoothed its Crest, my
Passions subsided, and I felt nothing more of Rancour against my Brother, or
Resistance against my God.

The Activity of the Soul will find itself Employment. As I had now no further
Prospect or Concern upon Earth, I began to turn my Thoughts and Attention
toward Heaven. I locked myself into yonder Closet. I threw myself into the
Dust. I have sinned, I cried, I have greatly sinned, O God! I am nothing, I am
crushed even lower than the nothing that I am; spare, spare me from a deeper
Perdition, I beseech thee!

I felt that my Prayer was heard; Peace descended upon me like Dew upon the
Night. The-Day Star began gradually to dawn to my Soul. The dark Kingdom of
Satan gave way before the Kingdom of the Son of Light and Love; and I would no
more have entertained any one of my former Passions, than I would have taken
burning Coals and have buttoned them up in my Bosom.

I was greatly delighted, Dada, with this Part and some more of Mr. Ruth's
Story, and I got him to repeat it over and over, that I might remember it the
better.

I now, continued he, I now pitied my Brother as much as ever I had hated him.
I grieved for having caused the Loss of his Peace. I wished to restore it to
him. I wrote a penitential Acknowledgment of my Faults. I besought his Pardon,
in the humblest Manner, for the unfortunate Blow. I subscribed to the Justice
of my consequent Sufferings; and I sent my Son, here, to attend his Lordship
with my lowly Address.

The Triumph, which this Humiliation gave to my Brother, supplied him with
Patience to go through my Memorial. But then conceiving, as I suppose, that it
was dictated by mercenary Meanness and Hypocrisy, he tore it to Pieces and
dashed it into the Fire. Then, returning to my Child the Box which had so
enflamed the Soul of his Lordship, he kicked my poor little Fellow out of his
House.

My Child came home to me, weeping sadly; but I consoled him the best I could,
and mingled my Tears with his; not in any Resentment for the Treatment
received, but through Grief for the Inveteracy of my unhappy Brother. O my God,
I cried, I no longer repine at my Abasement, at the Weight of my Sufferings and
Mortifications; I bless thee for them, O God; they have proved my best Friends,
my most salutary Physicians. Cruel and stern, indeed, is the Porter who stands
at the Iron Gate of Pain; but O, it opens upon Regions of inward Delight; for
he who clothed himself with the Cross is all glorious within.

My happy Experience of this Truth opened, for me, a new Prospect into the
Mystery of God's Dispensation to Mortals; and threw a Number of shining Lights
on those very Articles of Gospel-Redemption, which had formerly appeared to me
so exceptionable and gloomy. If God, said I to myself, has suffered Man to
fall, he has also provided for him every possible Means of Recovery and
Restoration.

Wherefore, when Sin came into the World, God also sent Suffering, its
inseparable Attendant, to be a Cure and an Antidote to the Poison thereof. If
Sin, therefore, has thrust the Kingdom of Heaven from within us, Suffering
comes, as God's Forerunner; it relaxes and unfolds the brazen Gates of our
polluted Temple, that Christ our Righteousness may enter, the very Hem of whose
Garment is Salvation to every Soul that lays hold upon it.

Here I took Mr. Ruth about the Neck, and, kissing him, said, that I was sure
my Dada would be willing to pay his whole Debt in Return for the sweet
Instructions which he had given to his Harry. You speak of your Dada, my Dear,
said he, as though he were the Representative of God, in the Gospel, who
forgave to his Servant ten thousand Talents. What you have given me already,
Master, is beyond any human Bounty that ever I heard of. I shall therefore lay
by two of these Notes, till I am better informed how far your good Father may
be satisfied with the Donation.

Soon after, we took leave, for the present, of this honorable Family. We then
went among the other principal Debtors, whose Distresses indeed were great,
though their Stories, except one, had little singular in them. In order to make
our Money go as far as we could, we hurried here and there, through the Town,
compounding with the several Creditors, from eight to ten and twelve and
fifteen Shillings in the Pound; so that, for about six hundred Pounds, we
discharged a Number who were indebted to the amount of a thousand.

On Tuesday about Noon, in the last Week, I stepped to Mr. Ruth's to see if the
Family had been decently clad, agreeable to my Request. There I found him and
his four Sons clothed in warm and clean, though very coarse Apparel; and he
told me, that his Wife had gone abroad with her three Daughters, in order to
put them also into a suitable Condition.

While I sat with him, a young Woman came in, of a very genteel Appearance,
though in a plain Dress. Don't you remember the Girl, Sir, said she, to Mr.
Ruth, who used to come to you, over Night, in a green Kerchief and a little red
Mantle. I should be very ungrateful, indeed, said he, if any Change of Dress
could conceal from my Remembrance that sweet and charitable Countenance. O Sir,
she cried, the few Shillings that I brought you, from Time to Time, came from a
very affectionate Hand, though from a Hand you would little suspect of any
Affection toward you; they came from your loving Niece Belinda Ruth, who has
shed many a Shower of Tears on your Misfortunes. May Heaven be her Portion,
cried out the good Man, since Earth has nothing equal to so much Goodness.
Indeed, Sir, continued the Girl, the little that your Niece sent you was
procured with much Difficulty and Danger to herself; for, from the Time that,
on her Knees and with a Deluge of Tears, she petitioned her Father, in your
behalf, he kept a watchful Eye over her, and took from her all Family Trusts;
so that she had nothing wherewith to supply you, except the Price of some cast
Gowns, and of other little Matters that she feigned to have lost. Moreover, my
Lord swore vehemently that, if ever she furnished you with the Value of a
Farthing, or kept any kind of Correspondence with you or with yours, he would
disown and turn her into the public Streets.

You alarm me greatly, cried out Mr. Ruth. Is any thing amiss, has any thing
happened to my dear Child? She was a lovely little Lamb, a little Angel from
her Cradle; though I should not know her, now, if she stood erect before me. I
hope, I say -- tell me -- proceed, I beseech you!

There was a Servant, Sir, a Man whom your Niece thought very faithful, and
therefore entrusted with the Secret of my coming to you, that he might attend
and see me safe back again. This Fellow, presuming on the Confidence that was
placed in him, would, this Morning, have taken indecent Liberties with his
young Mistress. This she resented in a becoming Manner, and threatened to
complain of his Insolence to her Father. The revengeful Villain instantly ran,
and told the Affair to his Lord with many Aggravations, as though his Daughter
was robbing him of all his Substance. Thereupon she was hastily called, and,
having in Part confessed the Charge, my Lord drew his Sword in his Fury,
whereupon, giving a Shriek and a sudden Spring, she got out of his Presence,
and has sent me to know, Sir, if you will be pleased to receive her?

Yes, cried Mr. Ruth, to my Bosom, to my Heart; with the same Pleasure and
Welcome that a Convict receives Pardon on the Hour of Execution.

Just then Mrs. Ruth entered, with her three Daughters, who, running up to
their Father, dropped together on their Knees before him for a Blessing.

While his Hands and Eyes were raised in Prayer over them, the young Stranger
stepped earnestly up, and, falling on her Knees beside the Daughters, she broke
into Tears, and cried aloud, bless me, bless me also, O my Father! I am your
Niece, your Belinda, my Father is no more! Yours, my Lord, is the Title, yours
all the Possession; I now, in my Turn, depend on your Bounty for a Morsel of
Bread. My Brother, my Brother dead! exclaimed Mr. Ruth. He is, my Lord, she
replied; he was suffocated by his rising Choler, and expired on the Spot.

While the young Lady spoke, Mrs. Ruth looked, as quite terrified by the
Tidings of such a sudden Elevation; and clapping her Hands together, and
lifting her Eyes, she cried, it cannot be, it is impossible! Ours the Title,
ours the Fortune! -- O my God! -- O my Husband! -- O my Children! -- and down
she dropped.

END of the THIRD VOLUME.
Just published by D. Chamberlain, at Faulkner's Head in Dame Street, facing
Fownes's Street. [Price sewed 1 s. 7 d. bound 2 s. 2 d.] Agreeable UGLINESS:
OR, The Triumph of the Graces.
Exemplified in the real LIFE and FORTUNES of a Young Lady of Distinction.
Translated from the French.
There runs a Sensibility through the Whole of these Memoirs, which speaks the
Author of them to have felt what she wrote, and to have been a thorough
Mistress of the Passions: The Incidents are most tenderly affecting, the
Characters-striking and finely contrasted; there is a pleasing and nervous
Simplicity in the Language, the Narrative is concise and free from the least
Indelicacy, and the Catastrophe pleasingly interesting.

At said Place may be had the following NEW PUBLICATIONS, viz.
High Life: a Novel: or the History of Miss Faulkland. 2 s. 8 d. History of
Nourjahad. By the Editor of Sidney Bidulph. 2 s. 8 d. The History of Alicia
Montague. 2 s. 8 d. Memoirs of a Magdalen: or, the History of Louisa Mildmay. 2
s. 8 d. The Convent: or, the History of Julia 2 s. 8 d. An additional Volume of
Lady Montagu's Letters. Price sewed 1 s. 1 d. Montagu's Letters complete. Price
bound 3 s. 9 d. The History of Eliza. 2 s. 2 d. The History of Miss
Pittborough. 2 s. 8 d. The Death of Noah. In two Volumes. 4 s. 4 d. Sharp's
Letters from Italy, describing the Customs and Manners of that Country, in the
Years 1765, and 1766. 2 s. 8 d. Thicknesse's Observations on the Customs and
Manners of the French Nation. 2 s. 2 d. The Progress of Vanity and Virtue, or
the History of Two Sisters. 2 s. 8 d. Pennington's Letters on different
Subjects, among which are interspersed the Adventures of Alphonso after the
Destruction of Lisbon. In four Volumes. 5 s. 5 d. Bellisarius. By M. Marmontel.
2 s. 8 d. Fordyce's Sermons to Young Women. In two Volumes. 4 s. 4 d. Mayhew's
Sermons to Young Men. In two Volumes. 4 s. 4 d. Byron's Voyage round the World.
Containing, among other curious Particulars, a Description of the Streights of
Magellan and of the Gigantic People called Patagonians. 2 s. 8 d. Memoirs of
the Marchioness of Pompadour. 2 s. 8 d. Memoirs of Madam de Granson. 2 s. 2 d.
Chrysal: or the Adventures of a Guinea. In four Volumes. 8 s. 8 d. The 3d and
4th Vols. may be had separate to complete Sets. The Reverie. In two Volumes. By
the Author of Chrysal. 5 s. 5 d. N. B. These Volumes complete the Author's
Works. Comerford's History of Ireland. 2 s. 8 d. Longsword, Earl of Salisbury.
2 s. 2 d. Beauties of the Adventurer, Rambler, World, Connoisseur. etc. In two
Vols. 3 s. 3 d. The same, bound in one Vol. 2 s. 8 d. Fielding's Works. In six
Volumes. 16 s. 3 d. -- Amelia. In two Volumes. A New Edition, by Mr. A. Murphy.
5 s. 5 d. Churchill's Poems, complete, with the Author's Life. In three
Volumes. 6 s. 6 d. Death of Abel. 2 s. 2 d. Jenny Salisbury. 2 s. 8 d. Emilius
and Sophia, by Rousseau. In two Volumes. 6 s. 6 d. Tristram Shandy. In eight
Volumes. 8 s. 1 d. -- The Ninth Volume. 1 s. 1 d. Montaigne's Essays In four
Volumes. 12 s. 0 d.

