A TRACT ON THE LAW OF NATURE, AND PRINCIPLES OF ACTION IN MAN.

BY GRANVILLE SHARP.

For ye are all the SONS OF GOD by Faith in Christ Jesus. GAL. iii. 26. " --
one is your Master (even) CHRIST, and ALL YE ARE BRETHREN. And" -- "one is your
Father, which is in Heaven." MATTHEW. xxiii. 8, 9. LONDON: Printed for B. WHITE,
at Horace's Head, in Fleet Street; and E. and C. DILLY, in the Poultry.

MDCCLXXVII.

A TRACT ON THE LAW OF NATURE, etc.
I HAVE neither leisure nor abilities to undertake a regular definition of the
Law of Nature, with all the doctrines usually ranked under that head: and
indeed, if I had both leisure and abilities, I should want inclination; because
such a work would unavoidably become voluminous, on account of the variety of
authors necessary to be mentioned, who have treated the subject with different
views: and as all science is vain, which is not reduced to practice, so the
more voluminous any subject is rendered, the less it can be useful, on account
of the increased difficulty of communicating it to the generality of readers. I
have therefore confined my tract to such general remarks on the subject, as are
most necessary for the observation of my countrymen at large, with respect
(more particularly) to one point, viz. the Illegality of reducing or subjecting
mankind to involuntary servitude, either under political or private dominion:
as all pretensions to an unlimited authority of any man or men over others, are
contrary to Natural Equity and the Laws of God, as well as baneful to mankind
in general; which effect is unhappily demonstrated by the numberless instances
of unnatural oppression now prevailing to the destruction of mankind, in almost
every part of the world. I have already shown in my answer This answer to Mr.
Thompson is confined to one kind of slavery only, viz. the oppression of
private tyrants, or petty slaveholders, and has already been printed in
America; and therefore I need not now repeat the arguments which it contains,
especially as I propose soon to reprint it in England with some other tracts
expressly against domestic slavery, such as is unlawfully tolerated in the
British colonies.


to the Reverend Mr. Thompson (an advocate for the African slave trade) that
the Jewish constitutions were not strictly consistent with the Law of Nature in
all points; and, consequently, that they are not to be considered as the rule
by which lawyers and casuists may safely determine "what is, or what is not,
according to Nature."

The Law of Nature has been variously represented; but all the best writers,
both ancient and modern, agree in adopting that maxim of the Civil Institutes
Servitus autem est constitutio Juris Gentium qua quis dominio alieno contra
naturam subjicitur." Justin. Institutes, Book 1. Tit. 3.

From whence the other authorities in the Common Law of England seem to be
derived.

2. Est quidem Servitus constitutio Juris Gentium qua quis dominio alieno
contra naturam subjicitur," etc. BRACTON, Lib. 1. Cap. 6.

"Est quidem Servitus libertati contrarium; item constitutio quaedam de Jure
Gentium, qua quis dominio alieno contra naturam subjicitur," etc. FLETA, Lib.
1. Cap. 3.

" Servitude is a constitution of the Law of Nations, by which, contrary to
Nature, one is subjected to another's power." COWELL'S Institutes, Tit. 3.


, which declares involuntary servitude, or slavery, to be "contrary to the Law
of Nature:" this rule is commonly understood as applicable only to domestic
slavery; but it is equally true when applied to political oppression, or the
exercise of an unlimited dominion over a whole nation. Some few authors indeed
have been so unreasonable, as to assert that "there is no such thing as natural
Law;" but they are properly censured by the learned Baron Puffendorf, in his
"Law of Nature and Nations." Book 2. Chap. 3.

He particularly mentions the argument of Carniades as contracted by Lactantius
to the following effect.

"That men first instituted Laws to secure and promote their own advantage,
etc. but that there was no such thing as Natural Law in the world," etc. p. 104.

Such doctrine is certainly very convenient for Tyrants and Slaveholders of
every degree, who must otherwise remain without excuse, whenever "the Law of
Nature," and "the Common Rights of Humanity," are urged against them: it is
therefore necessary for them, either to misrepresent the Law of Nature (as the
Reverend Mr. Thompson has done), or else (like Carniades) utterly to deny its
existence. This latter method has been also adopted by some modern advocates
for Slavery, who, in private discourse on this subject, have declared, that
they esteem "the Law of Nature" to be no other than their natural propensity to
pursue their own heart's desire of profit or pleasure: and this they call
"natural Liberty;" though it certainly is the most unnatural Tyranny: for when
the immutable necessity of reciprocal consideration is forgot, or set aside,
there can be no safety among men, and consequently no natural Liberty: we must,
therefore, submit ourselves to be the servants of law, in order to be truly
free; according to the excellent observation of Cicero. "Legum denique idcirco
omnes Servi sumus, ut liberi esse possumus." Tom. 2. p. 208. Hamburgh Edition
1618.
. We may learn from the histories of all nations, that Lust, Avarice, Pride,
Revenge, Love of Power, Jealousy, etc. are Principles of Action, which
unavoidably produce oppression and wrongs, to the destruction of the human
species, in all places where will and pleasure (whether in political or private
dominion) are supreme; or whenever Self-love and Private Interest become
entirely predominant among men. That Self-love is predominant with the
generality of mankind is but too apparent; yet we are not, therefore, obliged
to admit that "Self-love" is "the universal principle of action;" though an
eminent and learned law-writer has (with very good intentions, as his argument
proves) thought proper to give it that title.

"Honesty (indeed) is the best policy," even for a selfish man to pursue; and,
it is certain, that the solid seize of virtue and justice afford a real
and substantial satisfaction, which in the end, most amply fulfils the purposes
of Self-love.

But though Virtue and Honesty are thus favorable to Self-love in their
natural effects, yet this, by no means, proves that Self-love is the motive of
all virtuous and honest men; or that it is the "universal principle of action:"
for, if that were really the case, many of the most amiable virtues must be
esteemed mere empty names. There could be no true Generosity or Benevolence; no
Disinterested Goodness of heart; no sincere Natural Affection between parents
and their children, husbands and their wives, brethren, friends, etc. whereas
history affords many undoubted instances of Self-love being lost in the
superior affections, natural to generous minds, in all these different degrees
of connection; but it is needless to recite them, since, even in the brute
creation there are natural That excellent English lawyer the Great Henry de
Bracton informs us, that "Natural Law is that which Nature (or more properly
God himself) has taught all animals." "Jus Natural est quod Natura, i. e. ipse
Deus, docuit omnia animalia," etc. and afterward he further explains himself,
saying, "Jus Natural quod docuit omnia animalia Natura, i. e. per instinctum
Naturae, etc. viz. Natural Law, which taught all animals by Nature that is,
through the instinct of Nature," etc. Lib. 1. c. 5.


affections superior to Self-love.

The common hen is so inflamed with Natural Affection, and anxious care for her
tender brood, that she seems to have as little sense of Self-love in time of
danger, as of her own weakness; for she will boldly fly in the face of every
invader (except man) however superior in size or strength to herself.

The timorous cow, it is said, will attack the fiercest tiger, when her calf is
by her side. Many instances of very extraordinary Affection in dogs to their
masters have been well attested. Those faithful animals have sometimes been
known to lose all sense of danger to themselves in the necessary defense of
their owners. And the very swine discover such a Natural Affection and real
sympathy for their brethren of the sty, whenever they hear their cries of
distress, that their example ought to shame the depraved part of mankind
(imperial tyrants and royal robbers, who extend their dominion by breach of
faith, unlawful invasion, murder and rapine, as also those petty tyrants and
destroyers of mankind the African traders, and American slaveholders) lest the
affectionate brute, notwithstanding his sensuality, should seem, on comparison,
a more generous, and therefore a more noble animal than that Man, who stifles
all Natural Affection, Fellow-feeling, and Charity to his kind, merely for the
sake of acquiring power, or worldly profit to himself; and surely a time will
come, when all such offenders against the Law of Nature (who prefer the wages
of unrighteousness to the natural dictates of Humanity and Conscience) will
have reason to esteem the lot of the most contemptible brute infinitely more
eligible than their own!

Now, as it appears that "Self-love" is not the "universal Principle of Action"
even in brutes, much less ought it to be esteemed so in mankind, because the
human soul (besides the Natural Affection which men ought to have in common
with other creatures) is endowed with a much more noble principle, or motive to
good actions, I mean Reason, or that "Knowledge of good and evil," which we
inherit from our first parents, and which they unlawfully took upon themselves,
at the instigation of their spiritual enemy, that they might thereby be
rendered accountable for all their actions, and, through Knowledge "But of the
tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil thou shall not eat of it: for in the day
that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die." Genesis ii. 17.


, become guilty before God!

The history of that fatal transaction demands our most careful consideration,
since all mankind are particularly affected by it! And surely the principles of
our own Nature are subjects of enquiry infinitely more important to us, than
all the other branches of natural Philosophy; and yet perhaps they are less
examined by men of science, and consequently are less understood, than any
other! but in vain is the most accurate knowledge of plants, drugs, fossils,
and minerals; or of the exact revolutions of the heavenly bodies, and of the
nature and properties of all the elements, etc. if the philosopher is
unacquainted with himself -- Multi enim multa sciunt, et scipsos nesciunt: sed
qui seipsum nescit nihil b^ne novit, quam alia scire et se nescire, quid aliud
est quam seipsum gravius condempnare, etc. Doct. and Stud. c. 13.


, and the properties and state of his own soul, which is too often the case!
Knowledge, in all the former particulars, is indeed honorable and
praiseworthy, but, in the latter, it is indispensable; for when men, through
ignorance of the compouna Nature of man, slight the common means, which God has
revealed, to guard their minds against intellectual deceptions, they are sure
to be perverted in their principles, to the imminent danger both of body and
soul! Such an one, probably, thinks himself too judicious a critic to admit the
Mosaic account of the subject now before us, viz. the Fall of Man; at least in
the literal sense of the text: so that the doctrines, which I propose to
collect from it, will have very little weight, I fear, with men of that stamp.
Nevertheless, as there are many doctrines in other parts of Scripture, which
corroborate the literal meaning of that relation, and as there are also several
circumstances discoverable in the Nature of Man, which cannot otherwise be
reasonably accounted for, I must beg my readers to excuse me, even if they
think me too prolix in my examination of that part of the sacred history, which
I conceive to be absolutely necessary for the obtaining a true practical idea
of the Law of Nature, and the Principles of Action in Man.

God delivered a clear and express Law to Man before the fall; -- but of the
tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall not eat of it: and then follows
the denunciation of punishment; -- for in the day that thou eatest thereof,
thou shall surely DIE. Genesis ii. 17.

This was the first and only penal Law; A FORFEITURE OF LIFE! And though we
find afterward, that the declared punishment was not immediately executed
according to the letter (that is, the penalty of death was not inflicted on the
day of the transgression, as it seemed to be at first ordained) yet this
affords no just exception against the truth and propriety of the relation.

The same ALMIGHTY BEING, who had a right (as all things are his own) to
prohibit the action abovementioned, and to assign a punishment for
disobedience, had certainly a right also to respite, or postpone, or even to
remit (if he had been pleased to do so) the execution of the Law which he
himself had ordained. But for the present it is sufficient to remark, that the
nature of the penalty had been clearly revealed to our first parents, and was
as clearly understood by them, so that they were sufficiently sensible of their
obligation to observe the said Law, previous to their breach of it: which
plainly appears by the speech of the woman to the tempter, viz. But of the
fruit of the tree in the midst of the garden, GOD has said, ye shall not eat
of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

After so clear an acknowledgment of the divine precept, the act of taking the
fruit (which otherwise in itself would, probably, have been no crime) was
certainly a wilful sin of a very heinous nature, being a gross contempt of
God's word, for which our first parents very justly incurred the penalty of
death, which, they were previously told, must be the consequence of
disobedience.

They had received this caution even from God himself, whom they knew to be
their Maker and Supreme Lord; and yet the unwary woman unhappily listened to an
assertion, that was absolutely contradictory to her Creator's word, and thereby
drew upon herself, and all her descendants, the irrevocable doom to labor! --
pain! -- and mortality!

Perhaps the haughty philosopher will now be ready to arraign the justice of
the divine decree, which involved the innocent progeny (that is, innocent with
respect to this particular crime) in the punishment of their guilty parents;
but if he will patiently follow me through this examination of Human Nature, he
will, perhaps, be able to form a better idea of the Nature of original Sin, and
of the cause of its being intailed (or rather the effects of its being
intailed) on all the descendants of Adam. For the immediate effect of that
original Sin of our first parents, was the acquisition of an additional faculty
(even of a divine attribute) to the Nature of Man, which of course descends
from these original stocks by natural inheritance to all their progeny, and
thereby inevitably involves them all in the same condemnation; the manner of
which shall be more particularly explained hereafter. This very ancient example
of punishment for a contempt of God's word (the direful effects of which,
labor, pain, and mortality, are ever before us) should teach mankind the
extreme danger of paying attention to any doctrines and interpretations of Law
or Religion, that have the least tendency to oppose or contradict the literal
or most obvious meaning of God's word; for the efforts of our spiritual Enemy
are never more baneful, than when he is pleased to assume the office of a
commentator on the Laws of God; in which character he is frequently
discoverable; for though he does not now present himself outwardly or
apparently, as at first, in the assumed shape of a serpent, yet the venom of
his doctrines is too often sufficiently distinguishable, both in the writings
and discourses of men! And it is remarkable, that his first attempt against
mankind should be in the capacity of a critic on the Divine Law! The influence
of spiritual enemies is indeed a distinct Principle of Action in Man, which
shall be more particularly mentioned in the course of this Tract.

But to return to the first fatal instance, beforementioned, of Satan's
success, in misleading mankind, which occasioned another distinct Principle of
Action in Man.

It appears that the Tempter was well well acquainted with the true nature and
effects of the forbidden fruit, which he declared, indeed, but not without
uttering, at the same time, a notorious falsehood. Ye shall not surely die
(said he) for God does know, that in the day ye eat thereof (viz. of the fruit
taken from the tree of knowledge) then your eyes shall be opened: and ye shall
be as gods, knowing Good and Evil. Genesis iii. 4, 5.

Now this acquisition of Knowledge, which the Tempter promised, was really such
as he represented it, viz. a Divine Attribute ("Ye shall become as gods,
knowing Good and Evil;" so that, in this one respect, indeed, his intelligence
was true: for the inspired historian has recorded also the words of God himself
to the same effect: -- And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become AS ONE
OF US, to know Good and Evil. (Chap. iii. 22.) But truth is much more deceitful
and dangerous, even than falsehood itself, when, for the purpose of misleading,
it is maliciously blended with the latter; for notwithstanding the Deceiver's
flattering assurance to our first parents, that they should "not die;" yet in
the very day (as it seems) of their transgression, they heard the tremendous
sentence of misery and death pronounced against them! and though it was not
then finally executed, as they had reason to expect it would, according to the
tenor of the Law before declared, on which the judgment was founded, (for God
never judges men without Law, like the arbitrary princes of this world) yet the
said Law, by which their lives were expressly forfeited, was sufficiently
fulfilled by the condemnation of the transgressors (on the very day of their
offense) to mortality; whereby their once immortal bodies were rendered
continually liable to diseases, injuries, misery, and death, as the bodies of
all their descendants have ever since been! and they were no longer entitled
even to the food necessary for the support of their poor mortal bodies, without
severe labor, care, and assiduity! -- Cursed is the ground for thy sake; in
sorrow In sorrow (or rather in labor) for (...) is the expression in the
original; which, in the Targum, is explained by another Hebrew word ((...))
signifying rather fatigue or labor, than sorrow; and as the necessity of man's
labor was the more immediate consequence of the earth's new propensity,
through the curse, to bring forth thorns, thistles, and useless weeds, it seems
the most expressive rendering in this place, and most suitable to the context
in the following verse: "In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread." In the
Vulgate also it is rendered, "in laboribus;" and by Pagninus, "in labor." The
same word is also necescessarily rendered "Labors" in Isaiah lviii. 3. (...)
"and exact all your labors; and in Proverbs v. 10. (...) "Lest strangers be
filled with thy wealth, and THY LABORS be in the house of a stranger."


shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also and thistles shall
it bring forth to thee: and thou shall eat the herb of the field. -- In the
sweat of thy face (said God to his guilty creature man) shall thou eat bread,
till thou return unto the ground: for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou
art, and unto dust thou shall return. (Genesis iii. 17, to 19.)

These have ever since been the conditions of human life; and though some men,
who have store of worldly goods, endeavor to cast away care, and seem to live
in a state of opposition to this general rule, yet they only deceive
themselves; for no descendant of Adam, be he ever so rich, has any right to eat
the bread of idleness; nor can he do so without offense against his own soul,
as well as against this universal ordinance of God. -- If Providence has
afforded him wealth and leisure, he is accountable for both; being only a
steward for life; after which, the performance of his duty to God, to his
country, to his neighbors, nay, to mankind in general, his brethren of the
universe, will be strictly scrutinized, and punished in proportion to the
degree of his wilful neglect and disobedience; since nothing is more clearly
revealed, than that all mankind lie under an indispensable obligation to
improve their talents for all these duties, as well as to use them whenever
there is an opportunity; so that the man who neglects to employ, in these
services, a due portion of that leisure, which his rank, or situation in life
affords him, may justly be said to mispend his Master's time, for it is not his
own: and such an one must inevitably suffer with the "unprofitable servant,"
described in the Gospel, who neglected to improve his talent; -- Cast ye the
unprofitable servant into outer darkness! -- There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Matt. xxv. 30. See the whole parable from the 14th verse,
whereby it plainly appears, that mankind are laid under an indispensable
necessity to improve their respective natural talents, to the best of their
power, for their Lord's service.

The affluence, and unemployed leisure, therefore, of many persons, whom we
daily see amongst us, afford no just exception to God's general ordinance
concerning the hard conditions of human life. It is almost too obvious to be
mentioned, that riches and hereditary honors procure no exemption from the
most material part of that sentence, viz. "to dust thou shall return!" And that
the time and manner of that returning to the dust, or to the ground, is equally
unknown to the rich and to the poor, though to both equally certain: so that no
man, not the greatest or most independent, can claim even a single day
beforehand as his own: I will say to my soul (says the rich man in the
parable) Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years: take thine ease,
eat, drink and be merry. But God said unto him, Thou fool, THIS NIGHT THY SOUL
SHALL BE REQUIRED OF THEE; then whose shall those things be which thou have
provided? Luke xii. 19, 20. Wherefore, with respect also to the other part of
the punishment for the original sin (viz. the doom to labor) let those men,
who think themselves exempted, by their rank and fortunes, from the necessity
of employment; who think they have a right to spend their time, as well as
their money, just as they please, for their own amusement and mere
self-satisfaction; and seem to enjoy leisure and ease, as if God's general
ordinance to all mankind had been partial, or of none effect! Let such men, I
say, be reminded of the alarming dreadful sentence pronounced by "the Lord of
the vineyard" in the parable. Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on
this fig tree, and find none: cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground Luke
xiii. 7.
? How absurd therefore is the pride of those men, who value themselves on
account of territorial authority (whether public or private) and yet live as
if the importance, which they assume in right of landed possessions, or
hereditary rank in life, might of itself be esteemed a sufficient merit without
the cultivation of any other! But let them remember, that there is a Lord of
the vineyard "The Lord most High is terrible; he is a great King over all the
earth." Psalm. xlvii. 2. 7.


, to whom all things belong For though God has given the earth to the children
of men, Psalm. cxv. 16. yet "the EARTH IS THE LORD'S and the fullness thereof,
the world, and they that dwell therein. Psalm. xxiv. 1.


, and to whom a strict account must be rendered of every trust For (the kingdom
of heaven is) as a man traveling into a far country, who called his own
servants, and delivered unto them his goods. And unto one he gave five talents,
to another two," etc. "After a long time the Lord of those servants comes, and
reckons with them," etc. Matthew. xxv. 14. to 30. Give an account of thy
stewardship: for thou may be no longer steward. Luke xvi. 2.


, and of every possession, whether of lands, or of governments: so that the
dominions and estates of all temporal lords and landowners (be their right of
tenure ever so unexceptionable among men) are yet so far from being their own,
that even they themselves, whenever they acquire a habit of mispending their
time and wealth, are justly esteemed as ENCUMBRANCES upon that very ground, in
which all their imaginary consequence is planted! Now, shall we envy the rich
man's enjoyment of unemployed leisure, if this be the consequence? Far better
had it been for such a person to have endured, with the meanest labourer, the
common lot of man, and in the sweat of his face to have eat his bread Genesis iii.
19.
, than thus to have lived an unworthy exception to the general decree, thereby
rendering himself in the sight of God, as one that cumbereth the ground! It
would be well for mankind, if the consideration of this sentence might be
esteemed also a general Principle of Action; but, alas! we are all too apt to
mispend our time in some degree; yet it is a failing to which the rich are more
particularly liable. They are not compelled by necessity, like other men, to
think for themselves; and from thence a fatal, inconsiderate notion is too apt
to prevail among them, viz. that their time is their own; and therefore, as
they presume upon a supposed right to spend their leisure, according to their
own Will and Pleasure, they necessarily mispend their substance also, for which
they are equally accountable; and as riches are also the ordinary means of
procuring the sweets and enjoyments of life, they are, consequently, a
continual source of temptation, as well to acquire them unjustly, as to expend
them improperly. From hence, probably, arises the extreme danger of riches to
the spiritual welfare of mankind! Verily I say unto you (said our Lord) that a
rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again I say unto
you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of GOD, Matthew. xix. 23, 24. Go to now, ye
rich men, -- weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you! James v.
1. -- Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
Luke xvi. 25. It is, nevertheless, through the additional faculty
beforementioned, which human nature acquired by the transgression of our first
parents (viz. the Knowledge of Good and Evil) that Sin is imputed to us,
whether we be rich or poor.

Our spiritual Enemy envied the happiness of mankind in their original state;
and, therefore, artfully led them to the criminal usurpation of forbidden
Knowledge, that they might, thereby, be rendered accountable to THE ETERNAL
JUDGE for all their thoughts, words, and actions; and, through Knowledge,
become guilty before GOD, and continually subject to Sin and Death! For this
divine Knowledge obliges us (howsoever we act) to approve, at least, of
virtuous actions, and to condemn vice; so that, when men transgress, it is, for
the most part, knowingly, or wilfully: and as the strength of Sin is the Law
The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to
God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. xv. 56,
57.
, so the guilt of every criminal action is with justice imputed to us, because
we have wilfully offended against this natural Light, or LAW in our hearts, by
which we ought to have known how to refuse the evil, and choose the good. Isa.
vii. 15.

The Gentiles, without the knowledge of Scripture, nevertheless acknowledged
this principle. "Law" (according to Cicero) is a supreme Reason planted in
nature, which commands what ought to be done, and prohibits the contrary;" and
he affirms, that "the same Reason, when it is established and perfected in the
mind of man, is Law.

"Lex" (says he, in his first Book de Legibus) est Ratio summa, insita in
Natura, quae jubet ea quae facienda sunt, prohibetque contraria. Eadem Ratio,
cum est in hominis mente confirmata et confecta, Lex est. See Tom. 4. of his
Works, p. 219. Hamburgh Edition 1618.
.

Here the enlightened Heathen writer plainly acknowledges the Principle as
natural to Mankind ( -- Ratio summa, insita in Natura) and yet esteemed it, at
the same time, a divine Attribute, by some means imparted from GOD ( -- recta,
et a numine Deorum tracta Ratio) though he might probably be unacquainted with
the occasion of its being engraffed in Human Nature. He mentions this Attribute
again, in his second Book de Natura Deorum, where he speaks of Prudence, or the
choice of Good, and rejection of Evil, as a universal Law common to God and Man.

Sequitur ut eadem sit in his, quae in genere humano, ratio, eadem veritas
utrobique sit, eademque Lex; quae est recti praeceptio, pravique depulsio. Ex
quo intelligitur, prudentiam quoque, et mentem a Diis ad homines pervenisse,
etc. (Tom. 4. p. 157.) And in his first Book de Officiis, he more particularly
defines the Law of Nature in Man, by describing the double bias of soul, viz.
Appetite and Reason, and instead of laying down Appetite, or the Pursuit of
Happiness, as the Rule of Obedience (which some very eminent and learned
lawyers have done) he wisely reverses that rule, and thence forms an
unexceptionable Rule of Action, viz. that Reason must rule, but Appetite obey.
See his own words: Duplex est enim vis animorum, atque naturae: una pars in
appetitu posita est, quae est (...) Graece, quae hominem huc, et illuc rapit:
altera in ratione quae docet, et explanat, quid faciendum, fugiendumque sit.
Ita fit, ut Ratio praesit, Appetitus vero obtemperet. Tom. 4. p. 248.

He also clearly describes this natural instinct, the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, under the title of Common Sense, "Communis Intelligentia," and lays it
down as the Law, or Rule of Nature ("Naturae Norma") for distinguishing good
Laws What a profitable and convenient reduction might be made in the bulk and
number of our Statute Books, (especially of the later volumes) upon a revisal
conducted strictly according to this excellent rule!
from bad, right from wrong, and honorable from base, which certainly is a
much safer Principle to rely on than "Self-love."

Atqui nos Legem bonam a mala, nulla alia nisi Naturae Norma dividere possumus.
Nec solum jus et injuria a natura dijudicatur, sed omnino omnia honesta, ac
turpia. Nam et COMMUNIS INTELLIGENTIA nobis notas res efficit, easque in animis
nostris inchoavit, ut honesta in virtute ponantur, in vitiis turpia. Haec autem
in Opinione existimare, non in Natura posita, dementis est. De Legibus, Lib. 1.
Tom. 4. p. 222. Hamburgh Edition 1618.
. And the Apostle Paul has also given a strong testimony concerning the power
and influence of this instinct, or first Principle planted in human Nature.

He informs us, that some men, who had not the written Law of God, were,
nevertheless, capable of doing by Nature (or Instinct) the things contained in
the Law -- For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by Nature the
things contained in the Law, these, having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves We find a remarkable instance of the Natural Dictates of Conscience,
in the behavior of Tubourai Tamaide, (a poor uninstructed inhabitant of the
remote island of Otaheite) when he was unjustly charged with stealing a knife.
The story is related in the account of Capt. Cook's voyage (Vol. 2. p. 101.)
and the singularity of the circumstances leads the writer to the following
remark: Upon this occasion it may be observed (says he) that these people have
a Knowledge of RIGHT and WRONG from the mere dictates of Natural Conscience;
and voluntarily condemn themselves when they do that to others, which they
would condemn others for doing to them. That Tubourai Tamaide felt the force of
Moral Obligation is certain; for the imputation of an action which he
considered as indifferent, would not, when it appeared to be groundless, have
moved him with such excess of passion. -- But to what shall we impute the
lamentable Change of PRINCIPLE in the same person, who was afterward (on
another occasion) absolutely convicted of theft? May not the licentious example
of the English (whose criminal indulgences among the poor Indian women, proved
that they had no fixed regard for that pure religion which they professed),
have occasioned the corruption of the poor Heathen's morals, and natural
Principles of Virtue? He was certainly become a worse man by his acquaintance
with them!


; which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness (or the conscience witnessing with them) and their thoughts the
mean while (or between themselves) accusing, or else excusing one another; etc.
Romans ii. 14, 15.

This necessarily implies a natural Knowledge of GOOD and EVIL, so that this
divine faculty, or instinct in the Nature of Man, seems plainly to be the grand
Principle, whereby men, who have not the Law, are a Law unto themselves. (Romans
ii. 14.) And this I apprehend to be, properly, THE LAW OF NATURE in MAN, the
Law written on our hearts, or the Conscience, which bears witness with us, as
the Apostle declares in the following verse: -- Our thoughts the mean while
accusing, or else excusing us; -- for there are few men so bad, as not to have
been, at some time or other, sensible of remorse, through the accusation
abovementioned of their their thoughts, or Conscience. For what are these
thoughts which accuse and excuse, but Conscience itself; that is, the very same
Principle, only differently expressed by the Apostle, for the sake of
explanation? And again, this Conscience, which bears witness, is not a
different, or distinct Principle from the Knowledge of Good and Evil, but only
another name or mode of expressing the same Principle; or if it be so defined
by some writers, as to appear in any degree different or distinct from the
latter, it cannot, at most, be otherwise esteemed than as a different effect of
that same Divine Knowledge: and the like may be said of Sinderesis ((...)) as
well as of the Law of Reason; both of which some authors have treated as
distinct Principles from Conscience, notwithstanding that all these separate
heads, Sinderesis, Reason, and Conscience, are necessarily resolved into one
single principle or foundation, viz. "the Knowledge of Good and Evil," to which
the enquirer is naturally led, in attempting to define them; for indeed this
same identical Principle or Power is equally attributed to them all. Sinderesis
(says the author of Doct. et Student) is a natural Power of the soul, set in
the highest part thereof, moving and stirring it to Good, and abhorring Evil
See Doct. et Stud. English version, 1668 and 1746. Dialogue 1. Cap. 13; but in
the Latin copy of 1604, it is in the 11th Chapter. Sinderesis est vis motiva
seu potentia naturalis animae rationalis, quae semper est nata figi in
superioribus partibus animae movens et stimulans ad BONUM, et abhorrens MALUM,
etc. Doct. et Stud. Cap. 11. And again: Sinderesis etiam est Principium quo ad
speculativa et quo ad operativa; (and therefore a "Principle of Action.")
Exemplum de speculativis; ut omne totum est majus sua part, quodlibet est, vel
non est. Exemplum de operativis ut nullum MALUM est faciendum: BONUM est
prosequendum, et similia. Et, ideo, Sinderesis dicitur a quibusdam Lex
Rationis, quia principia Legis Rationis ministrat, quae ei insunt a Natura,
etc. Ibid. Cap. 11.


. What is Sinderesis therefore, when thus explained, but the natural Knowledge
in Man to reject the Evil, and choose the Good? REASON is also explained by this
celebrated author to the same effect: -- After (or according to) the Doctors --
Reason (says he) is the power of the Soul that discerns between GOOD and
EVIL, and between GOOD and BETTER, comparing the one with the other: the which
also shows virtues, loves GOOD, and flies VICES See Chap. 14. in the
English versions of 1688 and 1746; but the 12th Chapter in the Latin original
according to the Edition of 1604: Ratio, secundum Doctores, est ipsa vis animae
rationalis quae consulit et discernit inter BONUM et MALUM et MELIUS comparando
unum ad alterum, quae etiam virtutes eligit, et Deum diligit. Et dicitur non
solum Cognitiva, sed etiam Motiva;" (and therefore a "Principle of Action.")
"Cum autem judicat aliquid esse bonum vel malum et ibi sistit, sic dicitur
Cognitiva: si vero ulterius procedat, indicando aliquid esse bonum ut fiat, vel
malum ut evitetur, sic dicitur Motiva. Si vero adhuc amplius procedat et non
solum indicat aliquid esse bonum ut fiat, sed etiam id fieri appetit, sic
dicitur liberum arbitrium, nam liberum arbitrium apprehendit rationem, et
voluntatem. etc. Cap. 12.


.

In the beginning of the Chapter, he expresses himself, as if he supposed that
Man was endued with this divine faculty of Reason before the fall, even at the
time "when he was created Cap. 12. De Ratione. Quando primus Homo creatus est
percepit duplicem a Deo oculum. Exteriorem scilicet et Interiorem. Exteriorem
carnis quo visibilia cerneret. Et interiorem Rationis quo invisibilia
agnosceret atque divina: per illum carnis ut visibiles posset hosts aspicere,
cognoscere, et vitare, per illum Rationis, ut spirituales hosts contra animam
decertantes superare valeret, etc. Thus Englished in the Editions of 1668 and
1746, Chap. 14. Of Reason. When the first Man Adam was created, he received of
GOD a double eye, that is to say, an outward eye, whereby he might see visible
things, and know his bodily enemies, and eschew them; and an inward eye, that
is, the eye of reason, whereby he might see his spiritual enemies that fight
against his soul, and beware of them, etc.


;" a doctrine which, certainly, is erroneous. That our first parents received
from God, when they were first created, a due proportion of Reason suited to
their original condition, is not to be doubted; but there is no authority
whatever to warrant the supposition of their being at first endued with that
Perfection of Reason, that Attribute of a Divine and Spiritual Nature, which
afterward became natural to Man; though the worthy author apparently means
this supreme degree of Reason, when he tells us, that Man, by the gift of
Reason, is made like to the dignity of angels -- per quam etiam Angelicam
imitatur dignitatem a falso discernendo verum, et a bono malum. Quamobrem valde
a sua degenerat origin quoties veritatem discernere negligit, atque malum bono
preponit. Ibid. c. 12.


, discerning truth from falsehood, and Evil from Good; whereas it appears very
plainly from the Scriptures, that this Perfection of Reason was afterward
acquired by unlawfully eating the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge; for it is
plain, that the desire of acquiring Knowledge was part of the temptation to
trangress: ("a tree to be desired to make one wise," said the deluded Woman)
and it was not until they had both of them eaten the forbidden fruit, that God
said, Behold, the Man is become AS ONE OF US, to know Good and Evil; (Genesis iii.
22.) thereby plainly alluding to the Knowledge then newly acquired by the
forbidden fruit; and they were driven out of the garden, we are expressly told,
to prevent a further acquisition to the Nature of Man, viz. lest he put forth
his hand, and take ((...)) ALSO of the tree of Life, and eat and live for ever;
and therefore it is certain, that Man was not enlightened by the Divine Law of
Reason within himself, when he was first created; or at least not with so great
a share of it, as has since been justly attributed to Human Nature.

The third article which I have before mentioned, as a principle necessarily
included in that divine Knowledge of Good and Evil, which our first parents
unlawfully took upon themselves, is CONSCIENCE; and the ingenious author of
Doctor and Student, before quoted, in describing the meaning of the word
Conscience, has accordingly explained it exactly as if he had been defining the
true purpose of the former Principle, the Divine Knowledge of Good and Evil. So
God (says he) has placed Conscience in the midst of the rational soul, as a
light by which it should discern what it ought to do, or ought not to do Sic
Deus posuit Conscientiam in medio animae rationalis, tanquam Lumen quo
discernet quid facere, vel non facere debeat. Doct. et Stud. c. 13.


. This is exactly the purpose of "the Knowledge of Good and Evil," viz. that we
should use it as a light to discern what we ought to do, or ought not to do;
or, in Scripture words, that we may know to refuse the Evil, and choose the
Good. Isa. vii. 15. and again in the 16th verse.

From what has been said, it must appear, that Conscience, Reason, and
Sinderesis, though sometimes treated as distinct Principles, are nevertheless
essentially founded on one Great Principle, viz. the Divine Knowledge of GOOD
and EVIL; and when our first parents, contrary to the commands of God, took
that Knowledge upon themselves, the immediate effects of it were the most
pungent workings of Conscience! They were conscious of their disobedience to
God! Conscious of their shame and nakedness! Conscious that the Divine Justice
must pursue them, so that they would have even hid themselves, had it been
possible, from the presence of their Almighty Creator! But how vain was the
attempt to fly from God's universal presence The universal presence of God is
most elegantly described by the Psalmist: Oh! whither shall I go from thy
spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven,
thou art there. If I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the
wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there
shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. If I say, surely the
darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be light about me" (that is, with
respect to God's knowledge of my thoughts and actions): yea, the darkness
hides not from thee, etc. See the whole 139th Psalm. O Lord, thou have
searched me, and known me, etc.


, when they could not even separate themselves from the anxious warnings and
forebodings even of their own Consciences! For Conscience maintained its new
habitation in their throbbing breasts, attending them in their most secret
retirement with a stinging remembrance of their disobedience and ingratitude!
And as the wilful taking of Conscience upon themselves was the cause of all
their misery; so the effect of that one fault was the entailing Sin and Death
on all their descendants (who by the Laws of Nature must, necessarily, partake
of that Nature which their parents so unhappily assumed) for thus -- by one Man
Sin entered into the world (as we are informed by the great Apostle of the
Gentiles) and Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon all Men ((...)) in or
through whom all have sinned. For until the Law (that is, even before the
written Law of Moses) Sin was in the world: Also Also, or moreover -- The
original word is (...), which in this place, on account of the context, seems
more intelligible if rendered also, than "but;" which latter is the common
version.


Sin is not imputed when there is no Law. But But seems better to express the
meaning of (...) in this place, than the common rendering nevertheless, which
gives a different turn to the sense.


Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them who had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam's transgression, etc. (Romans v. 12. to 14.) Apparently
meaning, that as Death (which was the effect and punishment of imputed Sin)
reigned from Adam to Moses, (that is, "until the Law," (...)) so we ought to
conclude, that some sort of Law, previous to that of Moses, preceded Sin, as
Sin preceded Death, viz. ( as Sin has reigned unto Death, see ver. 21.) for
otherwise Death could not have reigned before the written Law; and consequently
the Law, to be understood, by which "Sin entered into the world," and by which
"Death passed upon all," and "reigned from Adam to Moses," was the Law of
internal Knowledge, or Conscience, by which all Men, from the time of our first
parents (Christ alone excepted) are convicted Sinners! For as the Ways of Man
are not equal to his assumed Knowledge, he is thereby rendered guilty, and
obnoxious to the eternal Justice of GOD, in whose sight shall no man living be
justified! (Psalm. cxliii. 2.)

Hence a temporal DEATH, or departure from this world, is not the only fruit of
Sin, but there is also a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation, etc. (Hebrews x. 27.), the sense of which is so deeply imprinted
on the human Conscience, that even the most hardened offender is, at some time
or other, affected with it; otherwise Sin could not be esteemed "the Sting of
Death" -- For if the natural light of Human Reason would permit men to indulge
themselves with a positive assurance, that Death is really the last period, or
final dissolution of their existence, the Consciousness of Sin would not
increase the Fear of Death, and could not, therefore, with propriety be
esteemed "the Sting of Death." Death is, indeed, the King of Terrors; and
Nature shrinks at its approach! But the anguish of the guilty and unbelieving
soul springs from a deeper source than Death! viz. the dread of what must
follow it! This is a further effect of Reason and Human Knowledge: for though a
man refuses to be bound by the eternal Laws of Reason, yet Reason will inform
him of his guilt, and its deserts, and vindicate her injured Laws by dreadful
expectation! for the very Devils believe and tremble! (James ii. 19.)

Horrible gloom! when Reason sees no ground for hope! -- Thus Conscience,
though not obeyed, is Conscience still; and a time, we know, will surely come,
when men shall begin to say to the mountains, fall on us; and to the hills,
cover us See also Revelation vi. 15, 16. And the Kings of the Earth, and the
great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondsman, and every freeman (for all will be equal in that tremendous day)
hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains; and said, Fall
on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand?


! (Luke xxiii. 30.)

Death, therefore, it is manifest, is not the only object of the sinner's fear,
or men would never seek a hiding place in what must be their graves, by wishing
to be buried under the very mountains and hills, with the vain hope of
secreting themselves from the wrath to come! -- And who is free from sin? -- In
the sight of God shall no man living be justified. (Psa. cxliii. 2.) And
without shedding of BLOOD is no remission. (Heb. ix. 22.) Wherefore it is
manifest, that the BLOOD of every man is forfeited before God! -- But the
Almighty was graciously pleased to accept the BLOOD of animals (probably as an
acknowledgment of that forfeiture, and as a type of a future and more effectual
redemption) to atone for human guilt -- For the life of the flesh (said God to
Moses) is in the BLOOD: and I have given it to you upon the altar, TO MAKE AN
ATONEMENT for your souls: for it is the BLOOD that makes an ATONEMENT for the
SOUL. (Lev. xvii. 11.)

But as the Necessity of Redemption is thus obvious, so the means of obtaining
it has been as clearly revealed: and therefore the same innate Knowledge of
Good and Evil, which has rendered us obnoxious to GOD'S Eternal Justice through
disobedience, will lead us (if we use it as we ought) to repentance and
amendment; and consequently to reconciliation and eternal happiness, through
that more effectual propitiation and redemption, to which all mankind are
invited by the Redeemer himself, who is the WAY, and the Truth, and the Life:
as no man comes unto the Father, but by him. (John xiv. 6.) For if through the
offense of ONE (our first parent Adam) MANY be dead; much more the grace of
God, and the gift by grace, (which is) by ONE Man, Jesus Christ, has abounded
unto MANY. And not as (it was) by one that sinned (so is) the gift; for the
judgment (was) by one to condemnation, but the free gift (is) of many offenses
unto justification, etc. (See the contrast as carried on by the Apostle Paul,
in the 5th chapter of his Epistle to the Romans.)

Men seldom fall indeed into any very gross offense against the Eternal Law,
till they are initiated, as it were, by lesser crimes; and have gradually
stifled the natural restraint of the innate Knowledge or Conscience before
described; and then they are no longer worthy to be called Men, being more
properly Brutes; because Conscience, or the Knowledge of Good and Evil, which
should distinguish the Nature of Men from Brutes, does no longer influence
their actions.

The state, indeed, of such unhappy men is worse than that of brutes; because
there is still another capital distinction in their nature, which wicked men
cannot cast off, as they do Conscience! they have a living Soul, which must,
inevitably, be accountable for all their actions, as I have before remarked;
and, therefore, when they prefer the temporal gratification of their passions
(whether of Pride, Love of unlimited Power, Avarice, Lust, Hatred, or
Selfishness) to the eternal welfare of their souls, they may be said to sell
themselves for naught; because all unlawful passions are increased, instead of
being satisfied, by indulgence; so that there is no Bondage so wretched as that
of Sin -- They allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness,
those that were clean (or for a little) escaped from them who live in error.
While they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the Servants (or Slaves)
of Corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in
Bondage. 2 Pet. ii. 19, 20. See also the remainder of the same chapter for the
lamentable consequences of that wretched Bondage, the Service of Sin!


; no Slave so truly miserable, as the man who is a Slave to his Passions
Whosoever commits Sin, is the Servant (or Slave) of Sin. (John viii. 34.) --
For the truth of this conclusion no further or better proof can be expected
than our Savior's authority. Dr. Jackson, Book 10. Chapter 17.


. And, therefore, when we are endeavoring to trace out the Law of Nature, and
Principles of Action in Men, it would be unreasonable to search for it among
Slaves (I mean those that are Slaves to their passions) because such MEN are
not their own masters, and consequently are not worthy the name of MEN. It
would be neither just nor charitable to draw our conclusions concerning the
Nature of Man from that depraved state of Human Nature, wherein the proper and
natural distinction of Manhood (the KNOWLEDGE of GOOD and EVIL, which we
naturally inherit from our first parents) has lost its influence!

No MAN, indeed, is perfect; neither are ALL MEN depraved; and though the
depraved state of man may, perhaps, be most general, it, certainly, is not
universal; and therefore the universal Principle of Action in Man is not to be
drawn from thence. But it will be still much more profitable for us to remember
(when any Rule of Obedience is proposed as an universal Principle of Action)
that it is not so much our business or interest to trace out what REALLY IS
"the universal Principle of Action," as what it OUGHT TO BE. I have already
produced the testimony of the most learned and able lawyer among the Heathens,
that the Knowledge of Good and Evil is an universal Principle, natural to
mankind; and he so far esteems it as "a Rule of Obedience," that he lays it
down as the foundation of Law. For Law (says he again in another place) is
nothing else but right and divinely inspired Reason, commanding what is honest,
and forbidding the contrary Est enim Lex nihil aliud, nisi RECTA et a numine
Deorum tracta RATIO imperans honesta, prohibens contraria. (Oration Philippica
11. Vol. 2. p. 487.)


. But a modern, though very learned and respectable, law commentator, has
referred us to a different Principle, as a "Rule of Obedience," which is very
liable to be misunderstood: he informs us in page 41, vol. 1. that the Creator
has graciously reduced the Rule of Obedience to this one paternal Precept, --
That Man should pursue his own Happiness. "This," (says he) is the foundation
of what we call Ethics, or natural Law. Yet, in justice to the worthy author,
it must be allowed, that the Happiness, which he speaks of, is not selfish,
partial, or sensual Happiness (for that would be a very improper subject for a
"paternal Precept") but real Happiness, and substantial Happiness, as he
further expresses himself in the same page; and no Happiness can be "real," or
"substantial," which is not lasting; so that it is plain this eminent writer
means that lasting and substantial Happiness alone, which arises from Obedience
to the will of God: for the Knowledge of which he refers us, at the same time,
to the Holy Scriptures. See the following page 42.

Yet even such "substantial Happiness" can only be called an effect, of which a
conscientious Obedience to the will of God is one of the causes; but the
primary cause, or motive to that Obedience in good Men, is still different from
both; and yet none of them can be the proper foundation of Ethics, or natural
Law.

The learned author has himself assigned a more probable foundation in the
preceding page, to which perhaps he might mean to refer by the pronominal
adjective "This," in the sentence which immediately follows his one paternal
Precept, (viz. This is the foundation of what we call Ethics, or natural Law)
for he observes in p. 40. that, CONSIDERING the Creator only as a Being of
infinite Power, he was able unquestionably to have prescribed whatever Laws he
pleased to his creature Man, however unjust or severe. But as he is also a
Being of infinite Wisdom, he has laid down only such Laws as were founded in
those relations of Justice that existed in the nature of things, antecedent to
any positive Precept. -- THOSE RELATIONS of JUSTICE, then, on which the other
Laws are founded, are properly THE FOUNDATION. And "these" (the learned writer
himself tells us in the following sentence) are the eternal, immutable LAWS of
GOOD and EVIL, to which the Creator himself, in all his dispensations,
conforms; and which he has enabled Human Reason to discover, so far as they are
necessary for the conduct of human actions. Thus THE FOUNDATION is clearly laid
down, and there is no occasion to assign any other Motive of Obedience to the
several Laws on this Foundation, than what is mentioned in the same sentence,
viz. Human Reason, by which men are enabled to discover these eternal and
immutable Laws of Good and Evil. For the Knowledge of what is Good, or what is
Evil, is surely a sufficient Motive for choosing the one, and rejecting the
other; because Good, when known, is as truly amiable in itself, as Evil is
detestable and frightful; so that the former most naturally engages our
preference, without any other Motive than this natural Knowledge of their
respective qualities.

Sinister Motives do, nevertheless, too frequently prevail, through the extreme
frailty of Human Nature, which engages the greater part of mankind in the
pursuit of temporal Interest, or partial and sensual Happiness!

So that, if the learned commentator had mentioned Self-love, as the general,
instead of the universal Principle of Action, I should not have thought myself
obliged to have taken particular notice of that part of his work.

Several reasons may be assigned why it cannot be admitted as the universal
Principle of Action.

And, first, Because the most worthy actions, as I have already observed, are
frequently occasioned by a more generous motive than Self-love.

Secondly, Because bad men are sometimes prompted to good actions, through the
influence of their own natural Knowledge of Good and Evil, when the occasion
happens not to interfere with their particular views of private Interest, or
their predominant Passions A more remarkable instance of this perhaps was never
known, than what my own grandfather experienced in his acquaintance with the
Lord Chancellor Jefferies, who was, perhaps, the most abandoned time-server of
those days (if we except his companion in iniquity, General Kirk It would not
have been possible (says Rapin, speaking of Chancellor Jefferies and General
Kirk) "for him" (King James the IId.) to have found in the kingdom two men more
void of all Religion, of all Honor, aad all Humanity. They were two tigers
chafed with blood, who had no pleasure but in carnage. Tom. 10. p. 30.


. Dr. Sharp was as totally different and opposite to the Chancellor, in every
part of his character, as it was possible for any man to be; yet the Chancellor
entertained a very particular regard and esteem for him. He treated the Doctor
very roughly indeed, when he had received his Royal Master's orders to
prosecute him for preaching against Popery; but in every other point, which did
not interfere with his time-serving principles and politics, he was always
ready to show favor and kindness to Dr. Sharp, whenever he had an opportunity;
and happy it was for him that he did so; for afterward, in the time of his
distress, when a just retribution of worldly trouble overtook him, (insomuch
that he was not only a prisoner, expecting in his turn a severe execution of
the Laws for his injustice and cruelty, but also grievously afflicted with the
stone, and other diseases, in consequence of his former intemperance,) Dr.
Sharp was the only person who afforded him any comfort in his misery; for he
regularly visited the unhappy man in his confinement, and used his best
endeavors to alleviate his distress, and prepare him for another world by
advice and exhortation.


: for, if this was not the case, it is obvious (considering the great multitude
of selfish men in comparison of the Just) that society could not exist.

And, thirdly, Because bad actions, which most abound, manifestly tend, even in
the opinion of the offenders themselves, to defeat the most essential purposes
of Self-love; for the most hardened sinners are conscious, through their innate
Knowledge of Good and Evil, that their unlawful temporary gratifications tend
to deprive them of their "real" and "substantial happiness," viz. Eternal
Salvation; for if they had not this Consciousness of Evil, there could be no
such thing as presumptuous sin.

Self-love, however, under proper restrictions, is certainly a main branch of
the Law of Nature; and, though it cannot be admitted as the universal Principle
of Action, is nevertheless an universal Principle; but it cannot be admitted as
a "Rule of Obedience," because there are many occasions when it ought to be
superseded by more noble Motives to Action.

The Knowledge of Good and Evil is also an universal Principle in Man; though
it is still much farther from being the universal Principle of Action than
"Self-love;" and indeed my present attempt is not to prove what is the
universal Principle of Action, but only what it ought to be, as I before
remarked; being convinced, that the one paternal Precept laid down by the
learned Law Commentator (though certainly with good intentions, and probably
with good authority from other Law Writers) as the "Rule of Obedience," (viz.
that we should pursue our own Happiness) is very defective; because the very
Rule itself requires a multitude of other Rules to restrain it within due
bounds, and curb the Self-love of individuals for the benefit of society.

Nothing is so liable to be misunderstood as "our own Happiness;" for when Self
alone is the object, Self-love can imply nothing but Partiality and
Self-preference; so that such a Rule of Obedience is liable to afford a handle
of excuse for actions of mere Self-gratification, to which the learned and
worthy author (or, perhaps, rather the adopter) of the hypothesis would be
entirely averse: a Slaveholder, for instance, might allege, that he pursues
his own Happiness, by extorting the unwilling service of other men, because he
is thereby enabled to maintain himself and family, not only comfortably, but
elegantly; and that the maintenance and support of the sugar islands, and
consequently the happiness of his wealthy neighbors, depends upon the
employing of slaves; so that social benefits do also arise from it: and he will
likewise allege, that he is obliged by Self-love to persist in the measure,
because he cannot maintain the same Happiness and comfort by any other means;
so that he does not act contrary to the Law of Nature, or the "Rule of
Obedience," as laid down by the most eminent writers on the subject!

Thus the "paternal Precept" (as it is called) of pursuing our own Happiness,
may lead men to form a false estimate of necessity (or what they may think
themselves obliged to undertake, from their particular situation in life) and
will afford them the like excuse for any other vice, on which a man's temporal
subsistence depends.

It is therefore an oblique Rule, which insensibly declines into mere
Self-gratification, or private Interest, which is the bane of Equity and
Justice; so that Self-love can no otherwise be admitted as a Rule, than for the
purpose of measuring the due proportion of that Love which we owe to the rest
of Mankind, agreeable to a real "paternal Precept" that will never deceive us;
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself. Lev. xix. 18.

This excellent maxim of the Old Law is strongly enforced and recommended in
the New Testament, which shall hereafter be shown: nay, the very Heathens, it
seems, were not entirely ignorant of this Divine Precept; for the favorite
maxim of the Emperor Alexander Severus was much to the same effect, according
to the report of Lampridius, quoted by the learned Joseph Mede, Book 3. p. 550.
viz. Quod tibi fieri nonvis, alteri ne feceris." "Do not to another, what you
would not have done to yourself. Neither has the doctrine been overlooked by
the writers on the Law of Nature. Hobbes very judiciously refers us to this
Rule of Obedience, for the easy knowledge of what the Law of Nature dictates.
When a Man doubts (says he) whether what he is going to do to another be
agreeable to the LAW OF NATURE, let him suppose himself in the others room. For
by this means (continues he) when Self-love and the other passions, which
weighed down one scale, are taken thence, and put into the contrary scale, it
is easy to guess which, way the balance will turn And Baron Puffendorf Law of
Nature and Nations, as translated by Basil Kennet. Oxford 1710. p. 109.


remarks thereupon, that -- this is no other than the great rule prescribed by
our Savior himself, of doing to Men as we would be done by.

The learned Baron, nevertheless, remarks in the following paragraph -- that
this Precept cannot be esteemed a fundamental Axiom of the Law of Nature; since
it is only a corollary of that Law, which obliges us to hold all Men equal with
ourselves; and therefore may be demonstrated a priori. But howsoever it may be
capable of being demonstrated, yet this is no just objection to Hobbes's
excellent rule for knowing, -- what the Law of Nature dictates; especially as
the learned objector seems, afterward, to have sought in vain for a more
fundamental Axiom of the Law of Nature: for I cannot find, that any thing, he
has afterward proposed, is at all worthy to be compared with it, either as a
Foundation, or a "Rule of Obedience."

Nevertheless, in justice to the learned Baron, I must observe, that he has
well defended this general Rule against the objection of Dr. Sharrock.

Dr. Sharrock is of opinion (says he) that this rule is not universal, because,
if so, a judge must needs absolve the criminals left to his sentence; inasmuch
as he would certainly spare his own life, were he in their place: I must needs
give a poor petitioner what sum soever he desires; because I should wish to be
thus dealt with, if I was in his condition: or I must clean my servants shoes;
because I require him to clean mine.

But the rule (says the learned Baron) will still remain unshaken, if we
observe, that not ONE Scale only, but BOTH are to be considered; or that I am
not only to weigh and examine what is agreeable to me, but likewise what
obligation or necessity lies on the other person, and what I can demand of him,
without injuring either of our duties. Book 2. Chap. 3. p. 109.

Neither does the Baron's own objection, which immediately follows, in the
least affect the propriety of Hobbes's rule for the easy Knowledge of what the
Law of Nature dictates: for though the nature of a Rule, or Principle of
Doctrine (differing from active Principles) be such as to induce the necessity
of supposing a prior Principle, or Instinct in man, whereby he may be enabled
to suggest, adopt, approve, or obey this or any other Rule (which seems to be
the reason of the Baron's refusing to acknowledge this excellent rule, as a
fundamental Axiom of the Law of Nature) yet the learned Baron himself has
multiplied the difficulty, by assigning still another Rule, or mere Principle
of Doctrine (viz. the holding all Men equal with ourselves) as the foundation
of this Rule, instead of a real first Cause, such as the immediate Inspiration
of God; the Revelation of his Will in the Scriptures; or the natural and divine
Instinct of KNOWING GOOD and EVIL. For whether the Precept is inculcated and
made known to Man by Divine Revelation, immediate, or scriptural, or merely by
the natural Instinct in Man, of knowing Good and Evil, it may nevertheless be
justly esteemed a fundamental Axiom of the Law of Nature.

The Jews and Christians, indeed, are taught the value and importance of this
Precept by the Holy Scriptures, yet this is not the only means of its being
known and received among men as a Rule of Obedience; -- for, besides the
example which I have already given concerning the Emperor Alexander Severus, it
appears that the Gentiles, in every part of the world, have demonstrated a
sense of this Precept, without the assistance of Scripture: not only the
ancient Greeks and Romans, but the remote inhabitants of China and America: of
which a few examples are here subjoined from the additional notes of the
translator of Puffendorf, p. 109. viz. Aristotle (in Diogenes Laertius, Lib. 5.
Segm. 21.) being asked how we ought to behave ourselves toward our friends,
answered, as we wish they would behave themselves toward us. Lib. 2. tom. 2.
Quod quis juris in alterum, etc. Seneca de Ira, Lib. 3. c. 12. Let us suppose
ourselves in the same circumstances as the person with whom we are angry: That
which now puts us in a passion is only the wrong opinion and estimate of
ourselves: We are unwilling to SUFFER what we are willing to DO. It Is a saying
of Confucius (in Marcinus's Hist. Sin. Lib. 4. c. 25.) Never do to another what
you are unwilling to suffer from him. The same Precept was made use of by Ynca
Manco Capac, the founder of the Peruvian empire; in order to the reducing his
subjects to a life of civility. De la Vega, L. 1. c. 21.

Thus it appears, that not only the Heathen nations of Europe, but also the
distant uninformed inhabitants of China and America, were endued, by their
innate Knowledge of Good and Evil, with general ideas of that most excellent
Precept which CHRIST himself has declared to be the true Christian RULE OF
ACTION: and which, therefore, may justly be esteemed a fundamental Axiom of the
Law of Nature, viz. -- All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets, Matt. vii.
12. See also Luke vi. 31. The meaning and apparent intention of this GOLDEN
RULE is exactly the same, in effect, as the other great commandment of the Law,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself; so that all persons, who carefully
examine these and other parallel texts, must necessarily be convinced, that the
command to love our neighbor as ourselves is the ONE PATERNAL PRECEPT, or
rather, I should say, the ONLY PATERNAL PRECEPT to which the Creator has
graciously reduced the Rule of Obedience, since by the highest authority we are
assured, that the equitable rule of doing to others, as we would that men
should do unto us; or, in short, to love our neighbor as ourselves, IS THE LAW
AND THE PROPHETS; which implies as much as if our Lord had said, This is the
Spirit, or FIRST PRINCIPLE OF LAW, and contains the Sum and Essence of all
other Laws! The testimony of the Apostle Paul is nearly to the same effect --
For ALL THE LAW (says he) is fulfilled in ONE WORD, even in this, THOU SHALL
LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF. (Gal. v. 14.) Which might well be paraphrased as
follows: ALL THE LAW IS FULFILLED IN ONE WORD; -- for the Creator -- has
graciously reduced the Rule of Obedience to this one paternal Precept (not, --
that Man should pursue his own Happiness; -- but) -- EVEN IN THIS, THOU SHALL
LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF; so that no other "paternal Precept" can possibly
be received as a general Rule of Obedience for all occasions except this alone;
which must, therefore, be acknowledged as the fundamental Rule, both of Natural
and Revealed Law. Concerning this Golden Rule of Action, I have wrote a
separate Tract under the title of the Law of Liberty, or Royal Law, to which I
must beg leave to refer my readers for further remarks on that head.

Having now proved, I hope, that this FUNDAMENTAL AXIOM OF THE LAW OF NATURE
ought to be THE UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLE OF ACTION IN MAN, I can more safely resume
my discourse concerning Principles of Action in general. It has already been
shown, that the Knowledge of Good and Evil is an universal Principle in Man, as
well as Self-love. But I must now remark, that the former has the following
essential difference from Self-love as an universal Principle, viz. that it is
never superseded, like the latter, by any just Motive of DUTY (though it is
often violated in breach of DUTY through human Frailty); for all just Motives
of DUTY are perfectly consistent with it, and influence the heart under its
direction and guidance, and even the most noble Motive to Action (independent
of Inspiration, or immediate Revelation) is so far from superseding the natural
"Knowledge of Good and Evil," that it may, more properly, be esteemed an
exertion of it: for instance, by a due exertion of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, we promote the very first Principle of all Duty, as it is the first great
commandment, viz. The Love of God; for if we have Knowledge to choose the Good,
and reject the Evil, the same Knowledge must incline us to prefer the Author of
all Good (when revealed to us) and his Commandments before every other
consideration; for so Abraham's Obedience in attempting to sacrifice his son,
was rendered acceptable to God: he knew his Maker and supreme Lord by
unquestionable Revelation; and, therefore, justly concluded, through his
natural Knowledge of Good and Evil, that the Command of God ought to supersede
all natural Affection, and Self-love; so that this was an Effect of Reason,
which seemed to counteract even the Principles of Reason itself, by dissolving
all the ties of Nature! But the Patriarch thereby gave an ample proof of a
sincere Faith, and of an unfeigned Love to his Creator.

By what Principle of Action also was Moses induced (though the meekest of Men)
to remonstrate to his Creator, when the Divine Indignation was declared against
the Ingratitude and Wickedness of the children of Israel, in worshipping the
molten calf during the time that Moses continued in the mount to receive the
Law? God said to Moses -- I have seen this people, and behold, it is a
stiffnecked people: now therefore LET ME ALONE, ((...) LET ME REST, that is,
from your intercessions) that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may
CONSUME THEM: and I will make of THEE a great nation. Exodus xxxii. 9, 10. Now,
if "Self-love" had been "the universal Principle of Action," Moses would not
have declined the acceptance of such a distinguished honor, when tendered to
him even by the ALMIGHTY LORD OF THE UNIVERSE, whose right of disposal could
not justly be called in question! But the faithful minister of the Israelitish
commonwealth did not seem to entertain the least sense of that imaginary
"paternal Precept" mentioned above, that Man should pursue his own Happiness:
for his answer on that occasion proves, that he was actuated by a Principle
infinitely superior to Self-love; I mean a true and unfeigned Zeal for the
Glory of God, arising from a right use of his natural discretion, or Knowledge
of Good and Evil, which directed his choice, and enabled him to set aside all
consideration of SELF, or private worldly Interest, when he thought the
circumstances of the proposition seemed likely to affect the honor of GOD in
the misinformed opinion of the Egyptians and other Heathen. For he besought the
Lord his God, (though God had previously forbid him, saying, "LET ME ALONE")
and said, Lord, why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou have
brought forth out of the land of EGYPT, with great power, and with a mighty
hand? Wherefore should the EGYPTIANS speak and say, For mischief did he bring
them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of
the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath (said Moses to the ALMIGHTY) and repent
of this evil against thy people. And he also claimed the promise by which GOD
had absolutely bound himself to the Patriarchs -- To whom (said Moses) thou
swarest by thine OWN SELF, and said unto them, I will multiply your seed,
etc. And the text immediately, informs us, that the LORD repented of the evil
which he thought to do unto his people. (Exodus xxxii. 7. to 14.) Thus God was
pleased to manifest his regard and consideration even for Human Judgment! --
even for the opinion of a mere Man, when founded on Reason, and other just
Principles, such as mankind are capable of exerting! And shall earthly
monarchs, then, presume to despise any reasonable remonstrance of their fellow
men -- of their equals in every other respect, except that of a delegated
office, when it is apparent that even the SUPREME LORD, and MAKER OF ALL
THINGS, has condescended to hear and graciously receive a remonstrance from his
Creature Man! Nay, and that repeatedly on various occasions! The like
remonstrance was also made by Moses, when God declared his anger against
Israel, for murmuring at the report given of the promised land; and for
proposing to return into Egypt; and also for attempting to stone Joshua and
Caleb, who had endeavored to appease, and convince them of their error. See
the 14th Chapter of Numb. ver. 7. And the LORD said unto Moses, how long will
this people provoke me? and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all
the signs which I have showed among them? I will smite them with the
pestilence, and disinherit them, and will MAKE OF THEE ( said GOD to Moses) a
greater nation, and mightier than they.

But the noble Principles (far superior to Self-love) by which that Great
Minister of State generally regulated his conduct, once more prevented his,
acceptance of the glorious promise, even though tendered by his Maker! His
sincere regard for the Glory of God, agreeable to the first great Commandment,
made him jealous that the Heathen nations should falsely conceive, that the
LORD JEHOVAH was not able to bring his people (the Israelites) into the land
which he "swear unto them;" so that his Zeal for the Glory of God was,
manifestly, the principal Motive of his answer on that occasion And Moses said
unto the Lord, Then the Egyptians shall hear it, (for thou broughtest up this
people in thy might from among them:) And they will tell it to the inhabitants
of this land; (for) they have heard that thou, LORD, (art) among this people;
that thou, LORD, (art) seen face to face; and (that) thy cloud stands over
them, and (that) thou go before them by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and
in a pillar of fire by night. Now (if) thou shall kill (all) this people as one
man, then the nations which have heard the fame of thee, will speak, saying;
Because the LORD was not able to bring this people into the land which he swear
unto them, therefore he has slain them in the wilderness. And now I beseech
thee, let the power of my LORD be great, according as thou have spoken, saying,
The LORD is long suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgression, and by no means clearing (the guilty,) visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth (generation.) Pardon,
I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, according unto the greatness of
thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this people from Egypt, even until now.
And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word. Numb. xiv. 13. to 20.


. And though a natural Affection (or brotherly Love) for his countrymen might,
probably, be also included as an additional Motive to his intercession (worthy
our imitation) yet his "own Self-love" was, manifestly, quite out of the
question; since he might have attained for himself the highest pitch of worldly
glory, without forfeiting his real or eternal Happiness by such an acquisition;
for as the offer was made by the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, the
acceptance of it could not have been imputed to him as sinful; though the
contrary behavior was apparently more agreeable to the will of the Almighty,
who was pleased to signify his approbation of Moses's remonstrance and
intercession, by declaring to him -- I have pardoned according to thy word.
Numb. xiv. 11. to 20.

Also upon the rebellion of Korah, related in the 16th chapter of Numbers, when
God spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, -- Separate yourselves from among this
congregation, THAT I MAY CONSUME THEM IN A MOMENT. Yet these two great leaders
of Israel were so little actuated by that imaginary universal Principle of
Action SELF-LOVE, that they were entirely regardless of their own danger,
notwithstanding the divine warning, and seemed to have no other care, but that
of endeavoring to save their brethren from GOD'S wrath; for it does not
appear, that they retreated, or separated themselves from among the
congregation, as they were expressly directed, but only "fell upon their
faces," and exerted the powers of Human Reason in the following short
remonstrance to their Maker -- O GOD, THE GOD of the Spirits of all Flesh,
shall ONE MAN SIN, and will thou be wroth with ALL THE CONGREGATION? Numb. xvi.
20 -- 22.

The like Remonstrance, founded in sound Reason and natural Equity, had once
before been made even to the Almighty himself, by his faithful Servant ABRAHAM,
when God condescended to reveal to him the awful decree of Divine Vengeance
against the populous cities of the plains of Sodom.

-- Will thou also destroy the Righteous with the Wicked? ( said Abraham And
Abraham drew near, and said, Will thou also destroy the righteous with the
wicked? Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city, will thou also
destroy, and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein? That
be far from thee to do after this manner; to slay the righteous with the
wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee:
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Genesis xviii. 23 -- 25.


-- shall not the LORD of all the earth DO RIGHT?

Thus a due exertion of right Reason demonstrated the Dignity of Human Nature,
and the examples, just mentioned, sufficiently prove, that THE ALMIGHTY
requires his Creature Man to judge of Right and Wrong, and to form and declare
a sound Judgment upon the eternal Principles of Justice and Righteousness,
agreeable to that Divine Knowledge with which the Human Mind is most certainly
endowed.

Though Abraham and his descendants, Moses and Aaron, knew that they could not
exist, even a single moment, without the immediate protection of Divine
Providence, yet they thought it their duty to remonstrate even to their CREATOR
on the eternal Principles of Justice and Judgment!

THE ALMIGHTY SEARCHER OF HEARTS knew beforehand what they would say, and the
propriety of their future answers; and, therefore, undoubtedly afforded them
these extraordinary opportunities of proving to all mankind their Knowledge of
Good and Evil, as well as their Faith and entire dependence on the eternal
"Justice and Judgment" of the Divine BEING, that these clear examples of the
Knowledge and Dignity of Human Nature, as also of the regard and consideration
which even the great Author of that Nature was graciously pleased to manifest,
on those occasions, toward the mental Faculties of his Creature Man, might be
recorded to the end of time!

Concerning the Spirit of Justice and Judgment with which Abraham was endowed,
God previously declared -- I know him, that he will command his children, and
his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do JUSTICE
and JUDGMENT, etc. (Genesis xviii. 19.) So that Abraham's Remonstrance, wherein he
appealed to " the JUSTICE and JUDGMENT" of GOD, was apparently agreeable to the
foreknowledge and expectation of the Almighty, as well as the other
Remonstrance of Abraham's descendants, Moses and Aaron. For these extraordinary
exertions of Human Reason, in appealing to the Divine Justice, were so far from
being offensive even to THE SUPREME AND ETERNAL SOVEREIGN OF THE UNIVERSE,
that, on the contrary, he clearly manifested his approbation by the gracious
manner in which he accepted and answered these human petitions! He condescended
to satisfy the righteous and just Spirit of ABRAHAM, by an assurance, that even
"if ten righteous persons" only could be found amongst the wicked nations in
the plains of Sodom -- I will not destroy it (said he) for the tens sake Genesis
xviii. 32. But alas, by the fatal catastrophe of all the nations in the plains
of Sodom soon afterward, and by the very small number of individuals that were
found worthy of the divine warning to escape the national punishment, it is
apparent that there were not even five righteous persons to be found in five
royal cities.! (Genesis xiv. 2.) Horrible depravity!


. And to the Remonstrance of Moses and Aaron (the descendants of the just
ABRAHAM) the like favorable attention was paid by the God of the Spirits of
all Flesh: -- for as their petition was offered up in behalf of the whole
Congregation (viz. that they might not suffer for the fault of one or a few
persons) God condescended to spare the Congregation, though they had justly
incurred the forfeiture of life by joining The text informs us, that KORAH
gathered ALL THE CONGREGATION against them (Moses and Aaron) unto the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation, whereby the guilt of the congregation is
manifest. Numb. xvi. 19.


the haughty and factious princes of Israel in open rebellion to the Divine
Ordinances, contrary to the clearest evidence of all their senses! For Moses,
on offering up this short petition, was immediately directed to separate the
Congregation from the more notorious offenders -- Speak unto the Congregation,
saying, -- Get ye up from about the tabernacle of KORAH, DATHAN, and ABIRAM. --
And MOSES rose up, and went unto DATHAN and ABIRAM; and the Elders of Israel
followed him. And he spoke unto the Congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you,
from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be
consumed in all their sins. -- And accordingly all persons, that had grace
sufficient to repent of their connections with these wicked men, -- Gat up from
the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side: And immediately
afterward God was pleased to justify Moses, and to demonstrate the truth of
his Divine Mission, by a tremendous and unusual example of Vengeance -- the
ground clave asunder that (was) under them: and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their houses, etc.


upon the hardened offenders and their families! (Numb. xvi. 1. to 40.) And
this being done in the presence of the whole Congregation, (then a populous
nation) the evidence of it (which is handed down to us by their descendants,
the Jews, and has also been confirmed, from time to time, by other instances of
Divine Vengeance upon the same nation) was thereby rendered incontestable!

Nevertheless, the very next day, all the Congregation of the children of
Israel murmured against Moses, and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the
people of the Lord. -- This further rebellion having once more provoked the
Divine Justice, the cloud covered the tabernacle, and the glory of the Lord
appeared! And Moses and Aaron were once more commanded to separate themselves
from the Congregation, that a National Vengeance might take place! -- Get you
up from this Congregation (said the Almighty) that I may CONSUME THEM AS IN A
MOMENT. Nevertheless, these two worthy Ministers of God discovered no sense of
fear for themselves, whilst the national danger demanded their endeavors in
behalf of their brethren; and therefore, instead of separating themselves, as
they had been once more commanded, they, once more, FELL UPON THEIR FACES, to
implore the Divine mercy and forgiveness of the national iniquity; so that
Self-love was manifestly superseded by Patriotism and brotherly Affection! And
as the plague was already begun among the people, the mediation of these two
men was so far favored by the God of Israel, that Moses was inspired with
wisdom and presence of mind to instruct his Brother Aaron how to make an
atonement for the people by the burning of incense -- And accordingly Aaron
stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was staid. Numb. xvi. 41
-- 48.

These are unquestionable examples to demonstrate, that "Self-love" is not "the
universal Principle of Action."

Upon a former intercession also of Moses in behalf of his ungrateful
countrymen, he permitted his natural Affection for them, to carry him
(seemingly) far beyond the bounds of Reason and Moderation, in his expressions
to the Almighty And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, Oh, this people
have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold. Yet now, if thou will, forgive their sin: and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book,
which thou have written. And the Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever has sinned
against me, him will I blot out of my book. (Exodus xxxii. 31 -- 33.)


; even so far as to wish, that he himself might be blotted out of God's Book
Meaning (probably) an exclusion from the temporal blessings promised in God's
covenant; or perhaps the loss of life, both of which came upon him afterward
for his unguarded expressions on another occasion. Compare Numb. xx. 12. with
Numb. xxvii. 12 -- 14. Deuteronomy. iv. 37. and Psalm cvi. 32.


, if the sin of the people was not forgiven! So that Self-love is by no means
the universal Principle of Action.

The affectionate Apostle Paul seemed also equally anxious for the eternal
welfare and prosperity of the same great Nation; and he expressed the like
unbounded Love toward them, by one of the strongest hyperbolical expressions
(as Mr. Burkitt calls it) that he could possibly have chosen for that purpose.
-- I could wish (says he) that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren
my kinsmen according to the flesh. (Romans ix. 3.) And though the Apostle, by the
words -- (...), might perhaps mean to refer only to that anathema of temporal
misery and destruction denounced by Christ himself, against Jerusalem, and the
unbelieving Jewish nation, for their open rejection of the Gospel Behold your
house (said Christ) is left unto you desolate. Matt. xxiii. 38. Luke xiii. 35.
And again -- When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken
of by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the holy place, (whosoever reads, let him
understand,) said our Lord; Then let them which be in Judea, flee unto the
mountains, etc. And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give
suck in those days! etc. For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not
since the beginning of the world to this time, no nor ever shall be. Matt.
xxiv. 15 -- 21. Under this severe ANATHEMA of national Misery, the unconverted
part of the Jewish people might with propriety be accounted (...), accursed
from the Messiah, being then separated, or excommunicated, as it were, from the
immediate protection of the eternal "KING of ISRAEL," and by him publicly given
up to temporal Vengeance; the Sufferings and Misery of which (and not the
Reprobation which occasioned them) the patriotic Apostle would willingly have
endured, if it were possible, in his own Person (for no otherwise could he wish
to be separated from Christ, but in Sufferings; for the Love of Christ was
unalienable: -- See preceding Chapter, ver. 35 to 39.) if he could thereby have
removed from his Nation this dreadful ANATHEMA of Christ's temporal Vengeance,
which, at the time the Apostle wrote, was dreadfully impending! But whether
this conjecture of mine be right or not, and whether the Anathema mentioned by
the Apostle is to be understood as temporal, as eternal, or both; yet the same
limitation with respect to the Love of Christ must necessarily be understood,
viz. that the Apostle wished he might perish (whether in this world or the
next) not as an Enemy of Christ, but as a Savior of his Brethren, (agreeable
to the remark of the learned Chrysostom) and as CHRIST himself also was MADE A
CURSE FOR US. (Gal. iii. 13.) See this point clearly stated by the Rev. Dr.
John Sharp, in his Symphonia Prophetarum et Apostolorum. Printed at Geneva in
1625.


; yet it is manifest, that the affectionate and truly patriotic Apostle would
have been ready to suffer every kind of temporal misery, and even to lay down
his Life for the refractory Nation, if he could thereby have averted the
approaching vengeance from his countrymen, and restored them to Grace and the
promised Privileges of the Gospel, to which they had been the first invited of
all other nations! And therefore we cannot surely conceive, that the Principle
of Action, or Motive to such a declaration, was Self-love.

The disinterested Principles of this Apostle are evident also from some other
expressions, and especially from that in his Epistle to the Romans, (v. 7.)
viz. -- peradventure for a good Man (says he) some would even dare to die;
which idea totally excludes the Principle of Self-love. But though the
Apostle's Expressions sufficiently prove that Self-love was not his Principle
of Action, yet the same was more effectually demonstrated by his Life and
Practice!

And again, When we read of JONATHAN'S inviolable Friendship toward DAVID, can
we conceive, that he was actuated, by Self-love? We cannot mention that
Principle without injustice to the generous character of that truly noble
Prince, unless we speak of it comparatively, to show, that his Friendship and
brotherly Love was equal to it; for the Scripture repeatedly informs us, that
he loved DAVID "as his own Soul."

It was not an unreasonable Friendship; he was well convinced of the Merit and
Virtue of DAVID; for on these he founded his Love; and he had too much Virtue
himself to violate a reasonable Friendship, even though his own private
Interest and very Inheritance was at stake!

These points were most earnestly pressed upon him with all the authority that
an anxious worldly-minded father could possibly assume, and yet without effect
-- As long as the Son of Jesse lives upon the ground (said Saul to Jonathan)
thou shall not be established, nor thy kingdom; wherefore now send and fetch
him unto me, for he shall surely die. Now, if Self-love had been the Principle
of Action with JONATHAN, he could not have greater temptation! But he knew how
to refuse THE EVIL, and CHOOSE THE GOOD, and would not, therefore, submit (like
modern statesmen) to the wretched policy of doing "Evil that Good might come!"
-- Honor and Justice were his Principles of Action; and he was willing to
risque, not only his worldly dignity and state, but his life also, rather than
injure and forsake an innocent man! Wherefore shall he be slain? (said he) What
harm has he done? -- And when he found that his father persisted in his base
resolution, he was filled with honest indignation; and, as the text informs,
rose from the table IN FIERCE ANGER -- not on account of his father's injurious
behavior to himself, in attempting to kill him with a javelin, but because he
was grieved FOR DAVID (says the text) and that his father had done him shame.
See 1 Samuel xx. 31. to 34.

And again -- Was David, King of Israel, actuated by Self-love, when he
tendered his own Life, to save the Lives of his Subjects, praying God to Let
his hand be against him, and against his father's house, instead of the nation
in general?

Surely his Principles of Action were very different from Self-love, or from
that imaginary PATERNAL PRECEPT of "seeking his own Happiness!"

His Conscience probably informed him, that he was guilty before God in having
numbered the Israelites, to satisfy some vain or presumptuous curiosity
concerning the Strength of the Nation, at a time when his whole confidence and
hope of success against his enemies ought to have been placed in GOD alone; and
he would perhaps then recollect, that the same sinful Presumption within
himself, which had occasioned the undertaking, had also occasioned This example
proves that KINGS and PRINCES are indispensably bound to exercise themselves
daily and constantly in the study of the Holy Scriptures (agreeable to the
command in Deuteronomy. xvii. 18 -- 20. And it shall be when he sits upon the
throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this Law in a book,
out of (that which is) before the Priests the Levites: and it shall be with
him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to
fear the LORD his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes,
to do them; that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he
turn not aside from the commandment to the right hand, or (to) the left: to the
end that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he, and his children in the
midst of Israel
lest they should inadvertently occasion any breach of GOD'S LAWS, and thereby
draw down the Divine Vengeance upon themselves, as well as their unwary
subjects; who are equally guilty, whenever they comply with an unlawful command.


the neglect of that tribute or offering to God, which, in the Law, is
expressly enjoined to be given as a ransom for the Soul of every individual of
that nation, whenever they should be numbered, viz. half a shekel for every
one: When thou take the sum of the children of Israel, after their number
(said GOD to Moses) then shall they give EVERY MAN A RANSOM FOR HIS SOUL UNTO
THE LORD, when thou numberest them: that THERE BE NO PLAGUE among them when
thou numberest them, etc. See Exodus xxx. 12. to 16.

REASON and CONSCIENCE therefore taught him, that he himself was the principal
aggressor; and these just Principles, joined to a patriotic Regard for the
Preservation of his Countrymen, certainly induced him to present himself to God
as the proper victim of divine Vengeance! -- For DAVID spoke unto the LORD,
when he saw the angel that smote the people, and said -- Lo, I have sinned, and
I have done wickedly: but these sheep, what have they done? Let thine hand, I
pray thee, BE AGAINST ME, AND AGAINST MY FATHER'S HOUSE, etc. 2 Samuel xxiv. 17.

It would, surely, be highly absurd to attribute so pathetic and penitent a
declaration to the Principle of Self-love Some excellent arguments and very
striking examples have been produced by the truly benevolent Mr. Brook of
Dublin, in his "Fool of Quality," to prove that Self-love is by no means the
universal Principle of Action.

To quote the authority of a romance, in a Tract on the first Principles of
Law, will perhaps, at first sight, give offense to many of my readers; but, for
my excuse, I rely on the propriety of the arguments themselves, and the just
application of the several real examples by which they are illustrated. I
should never of my own accord, I confess, have consulted any work under the
Form of a Novel for information of this kind; but the sentiments of this
sensible author being pointed out to me by a worthy friend, I thought it would
be injustice to my argument, if I neglected to refer my readers to the clear
light which the worthy Author of the Fool of Quality has thrown upon the
subject, when he makes his EARL OF MORELAND enquire whence, how, by what means
may a Man arrive at Happiness? -- By getting out of himself, my Lord --
answered his worthy character MR. MEEKLY. Out of himself, Mr. Meekly! you
astonish me greatly. A contradiction in terms, unnatural, impossible! -- GOD
himself, my Lord, cannot make a Man happy in any other way, either here, or
hereafter. It is, said the Earl, an established maxim among all thinking Men,
whether Divines or Philosophers, that SELF-LOVE is the Motive to all Human
Actions. -- Virtue forbid! exclaimed Mr. Meekly; all Actions are justly held
good or evil, base or honorable, detestable or amiable, merely according to
their Motives. But if the Motive is the same in all, there is an end, at once,
to the possibility of virtue; the cruel and the kind, the faithful and the
perfidious, the prostitute and the patriot, are confounded together, etc.

He afterward relates, in very striking terms, the well-known example of Damon
and Pythias, whose inviolable FRIENDSHIP triumphed over SELF-LOVE, as well as
over the cruel intentions of the Tyrant Dionysius. -- Then follows the Author's
excellent definition of the term SELF, wherein he demonstrates the necessity of
overcoming SELFISHNESS by superior Principles originally communicated to our
Nature by the Divine Intelligence; and he proves that such Principles have
prevailed in the world, by reminding us of the ancient states of SPARTA and
ROME, which derived their luster and power, their whole pre-eminence and praise
(says he) from this Principle of Communication, which, in them, was called LOVE
OF COUNTRY. But this beatifying Principle (continues he) was still more
eminently instanced in the Society of THE CHURCH OF JERUSALEM, who had all
things in common; who imparted their possessions to all men, as every man had
need; and thence did eat their common bread with gladness and singleness of
heart, praising GOD, and having favor with all people, etc.

He afterward mentions the instances of the Roman Regulus, and the Decii, as
also that of Leonidas, and his three hundred Spartans, who devoted their lives
for THE LIBERTIES of Greece, etc. and, lastly, exemplifies this DISREGARD OF
SELF, the vital Source and Principle of every Virtue, in six Mechanics or
Craftsmen of the city of Calais, when it was besieged by King Edward the 3d.

The whole argument, with the examples, are too long to be inserted here, but
are highly worthy the reader's perusal. -- See THE FOOL OF QUALITY, vol. 1. p.
117. -- 130.


. The Monarch of Israel was actuated by a much less reasonable Principle of
Action, (and still very opposite to Self-love) when he uttered that bitter
lamentation for the death of his wicked, rebellious, and incestuous Son Absalom
-- Would to GOD (said he) I had died for thee my Son!

NATURAL PATERNAL AFFECTION was more powerful in this case than REASON; and
every other Principle of Action, even Self-love (which is also a natural
Affection, and generally very potent) was entirely superseded by it: for the
King most earnestly wished, that he himself had died, instead of that unnatural
wretch, who (he was well aware) ceased not, whilst he lived, to plot his
father's ruin, being an enemy (he well knew) that was implacable, that was
restless, and impatient to deprive him, not only of his kingdom, but of his
life; and had already violated his bed, in the most public and shameless
manner, with the detestable crime of incest! -- There was no room to hope for
the reformation of a wretch that had so entirely lost all distinction between
GOOD and EVIL! -- No gleam of happiness for his injured father, but in his
death! -- And yet paternal Affection compelled the latter to esteem even his
own death preferable, if he could thereby have prolonged the wretch's life! --
O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom! -- Would to God (said he) I had DIED
FOR THEE, O Absalom, my Son, my Son! 2 Samuel xviii. 33.

Thus it appears that SELF-LOVE is by no means the universal Principle of
Action, since there are other Affections, which sometimes supersede it, and
become the leading Principles of Action.

A certain noble Author of the last century, in a work, entitled A View of the
Soul, has several chapters concerning the Power and Influence of the Affections
over all the other natural faculties, Reason itself not being excepted: and in
one chapter he attempts to prove, that some Affection is the substantial Part
of the Soul I have thought (says this Author) and do think, and believe (which
is somewhat more than a thought, it is a thought with the concurrence,
approbation, and allowance of one's Reason) that the Soul of Man is immortal;
and that the very Essence or substantial part of a Human Soul, disrobed of a
Body, or subsisting of itself, is some restless working (however at some times
invisible) affection; and that if those more noble faculties of our Soul (next
and immediately under that bright heavenly Star) are the Pilots to conduct us
unto rest, some affection (as it seems to me) is the chief Passenger in this
frail and weak Vessel of the flesh. St. Paul, in that admirable Encomium of his
of Charity, tells us, that it abides, when many other gifts fail. And if we
shall know, as we are known, as he tells us in another place, there will be
then little use of the Invention, Memory, Reason, or the like, which are but
the Handmaids to knowledge. Neither can I rationally imagine, after return of
the Soul to its place of rest, or for default thereof in its banishment to
everlasting wandering, any use of other faculties than the affections, unless
toward the exalting or heightening them in their several degrees, whether love
and joy on the one side, or sorrow, fear, etc. on the other.

The Soul of Man being an emanation from that DIVINE LOVE, must necessarily
partake of it, LOVE; and not able at present by any natural light it has, to
reach unto itself its proper object, lays hold on any thing, rather than seem
to vanish or be extinct; and withal that it happens to have such several
inclinations in man, while it is here, is surely by reason of some false
imaginary light, or the want of a true one, and that we want both power and
skill, in the setting or tuning some strings of the affections, as I may call
them. And it is want of a clear inspect into our nature and frame, that we
become, as David speaks, a stubborn generation, a generation that set not their
hearts aright, and whose Spirit cleaves not steadfastly to God. And I do
further believe, that all the faculties, strength, and power of the Soul, which
we have, are given us toward the performance of that first and great
Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all
thy Soul, and with a^^ thy mind: The whole Soul beside seems naturally
subservient, if not subsequent, to the affections motion, and the motion of the
Soul would be strange without them, and not imaginable; they being as necessary
as they are useful. And therefore I think we may as well cease to be, by our
own power, as cease to affect; and they who have gone furthest or most covertly
herein, have in going about to hide some particular affections, showed others
more visibly; and for the covering of their joy or sorrow, fear or anger, or
the like, have set up for predominant in their Soul, a seeming contempt of all
things; which is an affection itself, and, for ought I know, as subject to be
faulty as any. For surely the Soul may seem no less glorious in its march, with
all its parts and retinue, than some of them; provided it marches the right
way, and each faculty help and assist, and not go about to destroy each other.
A VIEW OF THE SOUL. Sect. 5. pages 109, 110.


. But though the Affections are certainly to be esteemed "Principles of
Action," yet they cannot at any rate be admitted as Rules of Obedience (as I
have before observed concerning the Affection of Self-love) because the
generality of Mankind are more liable to be influenced by evil, misplaced
Affections, than by those which might tend to their real Happiness.

The Affections of the avaricious Man, for instance, are all subordinate to his
Affection for amassing temporal wealth: -- he may love his wife and children,
perhaps, when the natural Affections of the husband and parent do not interfere
with his predominant passion for riches; but, whenever they do, the wretch
loses all feeling for his own flesh and blood, and will eagerly sacrifice to
MAMMON the peace of his family, and the happiness of his beloved children, even
in the most material circumstance of their lives! And though such a wretch is
sometimes influenced, indeed, by the more general Principle of Self-love (that
is, whenever the consideration of Self happens to fall in competition with his
duty to other men) yet even Self-love itself must yield to the Love of
Hoarding, since it is the well-known characteristic of the Miser to withhold
all the comforts of life, even from HIMSELF, in order that he may indulge his
unreasonable Affection for amassing wealth; which Depravity, if not assiduously
and carefully checked in time, will most surely increase with age, till it
becomes inveterate and irresistible, and entirely enslave its wretched Votary!

It would be well for such men, if they deprived themselves only of temporal
comforts; but, alas, AVARICE defeats SELF-LOVE, even in its most important
concern, Eternal Welfare. Go to now ye Rich Men, weep and howl of your miseries
that shall come upon you. James v. 1. Compare this with what has already been
mentioned in pages 23 -- 30.

The depraved Appetites and Affections of Drunkards and Gluttons are also
PRINCIPLES OF ACTION, which are frequently too powerful both for Reason and
Conscience, and even for Self-love! for they too often lead Men with their eyes
open to certain destruction, even though they are warned by the clearest
Conviction and Foreknowledge concerning the inevitable consequences of their
respective vices! Diseases, misery, and death may stare them in the face, and
mark them, by their gradual approaches, as the unfortunate victims of these
criminal indulgencies; -- but how seldom do they deter! Nay, the certain
expectation even of eternal damnation is not sufficient to reform them; and the
learned Dr. Hales has produced an example -- so bewitching is this infatuation,
that though they cannot, most of them, but be sensible, (says Dr. Hales) that
they are manifestly shortening their days, and just plunging themselves into
their graves; yet will they not refrain. This an eminent Physician was so
sensible of, from his own unhappy experience, that he said, when Men had got a
habit of it, THEY WOULD GO ON, THOUGH THEY SAW HELLFIRE BURNING BEFORE THEM. A
Friendly Admonition to Drinkers of Gin, Brandy, etc By Stephen Hales, D.D. p.
14.


concerning Drunkards, to prove that they would go on, even though they should
see Hellfire before their eyes!

The depraved Affections for every other vice, as Lust, Gaming, etc. are
equally capable of supplanting the universal Principles of Self-love and Common
Sense; and do frequently carry Men headlong to destruction, when it is
impossible but that they must have foreseen the necessary consequences of their
inordinate pursuits!

How carefully therefore ought Mankind to guard themselves against every
unlawful Affection; and strenuously to resist them, whenever they occur, lest
any undue Affection should become the reigning Principle of Action, and lead
the poor enslaved mortal to eternal destruction! From whence (come) wars and
fightings among you? (Come they) not hence, (EVEN) OF YOUR LUSTS, THAT WAR IN
YOUR MEMBERS? Ye LUST, and have not: ye KILL, and desire to have, and cannot
obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ASK NOT. Ye ASK, and
receive not, because ye ASK AMISS, that ye may consume it upon your LUSTS. Ye
ADULTERERS and ADULTERESSES, know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity with God? James iv. 1 -- 4.

But many actions which may seem apparently to have been occasioned merely by
corrupt Affections, are nevertheless promoted by a more latent cause: I mean
the Inspiration or Influence of the spiritual Enemies THE DEVIL is not merely a
name, which those who would sap the foundations of religion pretend religion
has contrived to frighten timorous minds; nor is danger then only to be
apprehended from him, when he is supposed to assume a bodily form: it is
superstitious weakness to be afraid of him only when imbodied, and to neglect
the secret and unseen influence, which his continual converse with us, as an
unimbodied spirit, may have upon us. He and his angels are not yet cast into
outer darkness, though it be prepared for them; the mouth of the bottomless pit
is not yet closed over them: they fell from GOD, not so much by a local
descent, as by mental apostasy and dissimilitude; and they have still this
visible world, once the seat of their happiness and glory, to range in: they
are, therefore, styled by the Apostle spiritual wickednesses in high places;
and their leader is called, The God of this World, The Prince of Darkness, The
Prince of the power of the Air. Uncloathed and unimbodied spirits may converse
with us by secret illapses, without our perception of the medium through which
they act: even the wind blows where it lists, and we hear the sound
thereof; but cannot tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes. As there are
Divine Illuminations communicated to the soul by THE GOOD SPIRIT OF TRUTH, so
there are impure suggestions to the fancy made by The Evil Spirit of Darkness;
and a watchful observer of his own heart, must have heard the frequent whispers
both of The Voice of Wisdom and The Voice of Folly: he, from whose eyes a
Heaven-born Faith in CHRIST has removed the scales of corruption, may easily
discern The Calm Irradiations of Divine Light leading him to holiness and
peace, and the foul and disturbed fires of Satan betraying him into sin and
misery.

But though our Enemy be invisible, and, on that account, more able to execute
his malignant designs against us; yet let us not so dread his power, as to
decline the contest. While our minds are constantly turned to That Light, which
lights every man that comes into the world; while we desire it, and depend
upon it, as The Light of Life; we shall always be able to know and to guard
against the stratagems of the Apostate Spirit, whether he appears in his own
naked deformity, or clothes himself like an Angel of Light. A forced imitation
will always fall short of the archetype: and though sin and falsehood may put on
the mantle of Holiness and Truth; yet he, that is inwardly acquainted with The
Truth as it is in JESUS, and ingenuously loves and pursues it, will be able to
detect the imposture, and through the veil behold the blackness and malignity
of the enemies to his peace. "Evangelical Discourses," by the worthy and
ingenious Mr. John Pain. Discourse V. p. 121 -- 124.


and Deceivers of Mankind, which must also be reckoned amongst the various
Principles or Motives to Action; because nothing can be more certain, than that
these incorporeal MALIGNANT BEINGS take a most dangerous advantage (though
unperceived) of all immoral carnal Affections in unguarded worldly Men; and do
thereby lead the unwary and careless Liver into the most detestable Slavery The
Original or Fundamental Temptation by which Satan draws men into the snare of
Servitude, or bondage spiritual, is by enlarging or improving their desires,
not of things simply evil, but of things either natural, or indifferent; that
is, for their kind or quality not unlawful. These desires being improved unto
the full, or unto some excessive measure, do, by long custom or continuance,
require satisfaction by as strong a law of necessity (at least as
importunately) as our natural desires of food or raiment do. The more excessive
or exorbitant any desire is, the more impatient it is of repulse. It is as
impossible for a greedy or ravenous Appetite to be satisfied with a spare or
moderate diet, as for a moderate appetite to be satisfied without any food at
all. A vain Fantastic, that takes proud clothes to be Part of Himself, is as
desirous of change of suits or costly apparel, as a poor man is of apparel
itself, or of such stuff as is sufficient to keep out cold and wet. An
ambitious Spirit is not so well content with an ordinary place or rank amongst
Freemen, as an ingenuous mind will be with the estate or condition of an hired
Servant; if no better by means fair and honest be likely to befall him. A Man
apt to over-prize himself, and jealous withal of contempt, of wrong, or of
gross abuse, is not so easily appeased with streams of blood, as a calm and
gentle spirit is with an ingenuous acknowledgment of wrongs done, or with a
courteous answer for wrongs suspected. The desire of wealth or worldly goods,
after it has once exceeded its lawful bounds, becomes as unsatisfiable as
Hell. It enlarges itself by often satisfaction, and of all earthly and mortal
things, it knows no stint or period of growth, but grows strong and lusty by
waxing old.

None of these desires of meat, of drink, of apparel, of satisfaction for
wrongs done or suspected, of honor, riches, or preferment, are in themselves,
or for their quality, unlawful. Their unlawfulness consists only in their
excess. But even the best of these or like desires, being improved beyond its
measure, will, for its private satisfaction, betray the Soul, which gives it
harbor, into Satan's hands. He does not, he need not tempt any man to be a
thief, a robber, or a murderer. For, (as St. James tells us, Chap. 1.14.)
Every man is tempted (to these and the like crimes) by his own concupiscence,
and our concupiscences and sensual desires are always increased by custom. He
that has long inured himself to exceed either in quality of meat or drink, or
to fare deliciously, desires only to satisfy his appetite, or to observe his
delightful custom: so these may be satisfied, he has no desire to be a thief,
to be a cheater, or couzener. But rather than his intemperate appetite should
be unsatisfied, he will take himself to some other part of Satan's Service; and
adventure on theft or murder, or any other breach of God's commandments. Dr.
Jackson's Works, Vol. 3. p. 62.


, that they may dishonor the work of God, and prepare the deluded Mortal for
eternal shame and punishment!

The amazing power and force of the unlawful Affections, which I have already
described, cannot reasonably be accounted for, on any other Principles. We have
no right, however, to murmur at God's permission of spiritual Temptations
(whereby the Divine Knowledge of Good and Evil, presumptuously assumed by Man,
is proved and tried) especially as the Almighty has mercifully been pleased to
give us the most ample warning throughout the Scriptures of our continual
danger; insomuch that the Christian Church has generally made the necessary
resistance to Evil Spirits an express Article of the Baptismal Vow, viz. To
renounce the Devil and all his Works. Nevertheless, the unreasonable Heresy of
the Sadduces (who were the Deists of ancient times) not only subsists to this
day, but seems even to prevail in a most dangerous degree; for there are many
people amongst us, who profess to believe the Scriptures, and yet affect to
disbelieve the existence of those malignant spiritual Beings, commonly
mentioned and signified under the name of "the Devil," though the Scriptures
afford the clearest testimony concerning them: but our modern Sadduces
endeavor to explain all texts, wherein Devils or Evil Spirits are mentioned,
as mere customary figures of speech expressive of some Evil Affections, and
sometimes of mere bodily Disorders According to them (said Archbp. Sharp) the
Devil that is so often spoken of in the Scriptures, is nothing else but either
a disease of the body, or a phantasm in the brain, or the wicked principles and
inclinations of a man's heart. This is the doctrine of Mr. Hobbs, and his
followers.

But there cannot a vainer conceit enter into a man's head than this is. By the
very same logic that they can prove this, they may likewise prove, that all
those men that are spoken of in the Old and New Testament, were not real
persons, but qualities. For it is certain, that the Devil is in the Scripture
as much represented as a person, a real subsisting being, distinct from God and
from good angels, and from mankind; I say, he is as plainly thus represented,
as any man or woman, that is there mentioned, is. And he, for instance, that
will say, that when our Savior was tempted by the Devil in the wilderness, all
this was but a transaction of his imagination, and that it was only his own
fancy that presented to his eyes all the kingdoms of the world, and that it was
only his own fancy that set him upon a pinnacle of the temple, and would have
had him fallen down and worshipped it; I say, he that would give such an
account as this, of that matter, may with the same reason say, that Jesus
himself was but a phantasm, an imagination, and that there was never such a
real person in the world.

The Devil then has a real Being of his own, independent of us, or any other
creature: and that Being is of the spiritual or angelic nature. As there are
good spirits, and good angels, so there are evil spirits, and evil angels; and
of this latter sort is the the Devil.

But then, secondly, When we are speaking of the Devil, we are not to
understand any one particular being, or any one particular evil spirit, but the
whole aggregate, or company of evil spirits, which inhabit round about us in
the lower regions of the air. All these are in the scripture language, and in
common speech, called by the name of the Devil, and sometimes in the plural
number, by the name of Devils.

For the understanding this we are to know, that among that infinite and
innumerable company of angels which God created in a happy and glorious
condition, all of them did not continue in that primitive happiness: but
several of them, by their wilful apostasy from God, forfeited that dignity and
glory they were possessed of, and so depraved their natures, that they were
incapable of dwelling any longer where they did before: but were, by the just
vengeance of God, cast down into these lower regions of the air, where they are
reserved by Providence, to the judgment and punishment of the great day.

This is the plain account that the Scriptures give us as to this matter. Thus
St. Jude in the 6th verse of his Epistle: The angels, says he, that kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitations, them has God reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. And just
to the same purpose, and almost in the same words, does St. Peter speak in the
second chapter of his second Epistle, verse the fourth.

These fallen angels now thus thrust down from heaven, though they do yet in a
great measure retain all the intellectual accomplishments of the angelical
nature, such as reason, and memory, and knowledge, yet are they in their moral
qualities quite contrary to all the good angels; and particularly as to this,
that as the good angels are infinitely kind and benign, great lovers of God and
of mankind, and most entirely disposed to do all good offices to them
whatsoever; so the nature of those fallen angels is cruel and revengeful, full
of hatred, and spite, and malice to God, and to his whole creation; and upon
account of this, the Scripture has given to them the name of Satan or Devil,
which two words (as all that understand the learned languages know) signify
neither more nor less than an adversary, or an accuser, or calumniator. The one
being the Hebrew word for it, and the other the Greek word. And indeed it is,
with reference to this enmity to mankind, that most of these names and
characters, that they bear in Scripture, are bestowed upon them. Upon this
account it is, that the Devil is called a murderer, a deceiver, a liar, and the
father of lies, the destroyer, the old serpent, the great dragon, with sundry
other such appellations. But then, though these names being put in the singular
number, seem to denote some single evil spirit, that bears ill will to mankind;
yet we are always to remember, that they are to be expounded collectively, that
is to say, to signify the whole body of these apostate spirits, of which there
are a vast number: I say, the whole body of them; for that these lapsed angels
are formed into a body politic, or government, or kingdom, is plainly enough
intimated in the New Testament: for there we meet with the kingdom of darkness,
in opposition to the kingdom of light; and there we meet with the prince of the
Devils as the chief of them; who is likewise by St. Paul called, The god of
this world, and the prince of the power of the air. Under whom also, as in
other societies, there are many subordinate officers, as St. Paul seems to
intimate in the 6th of the Ephesians; where, among the wicked spirits in
heavenly places (that is, in the air, as Grotius, with the ancients, rightly
expounds it) that he says we wrestle against, he makes mention in the plural
number of principalities and powers, and other rulers of the darkness of this
world.

This is the Scripture account of these matters. I must confess, it may seem a
very odd thing to some, that there should be in the world a society of such
spirits, as are confessedly endowed with all the knowledge and subtilty of the
angelical nature, and yet are so horribly degenerated in their morals, as to
take pleasure in every thing that is naught, and even in ruining mankind, if
they could. But that it is really possible that there should be such beings,
does in some measure appear from the prodigious instances of the depravation of
reasonable natures, that we sometimes see among ourselves; there being men of
excellent parts and endowments to be found, that do sometimes so far degenerate
from human kind, that for all manner of wickedness and malice, they may be
rather called Devils than men. But that it is more than possible, that there
are a race of such spirits, as do malign the welfare of mankind, and take
pleasure in making fools, and wretches, and slaves of them, is too evident,
both from all the histories of past ages, and from the sad experience of some
nations at this day; who (if we may credit the histories that are writ of them)
do miserably groan under the violences and tyranny of the Devil. But however,
no one that acknowledges the truth of the Scripture, can possibly doubt of
this; for what I have now delivered, is so plainly affirmed in the Old and New
Testament, that there is no evading of it. And indeed, this hypothesis of the
being of evil spirits, and their ill will to mankind, and their concerning
themselves continually to do us mischief, is so interwoven with, and makes so
considerable a part of the scheme of, our religion, as it is delivered by
Christ and his Apostles, that we cannot deny the one, without much weakening,
if not altogether overthrowing, the other. Archbishop Sharp's Sermons, Vol. 3.
p. 60 -- 65.


. Howsoever plausible this kind of sophistry may appear, where applied to some
few particular passages, yet there are others so clear in the literal
expression, and so well guarded by the scope or intention of the subject
delivered in the context, that it is impossible to wrest them from the obvious
literal meaning, without perverting all the rules of grammar and common sense.

We are most carefully warned by the great Apostle to the Gentiles, to be upon
our guard against these powers of darkness.

Put on the whole Armor of God, (says he) that ye may be able to stand AGAINST
THE WILES OF THE DEVIL. For we wrestle not with FLESH and BLOOD, but against
PRINCIPALITIES, against POWERS, against THE RULERS OF THE DARKNESS OF THIS
WORLD, against spiritual Wickedness in high places. Ephesians. vi. 11, 12.

In the same Epistle (iv. 27.) the Apostle still further warns the Ephesians
against the SPIRITUAL ENEMY. Neither (says he) give place, to the DEVIL. And,
in his 2d Epistle to the Corinthians (ii. 10, 11.) he signifies his forgiveness
to some offending person (probably meaning that fornicator whom he ordered in
the 1st Epistle (Chap. 5.) to be excommunicated. He says, for your sakes
(forgave I it) in the person (or in the sight or presence) of Christ; lest
SATAN should get an advantage over us: for we are not ignorant of his Devices.
The Apostle James also warns us upon the same points: Resist the Devil (says
he) and he will flee from you. (iv. 7.) And the Apostle Peter is still more
particular in his advice on this head -- Be sober, be vigilant; (says he)
because your Adversary THE DEVIL, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking
whom he may devour. Whom RESIST steadfast in the faith,etc. 1 Pet. v. 8.

The same Apostle also tells us, that GOD spared not THE ANGELS that sinned,
but cast them DOWN TO HELL, and delivered them into CHAINS OF DARKNESS, to be
reserved unto Judgment. (2 Pet. ii. 4.) The Word which is here translated "
down to HELL," viz. (...) ( down to Tartarus, or in Tartarus;) is derived from
the Greek verb (...), Terreo, to dread, or be in Terror; so that even if
Tartarus, or Hell, does not signify a real Place But the place of torment, or
Hell, after the day of Judgment, must necessarily signify a real Place of
material Fire, because all Men are to rise again with their Bodies And (though)
after my skin (worms) destroy this (Body) yet IN MY FLESH shall I see God. Job
xix. 26.
, and consequently will be capable of bodily punishment; for it is not the Soul
alone, but the whole Body of the unrepenting Sinner, that will be cast into
Hell If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it
is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
WHOLE BODY should be cast into Hell. Matt. v. 20.30.
; and as Human Bodies after the Resurrection will be incorruptible For the
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall
be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must
put on IMMORTALITY. 1 Cor. xv. 53.
or everlasting, so, of course, they will be capable of everlasting bodily
punishment in the fire that never shall be quenched: where THEIR WORM DIES
NOT, and the Fire is not quenched. (Mark ix. 45, 46.) and this FIRE (which must
be a material Fire, as Bodies are to be punished in it) is the very same FIRE
that is prepared for the Devil and his Angels Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Matt. xxv. 41.
, and consequently we may be assured, that the latter, though Spirits, will
also be rendered as capable, as the Human Bodies, of feeling the perpetual
torment of that Fire. And lastly, it is not improbable, that even this
Terrestial Globe, on which the worldly-minded seem to place their whole desire
and happiness, may hereafter become that very Hell, or place of future
punishment both for wicked Men and Devils, since it has so long been the seat
both of Human and Diabolical wickedness; for Moses seems to intimate, in his
prophetical song, that there is a worldly Hell -- a Fire is kindled in mine
anger, and shall burn UNTO THE LOWEST HELL ((...)) and shall consume the earth,
with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains. (Deuteronomy.
xxxii. 22.) Commentators generally remark indeed, that HELL is mentioned here
only as a Type or Metaphor of the most extreme temporal misery, or sufferings
in this life, agreeable to the tenor of the subject carried on in the following
verses, yet the having recourse to such a Metaphor certainty implies a real
idea of Hell, and of the future destruction of the world BY FIRE; for otherwise
the recital of these circumstances, even as Metaphors or Types, would be
useless and unintelligible. It may be objected, indeed, that the present world
will be consumed, or (agreeable to the literal expression of the Hebrew in this
text) EAT by the Fire; which is also foretold by the Apostle Peter -- that the
earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. (2 Pet. iii.
10.) So that the Earthly FIRE must, at length, CEASE for want of materials, if
all earthly things are to "be burned up," and to "pass away" Heaven and Earth
shall PASS AWAY, but my words shall NOT PASS AWAY. Matt. xxiv. 35. See also
chap. v. 18. and Luke xvi 17.
in fire and smoke! Whereas the "Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels,"
is expressly declared to be an everlasting Fire. (Matthew. xxv. 41.) Yet these
last considerations will afford no just objection to what I have before
suggested, because THE ALMIGHTY can surely render the Fire perpetual, by a
continual accession of new materials, as the old are consumed (or by a variety
of other means, which, like most other operations of Providence, are infinitely
above human comprehension) agreeable to the intimation of the Prophet Isaiah,
though the same is also given as a Metaphor of extreme temporal sufferings --
viz. and the STREAMS thereof shall be turned into PITCH, and the DUST thereof
into BRIMSTONE, and the LAND thereof shall become BURNING PITCH. It shall not
be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go up for ever, etc. Isaiah
xxxiv. 9, 10.


, it signifies, at least, an actual State or Condition of extreme Terror and
horrible Darkness, in which even SPIRITS may be involved, or (as it were)
bound; for the Apostle, by the idea of Darkness here expressed, may perhaps
allude to a total Exclusion from the Light, Comfort, and Influence of the
Divine Grace, or an entire Withdrawing of the glorious CREATOR'S Light and
Spirit, by which Exclusion or Withdrawing, the wilful Reprobacy of these
rebellious Angels might, probably, have been fixed upon them, as an indelible
stain of infamy, to mark them for future punishment, and to exclude them from
all hope of escaping the Divine Justice! So that those Spiritual Beings, which
once were glorious in their Nature (being created "Angels of Light") have
rendered themselves most inglorious and detestable, by misusing that Liberty,
in which the benevolent Creator had placed them; for they kept not their first
Estate And the Angels, which KEPT NOT THEIR FIRST ESTATE, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness unto the
Great Day. Jude 6.
, but wickedly withdrew themselves from "their own Habitation," and have
thereby been the wilful Authors of their own disgraceful and depraved Nature
(the Diabolical Disposition); which is founded only in their own voluntary
wickedness; for GOD IS NOT (the Author) OF CONFUSION God has declared, indeed,
by his Prophet Isaiah (c. xlv. 7.) I FORM the Light, and CREATE DARKNESS: I
make Peace, and CREATE EVIL. I the LORD DO ALL THESE (Things). But the latter
part of this sentence (says the learned Dr. Louth, Prebend of Winchester in
1714) explains the former: LIGHT being often put for Happiness, and DARKNESS
for Adversity. The sense is (continues the Doctor) that all the vicissitudes of
good or ill success are to be ascribed to Providence: God sets up one kingdom,
that of CYRUS, and pulls down another, the BABYLONIAN monarchy. (Commentary on
Isaiah, p. 367.) To the same effect is the Paraphrase of the learned DEODATI,
viz. I am the cause of all Goodness and Prosperity through my BENIGNITY: as
likewise by my JUSTICE I am Author of afflictions, punishments, and calamities.
And indeed Commentators in general agree, that the EVIL here to be understood
is not the EVIL of Sins and Vices, ( modo hic excludas PECCATA et VITIA, quae
sunt ex homine, says the learned Vitringa) but the EVIL of Afflictions,
Sicknesses, subjection to foreign enemies, and all other external or bodily
Sufferings, whereby mankind are either proved and tried, that they may thereby
set forth due examples of Faith and Patience to others, or else are punished
and chastised according to the just dispensation of GOD'S Providence in the
government of the world. Nevertheless, GOD both proves and punishes mankind,
even by internal Evil: for as the supreme direction and control of all things
whatsoever belong absolutely to GOD ALONE, he is said in Scripture to DO, what
he only PERMITS upon just occasions As when men wilfully forsake GOD's Laws and
Religion, preferring temporal gratifications to Justice, Righteousness, and
Truth! Such a gross abuse of the natural Knowledge of Good and Evil is
presumptuous Sin; and " he that commits SIN is of the DEVIL. (1 John iii.
8.) But if God permits men to be ensnared by the delusions of the DEVIL after
the working of SATAN, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with
all DECEIVABLENESS of unrighteousness in them that perish -- a plain reason is
assigned for such permission -- because they received not the love of the
TRUTH, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong
delusion, that they should BELIEVE A LIE! that they all might be damned (or
judged) who believed not the TRUTH, but had pleasure in UNRIGHTEOUSNESS. (2 Thessalonians. ii 9 -- 12.)


, by withdrawing his restraining Grace from man, and giving him up entirely to
the bent of his own inclination GOD also GAVE THEM UP to uncleanness through
the lusts of their own hearts, etc. And again -- GOD GAVE THEM UP unto vile
affections. And again GOD GAVE THEM OVER to a reprobate mind, etc. For all
which plain reasons are given, showing that the wilful wickedness of man is the
one foundation or first cause of God's deserting, or thus GIVING THEM UP so
that they are without excuse: (says the Apostle Paul) Because that when they
knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain
in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools, etc. WHEREFORE GOD also GAVE THEM UP
to uncleanness through the lusts of their OWN HEARTS, etc. (See Romans i. 20 --
32.) and even God's own servants may sometimes be deserted or left to
themselves for a time, as King Hezekiah was upon a particular occasion, when
the ambassadors came to him from Babylon to enquire of the wonder that was done
in the land; for then GOD LEFT HIM, to try him, that he might know all ( that
was) in his heart. 2 Chronicles. xxiii. 31. That is (according to the Dutch
annotation) that God might make known to HISKIA, and to all the Church, what
was in his heart. For God made trial of him for a while by the forementioned
desertion, that he might know himself, and out of the sense and feeling of his
own weakness and impotency, might have cause to HUMBLE HIMSELF; and that all
believers beholding their own weakness and infirmity in him, might work out
their own salvation with fear and trembling And accordingly we road, that
HEZEKIAH HUMBLED HIMSELF for the pride of his heart, both he, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the Lord came not upon them in
the days of Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 26. This example affords a clear
illustration of the true sense in which God may be said to "tempt," or to "lead
into temptation" viz. GOD LEFT HIM, to try him," etc.


, or by ceasing to restrain the power of spiritual deceivers When the Divine
vengeance and retribution was to be poured upon the wicked King Ahab, he was
GIVEN UP to the delusion of wicked spirits -- And the Lord said, Who shall
persuade AHAB, that he may GO UP AND FALL at Ramoth Gilead? etc. And there came
forth a spirit, and stood before the LORD, and said, I will persuade him. And
the Lord said unto him, wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I will be
a LYING SPIRIT IN THE MOUTH OF ALL HIS PROPHETS. And he said, Thou shall
persuade and prevail also: go forth and do so. Wherefore the true Prophet
Micaiah told Ahab -- Behold the LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouth of
all these thy Prophets, etc. (1 Kings xxii. 20 -- 23.) Here the effects of
God's permission is plainly considered as the act of God; for the spirit, being
rendered free to act agreeable to its own wicked principles upon the persons
mentioned, effected the purpose of the Divine Justice and Retribution upon
Ahab. Thus the very Devils are used as instruments to fulfill the eternal
Justice and Judgment of the Almighty upon the unrighteous; and in such cases
may properly be said to become the "Principles of Action" in Man!


. Hence arises the necessity of our daily prayer -- Lead us not into
TEMPTATION, but deliver us from EVIL, notwithstanding that we are assured by
the Apostle James, that GOD "TEMPTS NONE" ((...)) but EVERY MAN is tempted
when he is drawn away of his OWN LUST, and enticed. Then (says he) when LUST
has conceived, it brings forth SIN: and SIN, when it is finished, brings
forth DEATH. (Jam. i. 13 -- 15.) This latter text teaches us how we are to
comprehend and limit such expressions as that above quoted from the Lord's
Prayer.


, BUT OF PEACE. (1 Cor. xiv. 33.) God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither
tempts he any Man, or rather, he tempts NONE, ((...)) no Beings whatsoever,
(James i. 13.) and -- Out of the Mouth of the Most High proceeds not EVIL and
GOOD? (Lam. iii. 38.) so that as Iniquity can have no Fellowship GOD is Light,
and in him is NO DARKNESS at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in DARKNESS, we lie, and do not the Truth: but if we walk in the
LIGHT, as he is in the LIGHT, we have fellowship one with another, and the
blood of JESUS CHRIST his Son cleanses us from all Sin. 1 John i. 5 -- 7.
with GOD, these Apostate Spirits have, of course, been totally excluded from
every Ray of the Divine LIGHT; whereby, instead of continuing Angels of Light,
as at first created, they are become totally dark, and opposite in every
Principle to the LIGHT, Goodness, and Mercy of THE ALMIGHTY; so that they may
now be called, with propriety, ANGELS of DARKNESS; for though they sometimes
deceitfully assume the opposite character FOR SATAN HIMSELF is transformed into
AN ANGEL OF LIGHT. 2 Cor. xi. 14.
, in order to deceive the unwary, yet their Power is only of Darkness The
Apostle Paul apparently means these wicked Angels or Spirits, when he warns us
against POWERS, against the RULERS of the DARKNESS of this world. Ephesians. vi.
12. And elsewhere they are spoken of collectively, as "THE POWER OF DARKNESS."
Giving thanks unto the FATHER (says the same Apostle) which has made us to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in LIGHT: who has delivered us from
THE POWER OF DARKNESS, and has translated (us) into the kingdom of his dear
Son. Col. i. 12, 14. -- "This is your hour" (said our Lord to the chief priests
and elders of the Jews who came to apprehend him) and THE POWER OF DARKNESS."
Luke xxii. 53. The Power of Death has also been attributed to the same
malignant Spirits; for Christ took upon himself our Nature, Flesh and Blood --
that through DEATH he might destroy him that had THE POWER OF DEATH, that is,
THE DEVIL, and deliver them, who, through fear of DEATH, were all their
lifetime subject to BONDAGE. Heb. ii. 14, 15.


, being bound (as it were) in the dark Chains 2 Pet. ii. 4.
of their own Iniquity or Reprobacy -- in the "everlasting Chains" of horrible
Darkness Jude 6.
, whereby they are effectually "reserved for Judgment," without being deprived
of that activity, in exercising the malignity of their fixed reprobate
Principles, and proneness to do Evil, which the Scriptures in many other
passages attribute to them. For without some such supposition, how shall we
reconcile the abovementioned text of the Apostle Peter, as also that which is
parallel to it in the Epistle of Jude, (wherein the fallen Angels are
represented as bound in everlasting Chains under Darkness unto the Judgment of
the Great Day) And the Angels, which kept not their first estate, but left
their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains under DARKNESS,
unto the Judgment of the Great Day. Jude 6.
with those other texts before quoted from the Apostles Paul, James, and Peter,
concerning the Activity and Vigilance of Diabolical Spirits.

The Apostle Paul, as I before remarked, warns us of the Wiles of the DEVIL,
(by which word, in the singular number, is commonly understood the Prince THE
PRINCE of the Power of the Air, THE SPIRIT that now works in the children of
disobedience. Ephesians. ii. 2. Now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. John
xii. 31. -- Beelzebub the PRINCE of the Devils. Matt. xii. 24 -- 27.
, or Chief of the fallen Angels), and tells, that we wrestle not against FLESH
AND BLOOD, but against PRINCIPALITIES, against POWERS, against the Rulers of
the DARKNESS of this World, etc. Ephesians. vi. 11, 12.) being a clear declaration of
the Agency and Activity of these invisible Spiritual Beings.

Again, the Apostle James tells us, to resist the DEVIL, and he will FLEE from
us; which excludes every idea of his being actually bound in chains of
confinement. And the Apostle Peter represents him as a roaring Lion, that
WALKS ABOUT, seeking whom he may devour; which absolutely forbids the belief
of a local confinement in any one place: so that the Chains of Darkness in
Tartarus may very well express such a total Darkness of Apostasy and absolute
Reprobation, as I have supposed, wherein the disobedient Angels are bound and
reserved for the day of Vengeance; for THE EVERLASTING FIRE Having in a former
note, at p. 131, made some remarks concerning the probability that the present
Terrestrial Globe (on which the greater part of mankind seem to place their
whole interest and desire) will hereafter become the region of EVERLASTING
FIRE, or Hell, I have since had the satisfaction to find, on a further
examination of that point, that the same opinion has been long ago decisively
asserted by my own grandfather, in a sermon concerning "the manner of the day
of judgment;" and though I could wish my readers to peruse the whole sermon,
yet I must beg leave to lay before them a short extract from it, which is much
to my present purpose. -- The second particular (says he) which the Scriptures
acquaint us with concerning the general judgment, is this; that the earth shall
then be set on fire, and that in the most terrible manner imaginable. Whether
this general conflagration will happen upon Christ's coming to judgment, or
rather will be the last transaction of the judgment, the Scripture does not
declare. But that there shall be such a conflagration, and that THIS FIRE SHALL
BE FOR THE EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT BOTH OF THE DEVIL AND WICKED MEN, WHO WILL
ALL BE TUMBLED DOWN INTO THESE LOWER REGIONS, WHICH WILL THEN BE A PERFECT LAKE
OR SEA OF FIRE (as the Scripture expresses it, Rev. xix. 20.) is beyond all
doubt. To this purpose let us observe what the Apostle says, The Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire, to take
vengeance of them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Thessalonians. i. 7.

But more expressly this conflagration of the world is taught us in the second
Epistle of St. Peter, Chap. iii. 6, 7. where the Apostle tells us, that as the
world which was of old perished by an universal deluge of water, so the heavens
and the earth which are now, are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the
day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men. From whence it is plain, that at
the day of judgment this world shall be set on fire, and that fire shall be for
the punishment of ungodly men. Furthermore, in the verses following, he adds to
the same purpose, The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, in
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall
be burnt up, ver. 10.

If any one be at a loss to conceive how the heavens should be set on fire as
well as the earth, as St. Peter three times in this chapter affirms they shall
be; the difficulty will be removed by considering that the heavens here spoken
of, are not those heavens in which stars are, (in which signification we
commonly use that word) but the sublunary heavens, viz. those lower regions of
the air, wherein are the clouds and vapors and other meteors, which are here
called the elements, and in which sense the heavens are frequently taken in
holy Scripture. Now these heavens, together with all that is in them, shall at
that day pass away with a crackling noise of fire, and the earth, and all the
things in it, shall be put in flames. David tells us, that upon the wicked God
shall rain fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the
portion of their cup, Psalm xi. 6. And our Savior intimates the same, when he
tells us, as in the day when Lot went out of Sodom, it it rained fire and
brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all; so shall it be in the day when
the Son of man is revealed, Luke xvii. 29, 30.

And now who can express the horror and confusion that shall be at that day?
Who can fancy so sad and dismal a face of things, as shall then be all the
world over? Could we imagine ourselves to be present, when the whole frame of
nature is upon the point of dissolution, and the whole world in flames about
our ears, with what terror and amazement should we be filled? How would our
hearts fail us, and our joints be loosed, and our knees smite against each
other, Dan. v. 6. unless we were sure we were in the number of those who should
be wafted up to meet the bridegroom with comfort? Oh, what will then become of
all impenitent sinners! What will become of all worldly, sensual, ambitious,
voluptuous men, who set up their rest in this world, and mind nothing but their
ease, and the gratification of their appetites, or the pursuit of their secular
interests! When they shall see all that they loved, all that they admired, all
that they delighted in, gone, irrecoverably gone in a moment! Lastly, what will
become of all those bold profane persons, who entertained all discourses of a
future judgment only with scoffs and derision! Oh, how will they find
themselves abused, and see, to their great amazement, what they would never
before believe, that there is a reward for the righteous, that there is indeed
a God that judges the earth! Ps. lviii. 11. Archbishop Sharp's Sermons, Vol.
6. p. 184 -- 186. 3d. Edit.


prepared for the DEVIL and HIS ANGELS; (Matt. xxv. 41.) being marked and
distinguished from other Spirits by their confirmed propensity to Evil, and
their continual opposition to every good Principle; which renders their final
condemnation to that "everlasting Fire" inevitable; for "the DEVILS also
believe and tremble:" (James ii. 19.) by which, it seems, they foreknow their
own certain condemnation, like those abandoned. Human Sinners, who sin WILFULLY
after (they) have received THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUTH; to whom there remains
no more Sacrifice for Sins, but a certain fearful LOOKING FOR of Judgment and
fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. Heb. x. 26, 27.

This clear description of Human Reprobacy opens to us a very probable idea of
the Angelic Reprobacy, or the mode whereby the Nature of Devils was first
occasioned; and at the same time proves, that Men are equally liable to fall
into the same lamentable Degeneracy and horrible Apostasy from God, and thereby
may become a sort of Devils Thus the reprobate Judas was mentioned, even by our
Lord himself, (who knew the wilful wickedness of his avaricious heart, John vi.
64. For JESUS knew, from the beginning, who they were that believed not, and
who should betray him, John vi. 64.
and that he was a thief, John xii. 6.) was mentioned, I say, in express terms,
as being A DEVIL -- " Have not I chosen you twelve (said our Lord to his
disciples) " and one of you is A DEVIL." John vi. 70. The MAN, indeed, was the
work of the benevolent Creator, but he became A DEVIL by the operation of his
own mind, assisted by the spiritual Influence of SATAN, whom he neglected to
resist (thus wilfully abusing the divine hereditary Knowledge of Good and Evil
within himself) and of course partook of the Diabolical Nature; which will,
most certainly, be the unhappy case of every other Man, who, in like manner,
neglects that necessary Resistance to SATAN, and his own predominant passions,
whereby he is rendered a Slave to habitual Sin!


, but indeed, of a very base and inferior order: for though they may be EQUAL,
perhaps, IN WICKEDNESS (when the restraining Power of Conscience, or the Divine
Knowledge of Good and Evil, is entirely effaced, or withdrawn from them) yet
they must remain as much INFERIOR IN POWER and ABILITIES, as Human Nature is
inferior to the created Part of Devils, I mean the Angelic Nature; for the
Scriptures inform us, that ANGELS are GREATER in Power and Might; (2 Pet. ii.
11.) and consequently must retain a GREATER proportion of both, (i. e. Power
and Might) even in their fallen State, than reprobate Men.

The Devils, or Satanical Spirits, are constantly represented in the Scriptures
to be as diametrically opposite in their Nature to the infinite Goodness of
GOD, as Darkness is to Light GOD is LIGHT, and in him is no DARKNESS at all. 1
John i. 5.
; as Falsehood Ye are of your Father the DEVIL, etc. When he speaks a LIE, he
speaks of HIS OWN: for he is a LIAR, and the Father of it. John viii. 44.
is to Truth I am the Way, and the TRUTH, and the Life. John xiv. 6.
; as implacable and unprovoked Malice He (the Devil) was a MURDERER from the
beginning, and abode not in the Truth, because there is no Truth in him. John
viii. 44.
is to everlasting Mercy and Love GOD is Love. 1 John iv. 8. For the LORD
(Jehovah) is good: his MERCY IS EVERLASTING, and his TRUTH endures to all
generations. Psa. c. 5.
! And, therefore, as they were really "Angels" in "their first Estate," so
entire a change in their very nature may fairly be accounted as " Chains of
Darkness" -- of horrible Darkness! wherewith they are bound, as it were, and
reserved for eternal Judgment, without hindrance or impediment to their natural
activity in promoting Evil, as far as God is pleased to permit, in order to
prove the Faith of Mankind; as in the severe trials of Job's patience, and also
in the temptation even of our Lord himself, which cannot be otherwise
understood than in a literal sense; for CHRIST in his Human Nature, not only
overcame those extraordinary exertions of the Devil's power, related by the
Apostle Matthew (Chap. 4.) and the Evangelists Mark (Chap. 1.) and Luke (Chap.
4.) but was also in all points tempted like as we are (yet) without Sin. Heb.
iv. 15.

And our Lord also declared the earnest wish and activity of the Spiritual
Enemy to overcome the Faith of the Apostle Peter -- Simon, Simon (said our
Lord) Behold, SATAN HAS DESIRED (to have) YOU, that HE MAY SIFT (you) AS
WHEAT: but I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not: and when thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. Luke xxii. 31, 32. This is a clear
Revelation that Human Nature is really liable to the impulse and temptations of
wicked Spirits The above remarks are principally intended for the use of those
persons who disbelieve the Reality of Spiritual Influence; but there are some
people (and worthy people too) who are apt to fall into a contrary Extreme
concerning Spiritual Adversaries: I mean those persons, who, through bodily
disorders, are subject to low Spirits and religious Melancholy, whereby they
are led to conceive, either that GOD has forsaken them, and left them to
themselves, or that it is the DEVIL that is always busy about them, and raises
those tumults and disturbances in their minds. And as this unhappy case of
RELIGIOUS MELANCHOLY may be esteemed an Affection of the Mind, as well as of
the Body, it certainly relates to my present subject, and seems worthy of as
much notice in this tract, as most other Affections of the Human Mind which I
have mentioned; but I am precluded from offering any remarks of my own upon it,
by the writings of my grandfather, who has already treated this case so fully,
so judiciously, and so satisfactorily for the comfort of such persons as may
happen to want advice thereupon, that it would be superfluous to add any thing
more than a reference to those parts of his works where the subject is examined
and discussed. See Archbishop Sharp's Sermons, Vol. 3. Sermon. 2. p. 21. and
indeed all the Sermons collected in that Volume are on such points as are most
liable to perplex and disturb the minds of persons subject to low Spirits and
religious Melancholy; and the several difficulties are explained in such easy
and natural arguments, as cannot fail to instruct and remove the doubts of
every attentive reader.


, which will certainly prevail over us, and become the Principles of Action, if
we are not careful and vigilant to resist them as we ought: for Christ did not
forbid the Tempter from using his endeavors against Peter, but only prayed,
that THE FAITH of the Apostle should not fail; whereby he has taught us, that a
sound and steadfast FAITH (for which WE ALSO are bound to pray) will
sufficiently enable us to resist the POWERS OF DARKNESS.

But when Men disbelieve the very existence of those active Spiritual
Adversaries, how should they be upon their guard to resist their influence? For
Unbelief in the existence of Spiritual Beings will certainly be promoted, even
by the DEVILS themselves, in all places wherever they can gain advantage by
it, and especially wherever Skepticism, Deism, and the groundless notions of
the Sadducees, are openly set up in opposition to the clear testimonies of
revealed Religion, and the true Faith: for in all such places, it is obvious,
that the interest of Satan's empire will be promoted by a disbelief of his
existence; and consequently, that the Angels of Darkness will, in such places,
most carefully abstain from every outward and visible demonstration of their
agency and power among Men. Whereas at other times, and in other places, where
ignorance of a contrary nature has prevailed, and Men have been subjected to
superstitious terrors, by neglecting the only proper object of their
confidence, in such places, I say, the Agency and Interference of DEMONS with
Mankind have ever been notorious and manifest; of which the histories of all
Heathen nations bear ample testimony.

The uniformity of Demon Worship, in all parts of the world, before the
preaching of the Gospel, affords also a clear proof of the worldly Empire of
Satan; for though Devils were worshipped under various names, and various
figures, yet there was a constant uniformity in all such particular points as
tended most to the Destruction of Mankind, or to lead Men to the most direct
opposition to the revealed Laws of God, whereby the universal Author or
Promoter of such baneful devices was clearly discoverable; the same being for
the most part contrary to the Nature of Man, and such, therefore, as could not
naturally proceed from Man alone.

Hence we may plainly account for the universal adoption of Human Sacrifices
amongst all Heathen Nations! Some of these deluded people withheld not even
their own offspring from their Spiritual Deceiver; the spilling of Human Blood
being most grateful to that Being, who " was a MURDERER from the beginning " Ye
are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do: He was a
Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth, because there is no
Truth in him. When he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a Liar,
and the Father of it. John viii. 44.
. Hence we may also account for the Cuttings in the Flesh for the dead, and the
marking or tattooing of the skin, which still prevails amongst the African and
American nations, and the present uninformed Islanders of the South Seas, as
much as it formerly did amongst the Picts, and other more ancient Heathens; for
their marks in the flesh were certainly intended by the Spiritual Deceiver, as
a sort of Dedication to himself I have been informed by an Englishman, who
lived many years amongst the Indians in the internal parts of North America,
very far to the westward, (and who is himself tatooed with all the marks of
distinction common to the nations with whom he has had any connections) that he
once saw a party of Indians (who had taken some prisoners in war) tatoo a
couple of their unfortunate captives with the most curious marks they could
devise, and afterward hang them up upon a tree, as a sacrifice to that
infernal Being which they worshipped, saying at the same time in their
language, that they hoped those two fine Men (viz. finely tatooed) whom they
presented, would be acceptable to him; for though the Indians in general
acknowledge that there is a God, whom they call the Great and Good Spirit, yet,
through the delusions of the Devil, they think it more profitable to worship
Evil Spirits by way of propitiation, lest they should hurt them.

Outre l'idee du premier Estre qu'ont les Sauvages, (says Father Lafitau,
speaking of the American Savages) et qu'ils confondent avec le Soleil, ils
reconnoissent encore plusieurs Esprits ou Genies d'un Order inferieur, que les
Iroquois nomment Hondatkon-Sona, c'est-a-dire, Esprits de toutes Sorts. Le
nombre n'en est point determine, leur imagination leur en fait voir dans toutes
les chooses naturelles, mais encore plus dans celles, don't les ressorts leur
sont inconnus, qui sont extraordinaires, et qui ont quelque air de nouveaute.
Quoiquils leur donnent en general le nom d'Esprit, d'Okki, ou de Manitou, qui
leur sont des noms communs avec le premier Estre, ils ne les confondent
pourtant jamais avec cet Estre superieur, et ne leur donnent jamais certains
noms particuliers, qui le designent lui seul, tell que sont les noms Chemiin,
Areskoui. Ces Esprits sont tous des Genies subalternes; ils reconnoissent meme
dans la plupart un charactere mauvais, plus port a fair du mal que du bien;
ils ne laissent pas d'en etre les Esclaves, ET DE LES HONORER PLUS QUE LE GRAND
ESPRIT, qui de sa nature est BON, mais ils les honorent par un effet de cette
crainte servile, qui a le plus contribue a maintenir la superstition et
l'idolatrie, que l'Ecriture Saint appelle pour cette raison une Servitude;
ainsi ils sont veritablement idolatres. Moeurs des Sauvages Ameriquains, Tom.
1. p. 145, 146.


, and as an affront to the Divine Creator, who formed Man without any such
unnatural distinctions, and expressly commanded in his revealed Law. -- Ye
shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, (or rather FOR THE
SOUL) nor print any marks upon you: I am the Lord (that is, JEHOVAH, the only
eternal BEING.) Levit. xix. 28.

And as the "forbidding to marry" is declared in Scripture to be a Doctrine of
Devils Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to SEDUCING SPIRITS, and DOCTRINES OF
DEVILS; speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a hot
iron; FORBIDDING TO MARRY (and commanding) TO ABSTAIN FROM MEATS, which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know
the truth. 1 Timothy iv. 1 -- 3.
; so we accordingly find, that amongst the ancient Heathens there was an order
of Nuns or Priestesses (called Vestal Virgins) that were bound, contrary to
Nature, in vows of CELIBACY; and amongst the Heathen Tartars, Chinese, and
other idolaters, even to this day The celebrated Venetian Father MARK PAUL, in
the account of his Travels through the East, speaking of the territories of the
Great Cham of Tartary, informs us, that there are MANY MONKS appointed to the
worship of idols, who have a great MONASTERY. Inveniuntur in Regione illa
PLURIMI MONACHI, idolorum cultui deputati: habent hi MONASTERIUM quoddam
magnum, etc. Novus Orbis Regionum ac Insularum, etc. p. 360. See also p. 385 of
the Pagan Monks and Monastery at the city Caigui.

Mr. Isbrants Ides, who was Envoy Extraordinary from their Czarian Majesty's
John and Peter Alexowitz, in 1692, to the Court of China, speaking of the town
of Jekutskoi, on the river Angara, which rises from the lake of Bakal, says, On
one side of this town, likewise, there stands a FINE MONASTERY, or CONVENT, on
that particular spot where the river JAKUT, from whence it derives its name,
empties its waters into the ANGARA. Extract from Mr. Isbrants Ides Travels,
inserted in the English edition of Mons. Le Brun's Travels, p. 165. -- In the
following page mention is made of the Mongulian Devotees; and he describes a
Mongulian NUN, as well as a LAMA or Priest Whilst the envoy resided in this
place, he met with a Taischa, that is to say, a Mongulian, or Mogulian lord,
who had th^own himself under the shelter and protection of the Czar of Moscovy,
and had been for some time a proselyte to the Christian faith, and received a
member of the Greek church.

This young nobleman had a sister, who was a Mongulian nun, and was greatly
inclined to become a Christian c^nvert, a^ well as her brother. In conversation
upon that serious and important topic, she would ingenuously acknowledge, that
the God in whom the Christians put their trust and confidence, must of
necessity, in her opinion, be an omnipotent God indeed; since he had expelled
their Mongulian deity out of paradise; but she was firmly persuaded, that a
time would come, when he should be restored, ( a proof this that the MONGULIAN
NUNS are Pagans) "and never be subject to the like disgrace again.

When any of these NUNS, or MONGULIAN DEVOTEES enter into a room, they never
salute any person present whomsoever, though it is a customary thing with their
ladies, who live under no restraint; since their order is too strict to approve
of such formal a^ts of complaisance. IN HER HAND SHE HELD A STRING OF BEADS,
which she coun^ed over and over with her fingers; and was attended by a
MONGULIAN PRIEST, whom they cal^ed a Lama, WHO HELD IN HIS HAND LIKEWISE A
STRING OF BEADS, which he kept constantly counting with her, and at the same
time visibly moved his lips, like one deeply engaged in private contemplation,
AS IS CUSTOMARY AMONGST THE MONGULIANS, AS WELL AS THE CALMUCS. This priest, by
the incessant practice of this branch of devotion, had wore his thumb, his
nail, and the joints of his fingers to that degree, that he had perfectly lost
the sense of all feeling in them. Le Brun's Travels, p 166.


; from whence it is natural to conclude, that the monastery or convent
beforementioned belonged to one or the other of these orders. They both kept
their account of their vain repetitions and numerous prayers, by Strings of
Beads, like our Popish Christians In the account of the Dutch Embassy to the
Great Cham of Tartary (Ann. 1655 to 1657) where the author describes the
idolatrous Chinese priests, (pars ultima, p. 54,) it appears that some of them
use Be^ds, and are also, in many other respects, like the Romish Priests, as
that they fill their chapels with statues; they abstain from flesh, but not
all; however, such crimes (says the author, meaning such crim^s as the eating
of flesh) are easily pardoned for money; and, like them, they boast that the
souls of the dam^ed are redeemed from hell by their prayers: some live by
begging, others live in caves and mountains, but the greatest part in
MONASTERIES Some of them have a long black robe and square cap, and walk with a
Pater-nefter or Rosary, (that is, a string of beads) in their hands. The women
or NUNS have separate monasteries, shave their hair, and REJECT MARRIAGE; and
the priests of the sect of Lauzu profess celibacy, and live in monasteries.
Caeremonias fere instar Romanensium habent. Horas suas plane more Gregoriano
cantillando recitant. Pagodas suos et SACELLA STATUIS REPLENT. -- CARNIBUS, ET
QUAE VIVUNT, ABSTINENT, sed non omne^, et talia peccata sacile argento
condonant, jactantque damnatorum animas suis se precibus ab inferis redimere
p^sse. Capillos continue abradunt Alii mendicando vagantur, alii in speluncis
et montibus vivunt; maxima pars vitam in COENOBIIS SACELLORUM agunt, etc. --
Vestitus eorum dispar, ut ex quatuor iconibus ( referring to the picture in p.
65.) videri potest. Aliqui, ut primus ad laevam ( on the left side of the
plate) longa nigra toga, quadrato pileo, PATER NOSTER, aut ROSARIUM MANU
TENENTES, incedunt. -- Habent foeminae separata monasteria, quae et ipsae
capillos radunt, CONJUGIUM REPUDIANT et sinice Nicu vocantur. Tertiae Sectae
Lauzu quidam Confutii coaetaneus auctor, etc. (of whose followers, he says, in
the next sentence) HI IN COENOBIIS CAELIBESVIVUNT, etc. pars ultima, p. 54, 55.
And lest the testimony of my Dutch author (who is nevertheless very
respectable) should be called in question by any partial bigot of the Romish
church, I must beg leave to add a similar testimony even of a learned Jesuit
(Athanasius Kircher) who, in his China Illustrata, p. 154, makes particular
mention of a MONASTERY of idolatrous Chinese Priests, or Bonzes at the city of
Camsan; and in his account of the Japanese idols, p. 139, he informs us, that
the Japanese believe that their idol Amida requires nothing of them to incline
him to save them, except a FREQUENT REPETITION of the word, Namu, Amida, Buth,
that is, "Happy Amida, save us" (Compare this with the vain repetitions of the
Popish Rosary.) And when they repeat these words, they also use their Rosaries,
or Strings of Prayer Beads, which the Japanese (says he) have in common with
the Christians, and which are commonly painted in the hands of their idols, as
you see (says he) in the annexed picture, which shows the representation of
AMIDA, and every way corresponds with the figure of PUSSA, the goddess of the
CHINESE. -- Illos huic idolo tantum tribuere, ut ad salvandum se nihil aliud
requiri credant, nisi frequentem horum verborum repetitionem: NAMU, AMIDA,
BUTH, hoc est, Felix Amida, salva nos. Quae verba identidem repetunt, Rosaria
sua, seu coronas e globuiis precatoriis confectas gerunt, quas Japo^^^ communes
habent cum Christianis, et in idolorum manibus fere depinguntur, uti h^c
imagi^e adjuncta vides, quae imaginem Amidae, refert, et Pussae Sinarum
Deastrae undequaque respondet ut postea videbitur. See the plate at p. 154,
where Pussa is represented holding a Rosary in one of her many hands. And in
the picture of the Great Lama, the same author represents him holding a String
of Beads in his right hand, p. 73: and the priest which attends the idol Menipe
is represented in the plate at p 131 and 145, with a string of Prayer Beads
hanging from his girdle after the Popish Fashion.


; and though we have no account that the ancient Heathen used BEADS, yet they
were certainly equally distinguished by their numerous prayers and repetitions
(for which alone the Beads are used); as our Lord himself testified -- But when
ye pray (said he) use not VAIN REPETITIONS, AS THE HEATHEN DO: for they think
that they shall be heard for their MUCH SPEAKING. Be not ye therefore like unto
them, etc. Matt. vi. 7, 8.


, there are distinct orders of Men, it seems, as well as Women, laid under the
same unnatural restraint through the instigation of their spiritual Adversary
Adversary -- The name for an Adversary, Hater, or Enemy, is Satan ((...)) which
name was generally applied by the Jews to the Spiritual Enemy in particular;
and it is remarkable, that many of the Heathen Tartars worship the Devil under
that very name to this day.

The author last quoted, respecting the Tartar Devotees, tells us, in page 152,
concerning the idols of the Ostiachs, that these idols are called SAITANS, a
name which seems to derive its origin from SATAN, the arch fiend of Hell. And
in page 186, speaking of the people of BARABINSY, who are a kind of CALMUCS, he
says -- When they traverse the woods, in order to hunt down their game, they
take their Saitan, as they call it, along with them; which is an image made of
wood, inelegantly carved with a knife only, and covered with a parti-colored
stuff, not unlike that which is frequently worn by the female Russians. This
idol, or Saitan, of theirs is enclosed in a box, which is carried upon a
particular sledge; and to this their god they offer up the first fruits of
their chase, be it what it will, without any exception.

When they prove more successful than they could reasonably expect, and when
safely arrived at their respective cabbins, this Saitan, or idol, is deposited
in the most conspicuous part of their tent, or hut, in its proper box, and
covered over with the finest furs they are masters of, by way of grateful
acknowledgment of the great success they have met with through their means; and
there they are left untouched till they are grown rotten and worthless in
process of time; for they are firmly convinced, that they should be guilty of
the most heinous sin of sacrilege, should they strip them of those robes, or
apply them to any other purpose whatsoever.


; and yet the same Deceiver promoted, almost universally amongst the Heathen,
as a sacred Rite, the promiscuous use of Woman, in order to draw Men by their
natural Lusts to join the superstitious Congregations of his Worshippers.

Of this kind were the Rites of Venus among the Greeks, Romans, and (more
particularly among) the inhabitants of Cyprus The young women here used to
prostitute themselves to such strangers as came ashore, in order to raise money
for their portions. Univ. Hist. Vol. 8. p. 239.
; the shameful Rites of Astarte (whom the Heathens called Queen of Heaven) in
her temple at Byblus -- for there she had a temple as the Venus of Adonis: and
there such women as would not conform to the custom of shaving their heads, at
the annual time of lamenting Adonis, were bound to prostitute their bodies, one
entire day, for hire; and the money thus earned was presented to the Goddess.
Univ. Hist. Vol. 2. p. 342.
: Those of Thammuz " There sat women weeping for TAMMUZ," Ezekiel. viii. 14.
Whoever he was (i. e. Thammuz) the superstition of mourning over him was
universally practiced by the women in those parts, (speaking of the country of
the Phoenicians, or land of Canaan.) They began their lamentations at a stated
time: they set up their outcries as soon as they perceived the river Adonis to
appear of a bloody hue, as at certain times it did The cause of this red face
of the river was anciently known; and, by those who were not so superstitious,
as the rest of their cotemporaries and countrymen, ascribed to a kind of
Minium, or red earth, which this river brought away when it swelled to an
unusual height. It is still subject to the same appearance in the time of
floods. (For which he quotes Mr. Maundrel's Travels) Univ. Hist. Vol. 2. p 327.


. The lamentations of a mother for the loss of her only son could not be more
loud, or tender: they then proceeded TO THE SACRIFICES OF THE DEAD, having
first DISCIPLINED THEMSELVES WITH WHIPPING; (which practices hay since been
revived by THE CHURCH OF ROME, at the instigation, without doubt, of the same
spiritual Author) and the next day, pretending him to be revived, and ascended
through the air to the upper regions, they shaved their heads, as the Egyptians
did for the loss of Apis; and at Byblus, at least, those who would not comply,
were bound to PROSTITUTE THEMSELVES in the manner and for the purposes above
specified. Univ. "Hist. Vol. 2. p. 345.


(or Adonis) among the Phoenicians, Syrians, and Apostate Jews: Those of
Tanais, or Anaitis, among the Armenians In honor of this Goddess (Tanais) and
in her temple, the Armenians used to prostitute their daughters, it being a
custom among the young women to consecrate their virginity to Tanais, that is,
to her priests. Univ. Hist. Vol. 9. p. 491.


: And those of MYLITTA, the Aphrodite, or Venus of the ancient Babylonians, and
more Eastern nations, at whose shrines women of all ranks, even of the first
quality, were required once in their lives to prostitute themselves (...) (who
is called also (...) in the same page) (...) etc. Herod. Lib. 1. p. 83.
Frankfort Edit. 1608.

Herodotus also tells us, that there was a similar law at Cyprus -- "(...)."


. The impious Rites of BAAL-PEOR (whereby many of the Israelites were ensnared
by "the Council of Balaam" -- Behold THESE (said Moses, speaking of the
Midianitish women, that were taken prisoners by the Israelites) caused the
children of ISRAEL, through the COUNCIL of BALAAM, to commit trespass against
the Lord in the matter of PEOR, and there was a plague among the congregation
of the Lord. Numb. xxxi. 16.


seem to have been of the same kind For worshipping Baal-Peor (says Bishop
Patrick) into which they (the Israelites) were inveigled by the women; who
invited them to a feast, and there by their charms excited another fleshly
appetite in them: which they would not let them satisfy, unless they would both
eat of their sacrifices, and worship their idol, etc. On Numb. xxv. 18.


; and to increase the temptation to Demon worship, it appears that the women of
the first quality, among the daughters of Moab and Midian, were not exempted
from that most disgraceful and pernicious pollution, baneful both to body and
soul: for the Midianitish woman, that prostituted herself to Zimri the
Simeonite (and was killed, together with her captivated Israelitish paramour,
by Phineas) is expressly declared to have been the daughter of Zur By whose
consent, no doubt (says Bishop Patrick) she went upon this wicked design, that
by her noble garb and attendance she might the more powerfully entice the great
men of Israel to idolatry.


, who was HEAD OVER A PEOPLE, and of a CHIEF HOUSE in Midian. (Numb. xxv. 15.)
And he is mentioned afterward as one of THE KINGS of Midian. (Numb. xxxi. 8.)

Thus "the Council of Balaam" promoted the service and worship of Devils; and
this should warn us of the extreme danger of yielding to the crime of
Fornication, which, in all ages and nations, has been used as a snare to vilify
mankind, and enslave them to Spiritual Adversaries: for as THE FORBIDDING TO
MARRY is unquestionably THE DOCTRINE OF DEVILS (see p. 156 preceding) whereby
those, who devote themselves to such unnatural commands, fall under more severe
Temptation to FORNICATION When Pope Gregory VII. (Hildebrand) removed the
married Priests (in the year 1074) from officiating in the church service, and
forbid the laity to hear them say mass, the numbers of Monkish or unmarried
clergy were of course increased; and the scandal of Incontinence (the necessary
effect of "forbidding to marry") became notorious, of which even the Monk
Matthew Paris bears ample testimony -- Porro PAUCIS CONTINENTIAM OBSERVANTIBUS,
aliquibus came causa lucri ac jacantantiae simulantibus, multis INCONTINENTIAM
perjurio multipliciori ADULTERIO cumulantibus. M. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 9. And
afterward, in the reign of Henry I. (anno 1102) when Archbishop Anselm
excommunicated the married Priests (whom he maliciously called Sacerdotes
concubinarios, as if their lawful wives were no better than concubines) there
were not wanting some prudent persons (even in those dark days) to declare the
immoral tendency of the measure, as M. Paris testifies. "This" (says he,
speaking of the said excommunication of married Priests) seemed good to some,
and to others DANGEROUS, lest while they aim at PURITY greater than their
strength, they should fall into worse UNCLEANNESS Hoc autem bonum quibusdam
visum est, et quibusdam PERICULOSUM, ne dum mundicias viribus majores
expeterent, in IMMUNDITIAS LABERENTER DETERIORES. M. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 58.


; a remarkable example of which he gives us in the person of Cardinal John de
Creme Anno Domini M.C.XXV. Johannes Cremensis, Apostolicae sedis Cardinalis, de
licentia Regis Anglorum veniens in Angliam, perendinavit per episcopatus et
abbatias, et non sine magnis donariis, ad Nativitatem Beatae Marioe apud
Londonias solemn Consilium celebravit. Ubi igitur de concubinis Sacerdotum
severissime tractasset, dicens summum esse Scelus de latere surgere meretricis,
ad corpus CHRISTI conficiendum: ipse cum die illa corpus Christi consacrasset,
post vesperam fuit in meretricio interceptus: res notissima negari NON POTUIT,
dum magnum decus in summum dedecus commutavit. M. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 70.


, (Joannes Cremensis) who, after holding a council of the clergy in London (in
the reign of Henry II.) against married Priests (and therein bitterly
exclaiming against the monstrous wickedness of rising from the side of a whore,
for so he affected to call the virtuous wife of a Priest, to perform Mass) was
himself detected, that very evening, in a real brothel -- The affair was so
VERY NOTORIOUS (says M. Paris) that it could not be denied, whilst the Cardinal
exchanged great honor into profound disgrace.


, so, on the other hand, FORNICATION is reciprocal in its effects, by being one
of the most baneful obstacles to lawful and virtuous MARRIAGE, and,
consequently, to the increase and multiplication of mankind: but this, bad as
it is, is not the worst consequence of habitual FORNICATION; for men, being
thereby drawn away from the service and worship of their Creator, are gradually
led to greater crimes, whereby their minds are more and more darkened, like
those of the fallen Angels, until they are totally deprived of the Light and
Image of their Creator, and lose both temporal and eternal Happiness!

When Men are IN BONDAGE to their own Lusts, there is no doubt but that Satan
has already "got an Advantage" over them; and, by their Lusts, and unrestrained
Affections, does hold them IN BONDAGE also to himself! So that a Man cannot
free himself from Spiritual Bondage, without forsaking and repenting of his
favorite sins; for we can have no direct idea of resisting the Devil (as the
Scriptures command us) but that of resisting Evil, wherever we perceive it,
whether in thoughts, words, or actions. But when Men entirely neglect this
necessary resistance to Evil, they are sure to be led on from one vice to
another, till the two beforementioned natural and universal Principles in
Mankind, intended for their Preservation, viz. Common Sense (or Reason) and
Self-love, have lost their influence: for the Actions of of a great part of
Mankind cannot be accounted for upon any other Principle than that of a
lamentable BONDAGE to the SPIRITUAL ADVERSARY, who leads them to actions that
are clearly contrary to Self-love and Common Sense, and contrary even to any
probable gratification that might afford a Temptation to Human Beings! -- to
actions that apparently tend to their own everlasting destruction!

How common is it for Men to lift their hands against their own life, and
deliberately to exclude themselves from all possibility of repentance? It must
be allowed indeed, that real Madness, or Lunacy, and other natural distempers
and frenzies, are frequently the Principles of Action which occasion Suicide;
but we have too many instances of deliberate Self-murder, wherein no such
natural causes can with justice be alleged, though generally assigned by the
coroner's juries, through a false notion of mercy, which inclines them to adopt
the erroneous maxim, that all Men are mad who kill themselves. But nothing is
more false!

If the Brute Creation were equally liable to voluntary deaths, Suicide might
with more probability be attributed to natural causes only, as they are almost
equally liable to distempers; but herein appears a capital distinction between
Human Nature and that of Brutes. None of the BRUTE CREATION ever violate the
universal Principle of SELF-LOVE, which the Divine Author of Nature has given
them for their preservation! And though MAN is also endowed with the same
Principle, as I have already shown, yet the very BRUTES make so much better use
of it than MAN, that in them we distinguish the same Principle, even by another
name, and call it INSTINCT -- an INSTINCT of Self-preservation -- an Instinct,
because it is never violated. How are we to account for this seeming
Superiority in the BRUTES? Why should HUMAN NATURE be more subject to Depravity
than they are? MAN, who, in addition to that natural Light with which he was
endowed at the time of his Creation, has since acquired an additional power of
discernment and prudence for his preservation, even a Divine Knowledge of GOOD
and EVIL, that he may know how to refuse the EVIL, and choose the GOOD; and yet
is in general infinitely more depraved than the very BRUTES! Let any reasonable
Man consider how impossible it is, by natural Causes, to account for so
extraordinary a circumstance! That MAN, endowed with such a Superiority of
Knowledge for SELF-PRESERVATION, and also endowed with Self-love in common with
the rest of the Creation, should yet be subject to such monstrous Depravity, as
to lose all sense of both, while the BRUTES are never known to violate that
universal Principle, Self-love! except it be for a reasonable Cause, that they
risk their own Lives in defense of their young, to preserve their species, or
through gratitude, as Dogs will defend their masters, which surely is no
Depravity! To what extraordinary cause then shall we attribute this very
singular superiority of BRUTES in a circumstance so necessary to happiness. The
cause is obvious, BRUTES have never been subject to spiritual Delusions, or to
be actuated by infernal Spirits, since the time that the Serpent deceived our
first parents!

There is no instance, I believe, since that time, of BRUTES being really
actuated by evil Spirits, except one; and that was (be pleased to observe) by
express Permission of our LORD himself, viz. when the Devils entered into the
swine by the lake of Gennesareth. For it appears, that the Demons had no power
to enter into the animals, till our Lord had expressly granted it: for -- the
Devils BESOUGHT HIM, saying, If thou cast us out, SUFFER US to go away into the
herd of swine, and he said unto them, Go. THE PERMISSION being thus gained, the
animals immediately acquired a new "Principle of Action," too similar to that
which actuates poor abandoned sinners among MEN (as when the Devil entered
Judas, and led him, not only to betray his Lord, but to punish the horrid
treason with his own hands, contrary to every conceivable Natural Principle of
Action) so the unhappy Brutes by Gennesareth were no sooner subjected, like
Mankind, to the Bondage of infernal Spirits, than they immediately lost that
Principle of Self-love, which in them (because never violated but at this
particular time) is called Instinct; and by the immediate consequence of that
loss, they have afforded us a notable example of the baneful effects of
Diabolical Inspiration This particular case of the Gadarene Demoniacks has been
violently attacked by the opposers of the common received doctrine concerning
the Reality of Demoniacal Possessions. Three very eminent and learned men among
them, for instance, have endeavored to accommodate to their own notions the
evangelical history of this matter, and by the failure of their several
attempts have proved, that the literal meaning of the terms in which the
Evangelists have related the several circumstances of that case (and no less
than three Evangelists out of the four have mentioned it) cannot possibly be
set aside, without raising up in its stead the most glaring absurdities! One of
these gentlemen (notwithstanding his own errors) has very fully and justly
censured the miserable shift to which the other two learned men were reduced,
in attempting to defend their own groundless hypothesis.

A farther argument (says he) in favor of REAL POSSESSIONS, is taken from the
destruction of the herd of swine, which the DEMONS are said to have entered,
and stimulated to instantaneous madness. This case is considered by some'
(continues he) 'as a decisive proof of the power of Demons, both over the human
and BRUTAL RACE This conclusion is expressed in too general terms. The example
is indeed " a decisive Proof of the Power of Demons over the BRUTAL RACE,"
whenever Demons can obtain the Divine Permission to enter Brutes; but without
such EXPRESS PERMISSION the case itself sufficiently demonstrates, (as I have
remarked above, for otherwise the asking and granting PERMISSION to enter the
swine would be but vain circumstances,) that they have NO POWER over the Brutal
Race. The case is very different with Human Bodies, which I have already shown.


, and is thought even to have been purposely designed by Providence to refute
the opposite opinion. To enervate this argument, DR. SYKES suggested, and DR.
LARDNER strenuously contended, that THE SWINE WERE FRIGHTED BY THE TWO MADMEN,
AND SO DRIVEN DOWN THE PRECIPICE INTO THE SEA. On the other hand' (says he)
'the advocates for the common hypothesis insist upon it, (to my apprehension'
[continues he] 'with great reason,) that IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE FOR TWO MEN, HOWEVER
FIERCE, TO PUT SO VAST A HERD OF SWINE AS TWO THOUSAND INTO MOTION IN AN
INSTANT, AND TO CAUSE THEM ALL TO RUSH WITH VIOLENCE DOWN A PRECIPICE INTO THE
SEA; SWINE, CONTRARY TO THE NATURE OF MOST OTHER ANIMALS, RUNNING DIFFERENT
WAYS WHEN THEY ARE DRIVEN. But this part of the controversy might well be
spared; it not appearing from the history, that the men ever fell upon the
herd, or made any attempt to drive them into the sea. Nay, the history
expressly refers their destruction to a different cause from the behavior of
the madmen. "An Essay on the Demoniacks of the New Testament." P. 280, 281.
Many other insurmountable objections are alleged by the same ingenious writer,
and may be seen at large in pages 283 to 290, if what I have already quoted
should not be thought amply sufficient to confute the groundless supposition of
the other two learned men. And he very justly concludes thereupon -- For these
reasons (says he) I cannot accede to the opinion of those learned writers, who
ascribe the destruction of the swine to the madmen. But then (unfortunately for
himself) he immediately adds -- Neither (says he) can I see any just ground for
ascribing it to THE AGENCY OF DEMONS. P. 291.

He tells us elsewhere, that what is called the ejection of DEMONS, is the case
of a natural disorder, p. 178 and 189 -- that there never was, nor can be, a
real Demoniack,' p. 240 -- 'that the DEMONIACKS spoken of in the New Testament
were ALL either MADMEN or epilepticks, Prop. vi. p. 92. -- And, with respect to
the particular case before us, 'he asserts, that all that can he inferred from
their (the Evangelists) saying, that the Demons came out of the Men, and
entered into the herd of swine, is, that the madness of the former was
transferred to the latter, in the same sense as the leprosy of Naaman was to
cleave to Gehazi, and to his seed for ever. P. 292. He allows, however, what a
learned writer (says he) contends for, that in the case before us, the power of
imagination could have no place Dr. Warburton. p. 223, 224.
. It was never said, that the swine FANCIED themselves possessed; their
disorder, I admit (says this author) was REAL, but not therefore DEMONIACAL. So
great a miracle as that wrought upon them (continues he) can be ascribed to no
other AGENCY than that of GOD. P. 293.

Certain it is, that no created Being whatsoever, whether good or evil, visible
or invisible, can have any power to act without the Knowledge and Permission of
the ALMIGHTY; but, at the same time, we must remember, that there is a very
material difference between the AGENCY of God, and the PERMISSION of God. --
God is, indeed, said to do what he only permits, as I have elsewhere remarked
(see notes in pages 134 to 137) and he sometimes grants his Permission to very
unworthy AGENTS, both spiritual and temporal, which act with views and
intentions very opposite to the actual purposes of God, that are really
effected by their Actions; for the histories of all nations sufficiently
testify, that even the vices and malicious dispositions of the enemies both to
God and Man, are frequently permitted to act as Instruments of DIVINE VENGEANCE
(see my Tract on the Law of Retribution, pages 125, 184, and elsewhere) to
promote the eternal Justice and Glory of the ALMIGHTY, as he alone can bring
Good out of Evil.

But in all such cases, wherein there is manifest evidence of Evil in the
production of events, though the same are certainly by the Sufferance or
Permission of God, yet it would be highly injurious to truth to ascribe the
AGENCY to GOD.

In the case before us concerning the Gadarene Demoniacks, the PERMISSION and
the AGENCY are clearly distinguished by the Evangelists in the most express
terms. So the DEMONS besought him, saying, if thou cast us out, SUFFER US to go
away into the herd of swine. And he said unto them, Go. Matthew. viii. 31, 32. --
And all the DEMONS besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may
enter into them. And forthwith JESUS GAVE THEM LEAVE. Mark v. 12. -- And they
(the Demons) besought him (Jesus) that he would SUFFER THEM to enter into then
(the herd of swine) and HE SUFFERED THEM. Luke viii. 32.

Thus the DIVINE PERMISSION is clearly and distinctly declared; and the same
faithful historians leave us as little room for doubt concerning the AGENTS in
this matter: for, when they' (the DEMONS) 'were come out, they entered into the
swine: and behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place
into the sea, and perished in the waters. Matthew. viii. 32. -- And the UNCLEAN
SPIRITS went out, and entered into the swine, and the herd ran violently down a
steep place, etc. Mark v. 13. -- Then went the DEMONS out of the man, and
entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down, etc. Luke viii. 33.

Here is the most EXPRESS EVIDENCE of three Evangelists, that DEMONS, or
UNCLEAN SPIRITS, entered into the swine; and the consequences of that entering
are as clearly noted; -- the animals rushed headlong to their own apparent
destruction! A circumstance which was never known to happen, either before or
since that time, to any Brute Animals whatsoever; so that it is unreasonable to
attribute that singular deprivation of Natural Instinct in Brutes to "a Natural
Disorder," because the circumstances of it must necessarily be allowed to have
been totally unnatural to Brutes; though with mankind, alas! it is far
otherwise; for we have almost daily examples of men that are absolutely
actuated with the same violent desire to rush headlong out of the world! But
the reason of of this remarkable difference between Men and Brutes I have
already (I hope) sufficiently explained.

Now, if it is unreasonable to attribute this singular destruction of Brute
Animals to a Natural Disorder, it is much more unreasonable, nay, it will
appear profane and blasphemous to say, that it can be ascribed to no other
AGENCY than that of GOD, when we consider that the Demons, which are said to
have entered the swine, were not mere nullities, as this author supposes; not a
mere name for deceased Souls, or the Souls of DEAD MEN, but are expressly
declared by the Evangelist Mark to be UNCLEAN SPIRITS! (...). Mark v. 13. For
if the Sin against the Holy Ghost (the most unpardonable of all Blasphemies!)
consisted, as many learned commentators have supposed, in attributing the the
Works of GOD to " Beelzebub the Prince of Demons," surely it must be almost
equally dangerous to ascribe to the Agency of GOD the furious and profane
agitations occasioned by the inspiration of unclean Spirits!

But I impeach not the intention of the learned author, but only the tendency
of his doctrines: his excuse, however, is already prepared; he doubts (in page
61.) whether these epithets (EVIL and UNCLEAN, given by the Evangelists to the
SPIRITS ejected by Christ) express their PERSONAL DISPOSITIONS, or only those
EFFECTS they were supposed to produce; nay, even (...) (Caco-Demon) with him is
"not a wicked Demon!" See note in p. 61. And he tells us in another part of his
work, p. 352. that Infirmities, plagues, and EVIL SPIRITS, seem to be mentioned
only as so many distinct species of DISEASES. These suppositions (for they are
merely such) may seem at first sight to afford some excuse for his ascribing to
the Agency of GOD the declared effects of unclean SPIRITS. But his error has
still a deeper root; he has, in another tract "An Inquiry into the Nature and
Design of Christ's Temptation in the Wilderness." (2d Edit. enlarged).
, ' ascribed to the Agency of GOD' that which no less than three Evangelists
have expressly registered amongst the transactions of the Devil himself, (I
mean the temptation of Christ by the Devil in the wilderness); and he roundly
exculpates Satan from the charge There was no real Presence or AGENCY of SATAN
(says he) ON THIS OCCASION, p. 63. and that the DEVIL was not really and
personally present with Christ, but only in mental representation, and
consequently could act no part in this whole transaction. P. 62.
; and yet all this is carried on in such smooth language, and with such seeming
plausibility, that the author himself is apparently deluded by his own
sophistry and mistaken conclusions After a great deal of sophistry (in p. 50 to
59) in comparing the Evangelists account of the Temptation with several
expressions in Ezekiel and St. John relating to the Revelations of the Spirit;
(viz. as that -- 'the Spirit took me up' -- lifted me up, and took me away' --
I was in the Spirit -- 'He carried me away in the Spirit into the wilderness,'
etc.) he boldly concludes thereupon in p. 59. -- Thus (says he) from the
EXPRESS TESTIMONY of the THREE several Evangelists, it appears, that Christ was
conveyed into the wilderness IN A PROPHETIC VISION, TRANCE, or EXTACY, under
the afflatus or inspiration of the Spirit of God. -- But where has he shown the
EXPRESS TESTIMONY of the three several Evangelists, that Christ was conveyed in
A VISION? He cannot show, that even one of the three has once used any such
EXPRESSION, or even the least insinuation about a VISION on that occasion.
Though the EXPRESSIONS of Ezekiel and St. John relate to Revelations received
in the way of VISIONS; yet that does not prove that all similar expressions,
wherein the Spirit is said to lift up, or take away, must necessarily be
understood as VISIONS. If his argument proved any thing at all, it would prove
too much. Let us suppose it for once to be perfectly conclusive, and apply it
to that text in the Acts of the Apostles, where we read, that -- the Spirit of
the Lord caught away Philip, and afterward that he was found at Azotus: shall
we say then (to argue like our critic) that -- ' this 'passage of Scripture is
to be understood as a history, not of a fact, but of a VISION, p. 64; and that
it appears " from the EXPRESS TESTIMONY" of the text (though the text contains
not a single word about a VISION, TRANCE, or EXTACY, any more than the texts of
the three Evangelists do about the supposed VISION of Christ) that Philip was
conveyed in a VISION, that is, his removal was not REAL and CORPOREAL, but
SPIRITUAL and MENTAL only, p. 60. notwithstanding that the text afterward
asserts it as a FACT, that he was FOUND AT AZOTUS. The circumstances of this
transaction necessarily oblige us to understand, that the operation of THE
SPIRIT upon Philip, when he was "CAUGHT AWAY, was not visionary, but REAL; and
it will appear upon further examination, that a similar necessity of literal
interpretation is equally included in the circumstances of the other case also.
Now "if the Spirit of the Lord" REALLY "caught away Philip" from the sight of
the eunuch in the desert, and left him at Azotus, there is no absurdity in
supposing that our Lord himself might also REALLY be led" by (or in) the Spirit
into the wilderness; and that the history must necessarily be so understood,
will, I trust, be hereafter shown. That it was no unusual thing for the
Prophets of God to be actually "led" -- "carried" -- or " caught away," by --
or in -- the Spirit, is manifest from the apprehension of such a carrying by
the Spirit, expressed by the generous and faithful Obadiah, governor of king
Ahab's house, when Elijah required him to acquaint his master where he might
find him, 1 Kings xviii. 12. and the opinion of Obadiah, with respect to the
true meaning of such expressions, is certainly to be preferred before the
sentiments of the author of the "Inquiry," etc. or perhaps than the opinion of
any other man whatever, because Obadiah was not only personally acquainted with
Elijah, but also with a great many other Prophets of the Lord, having himself
preserved the lives of more than one hundred of them, by hiding and maintaining
them in caves, so that he could not be unacquainted with the occasional effects
of the HOLY SPIRIT upon Prophets; and therefore we may fairly conclude, that
his apprehension of the SPIRITS removing or carrying the Prophet to a different
place, was not without just foundation or example, or at least not without
probability, especially as we read, that Elijah was at last actually taken away
in a miraculous manner, which was equally attributed to "the Spirit of the
Lord" by the sons of the Prophets at Jericho -- lest peradventure (said they)
THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD HAS TAKEN HIM UP, and cast him upon some mountain, or
into some valley. (2 Kings ii. 16.) And they cannot surely be be supposed to
mean, that the Spirit of the Lord had taken him up in a mere trance or vision.


: for, notwithstanding the plain testimony of the Evangelists abovementioned
concerning the Agency of the Devil and Satan in that temptation; As that he was
' led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of THE DEVIL (in
which the AGENCY of the Spirit, and the AGENCY of the Devil, are clearly
distinguished.) That Jesus said unto him (the DEVIL) ' Get thee hence, SATAN:
-- and that -- 'then THE DEVIL (N. B. the appellations Satan and the Devil are
manifestly applied to the same wicked Being) ' leaves him, etc. Matthew. iv. 1
-- 11. And immediately the SPIRIT drives him (Jesus) into the wilderness. And
he was there IN THE WILDERNESS forty days TEMPTED OF SATAN, and was with THE
WILD BEASTS, etc. Mark i. 12, 13. whereby the reality of our Lord's being
driven by the Spirit INTO THE WILDERNESS is manifest: for though the Author of
the Enquiry asserts in pages 47 and 48, that it appears, by comparing the
several Evangelists together, that Christ had but just left the banks of
JORDAN, and therefore WAS STILL IN THE WILDERNESS, at the very time he is said
to have been led into it, etc. yet that part of the wilderness where John
baptized ceased in effect, though not in name, to be a wilderness, whilst it
was the place of public resort for all Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the
region round about Jordan. (Mat. iii. 5. Mark i. 5.) and therefore, even
supposing it true that Christ was still in the wilderness at the very time he
is said to have been led into it, we must necessarily understand that he was
led to some more solitary part of the wilderness than that which had been for
some time before the place of public resort for the whole nation, for
otherwise he could not well be said to be " there, in the wilderness" -- "with
the wild beasts." But when our author wrote the above assertion, that "Christ
was still in the wilderness, etc. (notwithstanding that the Evangelist Luke
assures us that he returned from Jordan (...)) he seems to have forgot that the
word return (or (...)) implies a going BACK to some other place from whence he
had lately come, and is used in that sense about thirty-four times in the New
Testament without a single exception; so that it is much more prudent to
believe the plain testimony of the Evangelist, that Christ "returned from
Jordan," that is, from the place where he was baptized, to some other place;
or, at least, was on his way to some other place; than to believe the
contradictory assertion of this critic, that he was still in the wilderness at
the very time he is said to have been led into it.


; yet our author is pleased to assert, that it is to be understood as a
history, not of a fact, but of A VISION. As such (says he) the writers of the
Gospel EXPRESSLY represent it (by which, it seems, this learned author is so
far blinded by hypothesis, as to forget the true meaning of the word EXPRESSLY;
for not one of the writers of the Gospel have EXPRESSED the least idea about a
VISION in that particular case; and yet he asserts, that they EXPRESSLY
represent it) without leaving us (says he) as the sacred penmen have been
thought to do in other instances, to collect it from the nature and
circumstances of the relation. They likewise (continues he) REPRESENT THIS
VISION (he must mean this VISION of his own imagination -- this VISION of a
VISION; for the Evangelists cannot justly be charged with any such
REPRESENTATION) not as DIABOLICAL, but DIVINE; ascribing it (says he) to the
SPIRIT OF GOD. ("An Inquiry," etc. p. 64, 65.). Now what shall we say to the
assertions of this critic, when we turn to the authority of the Evangelists
themselves, and find, that they are so far from ascribing any such supposed
VISION of a temptation to the Spirit of God, that they expressly mention the
Devil or Satan as the tempter; and do not express or represent a single word
about a VISION in that particular case: nevertheless, our Commentator boldly
adds to this monstrous perversion of evidence the following mockery of truth,
viz. -- So that to all the other arguments urged above (says he) we may add
(what we before promised to produce) THE AUTHORITY OF THE EVANGELISTS (whom he
most notoriously contradicts) and THE EXPRESS LETTER OF THE TEXT (which as
notoriously contradicts him) in confutation (says he) of those, who misconstrue
Christ's temptation, either as an outward transaction, or as an illusion of
Satan. Inquiry, etc. p. 65. See also his proposition, p. 36. -- that all the
Evangelists, who have mentioned this affair, do, IN EXPRESS TERMS, affirm, that
it passed SPIRITUALLY and IN VISION, that it was AN IDEAL OR MENTAL
REPRESENTATION; and consequently could not be an outward transaction. Now, "If
such a method of explaining Scripture," (as he himself censures others in, p.
372. of his Essay on the Demoniacks, etc.) "be allowed, language can be of no
use!"

He may think it a generous action, perhaps, to excuse, or endeavor to
exculpate an Adversary (and more especially such an inveterate Adversary as
Satan himself The author of the Inquiry, etc. in p. 3. objects, that if the
Evangelical History of our Lord's Temptation is to be understood as a narrative
OF REAL FACTS, etc. it is unsuitable to the SAGACITY and POLICY of the Evil
Spirit, etc. -- Now this would certainly be a good argument, if we could
suppose that the Evil Spirit is prompted by no other Principles of Action than
SAGACITY and POLICY; but, alas! he yielded himself a Slave, (as frail men do)
to Principles very opposite to SAGACITY and POLICY, or he would surely have
kept his first estate, and have still remained (as originally created) an Angel
of Light! And therefore with respect to the particular circumstances of
Christ's temptation EXPRESSLY ascribed to the DEVIL, or SATAN, by three
Evangelists, we may reasonably conclude, that our Spiritual Adversary was
prompted to that unequal contest with Christ by the same predominant Principles
of Evil (viz. PRIDE, ENVY, and FALSEHOOD) that originally occasioned his Fall
from GOD; but now occasioned a much more mortifying abasement to Satanical
Pride and Envy -- a Defeat by MAN! -- even by "the seed of the" (deluded and
much injured) "Woman!"


) from the most baneful and malicious attempt that was ever made against the
happiness of mankind! But this generosity (or whatever else it may be called)
to the Enemy, is productive of consequences which the learned author (had he
been aware of them) would not, perhaps, be willing to adopt: for his doctrine
of SATAN'S INNOCENCE IN THIS MATTER (viz. that " there was no real presence or
AGENCY OF SATAN on this occasion, p. 63. -- that the DEVIL was not really and
personally present with CHRIST, but only in mental representation; and
consequently could act no part in this whole transaction, p. 62. and that the
Evangelists represent this VISION -- We have as little reason to affirm, from
the style of the Gospel writers, and the manner of their expressions, that
Christ's temptations are only' "the history of a vision," as we have to affirm,
that our Lord's restoring the lame to their feet, the blind to their sight, the
lepers to their cleanness, the diseased to health, and the dead to life, was
likewise all the history of what was transacted in a vision: or that the whole
Gospel account of what our Lord did upon earth is no more than the history of
so many visions; an account of what he saw,' "in spiritual raptures, by a
prophetic afflatus and inspiration.

'Hui, quantam fenestram ad nequitiam patefeceris!' See p. 55. of a little
Tract printed in 1762, entitled, Christ's Temptations real Facts; or a Defense
of the Evangelical History; showing, that our Lord's temptations may be fairly
and reasonably understood, as a narrative of what was really transacted, etc.
wherein the reader will find many sensible and learned remarks in confutation
of the novel doctrine propagated by the Author of the Inquiry.


[as he is pleased to call it] not as DIABOLICAL, but DIVINE; ascribing it to
the SPIRIT of GOD, p. 65.) This doctrine, I say, of SATAN'S INNOCENCE, not only
deprives Christ, " the Son of MAN," of that actual triumph and victory, which
he gained in his HUMAN NATURE (for the Restoration of Mankind) over the
temptations of the Prince of this world; but it also necessarily implies, that
GOD himself was the tempter; which, if not downright blasphemy, is at least a
doctrine which is EXPRESSLY contradicted in Scripture -- for there we read,
that God cannot be tempted of Evil, NEITHER TEMPTS HE ANY MAN. (James i. 13.)
And though there are several passages of Scripture wherein God is said to tempt
As for instance, we read in Genesis xxii. 1. -- that God did TENET Abraham,
etc. when he ordered him to offer up his only son for a burnt-offering. Yet
this was not a temptation to SIN; for men if the command had been actually
executed, the Patriarch would not have sinned; but, on the contrary, would have
been justified by his faith in him that commanded, whom he knew to be the
Creator, and Lord of LIFE, and therefore the only rightful disposer of LIFE in
all creatures: but as the command was revoked just in so critical a time, as to
demonstrate the Patriarch's readiness to obey, and yet to save the life of his
son, the command was so far from being a temptation to SIN, that it was not (on
the part of the righteous Lord who commanded) even a temptation to KILL,
because the event showed, that the command was not given with any such
intention, but merely to PROVE the Patriarch's faith and obedience. The same
Hebrew root (...) here rendered did tempt, is frequently used in other passages
of Scripture, where it necessarily signifies to prove or try, as in Exodus xvi.
4. ' that I may PROVE them' ((...)) whether they will walk in my law or no. And
in Deuteronomy. viii. 16. -- that he might PROVE thee ((...)) "to do thee good," etc.
See also Judges vi. 39. Psa. xxvi. ^. etc.


, yet they are all clearly to be understood in a different sense from the
tempting mentioned by the Apostle James, which was a tempting, or being tempted
of EVIL, apparently meaning a temptation to SIN There is an expression,
however, in 2 Samuel xxiv. 1. which, without a further explanation, would be very
difficult to be reconciled with the text above cited from the Apostle James,
that God cannot be tempted of Evil, neither tempts be any Man; for the text
in Samuel seems at first sight to imply a temptation to SIN by the Almighty. --
And again, the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel: and HE MOVED DAVID
against them, to say, GO, NUMBER ISRAEL and JUDAH, as if God himself had MOVED
David to sin against Israel, which might seem to give countenance to the
doctrine of the Author of the Inquiry into the Nature and Design of Christ's
Temptation, viz. that it is represented, not as DIABOLICAL, but DIVINE,
ascribing it to the Spirit of God, -- and that there was no real Presence or
AGENCY of SATAN on this occasion, p. 63. 65. But we are happily relieved from
the difficulty by further information in another text concerning the real AGENT
in that temptation or MOVING of David; for we read in 1 Chronicles. xxi. 1. that --
SATAN stood up against Israel, and PROVOKED David (or MOVED David, for the same
Hebrew word [(...)] is used in both texts) to number Israel; and therefore,
when this text is compared with the former, wherein it is said that God moved
David, we must necessarily understand, that the moving of David was indeed
SUPERNATURAL and SPIRITUAL, but that the real AGENT (as the Action was Evil)
was the spiritual Enemy (SATAN) acting by God's Permission, as a just judgment
against Israel, and also against David himself, who at that time was probably
so much elated by his temporal prosperity and successes, as to forget that his
absolute dependence ought to be upon God, and not upon the Number of his
subjects; and certain it is, that he was off his guard, and neglected that
necessary vigilance over his thoughts and actions, which God requires of all
men; for otherwise he would have resisted the EVIL SUGGESTION of Satan, whereas
his yielding to it occasioned the imputation of sin.


. And in other passages, where the latter (or indeed any spiritual influence of
EVIL whatever) is to be understood, the Evil Spirit, or real AGENT in the EVIL,
is generally mentioned; and in that case the Agency cannot be "ascribed to the
Spirit of God," without gross absurdity, at least, if not blasphemy! even
though the SPIRIT be expressly declared to be "from the Lord," as in the case
of Saul related in 1 Samuel xvi. 14. where we read, that an Evil Spirit FROM THE
LORD troubled him.

Now this expression, if we regard the literal meaning of it, clearly implies,
not only, that the Evil Spirit came by the Permission of GOD (as it was an Evil
Spirit FROM THE LORD) but also that the said Evil Spirit was really "THE AGENT"
which troubled Saul.

The same ingenious writer has attempted to set aside the literal meaning of
this text also, by attributing Readiness disorder to "a deep melancholy," meaning
thereby a mere natural disorder, without any supernatural spiritual influence
(for if he admitted the latter as the cause of Readiness melancholy, he must
necessarily give up his whole hypothesis); but the futility of such a
supposition shall be clearly shown hereafter in a separate Tract on the Case of
Saul, as I have already extended this note to a most unprecedented length; but
as the "Law of Nature," and the Principles of Action in Man, cannot be
understood without a competent knowledge of those Spiritual Beings, with which
the minds of men are liable to be influenced, I was obliged to take some notice
of such contradictions to my general doctrine, as had been previously published
by the ingenious Author of the Essay on Demoniacks; for I must acknowledge,
that I was not aware of them, until my Tract was not only finished (as I
thought) and sent to the press, but was also more than half printed; and
therefore I hope my readers will excuse the irregularity of tacking so long a
note to so small a Tract.


, to which at all other times Mankind alone are subjected; -- for behold (says
the text) the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the
sea, and perished in the waters. Matthew. viii. 28 -- 32.

Thus the Influence of EVIL SPIRITS became, manifestly, a Principle of Action
in the poor Brutes, which overpowered their Natural Instinct of
Self-preservation, and hurried them headlong to destruction; and the cause
being known, it is very natural to conclude, when we see similar Effects in
Human Beings, that the same "Principle of Action" may perhaps have produced
them; especially if there be no previous circumstances of Distemper or
Distraction, which may leave room to hope, that another Cause might reasonably
be assigned. And as the example also shows us, that Devils have no power to
enter Brutes without express Permission of the Creator, let us, by a
comparative consideration of our own bodies, learn to be continually upon our
guard against the devices and instigations of our spiritual Enemies, always
remembering, that they need no such express Permission from God to enter the
Human Body; or rather, that God has already lodged the Power of permitting or
resisting them, entirely in the Human Breast; since we are by Nature
continually liable to receive the Inspiration of the Devil and his Angels as a
"Principle of Action," if we neglect the necessary Resistance commanded in the
Scriptures; and consequently, that they already have Permission from God to
enter all Human Beings, I mean all those as are capable of discerning between
Good and Evil, and do not reject the Evil as they ought, according to that
Divine Knowledge which we inherit from our first Parents!

This Peculiarity in our Nature is therefore apparently the reason why
Spiritual Adversaries are permitted by the Almighty to approach Mankind, though
they have no such general Permission with respect to the rest of the animal
Creation. But Man took the Knowledge of Good and Evil upon himself, contrary to
the express commands of God, as I have before remarked; and therefore we have
no right to murmur at the Permission which God has granted to the Devil and his
Angels, to take possession of all unguarded Souls, which unhappily yield to
their suggestions and temptations, without resistance or repentance; and more
especially we have no right to murmur (I say) at this Permission, if we
consider that God has given us fair warning of our continual danger and warfare
with the Principalities and Powers of Darkness; as the Holy Scriptures plainly
inform us, that we are continually liable to Satanical influence; and that the
DEVIL will get an advantage over us, if we do not resist him as we ought! -- In
this necessary Resistance, and the objects of it, consist the principal
exercise of that assumed Knowledge of Good and Evil, for which we are
accountable; viz. we know Evil from Good, and consequently know when we ought
to resist; but if we do not resist, then we have chosen the EVIL, and (in
whatsoever mode the EVIL is manifest) have given Advantage to the Devil, and
submit ourselves to his Bondage. The Choice therefore, which is set before us,
amounts to this -- Whether we will choose the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, (Mat. vi. 33.) and cheerfully assent (as the dignity of Human
Nature requires) to that perfect Law of Liberty, which Christ has tendered to
us for the regulation of our conduct toward all Mankind, as well as for
Self-preservation? or -- Whether we rather prefer the Empire of SATAN, the
spiritual Enemy, for the sake of those temporal gratifications and vile
indulgences, by which he holds Men in Bondage, through their carnal affections,
till they become personal Enemies, even to themselves!

The assumed Principle of knowing Good and Evil, will undoubtedly induce all
Mankind most readily to CHOOSE the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; (Mat.
vi. 33.) but this is not a CHOICE to be made merely once in our lives, but to
be continually maintained, or the prudent CHOICE will avail nothing! Are not
Men in general bound by a solemn oath in the outward rite of Water Baptism,
thus to maintain that prudent CHOICE which they publicly profess? And yet how
little do their practices in general correspond with such a resolution! Surely,
the Mammon of Unrighteousness, (Luke xvi. 9.) the PRINCE of this World, that
had been cast out, (John xii. 31.) the Principalities, Powers, and Rulers of
the Darkness of this World, (not FLESH AND BLOOD) with whom we have to WRESTLE,
do apparently prevail over a great multitude in every rank of life! For, this
is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men loved DARKNESS
rather than LIGHT, (a lamentable Choice! a shameful prostitution of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil! but the Apostle assigns the reason) because, (says
he) their Deeds were EVIL. For every one that does EVIL, hates the LIGHT,
neither comes to the LIGHT, lest his Deeds should be reproved. But he that
does the Truth, comes to the LIGHT, that his Deeds may be made manifest, that
they are wrought IN GOD. John iii. 19. to 21.) Let us therefore be upon our
guard, and put on the whole Armor of God, that (we) may be able to stand
against the WILES OF THE DEVIL. (Ephesians. vi. 11.)

But though Human Nature is thus liable to the Influence of the Devil and his
Angels, let us remember at the same time for our comfort, that it is equally
capable of being actuated by DIVINE INSPIRATION; and that Mankind (in the
glorious FREEDOM of the Gospel) are equally left to their CHOICE for the
admission of that supreme Good, "THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST," to regulate their
Principles of Action in all cases, as they are for the admission of the
contrary Spirit, the Prince of Darkness! For the Promises of CHRIST relating to
that heavenly Gift are clear and absolute, and are tendered to all Mankind
without exception, that they may exercise their natural Knowledge of GOOD and
EVIL, in CHOOSING, ACCEPTING, and continually CLAIMING them, if they really
prefer "the Kingdom of God" to "the Kingdom of this World!" Here is true
Freedom! a Charter of inestimable Privileges! ASK, and it shall be GIVEN YOU;
SEEK, and ye shall FIND; knock, and it shall be OPENED unto you, etc. (Mat.
vii. 7.) And again, "All things whatsoever ye shall ASK IN PRAYER, believing,
ye shall receive." (Mat. xxi. 22. and Mark xi. 24.) And after these general
promises, our Lord appealed to the common Sense of his hearers concerning the
efficacy of a son's request to a natural Father, to obtain things that are
necessary for him; and concludes thereupon -- If ye then being EVIL, know how
to give GOOD GIFTS to your Children: HOW MUCH MORE shall your heavenly Father
GIVE THE HOLY SPIRIT to them that ASK HIM? (Luke xi. 9. to 13.) So that every
Man, who devoutly, and with due Faith, claims that glorious GIFT according to
the Promise, and with such a disposition of mind as the Scriptures require,
will undoubtedly receive it, "for he is faithful that promised." Heb. x. 23.

I am well aware how uncommon it is to introduce these religious topics into
Tracts of Law, but as the Divine Influence of THE HOLY SPIRIT upon Mankind may
certainly be esteemed the supreme "Principle of Action in Man," I am obliged,
by the nature of my subject, to cite some testimonies concerning the general
effect of that heavenly Gift, to which all Mankind are entitled; for such is
the compound Nature of Man, that Enquiries concerning Human Nature, and the
Principles of Human Actions, cannot be fairly and carefully defined, without a
careful examination of this Human Claim to DIVINE INSPIRATION; nor indeed
without a careful warning also against that very opposite and foreign Spiritual
Influence, which is equally liable to alter Human Nature, and become the
Principle of Action; which I hope I have already sufficiently proved from
Scripture. And therefore with respect to the former, viz. the inestimable Claim
to Divine Inspiration which we hold in CHRIST, it is proper to be remarked,
that the peculiar and necessary Effect of that glorious and heavenly Gift, is a
total change in the Nature of Man (from his fallen State, before described, to
A NEW CREATURE) by a Regeneration or New Birth through THE SPIRIT; to which God
has also been pleased to annex (as necessary on our first public Admission to
the Claims and Privileges of the Gospel) an outward visible Sign also, or
typical Washing with Water Verily -- Verily, I say unto thee, (said our Lord to
the Jewish Ruler, Nicodemus) Except a Man be born of WATER and of THE SPIRIT,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. John iii. 5. Here are two distinct
articles expressly mentioned by our Lord, as necessary to salvation, viz. 1st.
Water, by which we outwardly profess our Faith, in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, upon our first admission into Christ's
church; for that is the Form of Baptism afterward expressly ordained by Christ
himself. (Matt. xxviii. 19.) and 2dly, the Holy Spirit, which we claim of the
Father, in the name and through the merits of the Son; so that Faith in all the
Three Divine Persons is undoubtedly necessary to constitute that Spiritual
Regeneration, without which no Man can enter into the Kingdom of God; and as
FAITH therefore must precede, we may clearly perceive the reason why WATER (the
outward sign of initiation to the public profession of that necessary FAITH)
is first mentioned.


; by which we bear a public or outward testimony of that true Faith, which
alone can qualify our claim to the promise.

Thus Man, through the privileges of the Gospel, becomes "A NEW CREATURE," (2
Cor. v. 17.) and partakes even of THE DIVINE NATURE, if his own earnest and
sincere endeavors are not wanting; for the Apostle PETER has expressly
declared, that this is one of the effects of our Lord's most gracious promises.
Grace and Peace be multiplied unto you (said the Apostle) through the Knowledge
of GOD, and of JESUS OUR LORD, according as his DIVINE POWER has given unto us
all things that (pertain) unto Life and Godliness, through the Knowledge of him
that has called us TO GLORY and VIRTUE: whereby are given unto us EXCEEDING
GREAT AND PRECIOUS PROMISES; that by these ye might be PARTAKERS of the DIVINE
NATURE (KONONOI) having escaped the Corruption that is in the World through
Lust. (2 Pet. i. 2. to 4.)

Hence the Dignity and Superiority of MAN over the rest of the visible Creation
is manifest! We not only possess, by natural Inheritance from our first
Parents, a DIVINE ATTRIBUTE (as I have already shown in the former part of this
Tract) viz. the Knowledge of Good and Evil; but also, by a right use of that
Knowledge, in CHOOSING and preferring the Good, and in REJECTING and resisting
the Evil, we are capable also ( through CHRIST) of PARTAKING " even of the
DIVINE NATURE;" so that if we consider this most extraordinary Privilege, which
is tendered to us on the one hand, and that deplorable Condition on the other
hand, which we shall probably fall into, if we neglect it (viz. the partaking
of the Diabolical Nature by the inspiration of the Devil and his Angels; to
which, as I have already shown, we are continually liable, if we do not watch,
and resist); it must be be evident that MAN is either the most glorious, or the
most miserable and base of all other Creatures!

Surely the consideration of these things ought to humble the pride of those
inconsiderate persons, who, on account of mere temporal honors, and worldly
possessions, are so lifted up above their brethren, as to forget that they have
no natural Precedence; but expect that the multitude of inferiors in fortune
should implicitly submit to the will of the worldly superior, in all things;
and who also seem to lose all sympathetick concern, all sense of fellow-feeling
for the wants and sufferings of their poor dependants, as if they sprung from a
different Stock, and were not of EQUAL DIGNITY in the SIGHT OF GOD!

But, alas, PRIDE is a Principle of Action, which occasioned the Fall even of
SATAN himself 1 Timothy iii. 6. Lest being PROUD, he fall into the Condemnation
(or Judgment) of the DEVIL. That is, (says an old Commentator) by means of
PRIDE and High-mindedness be cast into Hellfire, in manner as the DEVIL is: by
which, to my seeming (says he) it is plain what the sin of the DEVILS was,
namely, an ambitious affecting, aspiring unto, and arrogating DIVINITY to
themselves, not content with their own condition; unto which very sin the DEVIL
afterward, by the serpent, tempted Eve: ministers being young men, and young
scholars (continues this writer) by PRESUMPTION AND PRIDE, are in no small
danger of eternal destruction. Complete Christian Dictionary (1655) p. 138.


, and of his Angels, and is equally pernicious to Human Nature; for it renders
MANKIND more liable to forfeit that glorious Liberty, those inestimable
Privileges, which I have before described, than any other vice! And the reason
is plain; for THE PROUD MAN, of all others, is most liable to neglect that
"ROYAL LAW," which I have already mentioned -- that GOLDEN RULE, by which their
notions of political government, and their behavior to all Mankind, ought to
be regulated; for if he was not guilty of this neglect, he would necessarily
cease to be PROUD, he would cease to be uncharitable; he would cease to be an
Advocate for arbitrary Power, either in political Despotism, or in domestic
Slavery, both of which now unhappily prevail almost throughout the whole world!
for even the enlightened English Nation is no longer qualified to censure the
unnatural Oppression of the Peasantry and lower orders of people in Russia,
Poland, France, some Part of Germany, and in many other States, which are
commonly called Christian; since the English Government have publicly
favored, and do continue to encourage the most abominable Oppressions that
ever disgraced Mankind; I mean the AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE carried on from England,
and THE TOLERATION OF SLAVERY IN THE BRITISH COLONIES! Let the Advocates for
these Oppressions seriously and carefully consider the DIGNITY and EQUALITY of
HUMAN NATURE, which I have described, as well as their own STATE OF PROBATION
in this life, and the Forfeiture of inestimable Privileges to which they are
continually liable, and I trust they will become sensible of their danger!

But, alas, there are many other causes of failure, which tend to deprive
Mankind of that glorious and eternal Dignity, for which ALL MEN should be
candidates: for besides the ordinary temptations of worldly Pleasures This is
the Condemnation, that Light is come into the world, and Men loved Darkness
rather than Light, because their deeds were evil. John iii. 19.
, which draw the bulk of Mankind from considering the true means of obtaining
the glorious promises of the Gospel, how often are the minds of Men puffed up
with Self-sufficiency, and the PRIDE OF HUMAN LEARNING, and too often even with
SPIRITUAL PRIDE, whereby they suffer themselves to be perverted through the
deceitfulness even of their own sophistry!

How can such Men avail themselves of the glorious Promise of DIVINE
INSPIRATION, as "a Principle of Action," if they form to themselves a Mode of
believing, which is totally different from "the Faith once delivered to the
Saints?"

Perhaps they will say -- We do ask the assistance of God's Holy Spirit, and
have as good a Right as others to suppose that God's Promise is fulfilled in
us; nevertheless they must allow, that FAITH is necessary for those who ASK;
and how can Men be said to have the NECESSARY FAITH, who form to themselves
notions of God's HOLY SPIRIT, which are totally inconsistent with the DIVINE
NATURE?

How can we conceive that the SPIRIT OF GLORY and OF GOD (1 Pet. iv. 14.)
rests upon those who wickedly esteem that glorious and Eternal Spirit (Heb.
ix. 14.) no otherwise than as a created Being, and a mere ministering Spirit;
and who refuse to join in that excellent Form of Prayer, the Litany of the
Church of England, merely because THE HOLY GHOST is, therein, addressed AS GOD?
Is not this to do " despite unto THE SPIRIT of Grace? (Heb. x. 29.)

These Men may pray for the HOLY SPIRIT, indeed; but, with such erroneous
conceptions of that GLORIOUS GIFT, it is impossible that they should RECEIVE
that eternal "SPIRIT OF TRUTH," till they have sincerely repented of their
horrid blasphemies, and humbled their own haughty Spirits to receive the plain
information of the Scriptures; for if our Belief in the HOLY TRINITY were set
aside, the greatest part of those sacred Writings would become utterly
unintelligible to us; because they must, in that case, seem to contain the
grossest contradictions, as there are passages, which, without that necessary
doctrine, would surely appear inconsistent with grammar and common sense! The
doctrine of the HOLY TRINITY is expressed in the Articles and Liturgy of the
Church of England in such guarded terms, as cannot easily be misconstrued and
perverted: and though a certain set of men may pretend to found their
objections to the Church of England on some other Articles of less moment, yet
I am thoroughly persuaded, that the said guarded Terms, concerning that ONE
necessary Doctrine, are the principal causes of offense to many of those
mistaken Clergymen, who lately petitioned Parliament that they might be
exempted from Subscription It is reasonable and just, indeed, that all men
should be at liberty to teach and profess whatever religious opinions they
think most consistent with the Holy Scriptures (if we except any public
promulgation of that religion, which offends against the laws of this nation,
as a civil society, by asserting a foreign jurisdiction; and which has also
unhappily adopted some antichristian rites of idolatry, sorcery, and
enchantments!

But the petitioners cannot allege that they are not already AT LIBERTY to bear
a public testimony of their opinions; and it would be dangerous even to the
true religion, were not SUCH LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE allowed: for supposing any
material alteration should be permitted to be made in the Articles and Liturgy
of the Church of England, a great majority, perhaps, of the present churchmen
might think themselves obliged to dissent, and separate from what would then be
called, the Established Church; and would certainly think themselves entitled
to a free toleration, and a public use of the present Liturgy in their several
separate congregations.

I am therefore a sincere advocate for LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE; but when a
majority of the clergy and people have agreed upon the Articles of their Faith,
and established the same as the National Profession of Religion, (which it
surely is while the majority continue of that opinion) it is certainly no
unjust restraint nor derogation from that NECESSARY LIBERTY abovementioned,
that those who are to be admitted public teachers of the national Profession,
should be required to subscribe a declaration that they approve and will
maintain the same. For otherwise the uniformity of doctrine would be banished
from the pulpits, and the peace of congregations would be continually disturbed
by the broaching of undigested notions diametrically opposite to the general
and established opinions of the people; and even the public Form of Prayer
would be reduced and molded according to the caprice of every officiating
minister; for there can be no Church Government without a written Test of
Doctrine, couched in such terms as are least liable to misconstruction and
equivocation. The Catholic or Universal Church in every age, and in every
place, has ever had its Tests of Doctrine, or particular Creeds, to which the
assent of all persons, but more particularly the assent of the clergy, was
always required; so that the Church of England is not singular in requiring the
assent or subscription of those persons who desire to be admitted and
authorized by the National Church as public teachers and expounders of the
Christian Faith.


to the Articles of the Church of England. But as a right Faith must seal and
authenticate our claims to the inestimable privileges and immunities of the
Gospel, and as the true Dignity of Human Nature cannot be attained without the
Divine Assistance, and the Inspiration of God's Holy Spirit, whereby Men are
made partakers (as I have already shown) of the Divine Nature, some knowledge
of the latter (so far as the Almighty has been pleased to reveal himself to
us) is absolutely necessary for those Persons who desire to be acquainted with
the Law of Nature, and the Principles of Action in Man: and therefore some
observations relating to the doctrine of the Holy Trinity, are by no means
foreign to the subject and intention of this Tract. But it is an awful mystery,
that must be received more by Faith in what God has been pleased to reveal to
us, than by Human Comprehension. The finite understanding of the NATURAL MAN --
the NATURAL MAN receives not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know (them), because they are spiritually
discerned. (1 Cor. ii. 14).
cannot, in this life, conceive an adequate idea of that glorious and eternal
BEING, which in every attribute is infinite perfection! Nay, even if we had a
perfect Knowledge of that which is now so far above us, yet no language could
supply words, no rhetorical figures of comparison could be found to express
that Knowledge! and it would, therefore, remain unuttered, in these lower
Regions, like those "unspeakable Words" which were heard by the Apostle Paul
when he was "caught up into Paradise!" 2 Cor. xii. 4. For -- To whom will ye
liken God? (said Isai. xl. 18.) or what Likeness will ye compare unto him?

But a time will come, when we shall know, even as we are known For NOW we see
through a glass darkly: but then FACE to FACE: now I KNOW in part (said the
Apostle to the Corinthians) but then shall I KNOW even as also I am KNOWN. 1
Cor. xiii. 12.
. This expression to KNOW, even as we are KNOWN, implies a perfect Knowledge of
that eternal Being, which is infinite in Knowledge, in Power, in Majesty, in
Glory, etc. -- And therefore a more exalted State of Happiness cannot be
conceived, than that which a perfect Knowledge of GOD must afford! -- A
Happiness to be expected only in Heaven, when Human Nature shall have put on
Incorruption and Immortality For this CORRUPTIBLE (Body) must put on
INCORRUPTION, and this MORTAL (must) put on IMMORTALITY; then shall be brought
to pass the Saying that is written (see Isaiah xxv. 8.) DEATH is swallowed up
in VICTORY. 1 Cor. xv. 53, 54.
. But though we can neither attain, in this life, a perfect Knowledge of God,
nor that perfect Happiness which results from it, yet it is our duty to improve
and cultivate our limited Knowledge concerning the Divine Nature, as far as God
has been pleased to reveal himself to us in the Scriptures; for so FAR the
Knowledge is undoubtedly necessary to MAN, even in this life, or otherwise, we
may be assured, the Revelation would not have been made, in the Scriptures, by
Inspiration of God All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, etc. 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17.
, who cannot act in vain! Let us therefore earnestly desire to partake of that
necessary Knowledge, and let us look into the evidences of it with the most
awful reverence, and the most humble submission of our FAITH to the Word of
GOD; lest through any improper conception of the Divine Nature, we should
unhappily fall under a similar condemnation to that of Eliphaz, and his two
friends, who visited Job -- My Wrath (said JEHOVAH) is kindled against thee,
and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me (the thing that is)
right, etc. (Job xlii. 7.)

When Moses desired to see the Glory of JEHOVAH (saying, I beseech thee show me
THY GLORY) he was answered by the Almighty, Thou can not see my Face: for
there shall no Man see me and live. (Exodus xxxiii. 18.20.) We must therefore
limit our ideas of those appearances under which God revealed himself to the
Patriarchs, and to Moses; -- for the Gospel expressly informs us, that no Man
has seen God at any time (but the Evangelist immediately adds with respect to
the Messiah) the only begotten Son, which IS IN THE BOSOM OF THE FATHER, he
has declared. ((...)) That is, has clearly declared or shown the Father, or,
as Mr. Leigh has remarked upon the Word in his Critica Sacra -- id est (says
he) Nobis ad ejus veram cognitionem eruendam Dux et Auctor fuit, etc.

This is further explained by the declaration of our Lord himself -- He that
has SEEN me (said our Lord) has SEEN the Father; etc. (1 John xiv. 9.)
Believe me, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me And yet they are
distinct persons; for the LORD said unto my LORD, -- Sit THOU on MY right hand,
etc. (Mat. xxii. 44. Psa. cx. 1.)


. (ib. ver. 11.) Not that any Man has SEEN the eternal Being (or JEHOVAH) I
mean the Divine Nature Nam DEUM, ut est, nemo mortalium, quamlibet magnus,
vidit unquam nisi per aenigmata. Et quanquam MOSI, Patriarchis, et Prophetis
aliquam suorum arcanorum portionem quadantenus patefecit, tamen hanc gratiae et
veritatis plenitudinem solus unigenitus filius accepit: qui sic ad nos
descendit, factus homo, ut PER DIVINAM NATURAM semper sit in sinu DEI PATRIS.
Erasmi Paraphrasis in Evang. Joannis, p. 24.
, in which the Son of Man (even while ON EARTH) was and is in the Bosom of the
Father, (and in which now that he is ascended into Heaven) he is always with
his Church ON EARTH, though he sat down ((...), which plainly implies a
personal Residence) on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High; (Heb. i. 3.) --
for "GOD is a Spirit," and cannot be seen by Human Eyes For he is -- the King
eternal, immortal, INVISIBLE, etc. 1 Timothy i. 17. -- WHOM no man has SEEN, nor
can SEE. (1 Timothy vi. 16.) -- there shall no man SEE me and live. Exodus xxxiii.
18. 20.


, though he be not far from every one of us. For in him we live, and move, and
have our being. (Acts xvii. 27, 28.) But Christ being the Image of the
INVISIBLE GOD In whom we have redemption through his blood (even) the
forgiveness of sins. WHO IS THE IMAGE OF THE INVISIBLE GOD, the firstborn of
every creature: for by him were all things created that are in heaven, and that
are in the earth, visible and invisible, whether (they be) thrones or
dominions, or principalities or powers: all things were created by him and for
him. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is the
head of the body, the Church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the
dead; that in all (or among all) he might have the pre-eminence. For it pleased
(the Father) that in him should all fullness dwell. (Col. i. 14.19.) But the
word Father, expressed in this version, is not found in the original Greek,
though it is here supplied as the principal Substantive, which is an
unjustifiable violence to the text, especially as the proper governing
Substantive of the sentence is plainly expressed in the original: I mean the
words (...), THE FULLNESS, for it apparently means that Divine FULLNESS, which
the same Apostle in the very next chapter (9th verse) expressly calls (...),
"all the Fullness of the Godhead" -- that DWELLS, (...), bodily, or
personally, in Christ; so that both verses have the same application of the
word (...); and surely "the Fullness of the Godhead" may, with propriety, be
said to will or please to dwell in Christ, according to the literal sense of
the text, and therefore there can be no necessity to supply another Substantive
to govern the Verb (...). The literal construction of the text is sufficiently
intelligible -- (...), which is literally rendered by the learned Hugh
Broughton as follows: For that in him all FULLNESS pleased to dwell This is
copied from an old printed Bible in my Possession, with MS. Corrections copied
from Mr. Broughton's own Handwriting. At the Bottom of the Page the same Verse
is transcribed, with a little Variation in the Order, but equally literal --
viz. For all Fullness pleased to dwell in him.


. The same literal interpretation exactly has been made by the author of the
Syriac Version, which Mons. de Dieu translates as follows: Quia in ipso voluit
omnis PLENITUDO habitare. The Arabic Version also has the same rendering,
except in one word, (...) being construed PERFECTION, instead of FULLNESS --
Quia PERFECTIO omnis in eo voluit habitare.


, in whom all Fullness dwells, (Coloss. i. 15 -- 19.) for in him dwells all
the Fullness of the GODHEAD BODILY, (...), or personally! (Coloss. ii. 9.) Who
being the Brightness of his Glory, and express Image of his ( that is, God's
See the first verse of the chapter, which contains the governing Substantive to
which this relative Pronoun his plainly refers. -- GOD, who at sundry times,
and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets,
has in these last days spoken unto us by (his) Son, whom he has appointed
heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds, who being the brightness
of (his) glory, and the express image of HIS person, and upholding all things
by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on
the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. i. 1 -- 4.


Person ((...)) and upholding all Things by the Word of his Power, (Hebr. i.
3.) in him alone, therefore, who is the Image of God, (2 Cor. iv. 4.) can GOD
be seen! and in him alone could be fulfilled that ancient Promise to the Jewish
Nation, that they should SEE THEIR GOD: -- O Zion, that bring good Tidings,
get thee up into the high Mountain: O Jerusalem, that bring good Tidings,
lift up thy Voice with Strength: lift (it) up, be not afraid; SAY UNTO THE
CITIES OF JUDAH, BEHOLD YOUR GOD! Isaiah xl. 9. Compare this with the Context
in the same Chapter. The Divine Person, whom "THE CITIES OF JUDAH" are here
called upon to BEHOLD, was afterward (agreeable to this prophecy) particularly
pointed out by John the Baptist, to " the Cities of Judah For there went out to
him (John the Baptist) JERUSALEM, and all JUDEA, and all the Region round about
Jordan. (Matt. iii. 5.) -- whom John had previously forewarned, saying, --
After me comes a Man which is preferred before me: a Man whom he himself knew
not, only that " he should be MADE MANIFEST" ((...)) "to Israel." (John i. 30,
31.) But as soon as this faithful Messenger was divinely instructed concerning
the Identity of the Person that was to be made manifest to Israel (for "GOD was
MANIFEST," (or appeared, (...)) IN THE FLESH, 1 Timothy iii. 16.) See Note in p.
223. concerning the true Reading in this Text.
he proclaimed him to the Cities of Judah (the People that flocked to him from
"Jerusalem, and all Judea") saying, "BEHOLD, THE LAMB LAMB OF GOD, i. e. the
Lamb foretold by Isaiah (liii. 7.) He is brought as A LAMB to the Slaughter,
etc.
OF GOD, which takes away (or bears) the "Sins of the World." John i. 29.


, and the Office of that faithful Harbinger, or Forerunner, in proclaiming the
Advent as well as the Dignity of the Divine Person, that was to be seen, or
made manifest to Israel, is as distinctly foretold in the 3d and 5th Verses of
the same Chapter. The Voice of him that cries in THE WILDERNESS (for the
Wilderness was the appointed Place of John's Ministry) Prepare ye the Way of
the LORD ((...) "the Way of JEHOVAH") make straight in THE DESERT (once more
alluding to the Place wherein the Messiah was first proclaimed by his inspired
Harbinger) a Highway for OUR GOD! And again, the Glory of THE LORD ( i. e. "the
Glory of JEHOVAH," (...)) shall be revealed, and ALL FLESH SHALL SEE (it)
TOGETHER, etc. This latter Sentence was fulfilled only in part, when "the Voice
in the Wilderness" proclaimed the Messiah, saying, Behold the Lamb of God, etc.
-- for though Jerusalem, "and the Cities of Judah," then beheld their GOD in
the Person of the Son of God " He that SEES ME (said our Lord himself) SEES
HIM THAT SENT ME." (John xii. 45.) Compare this with 1 John iv. 9. -- because
that GOD SENT his only begotten Son into the World, etc.


, and saw the Glory " The WORD was GOD,"etc. -- All Things were made by
him,etc. -- And THE WORD was made FLESH, and dwelt among us (and WE BEHELD HIS
GLORY, the GLORY as of the only begotten of the Father) full of Grace and
Truth. John i. 1 -- 14. Agreeable to this, the Apostle Paul informs us, that
"GOD WAS MANIFEST" (or appeared, (...)) IN THE FLESH. 1 Timothy iii. 16. The
Cavils of the learned Wetstein upon this Text are clearly confuted by the very
accurate Observations of the Rev. Dr. J. C. Velthusen (printed at London in
1773) who proves, that (...) C, the proper Abbreviation for (...) (and not O C
or O) is the true Reading in this Text.


of Jehovah, that was promised to be revealed, without perceiving it, agreeable
to another Prophecy of Isaiah ( in SEEING ye shall SEE, and shall not PERCEIVE
-- in them is fulfilled the Prophecy of ISAIAH, which says, By hearing ye
shall hear, and shall not understand; and SEEING ye shall SEE, and shall not
PERCEIVE. Matt. xiii. 14. Isai. vi. 9, 10. Ezekiel. xii. 2.
, chap. vi. 9.) yet all Flesh did not then SEE him together! Succeeding
Generations, indeed, may be said to see, and also to perceive the Glory of
Jehovah, that is, with the Eye of Faith in the scriptures: but the prophecy
will most certainly be literally and universally fulfilled AT THE DAY OF
JUDGMENT, when ALL THE TRIBES OF THE EARTH shall SEE THE SON OF MAN coming in
the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and GREAT GLORY. (Matt. xxiv. 30.) For then
"THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH" will be so revealed, that ALL FLESH SHALL SEE (it)
TOGETHER, even those Men shall see, that now presume to deny the Divine Nature
of our Redeemer, and refuse to worship him; for BEHOLD, he comes with the
Clouds; and EVERY EYE SHALL SEE HIM, and they (also) which pierced him. Rev. i.
7. This is he (said the learned Bishop Chandler, speaking of the Divine WORD In
the Beginning was the WORD, and the WORD was with GOD, and the WORD was GOD.
The same was in the Beginning with God. All things were made by him; and
without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was LIFE, and the LIFE
was the LIGHT of Men. And the LIGHT shines in Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehends it not. (John i. 1 -- 5, etc.) -- And the WORD was made FLESH,
and dwelt among us (and we BEHELD HIS GLORY, the Glory as of the only begotten
of the Father) full of Grace and Truth. (John i. 14.)


, which was in the Beginning with God, and was God, and made all Things) who in
time (says he) was made Flesh, and is called JESUS JESUS, or Iesous, from (...)
Jeshouo, in the vulgar Tongue of the Jews, while our Lord was on Earth,
signifying a SAVIOR ((...) from (...) SALVATION See Psalm. xx. 7. where the
Word is used as a Noun in that Sense, (...) "By the Strength" (or in the
Mightinesses) "of THE SALVATION of his right Hand. See also Psalm. L. 23.


, from whence is formed the Verb in Hiphal, (...) he SAVED) agreeable to the
Purport of the Name JESUS declared by an Angel before the Birth of Christ: She
shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his Name JESUS, for he SHALL SAVE
his People from their Sins. (Matt. i. 21.) -- The Apostle Peter also bore the
like Testimony concerning the true Meaning of Christ's Name, when he was
"filled with the Holy Ghost" in the Presence of the High Priest and Elders of
the Jews, saying -- Ye Rulers of the People, and Elders of Israel, if we this
day be examined of the good Deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is
made whole; be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that BY
THE NAME OF JESUS CHRIST OF NAZARETH, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from
the dead (even) by him does this man stand here before you whole. This is the
stone Which was set at naught of you builders, (see Psalm. cxviii. 22. Isai.
xxviii. 16.) which is become the Head of the Corner; neither is there SALVATION
(says he, still alluding to the Name JESUS) in any other: for there is NONE
OTHER NAME under Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be SAVED. Acts iv. 5
-- 12. This Name of SALVATION therefore exactly corresponds with the Title, by
which the Prophet Isaiah proclaimed to the Jews the Advent of that Divine
Person, who was to redeem ZION. (...) etc. Say ye unto the Daughter of Zion,
Behold thy SALVATION ((...) JESHO) comes; behold, his Reward is with him, and
his Work before him, and they shall call them, The Holy People, the REDEEMED of
JEHOVAH: etc. Isai. lxii. 11, 12.


, and CHRIST, as he is indeed the Fountain of Life and Light to every Being
that partakes of either, etc. (Sermon. before the King in 1718. p. 21.) Sometimes
he is indeed treated (says the same learned Writer, p. 15.) as an Angel, or
Messenger; but even then is so distinguished from all other Angels, in respect
of Majesty, Authority, and Power, or dignified with the incommunicable Title of
JEHOVA, that they had not the least Thought of his being a mere Angel, etc.

The Eternal WORD, though he was in the Beginning with GOD, and was GOD, yet
under the Dispensation of the Gospel (that he might restore the lost Dignity of
fallen Man) became the Angel, or MESSENGER of GOD; that is, of Jehovah
Tsabaouth, the Lord of Hosts. For He was -- the Messenger of the Covenant,
foretold by the Prophet Malachi, and being also Lord of Hosts himself, he sent
another Messenger before his Face to prepare his Way -- "BEHOLD, I" (that is, I
JEHOVAH TSABAOUTH, or Lord of Hosts, see the End of the Verse) " will send MY
MESSENGER" (that is, John the Baptist Our Lord himself applied this Prophecy to
John the Baptist -- for this is (he) of whom it is written (said our Lord)
"Behold I send my Messenger before thy Face, which shall prepare thy Way before
thee. Matt. xi. 10. Mark i. 2. Luke vii. 27.


) and he shall prepare the Way before me (that is, before the Divine WORD,
which, being included in the Unity of JEHOVAH, then spoke to the Jews under the
Title of LORD OF HOSTS) " and THE LORD" ((...) THE ADOUN Adoun (...) is a Title
for a great Lord; and from thence one of the false Deities of the Phoenicians
is named ADONIS; but when the (...) is prefixed to this Title in the singular
Number, it marks, that the Person spoken of is not only a hard, but THE LORD,
by way of Eminence, as being the only supreme Lord and Governor of all things;
for it is then applicable to none but JEHOVAH THE LORD OF HOSTS, and is so
applied in no less than seven other Instances of Scripture, without one
Instance of a different Application. See Exodus xxiii. 17. and xxxiv. 23. Isai.
i. 24. iii. 1. x. 16. x. 33. xix. 4.


, or supreme Lord) "whom ye seek" (whom the Jews were taught by their Prophets
to expect) shall suddenly come to HIS If THE ADOUN, or Lord, who was the
Messenger of the Covenant, was not also Jehova, he could not be said to come to
HIS Temple.


Temple, even THE MESSENGER (or Angel, (...) Malach, from whence the Prophet
Malachi himself was also named) OF THE COVENANT, whom ye delight in: Behold, he
shall come, says the LORD OF HOSTS. Malachi iii. 1.

Thus it appears, that the Messenger (whom our Lord himself declared to be John
the Baptist) was to be sent to prepare the Way before JEHOVAH OF HOSTS, the
same Divine Being who SPOKE by the Prophet, Behold, I will send MY Messenger,
and he shall prepare the Way before ME. But our Lord himself, in referring to
this Passage, varies a little from the Original, by making a Distinction of
Persons between the Lord (or Jehovah of Hosts) who spoke, and the Divine Person
before whom the Messenger was to prepare the Way -- Behold, I send MY Messenger
before THY Face, which shall prepare THY Way before THEE. Matt. xi. 10. This
Variation from the first to the second Person, from my to thy, and from me to
thee, proves that Christ (for it cannot be applied to any other but Christ and
Jehovah) was indeed the Person before whom the Messenger, John, was to prepare
the Way; and the original Text (which undoubtedly is also a true Reading in
this Place, as it perfectly corresponds with all the ancient Versions) proves
at the same time, that the Way was to be prepared for Jehovah, who said,
Behold, I will send MY Messenger, and he shall prepare the Way before ME; and
consequently it appears, by comparing both Texts, that CHRIST is included in
the Eternal Being JEHOVAH. The Socinians endeavor to evade this Testimony of
the Scripture concerning the Divine Nature of the Messiah, by supposing that he
is called Jehovah only in a relative Sense, as being the Prophet, or Ambassador
of JEHOVAH, the Representative being named for the Principal. In like manner,
for Instance (say they) as he that despises Christ's Messengers, is said to
despise Christ himself; and he that despises him, despises also him that sent
him. Luke x. 16. And he that lied to the Apostles, lied to God. Acts v. 4.

In these and such like Passages, indeed, the relative Sense is manifest; and
it may also, in a certain degree, be admitted in the Construction of the Text
in question, but yet not so as to favor the Socinian Argument in the least
respect whatsoever.

The Prophecy, for instance, concerning the Messenger therein mentioned (of
whom JEHOVAH said, -- " he shall prepare the Way before ME) was fulfilled in
the Person of John the Baptist, as our Lord himself declared (see Note in p.
227.); and therefore, according to the Socinian Method of Argument, it might
indeed be said of those worldly Men, who despised that extraordinary Messenger
of Jehovah, and neglected the Doctrine of Repentance, which he enforced; that
they, in so doing, despised the Lord Jehovah, by whom this Messenger was sent;
and, on the other hand, those Jews, who readily received John's Doctrine of
Repentance, and attended diligently to his Instructions, may, in the like
relative Sense, be said to honor Jehovah, by paying due Respect to his
Messenger. But a mere relative Honor, such as might lawfully be given to the
Messenger of Jehovah, will bear no Comparison with the Honor that is due to
Jehovah himself: -- the latter must be supreme Honor and Worship, whereas the
former amounts only to Respect, Attention, and good Offices, for whatever is
more than these must lead to Idolatry; so that the Comparison can be carried no
farther.

A Messenger of Jehovah cannot, therefore, merely as such, be allowed the Name
of JEHOVAH, because this would entitle him also to the Honor that is due to
JEHOVAH alone; so that when Jehovah said, MY Messenger -- he shall prepare the
Way BEFORE ME, he must mean (if Language has any Use) that the Messenger was to
prepare the Way for the Advent of Jehovah himself, who could not be said to
come in the Person of any Messenger, or Ambassador whatsoever, except in one of
the Divine Persons that are manifestly included in the same Eternal BEING, and
consequently are entitled to the Honor and Worship, as well as to the Name, of
JEHOVAH! This glorious Title JEHOVAH is no where in Scripture attributed to any
Person whatever, that is not thus included in the Unity of the Godhead, neither
can it be without Blasphemy (so that the Socinian Argument must fall to the
Ground) because it is the distinguishing Title of the supreme Divine Nature! --
Thou, whose Name alone (is) JEHOVA (art) the most High over all the Earth.
Psalm. lxxxiii. 18. or it should rather be rendered, as we find it in the old
English Versions -- Thou whose Name is JEHOVAH, art ONLY (or alone) the most
High, etc.

This Division of the Sentence is agreeable to all the ancient Versions, except
the Syriac; but, in either way of translating, the Name of JEHOVAH is
manifestly given as the distinguishing Title of the supreme GOD; and cannot
therefore be attributed to any Person whatever, that is not truly God, because
the said Distinction would be destroyed, if the Name was ever used merely in
that relative Sense for which the Socinians contend: Proper Names, indeed, were
frequently formed or compounded with that Holy Name, by having it prefixed, or
postfixed, to some other Word, apparently with an Intention to distinguish the
Servants of JEHOVAH See my Remarks concerning the Names Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin,
and Zedekiah, in my Tract on the Law of Retribution, p. 47. Note 101. 109, 110,
and 166.
; but the peculiar and incommunicable Name itself has never been mentioned by
any of the Sacred Writers in such a manner, as to refer us either in direct
Terms, or by necessary Implication, to any other Persons whatsoever, besides
those of the Holy Trinity; and, on the other hand, with respect to Christ, it
is not only the Name of JEHOVAH that is referred to him by the necessary
Interpretation of several incontestable Passages of Scripture; but also the
Power And Jesus came and spoke unto them (his Disciples) saying, ALL POWER is
given unto me in Heaven and in Earth -- Go ye, therefore, and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the NAME of the FATHER, and of the SON, and of the
HOLY GHOST. Matt. xxviii. 18, 19. For as the Father raises up the Dead, and
quickens (them) even so the SON quickens whom he will. John v. 21.


, the Honor For the FATHER judges no Man; but has committed ALL JUDGMENT
unto the SON: that all (Men) should HONOR the SON, even as they HONOR the
FATHER. He that HONORS not the SON, HONORS not the FATHER which has sent
him. John v. 22* 23.
, and the Glory of Jehovah And now, O Father (said our Lord Jesus) GLORIFY thou
me with thine ownself (and surely to be GLORIFIED with the Father himself, is
the same Thing as to partake of the GLORY OF JEHOVAH) with the GLORY which I
had WITH THEE before the World was. John xvii. 5.


: so that the Socinian Evasion beforementioned is as vain as it is wicked,
whenever it is applied to those Passages of Scripture wherein the Name of
Jehovah is attributed to that Divine Person, in whom dwells all the Fullness
of the Godhead, bodily! Coloss. ii. 9.

(...) JEHOVAH is the proper and essential Name of ALMIGHTY GOD, because it, in
some degree, expresses his Eternal Being or Existence, being a compound Word,
including different Tenses or Times of the Hebrew Verb (...) TO BE, or rather
(as it is the Preterperfect Tense, signifying HE WAS; from whence is formed
(...), the Participle as well as Present Tense, signifying, according to
Buxtorf's Concordance (though, in his Lexicon, he renders it also FUIT) ens,
es, est; being, thou art, he is; to which the prefixed (...), the true
characteristic Letter of the Future Tense ( shall or will be), is also added to
form the Word (...) JEHOVAH; so that this mysterious and awful Name seems to
express ALL TIME, or ETERNITY; as if, for instance, a Word was to be compounded
of three different Tenses of the Latin Word esse, to be, viz. est, fuit, erit
(he is, -- he was, -- he shall be) yet so as to include the Sense of all three,
and consequently to denominate in one single Word an Eternal BEING, that ever
did, and ever will, EXIST. -- And such seems to be the Interpretation of the
glorious Name JEHOVAH, according to the Opinion of the most learned in the
Hebrew Tongue, viz. "ENS, EXISTENS AB ETERNO ET IN ETERNUM," A BEING existing
from all Eternity and for ever. This is the Sense which the learned Buxtorf has
quoted in his Hebrew Lexicon from the famous Jewish Rabbin Aben Ezra, and he
cites also the Authority of several others of the most eminent Jews much to the
same Purpose Amongst the rest he cites a Commentary on some of the Psalms, viz.
x. 16. and cxlvi. 9. etc. from a Jewish book, wherein this sense is plainly
laid down. -- Textus his docet de DEO CREATORE, quod est PRIMUS sine Principio,
et ULTIMUS sine Fine. Sic Nomen ejus testatur de tribus existens^is, seu
existendi differentiis ejus, (...) PRAESENTI, PRAETERITO, et FUTURO, quae sunt
literae ipseu smet Nominis appropriati (...) et profort tr^s (...) EXISTENTIAS
EJUS, Voce Regui et Dominii, ad indicandum, quod ipse regnat et gubernat in
Mundo fuo, secut Rex regit serv^s fuos. The Text here teaches concerning GOD
THE CREATOR, that he is FIRST without Beginning, and LAST without End. So his
Name bears witness of his three Existences, or Differences of Existing, (...)
in the Present, the Preter, (or Past) and the Future Tenses, which are the
letters of his own appropriated (or peculiar name) (...) and proclaims his
three Existences (...) with the Voice of Rule and Dominion, to denote that he
reigns and governs in his World, as a King governs his Subjects.


. But, as the Words of Holy Scripture are best interpreted by Holy Scripture,
he refers us at the same time to a Text in the Revelations, wherein the Apostle
John addresses the Seven Churches of Asia in the NAME OF GOD, which is there
clearly expressed in the same Sense that the Jews (as I have before remarked)
have attributed to the Hebrew Name JEHOVAH, and seems therefore to be the true
Interpretation of it. -- " Grace be unto you, and peace from him, which IS, and
which WAS, and which IS TO COME, (...). Rev. i. 4. In like manner the four
Beasts, or rather living Animals (...) (which in the Revelations represent the
Hosts or Armies of Israel, by the Figures of those Animals which were borne on
the Standards of the four principal Tribes in their Encampments round the
Tabernacle) rest not Day and Night, saying, "Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty; which WAS, and IS, and IS TO COME, (...). Rev. iv. 8. So also the
four and twenty Elders, which sat before God on their Seats, fell upon their
Faces and worshipped God, saying, We give Thanks to thee, O LORD GOD ALMIGHTY,
which ART, and WAST, and (WILT BE, or) ART TO COME, etc. (...). Rev. xi. 16, 17.

This Eternal BEING, which has been pleased to reveal himself to us in such
clear and comprehensive terms, is the same Almighty JEHOVAH that is mentioned
in Genesis (xiv. 22.) in the highest terms of Power and Glory -- the Lord (in
the original JEHOVAH) the most high God, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth. The
same Eternal BEING, or JEHOVAH, is also called "JEHOVAH, GOD OF ISRAEL," (...)
in Exodus xxxii. 27. Joshua vii. 19. xiii. 33. xxii. 24. Judges xi. 23, etc. He
is also called JEHOVAH, the GOD OF GODS, ((...)) in Joshua xxii. 22. where we
find this glorious title twice expressed in the same sentence: The LORD (or
JEHOVAH) God of Gods; THE LORD God of Gods, he knows, etc. And therefore, as
the LORD, or JEHOVAH, mentioned in these several texts, is undoubtedly THE
SUPREME GOD, we are naturally led to attribute the same Divine Excellence, and
supreme Dignity, to the glorious name JEHOVAH, wherever it occurs in other
parts of Scripture, because there is but ONE JEHOVAH! " Hear, O Israel! --
(...) -- "The Lord," (or Jehovah) " our God (is) ONE LORD" (viz. ONE JEHOVAH --
(...) and thou shall love JEHOVAH with all thine heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy might, etc. (Deuteronomy. vi. 4, 5.) Thus the Unity of God is proved
to be an indispensable article of our Faith! And yet we are equally bound to
acknowledge, that Three Divine Persons are comprehended in that One, Almighty
and Eternal BEING, or JEHOVAH! -- because this glorious name is clearly
applied, in the Holy Scriptures (even in those of the Old Testament) to as many
distinct Persons; who are, therefore, to be esteemed equal, or ONE, with the
supreme God, as Jehovah our God (is) ONE JEHOVAH! Deuteronomy. vi. 4.

For though we are bound to acknowledge a manifest subordination with respect
to the merciful and gracious OFFICES of Redemption and Sanctification, whereby
Two of the Divine Persons are particularly distinguished in Scripture, yet we
are obliged, at the same time, to believe, that the several Divine Persons are
of One and the same Eternal and Almighty EXISTENCE with respect to that
incomprehensible BEING, or Divine Nature, wherein their Unity consists; because
the contrary Doctrines of those Men, who deny that OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, and
THE HOLY GHOST, partake of the same Divine Nature with THE FATHER, do
manifestly and necessarily include the supposition of a superior and inferior
order of DIVINE EXISTENCE (for that all the Three Persons have Divine Existence
and Divine Attributes cannot be denied, without setting aside the whole tenor
of the Holy Scriptures) which EXISTENCE could not, without absurdity, be called
one and the same, but must necessarily be esteemed several, or separate and
different, if the least degree of Inequality with respect to the Divine Nature
be admitted; and therefore such Doctrines are totally inconsistent with our
indispensable Belief in the Unity of God, whatsoever those mistaken people, who
call themselves Unitarians, may think!

But a due regard to these two necessary distinctions, viz. the Equality and
Unity (as there is but ONE GOD) of the THREE Persons with respect to their
Divine Nature, and the revealed subordination of TWO of them with respect to
the merciful and gracious OFFICES of Redemption and Sanctification, whereby
they are personally distinguished and made known to us in Scripture; -- a due
regard to these two necessary distinctions (I say) and to the proper
application of the several texts by which both are respectively proved, will
clearly demonstrate (at least to all Men who sincerely ask and seek the
knowledge of Truth, as Christ has commanded) that the Doctrine of the Trinity,
as received by THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND, is strictly consistent with the
indispensable doctrine of Scripture beforementioned concerning the Unity of
God.

That there are Three distinct Persons in that One ETERNAL BEING, or JEHOVAH,
is clearly revealed in Scripture; for each Person is occasionally mentioned
under that distinguishing and peculiar Name of the Supreme God.

And first, with respect to the first Divine Person in the Holy Trinity. -- In
the 42d chapter of Isaiah, the Divine Person, whom the Prophet represents in
the 6th verse, as speaking in the name of Jehovah, is clearly distinguished
from the MESSIAH and HOLY SPIRIT; and though it may seem a needless work to
produce any proofs that the Almighty Father, THE GOD and FATHER of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST Ephesians. i. 3. See also the 17th verse -- The God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory. Our Lord himself likewise said unto Mary
Magdalene, after he arose from the dead, -- Go to my BRETHREN, and say unto
them, I ascend unto MY FATHER, and YOUR FATHER, and to MY GOD, and YOUR GOD.
John xx. 17.


, is truly JEHOVAH (which no Man will deny) yet I propose to recite some parts
of this chapter, in order to prove the clear distinction of Persons and their
Offices, as revealed even in the Old Testament. -- Thus says GOD JEHOVAH, he
that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth the
earth, and that which comes out of it; he that gives breath unto the people
upon it, and Spirit to them that walk therein: I JEHOVAH have called THEE
(apparently meaning the MESSIAH) in righteousness, and will hold thine hand,
and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, and for a light
of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the
prison, (and) them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. I AM JEHOVAH;
that (is) MY NAME: and MY GLORY WILL I NOT GIVE TO ANOTHER, etc. Isai. xlii. 5
-- 8. These words of JEHOVAH are manifestly addressed to the MESSIAH, as a
distinct Person, in his mediatorial Office of Redeemer; and the Divine Person,
who thus addresses the Messiah, is manifestly the same that speaks in the first
verse of the same chapter, and mentions both THE MESSIAH and the HOLY SPIRIT in
that one sentence as distinct PERSONS FROM HIMSELF, and under different and
distinct characters or offices of the Christian Dispensation, suitable to the
nature of that extraordinary prophecy concerning the future Redemption of
Mankind! Behold, MY SERVANT, (apparently meaning the MESSIAH in his state of
humiliation as SON OF MAN) whom I uphold; mine Elect (in whom) my Soul
delights; I have put MY SPIRIT upon HIM: (Here the Three Persons are
distinctly expressed) He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles! He shall
not cry, not lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. A bruised
reed shall he not break, etc. Isai. xlii. 1 -- 3. Thus we find the Office of
THE MESSIAH particularly described in this chapter, as well as the descent of
THE HOLY SPIRIT upon HIM: and this is expressly foretold by the Lord JEHOVAH,
who speaks of himself distinctly from the other two; so that the distinction of
Persons is hereby clearly manifested.

Secondly, The glorious Name of the supreme God JEHOVAH, is plainly attributed,
in the 40th chapter of Isaiah, to the Second Person, the Divine Messiah, in his
Pastoral Office, as Shepherd of Israel.

The peculiar Harbinger or Forerunner of the Messiah is described and foretold
in the third verse, as the Forerunner also of JEHOVAH -- The voice of him that
cries in the wilderness, Prepare ye the WAY of the LORD ((...) THE WAY OF
JEHOVAH) make straight in the desert a HIGHWAY for OUR GOD. (3d verse).

And John the Baptist, in whom alone that prophecy could be fulfilled (as I
have shown more particularly in my Tract on Prophecy Remarks on several very
important Prophecies. 2d Edit. p. 177 -- 189.
) declared the identity of the Divine Person whom he preceded in the world, and
whose WAY he was SENT TO PREPARE, saying, -- He that comes after me is
mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: He shall baptize you with
the HOLY GHOST, and with Fire. Matt. iii. 11. -- And afterward, when the
Priests and Levites (those that were sent from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art
thou) questioned him, saying, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that
CHRIST, nor ELIAS, neither that PROPHET? John answered them, saying, I baptize
with water: BUT THERE STANDS ONE AMONG YOU, whom ye know not; HE IT IS, WHO,
COMING AFTER ME, is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to
unloose. etc. John i. 19 -- 27. And "the next day" he bore full and express
testimony to the identity of the Divine Person that came after him, whose WAY
HE PREPARED -- John sees JESUS coming unto him, and says -- BEHOLD THE LAMB
OF GOD, which takes away the sin of the world. THIS is HE of whom I said,
AFTER ME COMES a MAN, which is preferred before me; FOR HE WAS BEFORE ME. And
I knew him not: but that he should be MADE MANIFEST to ISRAEL, therefore I am
come baptizing with water. And John bare record, saying, I saw THE SPIRIT
DESCENDING FROM HEAVEN like a dove, and IT abode upon HIM. And I knew him not:
but HE that sent me to baptize with water, THE SAME said unto me (now mark
again the clear declaration of Two Divine Persons, separate and distinct from
the Divine Being now represented as speaking) UPON WHOM thou (John) shall see
THE SPIRIT descending and remaining on HIM, the same is HE which baptizeth with
THE HOLY GHOST. And I saw (said John) and bare record that THIS is the SON OF
GOD. Again, the next day after, John stood, and two of his disciples; and (bore
the like testimony to the Divine Person, WHOSE WAY he was sent TO PREPARE; for)
looking upon JESUS as he walked, he says -- BEHOLD THE LAMB OF GOD! John i. 29
-- 36. Thus John declared himself to be the peculiar, Harbinger (as I have
said) of the SON OF GOD; so that the name of JEHOVAH (whose WAY, in the
prophecy, he is expressly said to prepare) must necessarily be attributed to
the Messiah, to whom afterward this long expected preceding Messenger did
personally apply the prophecy.

THE VOICE OF HIM that cries in the wilderness, Prepare ye THE WAY OF JEHOVAH,
make straight in the desert a highway for OUR GOD, (Isai. xl. 3.) And the
Divine Person, for whom THE WAY was to be thus prepared, is so distinctly
described by his Advent, and Pastoral Office, in the 9th, 10th, and 11th verses
of this chapter, that the proper application of the glorious titles therein
mentioned, cannot be mistaken, at least by those who sincerely seek after
truth! O Zion, that bring good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain:
O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength: lift
(it) up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, -- BEHOLD YOUR GOD! To
the fulfilling of which in Christ the Apostle Paul (as I have already shown)
bears ample testimony, saying, GOD is as manifest in the flesh, etc. 1 Timothy
iii. 16. -- I have just now seen a new edition of the Greek Testament, by the
Rev. B. HARWOOD* D. D. published at London, in the present year 1766, wherein
(contrary to the general evidence of the best Greek MSS.) the editor has boldly
ventured to alter the common reading of this text, and to insert the masculin^e
article (...), (This) instead of the substantive (...), God. Had he added an
accent to the article, in order to render It neuter; viz. (...), instead of
(...), ( which instead of this) his NEW TEXT would have seemed rather more
probable; because the article (which at present is without a Substantive)
would, in that case, have agreed with the preceding noun substantive of the
neuter gender ((...)), and would also have been countenanced by the neuter
relative (quod) in the Latin Vulgate. This remark proves, also, that accents,
in some particular cases, are essential to the meaning, and proper construction
of the text, and should not, therefore, be indiscriminately omitted, together
with such as are useless, as they are in this edition. But, indeed, in either
way (with or without the accent) the expression, which he has introduced into
the text, is entirely unscriptural! Even, if (to make the best of it) we should
suppose that the accent is to be understood, and the article to be construed as
if written (...) -- what sense can be made of it? A MYSTERY -- which was
MANIFEST in the flesh! -- received up into glory! -- A parallel reading cannot
be found in Scripture!

As the Editor, in his Preface, appeals to God concerning his Sincerity and
Integrity, it would be uncharitable to call either of these in question; but we
are not bound to think so favorably of his Discretion! -- The zeal, which he
has expressed at the end of his Book for the opinions of the Polish Brethren
(who were most notorious SOCINIANS) gives us too much cause to suspect not only
his want of Discretion, but also such a want of Moderation and Impartiality, as
must render him totally unfit to DECIDE for us in the choice of controverted
readings of the Holy Scriptures; and consequently the preference which he has
paid to his own Opinion, by arbitrarily taking upon himself to alter Records
The particular alteration, of which I complain at present, has but one single
Greek manuscript to support it; and, what is worse, even this single MS. is not
a credible Evidence! For it has been condemned in the strongest terms by the
most eminent critics and judges of ancient MSS. in Europe. So that Dr. Harwood
has been particularly unfortunate to adopt this very exceptionable evidence, I
mean the CLAROMONTAN MS. of St. Paul's Epistles, together with the old
CAMBRIDGE MS. of the Gospels and Acts, as the principal authorities to justify
his presumption in altering the Sacred Records! He tells us, in p. vii. of his
Preface -- that they approach the nearest of any manuscripts now known in the
world to the original text of the Sacred Records -- that is, he must mean, in
HIS OWN OPINION; and accordingly in this edition (says he) these have been most
commonly followed. But the famous FATHER SIMON, speaking of the Claromontan or
Clerment MS. together with that at St. Germains, (which seems to have been only
a continuation or part of the two former in a third volume) says -- MAGNUM
ILLUM ERRATORUM, quae inveniuntur in duobus illis exemplaribus, in textu
Graeco, ESSE INDICIUM A LATINIS ESSE SCRIPTA, QUI GRAECAE LINGUAE COGNITIONEM
NULLAM HABUERE. With respect to the Cambridge MS. the learned Dr. Mill calls it
-- "CODICEM PESSIMI COMMATIS;" and asserts, that it contains many things that
are not Greek, and that the writer has "presumed to add, substract, and change"
(this includes all the various modes of corrupting Evidence, and ALTERING
RECORDS) an infinite number of places ("pro arbitrio," says he) according to
his own caprice! The very learned GER. VAN MASTRICHT, Syndic of Bremen, asserts
the same thing only in different words -- Prolixior fui de hoc Codice (says he,
speaking of the Cambridge MS.) quia omnes Paginas implet, addit, detrabit,
mutat pro lubitu, omniumque Codicum varias lectiones superat, ideoque NON
MULTUM EI TRIBUENDUM, quod ex examine hoc critico affatim patet, etc. The same
learned writer informs us, that M. Le Clerc esteemed it a mere paraphrase.
("JOH. CLERICUS in Art Critico hunc habet PRO PARAPHRASI," etc.) and that
Father Simons, and the learned Fr. Gomarus held it cheap. -- Non magnam
auctoritatem tribuunt. And in the Preface to Wetstens 2d Edition of the Greek
Testament in 12mo. the character of the Cambridge, Clermont, and St. Germain
MSS. is summed up in such terms, at must oblige us to think very indifferently
of Dr. Harwood's CHOICE of MSS. and much worse of his PRESUMPTION, in daring to
ALTER THE SACRED RECORDS upon such miserable evidence! -- A Librario Latino
Scripti (says the Author of the abovementioned Preface) et ad versionem
Italicam corruptam TAM INEPTE atque IMPERITE DEFORMATI atque DEPRAVATI SUNT, UT
RISUM MOVEANT, qui ILLIS locum dignitatemque genuinorum Codicum Graecorum
conciliare voluerunt. -- Now what must we think of Dr. Harwood's assertion,
that these MSS. approach the nearest of any MSS. now in the known world to the
original text of the Sacred Records! If my readers have not leisure to consult
the works of the several authors which I have quoted on this occasion, they may
see the evidence collected in the Prolegomena to the last mentioned Edition of
the Greek Testament. And I hope these few hints will induce the learned among
the Clergy (who ought to be the Guardians of the Sacred Text) to examine Dr.
Harwood's New Text with care and accuracy, to point out its errors to the
public, and to consider of the best means to prevent any ill effects from so
dangerout an attack upon the Sacred Records!


of so much importance, must, at best, be esteemed a dangerous presumption! His
indiscriminate and unjust censure of the doctrine of Athanasius (which he has
been pleased to entitle -- The Athanasian Impiety of Three Coequal Gods, Vol.
II. p. 284.) is a sufficient proof of the Intemperance of his Zeal, and the
Hastiness of his Conclusions; so that THE ADVENTUROUS VARIATIONS which he has
made from the common Greek Text will gain but little credit by his authority!
Athanasius was a steady assertor of THE UNITY OF GOD, and could not, therefore,
be guilty of so shocking an "IMPIETY," as to assert the Existence of Three
Coequal Gods! And if the Doctor meant only to reflect, on the Confession of
Faith, which is commonly called The Athanasian Greed, his censure is equally
unjust; for the Unity of God is clearly and expressly taught and declared
therein; neither does it contain any assertions whatever concerning the Divine
Nature of the Son and the Holy Ghost, which are not strictly warrantable
according to the clearest evidence of Holy Scripture -- by the evidence even of
incontrovertible texts! So that the charge about "Three Coequal Gods," seems
to be founded only in the indiscriminate Zeal of him who published that unjust
assertion against Athanasian! It distresses me much to speak so freely of this
Gentleman's performance; but the cause of Truth compels me; insomuch, that if
he had even been one of my own Brothers, whom I dearly love, I must have done
just the same! The opposers of the common reading ((...), etc) in the
abovementioned text, are so clearly confuted by the Rev. Dr. Veithusen, (as I
have before remarked in p. 223.) that I must request my readers, if they have
any doubts concerning the true reading of this passage, to consult his
judicious and accurate remarks upon it. They are published at the end of a very
thin Octavo pamphlet, entitled -- Observations on varius Subjects. -- Printed
for C. Heydinger, in the Strand. 1773.


. And again, For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Coloss.
ii. 9. So the Apostle John, " The WORD was GOD," etc. "All things were made by
him," etc. And the WORD was made FLESH, and dwelt among us, and we BEHELD HIS
GLORY, the GLORY, as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth. John i. 1 -- 14. See notes in p. 222 -- 224. But to return to the
Prophet.

Behold (said he) the LORD GOD (that is, ADONI JEHOVAH, or the Lord Jehovah)
WILL COME with strong (hand), and his arm shall rule for him: behold, HIS
REWARD (is) with him, and HIS WORK before him. HE shall feed his flock LIKE A
SHEPHERD (the peculiar Office of the Messiah, who himself declared, I am the
GOOD SHEPHERD. The GOOD SHEPHERD gives his life for his sheep, etc. John x.
11.) "HE" (said the Prophet) shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry
(them) in his bosom, (and) shall gently lead those that are with young. (Isai.
xl. 3 -- 11.) It is surely the REWARD and WORK of the MESSIAH in his Pastoral
Office, that are here so distinctly foretold; and therefore the Adjective HIS,
and the Personal Pronoun HIM (both expressed by (...) in the Original, and so
often repeated in these verses) as also the Personal Pronouns HIM and HE must
necessarily be referred, by the plainest rules of grammar, to the Personal
Nouns (THE LORD GOD, or ADONI JEHOVAH) which immediately precede them, and by
which the Holy Spirit has marked the supreme or equal Divinity of the Messiah
with the Father, and that he is really JEHOVAH and GOD beyond all possibility
of contradiction!

Before the Incarnation of the Divine Logos, or WORD OF GOD (that is, before he
was MADE FLESH, and dwelt among us John i. 14.) God revealed himself to the
children of Israel, not only by the name of (...) (JEHOVAH, signifying Eternal
Existence, by including the characteristical letters of the Present, Preterite,
and Future Tenses, as I have already shown) but also by the name of (...)
A-hi-ah, which is the same verb of Being or Existence, with the sign only of
the Future Tense, signifying, I WILL BE In the common English version this name
is rendered, I AM -- God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus
shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM, has sent me unto you. (Exodus
iii. 14.) The literal meaning, however, of the word (...), as it is in the
future tense, is, I WILL BE, and so indeed it was rendered in the older English
versions -- I have a copy printed in 1549, wherein the word is rendered, I WILL
BE. And the translator has added the following remark upon it. This
traunslation (says he) follows the Hebrew, which has, I WILL, for that
which is in all Latten traunslations, SUM, I AM. But which way soever it be
taken, it signifies, that God only HAS BEEN, IS, and SHALL BE, and has his
being of himself, and that all other things have their being of him. Stryve
not therefore for the matter, but let it be, WAS, AM, or WILL BE, al is one
matter.


: and when the Son of God was personally present on earth, in our HUMAN NATURE,
as a Descendant of Abraham, he asserted his pre-existent state, by giving
himself a similar title of Eternal Existence, though in a different Tense; for
he used the Present Tense alone, without any characteristical Letter of the
Future, (...), I AM, instead of, I WILL BE (as the promises respecting his own
Person were accomplished by his PRESENCE, which, as he himself also promised,
will continue to the end of the world Lo, I am with you always (even) unto the
end of the world. Matthew. xxviii. 20. For where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Matthew. xviii. 20. How the
Son of God, who was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God,
(Mark xvi. 19.) and will continue to sit there till all enemies are subdued or
put UNDER HIS FEET, as the Holy Ghost declared by David, saying, The Lord said
unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy
FOOTSTOOL. (Psa. cx. 1.) How the Son of God (I say) whose personal residence in
heaven is so expressly declared, may yet be said to be always present on earth
with his Church, will be more easily explained when I come to speak of the
Divine Nature and Existence of the HOLY SPIRIT in the Eternal Being, JEHOVAH.


Before Abraham was, (said our Lord) I AM. -- (John viii. 58.) This expression
(if the occasion of its being made be duly conconsidered) cannot be made to
accord properly with its context in any other sense than as a reference to
Christ's Eternal Existence; and, as such, it manifestly corresponds with the
meaning of the glorious Name JEHOVAH.

The purpose of our Lord's argument was, certainly, to declare his pre-existent
State of Glory, in answer to the Jews, who said -- Art thou greater than our
Father Abraham, which is dead? etc. (John viii. 53.) -- Thou art not yet fifty
years old, and have thou seen Abraham? So that his immediate answer -- Before
Abraham WAS, I AM, must necessarily be understood in the sense which I have
mentioned.

He had, a little time before, told the Jews, who disputed with him, I
proceeded forth (said he) and came from God. (v. 42.) The expression in the
original Greek has a much deeper meaning; it is not merely "from God," as in
the common English translation; but out of God, EK (...) -- "OUT of GOD, I
PROCEEDED FORTH," etc. which is much more expressive of that procession, which
is commonly called the Eternal Generation of the SON, -- of that Divine Person,
who is in the Bosom of the Father (John i. 18.) and whose GOINGS FORTH (have
been) from of old, from everlasting. Micah v. 2. Had not these Jewish
unbelievers been blinded by their own wickedness, and worldly desires, they
would have understood by the Prophets, that their Messiah, though he was to be
a Descendant of Abraham, according to the promises, was yet to be one who had
ETERNAL EXISTENCE, and consequently must be entitled to the incommunicable name
of Eternal Existence, JEHOVAH; for he, whose goings forth (have been) from of
old, from everlasting, was the same of whom the Prophet Micah says, that he
should come out of BETHLEHEM EPHRATAH, "to be Ruler in Israel," viz. that
Ruler, of whom the same Prophet foretold, that they should smite the JUDGE OF
ISRAEL with a rod upon the cheek. Compare the first and second verses of this
chapter. And in the fourth verse the name of Jehovah is manifestly attributed
to the same Divine Person. -- And he shall stand and feed (that is, "as a
Shepherd," compare with Isaiah xl. ii.) in the strength of JEHOVAH, in the
Majesty of the NAMEof JEHOVAH his God. Compare this also with the Prophecy of
Jeremiah concerning THE BRANCH from, the stock of JESSE -- And this (is) HIS
NAME, whereby he shall be called, JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. Jer. xxiii. 6.

His Eternal Existence, and Almighty Power, as GOD, were plainly declared by
the Psalmist -- Thy throne, O GOD, is for ever and ever. (Psa. xlv. 6.) This,
as the Apostle Paul testifies, was said of the SON -- But unto the SON (he
says) Thy throne, O GOD (is) FOR EVER AND EVER: a Scepter of Righteousness
(is) the Scepter of thy Kingdom. Thou have loved RIGHTEOUSNESS (which accords
with the Name of the Divine Branch, JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS) and hated
iniquity; therefore God, (even) thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. (Heb. i. 8, 9.)

In the latter part of this sentence, indeed, the Prophet manifestly alludes to
the inferior Nature (THE NATURE OF MAN) which this Divine Person was to assume,
for the Angels were not HIS FELLOWS; but Men: -- it was Human Nature alone that
was to be exalted and restored by that peculiar union with the Divine Nature in
Christ, whereby all Mankind are rendered FELLOWS and BRETHREN to him that is
ready to judge the quick and the dead, (1 Pet.iv. 5.) and may thereby become
(if their own negligence and wilful abuse of God's gifts do not prevent them)
even FELLOW HEIRS (Ephesians. iii. 6.) Heirs of God, and JOINT HEIRS with Christ:
(Romans viii. 17.) who is the Heir of all things, Heb. i. 2. -- For verily he
took not on (him the nature) of ANGELS; but he took on (him) of the SEED of
Abraham. Heb. ii. 16. And accordingly the same Apostle calls him the firstborn
among many BRETHREN, Romans viii. 29. and informs us also, that it behoved him to
be made like unto (his) BRETHEN, that he might be a merciful and faithful High
Priest in things (pertaining) to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of
the people. Heb. ii. 17. But the Apostle, nevertheless, amply proclaims the
Eternal Existence and Divine Nature of that Person, mentioned in his quotation
from the 45th Psalm, who was to be anointed above HIS FELLOWS; for he
immediately afterward quotes another Psalm (viz. cii. 25 -- 27.) to assert the
ETERNAL DIGNITY AND POWER of the same Person -- And thou, LORD Lord (...) --
The Apostle manifestly applies to Christ the title of (...) (Lord) which is the
usual Greek rendering of the Hebrew title, JEHOVAH, the essential name of that
Eternal BEING, to whom the Prophet, in the ciid Psalm, here quoted, really
addressed himself, as appears by the first verse (...) "JEHOVAH, Hear my
prayer," etc. And in the 24th verse, which immediately precedes the Apostle's
quotation, the Person addressed by the Psalmist is expressly called upon as God
((...), my God!) -- I said, O MY GOD, take me not away in the midst of my days:
thy years (are) throughout all generations; and then immediately follows the
Apostle's quotation, Of old, thou laid the foundation of the earth, etc. To
which he has added the word (...), though not expressed in the original; so
that he must mean thereby to express the Person to whom the Psalm in general
was addressed, viz. the Lord (...), or JEHOVAH. There is something peculiarly
deep and mysterious in this Psalm -- The Prophet, in his own person, as a man
of afflictions, seems to express and prefigure the temporal sufferings,
humiliation, and death See particularly the 23d and 24th verses -- He weakened
my strength in the way (probably alluding to the failure of our Lord's bodily
strength, "in the way" to Mount Calvary, when he was led away, bearing bis
cross, before the soldiers compelled Simon of Cyrene to carry the cross.
Compare John xix. 16, 17. with Matt. xxvii. 32.) he shortened my days. I said,
O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years (are) throughout
all generations.

The Hebrew word here rendered "to take away," is formed from the root (...) to
ascend; and from the ASCENDING of smoke toward heaven, the same word signifies
also to offer a burnt-offering; and, as a substantive, it signifies a
burnt-offering or sacrifice; for it is thus used (both as a substantive and as
a verb) in that remarkable command of God to Abraham, by which THE SACRIFICE OF
THE SON OF GOD was manifestly prefigured. -- Take now THY SON (said God to
Abraham) THINE ONLY (Son) ISAAC, whom thou love, and get thee into THE LAND
OF MORIAH; and OFFER HIM there for A BURNT-OFFERING ((...)) upon one of the
mountains which I will tell thee of. (Genesis xxii. 2.) It was also "upon one of
the mountains," in "THE LAND OF MORIAH," that the "Beloved Son of God," (who is
also eminently called Son of Man, by having voluntary taken upon himself the
Seed of Abraham, in which, according to the promise in Genesis xxii. 18. all the
nations of the earth were to be blessed) was really sacrificed, and became "the
propitiation for our sins." (1 John ii. 2.) as even Caiaphas the wicked High
Priest himself had foretold, saying, It is expedient for us that one man should
die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not. (John xi. 50.) He was
accordingly brought as A LAMB to the slaughter, which Isaiah had long before
declared (Isai. liii. 7.) nay, Abraham himself seemed to have foretold this
long before the giving of the Law from Mount Sinai, at a time indeed when he
thought of another sacrifice, even when he led his own Beloved Son as the
victim BEARING THE WOOD for the sacrifice, just as the Beloved Son of God was
afterward led away to death BEARING HIS CROSS! (John xix. 17.) For Isaac said
to Abraham, Behold the fire and the wood, but where is THE LAMB FOR A
BURNT-OFFERING? "And abraham said, My Son, GOD will provide himself A LAMB for
a Burnt-offering. (Genesis xxii. 6 -- 8.) And accordingly we find the Harbinger of
the Messiah proclaiming the manifestation of that promised Lamb -- BEHOLD THE
LAMB OF GOD, which takes away the sin of the world. (John i. 29.) for Isaiah
had also foretold this propitiation, saying, He was wounded for our
transgressions, (he was) bruised for our iniquities. (Isai. liii. 5.) In like
manner the inspired Psalmist (in the particular Psalm already mentioned) seems
to allude also to the same great sacrifice of the Son of God, if the
interpretation of the word (...), which it necessarily bears in the above cited
command of GOD to Abraham (and many other places) be admitted -- He weakened my
strength in the way; he shortened my days. I said, O my GOD, (...) -- SACRIFICE
ME NOT in the midst of my days. Psa. cii. 23, 24. So Christ afterward in
reality prayed to God, that the bitter cup of his sufferings might pass from
him -- O MY FATHER, (said he) if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless, not as I will, but as that wilt. (Matt. xxvi. 39.) for being in
all points tempted like as (we are yet) without sin. (Heb. iv. 15.) he was
affected (through the weakness of that Human Nature which he had taken upon
him) with all the horrors of an approaching agonizing death; but as he knew
that all things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses, and
(in) the Prophets, and (in) the Psalms concerning himself, (Luke xxiv. 44.) he
soon afterward declared his steady resolution to suffer for us, saying, The
cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? (John xviii. 11.) And
accordingly he was taken away (or rather sacrificed) IN THE MIDST OF HIS DAYS,
agreeable to the expression above cited from the Psalmist, being in the
thirty-fifth year of his age, as Scaliger, and several other learned men have
supposed (see the Rev. Mr. Burton's Essay toward reconciling the Numbers of
Daniel and John, p. 335.) which is exactly half the age of MAN; I mean, half
the term which Moses in the 90th Psalm has declared to be the usual period of
Human Life! But even if our Lord was only in the thirty-third year of his age
when he suffered (according to the common chronology) he might, still, with
sufficient propriety be said (agreeable to the Psalmist's expression) to be
SACRIFICED IN THE MIDST OF HIS DAYS.


of the MESSIAH as A MAN upon earth, at the same time that he prays to him as
GOD, and JEHOVAH, that looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from
heaven, etc. See verse 19.


, in the beginning has laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are
the works of thine hands: they shall perish; but thou remainest: and they all
shall wax old as does a garment: and as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and
they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.
Heb. i. 10, 11, 12. -- So that our Lord was really in his Being, or Existence,
what the same Apostle seems to apply to his Doctrine, JESUS CHRIST the same
yesterday, and today, and for ever. (Heb. xiii. 8.) For it was He, who said,
Fear not; I AM THE FIRST AND THE LAST: (I am) He that lives, and was dead; and
behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and death.
(Rev. i. 17, 18.) -- Thus it appears, that our Redeemer was not only JEHOVAH in
Name, but in Effect or Reality also, if the true meaning of that title be
considered, as his being THE FIRST and THE LAST, demonstrates his Eternal
Existence and Power as much as the Name of JEHOVAH. -- Compare the
last-mentioned text with the exhortation of GOD by Isaiah (xli. 10.) to his
people Israel -- FEAR THOU NOT; for I (am) with thee: be not dismayed; FOR I
(am) THY GOD: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my RIGHTEOUSNESS. And again, in the 13th and 14th
verses, For I the LORD (or JEHOVAH) thy GOD, will hold thy right hand, saying
unto thee, FEAR NOT, I will help thee. FEAR NOT, thou worm Jacob, (and) ye men
of Israel: I will help thee, says THE LORD (i. e. JEHOVAH) and thy Redeemer,
the Holy One of Israel. And this LORD, or JEHOVAH, who here declares himself to
be THE GOD of Israel, proclaims his own ETERNAL EXISTENCE near the beginning of
the same chapter (viz. 4th verse) in the very same terms that were used in the
Revelations by him THAT LIVES, AND WAS DEAD -- Who has wrought and done (it)
(said JEHOVAH by Isaiah) calling the generations from the beginning? I the Lord
(JEHOVAH) THE FIRST, and WITH THE LAST, I (am) HE. And also in the 44th
chapter, ver. 6. Thus says the LORD (JEHOVAH) the King of Israel, and his
Redeemer the LORD OF HOSTS (JEHOVAH TSABAOUTH) I (am) THE FIRST, and I (am) THE
LAST; and beside me (there is) no God. See also Isai. xlviii. 12. wherein we
find that the God of Israel, the Lord of Hosts (mentioned in the 2d verse)
declares his Eternal Existence in the very same terms used by Christ in the
Revelation, viz. I (am) THE FIRST: I ALSO (am) THE LAST -- and as it has
already been shown, that the true meaning of the title JEHOVAH is nearly to the
same purpose, it is manifest that Christ is JEHOVAH in effect, as well as in
name!

He is JEHOVAH also in power and glory -- Who have declared this from the
ancient time? (said Isaiah) (Who) has told it from that time? (Have) not I
JEHOVAH? and (there is) NO GOD ELSE BESIDE ME; A JUST GOD, and A SAVIOR:
(there is) none beside me. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the
earth: for I (am) GOD (...) and (there is) none else. I have sworn by myself,
the word is gone out of my mouth (in) righteousness, and shall not return, THAT
UNTO ME EVERY KNEE SHALL BOW, EVERY TONGUE SHALL SWEAR. Isai. xlv. 21 -- 23.

Now let us see to whom this is applied by the Apostle Paul -- For none of us
(that is, no true Christian) lives to himself (says the Apostle) and no man
dies to himself. For whether we live, we live unto THE LORD; and whether we
die, we die unto THE LORD: whether we live therefore, or die, WE ARE THE
LORD'S. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might
BE LORD both of the dead and living. But why do thou JUDGE thy brother? or
why do thou set at naught thy brother? for we shall all stand before the
JUDGMENT SEAT OF CHRIST. For it is written Here the Apostle applies to Christ
the very text which I last cited from Isaiah.
, as I live, says THE LORD It was JEHOVAH who spoke by Isaiah, in the text
cited by the Apostle -- Unto ME every knee shall bow, etc. for Jehovah
proclaimed his title in the preceding context, which I quoted above (...) I
JEHOVAH, and (there is) "no God else beside me," etc. and therefore it is
certain that the Apostle here uses the word (...), or LORD, as the usual Greek
rendering for JEHOVAH: for so it is generally translated in the Greek versions
of the Old Testament, as well as in the Gospels; so that by applying the title
(...), or LORD, in this place to Christ, he manifestly applies to him the title
of JEHOVAH, to which it refers in the Hebrew.


, EVERY KNEE SHALL BOW TO ME, AND EVERY TONGUE SHALL CONFESS TO GOD. So then
every one of us shall give account of himself TO GOD. Let us not therefore
JUDGE one another any more, etc. Romans xiv. 7 -- 13. The reason here assigned by
the Apostle for the illegality of JUDGING our Brother, is, that we shall all
stand at the JUDGMENT SEAT OF CHRIST, to whom he attributes the dignity of
JEHOVAH, by maintaining in the preceding context, that he is THE LORD, to whom
we live and die, etc. and by applying to him Isaiah's prediction of universal
homage to JEHOVAH, as if Christ himself, in his pre-existent state, had said,
(...) I JEHOVAH, etc. -- Unto me every knee shall bow, etc. -- And from this
application of the Prophecy to the Person of Christ, the Apostle immediately
draws a conclusion with a manifest reference to what he had before said of our
standing at the Judgment Seat of Christ. -- So then every one of us shall give
account of himself to GOD. Let us not therefore JUDGE one another any more, etc.

From this whole quotation it appears, that when the Apostle asserts the
dignity of Christ, as being THE LORD of us all -- (...) (that we live and die
"UNTO THE LORD," (...), etc.) he in effect applies to him the dignity of
JEHOVAH, as that title is usually expressed in Greek by (...), THE LORD. In the
Septuagint tranflation we read, (...), (Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one
Lord) for (...) that is, Hear, O Israel, JEHOVAH our God, is ONE JEHOVAH. Deuteronomy.
vi. 4. -- And the same text is expressed exactly in the same words by the
Evangelist Mark (xii. 29.) where he recites our Lord's answer to the question
of the Scribe about the first (or chief) Commandment; for the Evangelist
unquestionably substitutes the word (...) (Lord) in his Greek text for (...)
(Jehovah) in the original Hebrew, of which there are many more instances in the
New Testament; so that from thence we are taught the true import and meaning of
the title (...), the Lord, as applied to Christ in the New Testament.

LORDS there are, indeed, many; and the word (...) is of as general use and
application in the Greek Tongue, perhaps, as SIR in the English Tongue; but
yet, whenever it is preceded by the article (...) (as, (...)) and has no
express reference to any particular place, title, office, or temporal dignity,
it must necessarily, in that case, be understood as a title of Supreme Dignity,
because it is then applicable to no other Being, but that alone, which is most
eminently the Lord ((...)) as being " Lord of all This title of supreme Dignity
is due, not only to THE HEAVENLY FATHER, but is also expressly applied to his
MESSIAH -- The word which (God) sent unto the children of Israel, preaching
Peace by JESUS CHRIST; he is LORD OF ALL. Acts x. 36.


;" so that the title (...), THE LORD (and many times (...) even without the
article) is with propriety substituted in the Greek Scriptures When the Apostle
Matthew cites Isaiah's prophecy, that "a Virgin shall be with child," and
applies it to the birth of Jesus by the Virgin Mary, a descendant of the house
of David, he says, Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of THE LORD ((...)) by the Prophet, etc. Matt. i. 22, 23. whereas in the
Book of the Prophet himself, we find that the prediction was the Word of
Jehovah. See Isai. vii. 10 -- 14. Moreover, the Lord (i.e. JEHOVAH) spoke again
unto Ahaz, saying, Ask thee a sign-of JEHOVAH thy God, etc.

Again, when Isaiah's Prophecy concerning the Harbinger of Christ -- " Prepare
ye the way of JEHOVAH," etc. (Isai. xl. 3.) is cited in the New Testament, we
find the Greek word (...), Lord, substituted for the Hebrew name JEHOVAH by all
the Four Evangelists, Matt. iii. 3. Mark i. 3. Luke iii. 4. and John i. 23.
This Prophecy, by the unanimous testimony of all these Evangelists, is applied
to the Preaching of John the Baptist, who himself pointed to JESUS, as the
Person whom he was sent to precede in the world, and for whom he prepared the
way. BEHOLD THE LAMB OF GOD (says the Baptist) which takes away (or bears)
the sin of the world. THIS IS HE of whom I said, AFTER ME COMES a Man which is
preferred before me, etc. John i. 23 -- 36. Jesus, therefore, is undoubtedly
that (...), that Lord or Jehovah before whom John prepared the way, agreeable
to the prediction of the Prophet, as I have elsewhere remarked.

-- " Ye shall not tempt JEHOVAH your God," etc. in Deuteronomy. vi. 16. is rendered
by Matthew (iv. 7.) and also by Luke (iv. 12.) Thou shall not tempt THE LORD
thy God ((...)) and the like rendering of the title JEHOVAH may be found in the
10th verse of the same chapter of Matthew, and in the 8th verse of the same
chapter of Luke.

Also -- thou shall keep and perform a free will offering, according as thou
have vowed unto JEHOVAH thy God, etc. in Deuteronomy. xxiii. 23. is rendered by the
Apostle Matthew (v. 33.) Thou -- shall perform UNTO THE LORD ((...)) thine
oaths.

Deuteronomy. vi. 5. -- Thou shall love JEHOVAH THY GOD with all thine heart, is
rendered by Matthew (xxii. 37.) by Mark (xii. 30.) and by Luke (x. 27.) Thou
shall love THE LORD THY GOD, -- (...).

Also (...) -- JEHOVAH said unto my Lord, in the 110th Psalm, ver. 1. is
rendered by the Apostle Matthew, xxii. 44. (...) -- THE LORD said unto my Lord,
etc. and in the same manner exactly by Mark (xii. 36.) and by Luke (xx. 42.)
and also in the Acts (ii. 34.)

In the remarkable Prophecy of Isaiah (lxi. 1.) quoted by St. Luke (iv. 18,
19.) concerning the Preaching of the MESSIAH, or ANOINTED (...) -- The Spirit
of ADONI JEHOVAH (or the Lord JEHOVAH) is upon me, because JEHOVAH has
ANOINTED me to preach to the poor, etc. The Evangelist has substituted the
Greek title (...) for the Hebrew titles Adoni Jehovah.

The Prophecy in the 118th Psalm (ver. 26.) which was cited by our Lord
himself, (...) " Blessed is he that comes in the Name of JEHOVAH," is rendered
by the Evangelist Luke, xiii. 35. Blessed is he that comes IN THE NAME OF THE
LORD, (...). And he expresses the Name Jehovah, by the same Greek title (...),
when he afterward records the circumstance whereby that Prophecy was in part
fulfilled, viz. the public entry of Christ into Jerusalem, when the whole
multitude of disciples proclaimed before him, saying, " Blessed is the King
that comes IN THE NAME OF THE LORD," (...). Luke xix. 37, 38. See also John
xii. 13. where we find the same rendering of the words -- in the Name of
JEHOVAH, by in the Name of THE LORD ((...)).

The Prophecy of Isai. (liii. 1.) Who has believed our report? and to whom is
the arm of JEHOVAH revealed, is rendered by the Evangelist John -- Lord, who
has believed our report? and to whom has the arm OF THE LORD ((...)) been
revealed. John xii. 38. -- These examples from the Evangelists, I hope, are
amply sufficient to prove the true meaning and importance of the Greek title
(...), Lord, when it is applied to God or to Christ; in which case it implies
nothing less than the dignity of Jehovah!


for the title JEHOVAH, in translations and quotations from the Hebrew
original, wherein that Holy Name occurs!

It would take up too much of my reader's time (as well as of my own) were I to
cite all the examples that may be found in the Greek Scriptures, of quotations
from the Hebrew text, wherein the word (...), or Lord, is substituted for the
Hebrew title (...) Jehovah: however, I have inserted in the preceding note a
sufficient number (I hope) of examples from the Evangelists to demonstrate,
beyond contradiction, the true meaning and importance of the Greek title, (...)
(LORD) when it is applied to GOD, or to CHRIST; for in that case, if there is
any truth in the Evangelists, as faithful translators, it implies and expresses
nothing less than the dignity of JEHOVAH! Exactly in this sense, therefore, we
must necessarily understand the Apostle Paul, when he tells us, in his first
Epistle to the Corinthians (xv. 47.) that the first Man (is) of the earth,
earthy: the second Man (is) (...) -- THE LORD, (or JEHOVAH) from heaven. -- The
effect of this translation of mine will appear sufficiently justifiable, if it
is compared with a parallel expression of John the Baptist recorded by John the
Evangelist (iii. 31.) -- He that comes from above, IS ABOVE ALL ((...)) he
that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth: he that comes
from heaven (the Apostle repeats his assertion) IS ABOVE ALL! This is clearly a
part of the testimony of John the Baptist, concerning the supreme Dignity of
that Divine Person, whose WAY he was sent TO PREPARE John the Baptist, as I
have already remarked, was sent to prepare the way of JEHOVAH -- his voice --
was the long expected voice foretold by Isaiah -- The voice of him that cries
in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of JEHOVAH, (xl. 3.) He was that
extraordinary Messenger of JEHOVAH, foretold by Malachi (iii. 1.) Behold, I
will send MY Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before ME, etc. -- that
is, I (JEHOVAH) will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before ME;
viz. before JEHOVAH; for the Divine Person, whom the Prophet represents as
speaking these words, is expressly mentioned in the 6th verse of the same
chapter, -- For I (am) JEHOVAH, I change not, etc. It therefore evidently
appears, that the way was to be prepared for JEHOVAH; and indeed the prediction
was fulfilled in the most exact, literal sense: for when this extraordinary
Messenger was questioned by his own disciples, and the Jews, concerning JESUS,
saying -- he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou bear witness,
behold the same baptizeth, and all men come to him. John showed them, that
their report of the increasing power and fame of Christ contained nothing
contradictory to the testimony which he had always borne concerning his own
office and calling -- Ye yourselves (said he) bear me witness that I said, I am
not THE CHRIST, but that I am sent before him, (that is, before the Christ or
Messiah). And after assuring them, that Christ must increase, saying, "he must
increase, but I (must) decrease," he added the highest testimony that could be
given of Christ's heavenly Power and Divine Existence, (such a testimony as
became that extraordinary Messenger, who was sent to prepare the way of
Jehovah), saying, " he that comes from above, IS ABOVE ALL;" which expression
cannot, with propriety, be applied to any person that is not really and truly
Jehovah! John iii. 26 -- 31.


! For the sentence immediately follows, what the Baptist said of Christ -- "He
must increase, but I (must) decrease." John iii. 30.


etc.

Now it must be allowed that none, except the God of Israel, whose name alone
is JEHOVAH, (Psa. lxxxiii. 18.) can justly be said to be ABOVE ALL! -- So that
if THE MESSIAH was not truly GOD, and included with the Almighty Father and the
Holy Ghost in the Eternal BEING, JEHOVAH, this expression (that he "IS ABOVE
ALL") could not, with the least propriety, be so peremptorily and repeatedly
applied to him! But as John the Baptist (who was sent to prepare the way of
JEHOVAH, as I have already remarked) has positively asserted concerning him
that comes from heaven, that he "is above all," we must necessarily conclude,
that the LORD FROM HEAVEN (the title applied to Christ by the Apostle Paul in
the parallel text recited above) is a title of supreme Dignity, and implies as
much as if the Apostle had expressly entitled the Messiah -- "JEHOVAH from
heaven;" for had this latter been literally expressed by some Prophet in the
Hebrew tongue, the Apostle's words, (...), would have been the regular Greek
version of such an expression, which I have already proved by a variety of
examples. (See pages 275 -- 281.)

But Christ is not only (...), THE LORD (or JEHOVAH) from heaven, but he is
also "the Lord of Glory" Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had
they known (it) they would not have crucified, (...) -- THE LORD OF GLORY. 1.
Cor. ii. 8.


, one of the highest titles that can be conceived! So that if he were not
really of one and the same Divine Nature with the Almighty Father, this title
of Supreme Excellence, THE LORD OF GLORY, could not be used with the least
degree of propriety, especially as God (i. e. the LORD Jehovah) has declared to
the Jews, that he will not give his Glory to another -- viz. I am THE LORD (i.
e. JEHOVAH); that is MY NAME: and MY GLORY will I not give to another, etc.
(Isai. xlii. 8.) -- If Christ, therefore, is the LORD OF GLORY, he must
necessarily be esteemed ONE with the Father, in the Eternal BEING JEHOVAH! --
Our Lord himself also declared, I and the Father are ONE. -- (...). (John x.
30.) and yet this very sentence, which asserts THE UNITY of the Father and the
Son, expresses at the same time a manifest Distinction of Persons; which is
also clearly demonstrable in almost every other page of Scripture; though the
doctrine of the Unity of God is not less clearly laid down and inculcated
throughout the Scriptures!

Our Lord has delivered this doctrine of his Unity with the Father, in various
modes of expression; as -- He that has seen me (said he) has seen the Father,
etc. and I am in the Father, and the Father in me, etc. (John xiv. 9, 10.) and
yet the true nature and manner of that UNITY must still remain a Mystery,
because a perfect knowledge of that Eternal BEING, which in every way is
infinite, cannot possibly fall within the comprehension of our finite
understandings See page 212.
!

This doctrine is, nevertheless, a necessary part of our Faith; because the
Scriptures contain such a proportion of evidence, really within the measure of
Human judgment, as is sufficient to authenticate the whole, and demonstrate the
Divine Mission of those Holy Persons, by whom they were, from time to time,
delivered for our instruction: and therefore, as we are answerable to God for
the use or abuse of that Knowledge of Good and Evil, which we inherit from our
first parents (as I have already shown in the beginning of this Tract) we
cannot reject any part of the Scripture Evidence, without being guilty of such
a manifest perversion and abuse of that hereditary Knowledge, as must render us
highly culpable before God, and endanger our eternal welfare! We are bound,
therefore, to receive even some things that we do not understand, for the sake
of those things which we do understand; just as our Lord himself instructed
Philip to believe this very doctrine of his UNITY WITH THE FATHER, for the sake
of the mighty Works -- or else believe me (said our Lord) for the very works
sake. John xiv. 11. Our Lord had been instructing his disciples concerning his
own dignity and office -- I am THE WAY, (said he) and THE TRUTH, and THE LIFE:
no man comes unto the Father, BUT BY ME. If ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also: and from henceforth YE KNOW HIM, and HAVE SEEN HIM.
Philip says unto him, LORD, show us THE FATHER, and it suffices us. JESUS
says unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known
ME, Philip? HE THAT HAS SEEN ME, HAS SEEN THE FATHER; and how say thou
(then) Show us the FATHER? Believe thou not that I AM IN THE FATHER, AND THE
FATHER IN ME? The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of myself: but THE
FATHER, that dwells in me, he does THE WORKS. Believe me, THAT I AM IN THE
FATHER, and THE FATHER IN ME: or else believe me for the very WORKS sake! John
xiv. 6 -- 11.


which he had shown him: for these, indeed, were evident to his senses, and
could not be denied; and therefore, as the Divine Mission was so strongly
authenticated, Philip was bound to receive the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, as
delivered by Divine Authority, even though he did not comprehend it! And, in
like manner, is every man indeed obliged to submit his judgment in receiving
and acknowledging these revealed mysteries of our religion, for the sake of
that substantial evidence which the Scriptures afford us of other Truth and
Facts, which fall more immediately within the measure of Human Comprehension --
Believe me, that I am in the Father (said our Lord) and the Father in me, or
else BELIEVE ME FOR THE VERY WORKS SAKE!

But our Lord, nevertheless, condescended to illustrate this doctrine, in some
degree, by a most interesting comparison, which relates, very materially, to
the principal subject of this Tract, (THE NATURE OF MAN) because it informs us,
at the same time, concerning that intimate Connection with THE DIVINE NATURE,
which HUMAN NATURE is rendered capable of acquiring, through the Divine
Mediator between GOD and Man!

Sanctify them, (said that DIVINE MEDIATOR, when he prayed to his "HOLY FATHER"
for his Disciples) through thy Truth: THY WORD IS TRUTH, (...). (And who is
this Logos, this Word, this Truth of the "HOLY FATHER," both under the Old and
New Covenant, but our Divine Mediator himself? who immediately added) As thou
have sent ME (said he) into the world, even so have I also sent them (viz. the
Disciples, as he had formerly sent the Prophets) into the world. And for their
sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the Truth.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their Word; that THEY ALL MAY BE ONE (which is the interesting
comparison beforementioned) AS THOU FATHER (art) IN ME, AND I IN THEE, THAT
THEY ALSO MAY BE ONE IN US: that the world may believe that thou have sent me.
And THE GLORY which THOU gave ME I have given THEM; that THEY MAY BE ONE,
EVEN AS WE ARE ONE: I IN THEM, AND THOU IN ME, that they may be made perfect in
one, and that the world may know that thou have sent ME, and have loved THEM,
as thou have loved ME. FATHER, I WILL ((...)) that they also, whom thou has
given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold MY GLORY which THOU have
given ME: for thou lovedst me BEFORE THE FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD. O RIGHTEOUS
FATHER, the world has not known thee: but I have known thee, and these have
known that thou have sent me. And I have declared unto them thy Name, and will
declare (it): that THE LOVE, wherewith thou have LOVED ME may be IN THEM, and I
in them. John xvii. 17 -- 26. Here is a glorious declaration of the Dignity, to
which God has been pleased to call MANKIND! And as the Unity of the Disciples,
or true Believers, is thus clearly compared to the Unity of THE FATHER and THE
SON, it is manifest that the doctrine of the last-mentioned UNITY (as far as
the Scriptures have revealed it to us) is a topic necessarily included in the
subject of this Tract -- "The Nature of Man." But this Unity of THE FATHER and
THE SON is not in all respects the same Unity, as that wherein the Church (or
Congregation of Disciples and true Believers) is included with the Father and
the Son That they also (said Christ to his Heavenly Father) may be ONE IN US.
; though the Faithful undoubtedly partake of the Divine Nature by the HOLY
SPIRIT, agreeable to the promises (see p. 200 -- 202), and both CHRIST and THE
FATHER are "IN THEM," as our LORD said -- I IN THEM, and THOU in me, agreeable
to what our Lord had once before declared -- If a man love me, he will keep my
words: and MY FATHER will love him, and WE will COME UNTO HIM, and make OUR
ABODE with him! (John xiv. 23.) Thus HUMAN NATURE is capable of being exalted
and dignified, even in this life, notwithstanding the uncertainties and
sufferings attending our worldly condition!

The Faithful, indeed, are ONE in the Father, and the Son, as our Lord prayed
for them to his Heavenly Father, that they all may be ONE ((...)) AS thou
FATHER (art) in me, and I in thee, that they also may be ONE IN US, etc. and
again, that they may be ONE, (...), EVEN AS WE ARE ONE: I in them, and thou in
me, that they may be made perfect in ONE, etc. but we must be careful to
maintain the due distinction between the Unity of THE FATHER and THE SON, and
the Unity of the Faithful in the Father and the Son! The latter is, indeed (in
some respect or other) like the former, alike probably in that very
circumstance alone of being in Unity -- in Unity of WILL, of LOVE, and
UNIVERSAL Benevolence, etc. for GOD IS LOVE, and he that dwells IN LOVE,
dwells IN GOD, AND GOD IN HIM, etc. (1 John iv. 16.) but it is not altogether
the same Unity, wherein the Scriptures declare the Almighty Father and his Son
to be ONE (as some Socinians have conceived) or it could not with propriety be
compared with it! Like is compared with Like; but Like is not the same, even to
a proverb! In what respect the latter Unity may be like the former, I have
already shown by authority of Scripture: but THE HEAVENLY FATHER and HIS SON
are ONE in many other respects, which cannot with the least degree of propriety
be attributed to the Unity of the Church in Christ! The Son of God is ONE with
his Almighty Father in Eternal Existence, in that BEING of Eternity, JEHOVAH!
(See p. 258 -- 275, etc.) They are ONE also in Power and Divine Attributes! The
Son being expressly entitled LORD OF ALL. (See page 276.) THE LORD FROM HEAVEN,
(page 283.) THE LORD OF GLORY, (p. 284.) and is also declared to be ABOVE ALL,
(p. 281.) and OVER ALL, GOD (...) (says St. Paul, speaking of the people of
Israel) (...). Whose (or of whom are) the Fathers, and of whom as concerning
the flesh CHRIST (came) WHO IS OVER ALL, GOD blessed for ever. Amen. Romans ix. 5.


BLESSED FOR EVER And our Lord manifested himself to be truly GOD, when he
asserted his "Power on earth to forgive sins," without contradicting the inward
sentiment of the Scribes, "reasoning in their hearts" -- Who can forgive sins,
but GOD only. See Mark ii. 5 -- 12.


. These are undoubtedly Attributes of the Heavenly Father (and many more shall
hereafter be mentioned in the course of the argument) so that THE FATHER and
THE SON are manifestly ONE in these several respects, and in many more, as
there is but ONE GOD, or ONE JEHOVAH! But the Unity of the Congregation of true
Believers, (that they are ONE in Christ, etc.) must be considered in a more
confined sense: the true Believers are ONE glorious Universal Church, ONE
Building, of which our Lord JESUS CHRIST is the Foundation, (1 Cor. iii. 11.)
the chief Corner Stone, (Ephesians. ii. 20.) "they are a Spiritual House," (1 Pet.
ii. 5.) a Bride For thy Maker is thine HUSBAND; the Lord (Jehovah) of Hosts
(is) his Name: and thy REDEEMER, the Holy One of Israel, the God of the whole
earth, shall he be called. Isai. live. 5.
, (John iii. 29.) a Being of many in one So we (being) MANY, are ONE BODY in
Christ, and every one members one of another. Romans xii. 5.
, as the symbol of the Cherubim, four living Creatures in one, which moved with
one Spirit, and represented the Hosts of Israel (see p. (...)): and of course
all those that are engrafted on that stock (the Olive Tree of Israel) through
Christ For -- if ye be CHRIST'S, then are ye ABRAHAM'S SEED, and heirs
according to the promise. Gal. iii. 29.

Thus all true believers in Christ, by being accounted "Abraham's Seed," are
included in the Spiritual Israel, and are esteemed ONE in Christ; that is, ONE
Catholic Church, but not ONE Jehovah; for in the peculiar Unity of the latter,
none can be included, except the Three Divine Persons, to whom alone the
supreme Title JEHOVAH is distinctly attributed in the Scriptures!

My reason for making this remark is, that some learned Men, in their Comments
on Jeremiah xxxiii. 16. (viz. Grotius, Vitringa, and several others) have
applied to Jerusalem that glorious Title, which the Scriptures have given to
Christ alone; viz. "JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS! The learned and Rev. Mr. William
Lowth (formerly Prebendary of Winchester) in his Commentary on Jeremiah, p.
293. also applies it to JERUSALEM, that is (says he) to the CHURCH, etc. The
learned Authors of our last excellent English Version have likewise unhappily
fallen into the same error (though the older English Versions were clear from
it) and have rendered the passage as follows -- And this (is the name)
wherewith SHE shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. So Vitringa -- Hoc
est (Nomen) quo IPSA denominabitur, JEHOVA JUSTITIA NOSTRA. (Anacrisis
Apocalypsios, p. 188.)

But the Hebrew Text will bear no such construction, insomuch that the
abovementioned Translators have been obliged to interpolate their respective
Versions of this passage with words that have nothing to answer them in the
original, in order to make up that imaginary sense of it, which they have
erroneously adopted! for they supply the words "is the name" and "NOMEN," for
which there is not the least authority in the original Text! Supplementary
words are never allowable in translations from the Hebrew Scriptures, unless
they are absolutely necessary to render the sense complete by filling up such a
vacuum in the English Expression as sometimes arises from the difference of
idiom in the two Languages; but they are very far from being necessary in the
Text before us, which will appear by two plain Circumstances, viz. -- 1st. That
a literal rendering of the Hebrew in this Text into English affords an
intelligible and just construction without that interpolation, so that ^here
can be no reason or authority whatever for making it! -- And 2dly. That the
Words supplied by the Translators have led them (for they could not have so
rendered the Hebrew Text without them) to attribute to Jerusalem that glorious
Title, which in the Parallel Passage of Jeremiah (Chapter xxiii. 5, 6, as well as
in the Text before us) apparently belongs to the Righteous Branch of David, the
King that should reign and execute Judgment and Righteousness ((...)) in the
earth; so that the passage instead of being (as in the Hebrew Bible) parallel
to the former In the former passage (Jer. xxiii. 5, 6.) the RIGHTEOUS Branch of
the House of David, the King that was to reign, and do judgment and
RIGHTEOUSNESS in the Land, is manifestly called "JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." --
"In HIS days" ((...), here is a masculine relative plainly refering back to the
substantive (...) -- King, in the preceding sentence) "Judah shall be saved"
((...) -- feminine -- i. e. Judah she shall be saved) and Israel shall dwell
safely (these are mentioned as contingents of that King's Reign, so that the
principal Substantive must be known by the reference of the Relative, which
plainly points to (...) the King, mentioned in the preceding sentence); And
this (is) HIS name whereby he shall be called ((...). Here the Masculine
Relative is again inserted and connected by the copulative (...) [and] to the
Relative in the beginning of the same sentence, so that both relatives
manifestly refer back to the same principal Substantive (...) the King
mentioned in the preceding sentence, and not to the nearest substantives Judah
and Israel as some have erroneously conceived, in order to make the Text
correspond with the mistaken construction of the Parallel Text, which cannot be
done without violence to both Texts, and therefore we must abide by the Letter
and construe this part of the Sentence as follows -- And this (is) HIS Name
which THEY shall call [or "proclaim"] rather than -- "whereby he shall be
called," for the Verb is in the 3d person plural) "THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS."
-- The expression in the other parallel Text varies in several circumstances
from this, so that Critics cannot be justified in attempting to warp the sense
of this passage to that, nor the sense of that to this, but on the contrary are
bound to give to each of them their true literal Sense; and we shall find that
the parallel will be so far from being weakened thereby, that it will, on the
contrary, appear much more clear and consistent.


, is rendered by their Translation absolutely dissonant, irreconcilable, and
unparallel not only to that particular Text, but to every other part of
Scripture!

Jerusalem, or the Church, might be allowed, by way of Title, to bear a Motto,
or Memorial respecting the Righteousness of Jehovah, or that Jehovah is
Righteous, as King ZEDEKIAH and others certainly did hear such a memorial of
JEHOVAH in their names (see my Tract on the Law of Retribution, p. 110, 166);
but neither Zedekiah, nor even the Redeemed Church or Spiritual Jerusalem,
could with the least degree of propriety be called, what Christ alone really
was and is, -- "Jehovah OUR Righteousness!"

But the impropriety of thus applying that glorious Title need not be argued:
it is amply sufficient to show that the Hebrew Text cannot admit of such a
construction without doing violence to it (as Vitringa and the learned English
Translators have done) by supplying the Word (...), Nomen, or name which is not
found in the Text! See the words at length. (...) That is -- In those days
(referring back to the former Sentence wherein THE RIGHTEOUS BRANCH of David is
foretold, and that he shall execute Judgment and RIGHTEOUSNESS in the Land)
shall Judah be saved ((...) feminine, She shall be saved) and Jerusalem shall
dwell ((...) also feminine, she shall dwell) safely; AND HE ((...) Iste or this
person) WHO SHALL CALL HER (or rather -- "he who shall call to HER" (...)) is
THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. Here is a Translation strictly literal (the only
word supplied being the common auxiliary verb is, which very frequently is
found necessary to be added to the English Expression in Translations from the
Hebrew) and though we find the manner of expression very different from the
Text in the 23d Chapter, there being here a feminine Relative instead of a
masculine Relative, the Verb being also varied from plural to singular, and the
noun (...) (Name) entirely omitted, yet the sense according to this most
literal rendering, is not only consonant and parallel to the former passage,
but also strictly scriptural. For Jehovah certainly CALLED TO Jerusalem and her
Inhabitants both before and after that Prophecy of Jeremiah; -- I have called
unto them (said JEHOVAH, speaking to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem by Jeremiah,
Chap. xxxv. 17) but they have not answered. Here is the very same verb (...) to
call, and the preposition (...), prefixed in like manner to the pronoun
following the verb; so that the expression is the same. And again we read in
the Prophet Micah (vi. 9.) -- The Voice of Jehovah shall CALL TO the City
(...). Here the very same Verb (...) is used in the same sense -- shall call;
and in the two preceding Chapters Sion is called upon under the figure of A
WOMAN -- Be in pain, and labor to bring forth, O DAUGHTER OF ZION, LIKE A
WOMAN in Travail, etc. Thou shall go even to Babylon, etc. Chap. iv. 10. And
again in the 5th Chapter 1st Verse, Gather thyself in Troops -- O Daughter of
Troops (manifestly refering to the Daughter of Zion mentioned in the preceding
Verse) he has laid siege against us; they shall smite THE JUDGE OF ISRAEL with
a rod upon the Cheek, etc. And who is this JUDGE OF ISRAEL? Surely it is the
Divine WORD who, not only by his Prophets in ancient times " Are not these the
Words which JEHOVAH has CALLED" -- ((...) called or proclaimed, i. e. to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem) "by the former Prophets, when JERUSALEM was
inhabited?" -- etc. -- Zech. vii. 7. Here the Verb (...) to call is used in the
very same sense that I have given to it in the Text of Jeremiah now under
consideration.


but also in his own Person (as Son of God, and Son of Man) CALLED TO THE CITY
and its unwary inhabitants? -- Who said by Isaiah -- I have spread out my hands
all the Day unto a rebellious People, etc. (Chapter lxv. 2.) -- But they refused to
hearken, and pulled away the Shoulder, and stopped their Ears, that they should
not hear. Yea, they made their hearts (as) an Adamant Stone, lest they should
hear the Law, and the Words which the Lord of Hosts has sent IN HIS SPIRIT by
the hand of the former Prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of
Hosts. Therefore it came to pass (that) as HE CALLED ((...) the same Verb,
still used in the same sense) and they would not hear, so THEY SHALL CALL
((...) in the future Tense) and I will not hear ((...)) says JEHOVAH of Hosts:
and I WILL scatter them ((...) still in the future Tense: and be pleased to
remark, that the prophecy of this scattering or dispersion was delivered by
Zechariah after the return of Israel and Judah from their former dispersion in
the Provinces of Babylon; but this future Dispersion was to be much more
notorious and general) -- I will SCATTER them with a whirlwind AMONG ALL THE
NATIONS whom they knew not, etc. (Zech. vii. 11 -- 14.) From this last dreadful
and general Dispersion, the Jews have never yet returned to their own proper
Country, but the Land is (still) desolate after them (see the 14th Verse)
having been ever since possessed and plundered by standing Armies (the bane of
Mankind) consisting alternately of various foreign Nations; and the frightful
desolation of that Devoted Land has been continued and prolonged by the
detestable Arbitrary Governments of Arabians, Turks, and such other foreign
Despots, the Scourges of Mankind! -- For they laid the pleasant Land desolate!
This determined Vengeance against the Jews (viz. "They SHALL CALL and I will
not hear," etc.) was lamented in the most affecting Terms by "THE JUDGE OF
ISRAEL" abovementioned, whom they smote and despised, for he called and they
would not hear! -- O JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM, that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee, HOW OFTEN WOULD I HAVE GATHERED THY
CHILDREN TOGETHER, even as a hen gathers her Chickens under (her) wings, and
YE WOULD NOT! Behold, your House is left unto you DESOLATE! For I say unto you,
Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in
the Name of the Lord. (Matt. xxiii. 37 -- 39.) May God of his infinite Mercy
hasten that time, and give grace to the Descendants of his once peculiar people
that they may acknowledge the true Shepherd and King of Israel, and be
collected from this fatal dispersion, which has already endured more than 1700
YEARS! Then will they know and declare that the Branch of RIGHTEOUSNESS that
grew up unto David, and executed judgment and RIGHTEOUSNESS in the Land, is he
that CALLED TO HER ((...)) that is, to Jerusalem (Jer. xxxiii. 16.) and that
this is HIS NAME ((...)) which they shall call JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. (Jer.
xxiii. 6.) Nay some of the most learned Rabbis have declared long ago that
this is the title of the Messiah; and even Grotius himself who applies this
Title to THE CITY ( hic de CIVITATE agitur, see on Jer. xxxiii. 16.) yet
acknowledges that not only Christians, but also the learned Rabbi KIMCHI refers
it in a more sublime sense to the MESSIAH. Sensu sublimiore non Christiani
tantum, sed et KIMCHI hoc ad Messiam refert.

And therefore if all the Texts above cited be duly compared and considered, it
must appear that the Title "Jehovah our Righteousness" is not applied by
Jeremiah (xxxiii. 16.) to JERUSALEM, but to him, who (as the prophet said)
shall call her. This it seems has been the opinion of several Interpreters,
particularly HUETIUS, Demonstr. Evang. Prop. vii. cap. 16, and our learned
Bishop PEARSON in the Notes upon his exposition of the Creed, p. 165, who, as
the abovementioned Mr. Lowth acknowledges, 'render the Words thus:' "HE THAT
SHALL CALL HER" [i. e. to be his peculiar people] "IS THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS." See also the Old English Translation by Tindal, printed in 1549
-- And HE THAT SHALL CALL HER, is even God our Ryghteous Maker. -- In the Old
Version called the Bishop's Bible, we read -- And he that shall call her, is
even God our righteousness. And in the common English Version printed by the
King's Printer in 1611, we find nearly the same rendering -- And he that shall
call her is the Lord our righteousness. -- These are sufficient authorities, I
trust, for what I have asserted in this note, and for the translation which I
have ventured to make of the Text in question; and therefore if all the Texts
also above cited be duly compared and considered, it must appear that the Title
JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS was NOT applied by Jeremiah to Jerusalem, but only to
the Righteous Branch, which (as he foretold) grew up to David, and called to
her!


, are in like manner esteemed ONE; because all distinctions of Nation, Rank,
and Dignity, and even of Sex, are set aside in the true Church -- There is
neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male
nor female: for ye are all ONE in CHRIST JESUS. And if ye (be) CHRIST'S, then
are ye ABRAHAM'S SEED, and Heirs according to the promise. (Gal. iii. 28, 29).
Thus the Faithful are one in Christ, but surely not with Christ; -- I mean, not
with him, in the UNITY of Power, Glory, and Eternal Existence, wherein he and
the Holy Ghost are (and ever were) included with the Almighty Father! The Unity
of the Church is, indeed, in some respects (as I have shown) LIKE the Unity of
THE FATHER and THE SON, but it is not the same Unity, as the Socinians would
insinuate This attempt of the Socinians to exclude the doctrine of Christ's
Divine Dignity, which necessarily arises from the repeated declarations in
Scripture, that the Father and the Son are ONE, is vain and futile; because the
many circumstances of Divine Omnipotence and Eternal Existence (already
recited) in which they are ONE, cannot without blasphemy be attributed to the
Church, or to that other Unity, wherein the Church is included in the Father
and the Son.


. In the Communion Service of the Church of England, indeed, mention is made of
our Unity WITH Christ -- We are ONE WITH Christ, and Christ WITH us, (see
Exhortation at the time of the Celebration, etc.) but this has not the least
reference to the Unity of Christ WITH the Father, but only to the declared
Unity of the Faithful, who form that one Building, whereof Christ is the chief
Corner (Stone). In whom all THE BUILDING fitly framed together grows unto AN
HOLY TEMPLE in the Lord: in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation
of GOD through the Spirit. (Ephesians. ii. 20 -- 22.) So that all faithful disciples
are, undoubtedly, ONE in Christ (that is, ONE " Holy Temple With respect to the
"One Holy Temple," we may say, that the Faithful are One, either in or with
Christ; because Christ is called "the chief Corner," and the Head And gave him
to be HEAD over all (things) to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of
him that fills all in all. Ephesians. i. 22, 23.
of the Church, and consequently in this figure is esteemed a part of the
Church.


," or ONE Catholic Church) even as the Father and the Son are ONE: but it must
appear from the several texts already quoted (if they are duly compared and
weighed together) that the Unity of the Church in Christ, is not mentioned as
the same Unity, wherein the Father and the Son are ONE (viz. One in Power,
Glory, and Eternal Existence, or One GOD) but only as a resemblance or
illustration, in some respects, of that DIVINE UNITY! -- In some respects (I
say) as being united in Will, or in Divine Love (as I have already shown) or by
the inspiration of the HOLY SPIRIT in each individual, through which the whole
Congregation of the Faithful that are "builded together" in Christ, become " an
Habitation of GOD," (see the text last quoted from Ephesians. ii. 20 -- 22.) but not
in all respects, because there are many circumstances (some of which I have
already mentioned) wherein the Unity or Fellowship of Christ with the Heavenly
Father is infinitely transcendent, and such as cannot, without Blasphemy, be
attributed to the redeemed Brethren, or those that are merely Members of the
Church; so that the Socinian objection to the doctrine, which necessarily
arises from the several texts, wherein the Father and the Son are declared to
be ONE, is apparently unjust and false! May any other Man, but the Man Christ
Jesus, (1 Timothy ii. 5.) say as he did -- ALL THINGS THAT THE FATHER HAS ARE
MINE? (John xvi. 14.) And again -- "As the Father knows me, even so know I
the Father?" (John x. 15.) or, as Christ expressed himself to his Heavenly
Father in Prayer -- And now, O Father, GLORIFY THOU ME WITH THINE OWN SELF,
WITH THE GLORY which I had with thee before the world was? (John xvii. 5.) Thus
Christ declares his right to be glorified with the Heavenly Father himself,
which must mean, to be glorified with SUPREME GLORY, as it is the Glory of the
Almighty Father, "the Glory which" the Son had with his Almighty Father "before
the world was!" This glorious Person assumed the NATURE OF MAN, and for a time
dwelt among men, that he might "fulfill all righteousness" (Mat. iii. 15.) even
in his Human Nature, and thereby restore the lost dignity and privileges of
that Nature; -- the first Man (being) of the Earth, earthy; but the Second MAN
THE LORD FROM HEAVEN! (1 Cor. xv. 47.) Human Nature, therefore, is indeed
exalted to eternal Glory, but that is only in, by, and through him, who alone
is truly and essentially the "SON OF GOD," as well as the "SON OF MAN!" For he
is the Way, and the Truth, and the Life: No man comes unto the Father (said
our Lord) but by me. (John xiv. 6.)

The miserable state of fallen MAN is already described in the former part of
this Tract. The means of retrieving our lost dignity remains still to be shown.
God has mercifully revealed to us these necessary means, and tendered them in
the Scriptures to our Choice, that by a prudent use of the Knowledge of Good
and Evil, we may constantly prefer, and choose the Good, earnestly claiming the
promises of Divine Assistance; whereby we shall also be enabled to reject the
Evil on all occasions, and effectually to resist the Spiritual Enemy, and
maintain our integrity in the severest trials of our Faith; for in all these
things we are more than Conquerors through him that loved us. (Romans viii. 37.)

Thus the device of SATAN, in promoting MAN'S assumption of forbidden
Knowledge, is completely turned against himself; for that very KNOWLEDGE, which
(through his deceit and temptation) subjected all Mankind to SIN and Death, is
now (through the mercy of God) become a proper Principle of Action (if we use
it as we ought) to incline us to RIGHTEOUSNESS, and lead us to " the Tree of
Life The hereditary KNOWLEDGE of Good and Evil, which our first parents
unlawfully took upon themselves, by eating of "THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE," is shown
in the beginning of this Tract to be a Divine Knowledge, such as must have
originally proceeded from GOD; and as THE DIVINE WORD, which " was with GOD,"
and " was GOD," (John i. 1.) is declared also to be the true LIGHT, which
LIGHTS every man that comes into the world, (John i. 9.) we may perhaps,
without impropriety, conceive, that the said Divine Knowledge (of which man
unlawfully partook) was in some way or other originally communicated to the
Tree of Knowledge in Paradise, by the ETERNAL WORD, because LIGHT and
KNOWLEDGE, when mentioned as mental Properties, are certainly synonymous terms;
so that to impart KNOWLEDGE to every man, is the same thing as to LIGHT, or
ENLIGHTEN every man that comes into the world. But, whether this conjecture be
true or not, yet we are certain that we can have no hopes of regaining the
privileges which were lost by the former fatal disobedience, except through
CHRIST alone: for to him are attributed all the properties of "THE TREE OF LIFE
From which our beguiled ancestor was unhappily excluded, being driven from
paradise -- lest he (should) put forth his hand, and TAKE also of THE TREE OF
LIFE, and EAT and LIVE for ever. Genesis iii. 22.


;" so that, in Him, we may truly partake of such benefits, as are amply
sufficient to restore the original Dignity of MAN! And this is the record, that
GOD has given to us ETERNAL LIFE; and this LIFE is in his SON. He that has
the Son, has LIFE; (and) he that has not THE SON OF GOD has not LIFE. These
things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of THE SON OF GOD, that
ye may know that ye have ETERNAL LIFE, and that ye may believe on the Name of
the SON OF GOD. 1 John v. 11 -- 13.) He that has an ear, let him hear what THE
SPIRIT says unto the Churches: To him that overcomes, WILL I GIVE (THE SPIRIT
here speaks in his own Name, and thereby declares his own Omnipotence and
DIVINE NATURE -- " To him will I GIVE," says the Spirit) to eat of the TREE OF
LIFE; which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. (Rev. ii. 7.) -- Therefore,
to " eat of the Tree of LIFE," is manifestly a spiritual repast, though real in
its eternal effects, which are undoubtedly the same as those we expect in
Christ. As the LIVING FATHER has sent me (said our Lord) and I LIVE by the
Father: so he that EATS ME, even he SHALL LIVE by me. This is that bread
which came down from heaven: not as your Fathers did eat Manna, and are dead.
He that EATS of this bread SHALL LIVE FOR EVER. John vi. 57, 58. Christ is
therefore, in a most effectual manner to us, THE TREE OF LIFE; and accordingly
he himself has assured us in the strongest terms -- VERILY, VERILY, I say unto
you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no
LIFE in you. Whose eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal LIFE,
and I will raise him at the last day. For my FLESH is MEAT INDEED ((...),
"TRULY SO") and MY BLOOD is DRINK INDEED, etc. (John vi. 53 -- 55.) Now as the
eating the flesh of the Son of Man, and drinking his blood ( EXCEPT YE EAT,
etc. -- YE HAVE NO LIFE in you, etc.) is thus declared to be absolutely
necessary for us, of course THE MEANS given us of DOING SO, demand our most
serious consideration, especially as they were expressly and clearly revealed
to the Apostles in the solemn hour of Christ's latest instructions The Apostle
Paul relates the last commands of Christ on this subject, as they were revealed
to him by our Lord himself, even after his ascension, whereby the necessity and
importance of them are still further confirmed! viz. That THE LORD JESUS, the
night he was betrayed, took BREAD: and when he had given thanks, he brake (it),
and said, Take, eat: THIS IS MY BODY, which is broken for you: THIS DO ((...),
manifestly directing his disciples to use the solemn ceremony of breaking
bread, AS HE HAD DONE) in remembrance (said he) of me. After the same manner
also the CUP, when he had supped, saying, THIS CUP is the New Testament (or New
Covenant) in my blood: THIS DO YE, as often as ye drink (it) in remembrance of
me. Thus far the Apostle relates the commands of Christ, which clearly relate
to what our Lord himself had before declared concerning the necessity of eating
his flesh, and drinking his blood; so that this solemn ceremony of Bread and
Wine is manifestly the means he had given us of doing so; because our Lord
declared of the Bread -- This is my Body, etc. adn of the Cup, This is the New
Covenant in my blood, etc. And therefore we may be assured, that all persons,
who sincerely and with due faith and disposition, partake of these two outward
symbols of his Body and Blood in remembrance of him (according to the form
which he himself so expressly instituted) do most certainly, in a spiritual
manner, partake also of "the Tree of Life," agreeable to the promise of THE
SPIRIT "to him that overcomes!" THE BREAD is no otherwise THE BODY OF CHRIST,
than as it is used in this institution -- viz. received, and eaten in
remembrance of Christ; by which we have Communion of his Body. 1 Cor. x. 16.
For we have no authority whatever to esteem it the Body of Christ in any other
respect; so that for all other purposes and uses whatsoever, it cannot be
allowed so much as the Name of any thing else, but what it really is -- mere
Bread -- even when it is held up to be worshipped; and therefore that Church
which uses it in suth an unjustifiable manner, is certainly guilty of the
grossest idolatry!


, which confirms the doctrine of their necessity and importance!

As our Lord had before declared -- My flesh is MEAT ((...), FOOD, from thence
the German BROAT, and English word BREAD) INDEED, and my blood is DRINK INDEED,
he now substituted the real viands of bread ((...), or FOOD INDEED) and wine
(drink indeed) as the outward symbols of that FLESH and BLOOD (that spiritual
meat and drink for the soul) of which all persons must of necessity partake,
who hope for ETERNAL LIFE! Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they
may have right to the TREE OF LIFE, etc. Rev. xxii. 14.


! But we must remember, at the same time, that this Knowledge in Man is far
from being of itself sufficient for these purposes! The dignity and privileges
of Human Nature cannot be known, nor the manner of communicating them properly
understood without a right Faith in the Dignity and Divine Nature of Christ,
because, in his Promises alone, our title to those extraordinary Privileges is
founded! Whatsoever ye shall ask IN MY NAME (said our Lord JESUS) that WILL I
DO (a clear proof of his Divine Nature) that the Father (said he) may be
glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in MY NAME (said our Lord
again) I WILL DO IT, etc. John xiv. 13, 14.

A right Faith, therefore, concerning the true Dignity of that Divine Person,
in whose Name we hope to obtain the heavenly Gift of the Holy Ghost, is
undoubtedly necessary; and we must "give him the honor due unto his Name," or
the very mention of that Name, instead of intitling us to favor, would be an
offense to God, who has highly exalted his only begotten Son, and given him A
NAME, which is above EVERY NAME: that at the NAME of JESUS every knee should
bow, of (things) in heaven, and (things) in earth; and (things) under the
earth: and that every tongue should confess, THAT JESUS CHRIST IS LORD, to THE
GLORY OF GOD the Father. (Philip. ii. 9 -- 11.)

Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is NONE OTHER NAME UNDER
HEAVEN given among Men, whereby we must be saved. Acts iv. 12. For as the
Father raised up the dead, and quickens them: even so the Son quickens whom
he will. John v. 21.

In a preceding verse (viz. 17th) our Lord, in like manner, compared (with a
seeming insinuation of equality) his own works with the works of his Father --
My Father works hitherto (said he) and I work.

The Father which works hitherto, was clearly understood by the Jews to
signify the Almighty Father, the Worker or Maker of all things, and therefore
they could neither brook the mention he made in the same sentence of his own
working, nor the particular claim which our Lord expressed in that sentence to
the Almighty Father as his peculiar Father, calling him My Father, instead of
Our Father, as the common Parent or Creator of Mankind.

All this is plainly implied in the following verse; and therefore the Jews
sought the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the Sabbath, (viz.
by his miraculous Works in healing the Sick, and doing good) but said also,
that GOD WAS HIS FATHER, (...), (said that God was his proper or peculiar
Father) making himself EQUAL with God. For to call God his peculiar Father was
justly esteemed by the Jews the same thing as making himself "equal with God,"
though they were unjustly incensed at it, through a want of due attention to
the mighty Works (similar to those of the Almighty Father) to which Christ
appealed, as a proof that he was really the Son of God!

That SUPREME HONOR is therefore due unto THE NAME AND PERSON OF THE SON, our
Blessed Redeemer, who, for OUR SAKE, took THE NATURE OF MAN upon himself, is
manifest, because we are expressly commanded to honor the Son, even as we
honor the Father; so that we cannot exceed -- FOR THE FATHER JUDGES NO MAN;
but has committed ALL JUDGMENT UNTO THE SON: that all (Men) should honor THE
SON, even as they honor THE FATHER, ((...)). And again, He that honors not
the Son, honors not the Father which has sent him. John v. 22, 23.

To "honor the Son" ((...), from (...) and (...), according as, or) even as
they "honor the Father," would be idolatry, if the Son was not a Divine
Person, really and truly God from all Eternity! Because the God of Israel, the
Eternal and Everlasting (...) Jehovah, and Creator of all things Thus says God
the Lord (or Jehovah) he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he
that spread forth the earth, and that which comes out of it; he that gives
breath unto the people upon it, and Spirit to them that walk therein: I the
Lord have called thee (that is, Christ) in righteousness, and will hold thine
hand, and will keep thee, and will give thee for a covenant of the people, for
a light of the Gentiles, etc. Isai. xlii. 5 -- 8.
, at the very time that he promised this Glorious Redeemer for a Covenant of
the people, for a Light of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out
the PRISONERS from the PRISON (that is, from the bondage and slavery of Satan)
and them that sit in darkness out of the PRISONHOUSE, he immediately added in
the very next sentence, I am the LORD (or Jehovah) THAT IS MY NAME: and my
GLORY will I not give to ANOTHER, etc. Isai. xlii. 5 -- 8.

It is impossible therefore, that the Supreme God, JEHOVAH, should give his
Glory, or require Men to honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, if the
Son was another, or not in Unity or One with the Father in the Eternal Being of
the One God; I mean, if he was not included in the One Eternal Divine Being
(...) which is but ONE ((...) One Jehovah) that is, UNITY ITSELF, and therefore
incapable of different Degrees, or Inequality. Hear, O Israel (said Moses) the
Lord (or Jehovah) our God, is One Lord, or ONE Jehovah. ((...)) Deuteronomy. vi. 4.
And yet we find, that this glorious Name of the One Eternal God of Israel; viz.
Jehovah (...), is manifestly attributed, both in the Old and New Testaments (as
I have already shown), to the Messiah as a distinct Person from the Father; and
therefore, when we read our Lord's expression in John xiv. 28. "My Father is
greater than I," we must necessarily understand, that no comparative reference
can possibly have been intended thereby, nor is to be made, concerning the
Divine Nature, or Godhead, which certainly is but One, viz. "ONE JEHOVAH," as
the text expressly declares, and consequently we must acknowledge with the
Author of the Creed, commonly attributed to Athanasius, that the Son is equal
to the Father, as touching his Godhead, (viz. the One Eternal Being, or
Jehovah) though inferior to the Father as touching his Manhood, or his
Mediatorial Office; for in some such qualified sense we must of course
understand our Lord's expression in John ( The Father is greater than I)
beforementioned; for those Men, who venture to assert, that the Inferiority of
the Son consists in his Divine Nature, must evidently suppose a Superior and
Inferior Divine Nature, and consequently, that there are Two Divine Natures,
which Idea the Scriptures expressly forbid -- (JEHOVAH, OUR GOD, is ONE
JEHOVAH, (Deuteronomy. vi. 4.) -- And therefore, as the Son is also JEHOVAH, we are
bound by the Scriptures to believe, that he is of the same Divine Nature with
the Father in that One Eternal Being, agreeable to what he himself has declared
-- I and the Father are One. ((...)) John x. 30. And as the Plurality of
Persons is clearly expressed in the latter text by the Plural Verb (...), we
are; so the word (...), One, evidently demonstrates the UNITY and EQUALITY of
their Divine Nature; for it is no less evident from the context, that the said
word (...), ONE, refers to the Being of God, or Jehovah, and was intended to
express the Unity of their Divine Nature (...), the Divine Nature, or Godhead
(Acts xvii. 29.) which can be but One, ((...), One Godhead) as there is but One
God, (...), 1 Timothy ii. 5. (...). James ii. 19.


. The Jews, it is plain, understood the expression in that sense, and
immediately charged our Lord with Blasphemy -- saying, -- Because that thou,
being a Man, make thyself God. And though our Lord condescended to cite a
passage from the Psalms, wherein the title of Gods is applied to mere Men, viz.
I said ye are Gods, in order to show, that the Scriptures would not be broken
by the consequence which they had drawn from his expression; yet he immediately
after maintains the evident meaning of his first expression, as it was at first
understood by the Jews, and, by a fair comparison, showed his infinite
superiority over them that were called Gods, in the Law, If he, (said our Lord,
meaning the Prophet David) called them GODS, unto whom the Word of GOD came,
and the Scripture cannot be broken; say ye of him, whom the Father has
sanctified, and sent into the world, thou blasphemest; because I said, I am THE
SON OF GOD? And our Lord immediately added an incontestable proof of his being
GOD [not merely in a confined, qualified Sense, like those Men called GODS in
Scripture I have said, Ye (are) GODS; and all of you (are) children (or SONS)
of the most High. (Psa. lxxxii. 6.) The whole Psalm is plainly intended as a
reproof and warning to wicked Rulers or wicked Judges, whom the inspired
Psalmist calls Gods, probably because they ought to act as God's Vicegerents on
earth, in judging righteously, according to GOD'S LAW, as Moses charged them --
Ye shall not respect persons in judgment, (but) ye shall hear the small, as
well as the great: ye shall not be afraid of the face of man; FOR THE JUDGMENT
IS GOD'S, etc. Deuteronomy. i. 16, 17. or, as King Jehoshaphat afterward warned his
Judges, in a most excellent charge, which ought to be wrote in letters of gold
on the most conspicuous part of every Court of Judicature -- viz. -- Take heed
what ye do: for ye judge not for man, BUT FOR THE LORD, WHO IS WITH YOU IN THE
JUDGMENT. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you! -- Take heed; and
do it! for (there is) no iniquity with THE LORD OUR GOD, nor respect of
persons, nor taking of gifts. (2 Chronicles. xix. 6, 7.) It is obvious, therefore,
when these texts are duly considered, that Judges and Magistrates are called
GODS, by the Psalmist, only in a confined and qualified sense, because they
"judge not for man, but for the Lord," and because "the judgment is God's;" and
though in the same sentence they are called "SONS OF THE MOST HIGH," yet this
is no disparagement or lessening to the title and dignity of the REAL SON OF
GOD, because the former (which are mere men by nature) are no otherwise SONS of
the most High, than by Adoption, for the sake of the REAL SON, who was not
ashamed to call them BRETHREN I will declare thy Name unto MY BRETHREN, Psa.
xxii. 22. And again -- Who are MY BRETHREN? And he stretched out his hands
toward his disciples, and said, Behold, my Mother, and MY BRETHREN. For
whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my
BROTHER, etc. Mat. xii. 48 -- 50.


, (Heb. ii. 11.) and even vouchsafed to take Human Nature upon himself, and to
become also "THE SON OF MAN," that he might be our BROTHER indeed, and the
Restorer of Human Dignity in his own Person!

The quotation made by our Lord (John x. 34.) from the 82d Psalm, viz. "I SAID
ye are Gods," manifestly refers us back to a preceding expression in the 1st
verse of the same Psalm, wherein the inspired Psalmist had "SAID," that God "
judges among THE GODS," -- meaning the congregation of God, mentioned in the
beginning of the same verse -- God stands in THE CONGREGATION OF GOD: he
judges among THE "GODS. How long will ye judge unjustly? etc. The whole Psalm,
as I have before remarked, is a reproof or warning to unjust Judges, who are
here called GODS, apparently in no other sense, than what I have already
described. The congregation of God, ((...) and (...)) signifies, for the most
part, the main body of the people, or the congregation of the Israelites in
general, as in Numbers xxvii. 17, and xxxi. 16. and also in Joshua xxii. 16,
17; but in the text before us (when the subject of the context is duly
considered) the expression seems to mean, the congregation or assembly of the
Judges or Senators of the people, and not the whole "Congregation of God;"
though indeed the said assembly was the proper representative of the whole
"Congregation of God;" because the Judges, Magistrates, and other Officers,
were originally ELECTED BY THE PEOPLE, AS ALL MAGISTRATES and PUBLIC OFFICERS
(in strict justice) OUGHT TO BE! We read, indeed, that Moses CHOSE able men out
of all Israel, and made them heads over the people. (Exodus xviii. 25.) but, in
fact, "the able men" were chosen by the people, and not by Moses (though it is
here said, that "he chose" them, as it was, indeed, by HIS advice, that they
were chosen, agreeable to the council and proposal of Jethro, related in the
preceding context) for in the first chapter of Deuteronomy, wherein Moses
begins to repeat the history of former transactions, he relates this amongst
the rest, in terms, which clearly show, that the election of the "able men" was
BY THE PEOPLE. I spoke unto you (says he) at that time, saying, I am not able
to bear you myself alone: the Lord your God has multiplied you, etc. How can I
myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife? TAKE YE,
((...) CHOOSE YE TO YOURSELVES In the Hebrew (says the learned Bp. Patrick) it
is, GIVE YE, i. e. present unto me (says he) such persons AS YOU THINK FIT,
according to the following characters. WISE MEN, and UNDERSTANDING, and KNOWN
AMONG YOUR TRIBES, etc. Thus the learned Bishop's paraphrase amounts to the
full meaning of my interpretation above, "Choose ye to yourselves" -- But there
is no need of a paraphrase to justify this rendering: the word (...) indeed,
literally signifies, GIVE YE, as the Bishop remarks; but neither his Lordship,
nor the English version, have taken any notice of the word which immediately
follows it, viz. (...). -- TO YOURSELVES; for, when these two words come
together, (...) they form a phrase, which, construed literally indeed, it, Give
ye to yourselves ((...), as the DXX. have literally rendered it) but as such a
sentence necessarily implies a choice, the phrase is much better expressed when
rendered, "Choose ye to yourselves," as above; above; which is the version of
the Syriac (...) "Choose ye to yourselves," both in this text, and in Joshua
xviii. 4. where the same Hebrew phrase occurs (...) -- CHOOSE YE TO YOURSELVES
three Men for each Tribe, and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go
through the land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and
they shall come (again) to me, etc. Thus Joshua also, as a faithful Minister of
State under GOD, was careful to maintain the popular Rights of Election, and to
promote them by his advice! Even a survey of the country, in his opinion (it
seems) was not to be trusted to any public officers or commissioners whatever,
but such as were duly chosen by the people, and those in equal proportions for
each Tribe -- Choose ye to yourselves (said he) three Men for each Tribe, etc.
) wise men and understanding, and KNOWN AMONG YOUR TRIBES, (which necessarily
implies that the Tribes were to NOMINATE) and I (said Moses) will make them
Rulers over you, (i. e. the returns of the elections were to be made to Moses,
and he was to invest the Elected with public authority). And ye (said Moses)
answered me, and said -- The thing which thou have spoken (is) good (for us) to
do. (Thus Moses, like a good politician, and faithful public minister under
under God, declared the free assent of the people, whereby the important
measure he had proposed, by the advice of JETHRO, was enacted, and became a
public LAW, or STATUTE). So I took (said Moses) the Chief of your Tribes, wise
men and known [that is, "known among the Tribes," (as expressed in the 13th
verse) which necessary qualification could not fairly be ascertained, unless
the known men were really returned or named to Moses, as such, by the Tribes
themselves] and made them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains
over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and officers
among your Tribes. [Thus it appears, that the officers in general, from the
colonel, or captain of a thousand (whether of individuals or families) down to
the sergeant, or tything-man, were recommended or nominated by the people,
before they were invested with authority by Moses] And I charged your JUDGES at
that time (whereby it must of course be understood, that the JUDGES also had
been previously nominated by the people as wise men, and understanding, and
known among the Tribes, agreeable to the preceding enacted proposal) saying,
Hear (the causes) between your brethren, and JUDGE righteously between (every)
man and his brother, and the stranger (that is) with him. Ye shall not respect
persons in judgment, etc. Deuteronomy. i. 9 -- 17. The remainder of the excellent
charge I have quoted above. -- I have thus far digressed from my subject, not
only for the sake of explaining several texts of Scripture, which occurred to
me in the course of my argument, but also, for the honor of Human Nature, to
show the glorious State of Political Liberty, with which God was pleased to
bless his people ISRAEL; and in which he would, most certainly, have maintained
them, if they had persevered in the right Faith, and in due obedience to his
Laws! But when men forsake GOD, they unavoidably lose their LIBERTY!


, but GOD also] in Effect and Power! -- If I do not THE WORKS OF MY FATHER
(continued our Lord) believe me not. BUT IF I DO, though you believe not me,
BELIEVE THE WORKS: that ye may know and BELIEVE that the FATHER is IN ME, and I
IN HIM. (John x. 31 -- 38.)

This reference to the Works of the Father, was a manifest appeal of Christ to
the understanding of his hearers, concerning the peculiar manner in which he
was really God, and of the same Divine Nature with THE FATHER, agreeable to the
obvious sense of his first proposition -- I and the Father are One, (ver. 30.)
-- and the unbelieving Jews (notwithstanding their mental blindness, and
hardness of heart, foretold by their own Prophets) as plainly understood, that
the necessary effect of this argument was exactly the same upon the whole, that
they at first apprehended; viz. that he MADE HIMSELF, (i. e. declared himself
to be really) GOD, and therefore they immediately renewed their wicked
persecution as at first; for they sought again to take him, (says the text) but
he escaped out of their hand, (ver. 39.)

My readers may perhaps think, that I prolong my work too much, and render it
tedious, by inserting so many proofs concerning the Divine Nature of THE SON OF
GOD; but alas! I find, that my labor on this point is become necessary! Many
learned men, and some, even of my own particular friends, have unhappily
overlooked that indispensable doctrine, and do not perceive, that the glorious
Name JEHOVAH (the peculiar Name of THE ONE SUPREME GOD) is clearly in the
Scriptures attributed also to the Son of God! And we cannot rightly understand
the Nature and Dignity of MAN (which is my leading subject in this Tract) nor
the true value of THE PRICE which was given for MAN'S REDEMPTION (as we are
bought with A PRICE, 1 Cor. vi. 20.) unless we are truly sensible of the Nature
and Dignity (as far as God has revealed it to us in the Scriptures) of that
Divine Person, who took Human Nature upon himself, in order to restore the lost
Dignity and Privileges of fallen MAN!

One of my learned friends (though a sensible and worthy man) amongst other
arguments and quotations against my doctrine, remarks as follows.

The Apostle Paul (says he) says, in Ephesians. i. 17 -- 20. that THE GOD OF OUR
LORD JESUS CHRIST, THE FATHER OF GLORY -- SET HIM AT HIS OWN RIGHT HAND. Hence
(says my learned friend) it necessarily follows that Christ is not Jehovah, but
the Son of Jehovah. -- God, who made the worlds by his Son, is the Father of
Christ. (Heb. i. 2.) See likewise (says he) Isaiah xi. 2. -- The Spirit of
JEHOVAH shall rest upon him. -- Also Isai. lxi. 1, 2. The Spirit of the Lord
God is upon me, because JEHOVAH has anointed me to preach, etc. compared with
Luke iv. 18.

Now that Christ is the Son of God, or (as my friend styles him) the Son of
Jehovah I will declare the decree: THE LORD (in the Hebrew JEHOVAH) has said
unto me, Thou art MY SON; this day have I BEGOTTEN THEE. Psalm. ii. 7.


, every true Christian must readily allow to be a true and indispensable
doctrine; but it by no means follows from thence (though my friend says it
necessarily follows) that Christ is not Jehovah! To the direct contrary of my
friend's assertion, I am obliged to remark, that as Christ is the Son of
Jehovah, and the Son of God in a peculiar and essential manner Christ is, in a
peculiar and essential manner, the Son of God, because he proceeded forth, and
came out of God, (see p. 261, 262.) and is expressly called THE ONLY BEGOTTEN
of the Almighty Father -- And the WORD was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and
we beheld his glory, the glory as of THE ONLY BEGOTTEN OF THE FATHER) full of
grace and truth. John i. 14. And again, GOD so loved the world, that he gave
HIS ONLY BEGOTTEN SON, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life. For GOD sent not HIS SON into the world to condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved. He that believes on him
is not condemned: but he that believes not is condemned already, because he
has not believed in the name of THE ONLY BEGOTTEN SON OF GOD. John iii. 16 --
18.


, it necessarily follows from thence, that he is also really and truly GOD and
JEHOVAH in an essential manner; for as a SON must necessarily partake of the
Nature or Essence of his natural FATHER, so "THE SON OF JEHOVAH" must
necessarily be of the same Nature, Being, or Essence with his ALMIGHTY FATHER,
JEHOVAH; and as there is but ONE JEHOVAH, must necessarily in some way or other
(though incomprehensible to us at present) be included in that ONE Eternal
BEING! The very circumstance which my friend assigns as a proof that " the Son
is NOT JEHOVAH," was esteemed by the unbelieving Jews (when our Lord was on
earth) as a proof that he made himself equal with God! Therefore the Jews
sought the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the Sabbath (that
is, as they falsely alleged, because he had healed the Sick, and done good on
the Sabbath Day, which was certainly lawful) but said also, that GOD WAS HIS
FATHER ((...), his own proper or peculiar Father, that is, his Father in a real
or essential manner; and this, it seems, is the very reason which my friend has
assigned as a proof that Christ is not Jehovah, but which, on the contrary, the
Jews rightly esteemed to be the same thing as) making himself EQUAL WITH GOD!
(...). John v. 18.

Our Lord was so far from denying the truth of the consequential Doctrine,
which the Jews had drawn from his having said, that "God was his Father," (...)
-- "his own proper Father," that he immediately, in the very next verse,
appealed to his works for the truth of it! Then answered Jesus, and said unto
them, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but
what he sees the Father do: (showing thereby, that the Father is indeed the
Fountain of Power; but immediately afterward he shows likewise, that he
himself, as being Son of the Almighty Father, was therefore equal in Power with
THE FATHER) for what things soever he (that is, the Father) does (said our
Lord) THESE ALSO DOES THE SON LIKEWISE! (or in like manner (...), which is
surely such an ample declaration of his own Almighty Power, as could not be
true, were he not really JEHOVAH) For the Father (continued our Lord) loves
the Son, and shows him ALL THINGS THAT HIMSELF DOES: and he will show him
greater WORKS THAN THESE (alluding to the mighty WORKS, by which he proved
himself to be "THE SON OF JEHOVAH") that ye may marvel (said he). For as the
Father raises up the dead, and quickens (them); EVEN SO THE SON QUICKENS
WHOM HE WILL. [Another incontestable declaration of ALMIGHTY POWER, such as
cannot be attributed to any that is not TRULY GOD, though it is certainly an
especial Attribute of him that is called (...) -- "THE PRINCE (or Author) OF
LIFE But ye denied the Holy One, and the Just (said the Apostle Peter to the
Jews) and desired a murderer to be granted unto you. And killed THE PRINCE OF
LIFE, whom God has raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses: and HIS
NAME [i. e. the Name of JESUS, as a proof that he has LIFE IN HIMSELF, (John
v. 26.) and QUICKENS WHOM HE WILL] through faith in HIS NAME has made this
man strong, whom ye see and know, etc. Acts iii. 14 -- 16. For as the Prophets
of old wrought miracles in the Name of JEHOVAH, so the Apostles and Primitive
Christians wrought miracles in the Name of JESUS, to prove that he was the Son
of Jehovah, and consequently is truly God and Lord!


]! For the Father (continues our Lord) judges no man; but has committed ALL
JUDGMENT unto the Son, that all (men) should honor Which Honor (as I have
before remarked) implies supreme Honor, and Worship, such as would be gross
idolatry, if THE SON was not truly JEHOVAH; because the Law (which Christ came
to fulfill Think not that I am come to destroy THE LAW, or THE PROPHETS: I am
not come to destroy, but TO FULFILL. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and
earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from THE LAW, till all
be fulfilled. Matthew. v. 17, 18.
) declares expressly -- Thou shall fear JEHOVAH THY GOD; him shall thou serve,
and to him shall thou cleave, etc. Deuteronomy. x. 20. And this Law Christ himself, in
his quotation of it, has taught us to understand as an injunction to serve and
fear JEHOVAH only, or exclusively of every other BEING -- for it it written
(said our Lord) Thou shall worship THE LORD THY GOD ((...), for "JEHOVAH thy
God") "and him ONLY shall thou serve" (or worship) (...), (Matthew. iv. 10.)
whereas if the Son was not truly JEHOVAH, this also would be an irreconcilable
contradiction to the command abovementioned, that all men should honor the
Son, even as ((...)) they honor the Father!


the Son, even as they honor the Father. (And as supreme Honor is certainly
due to THE FATHER, we must of course honor THE SON with supreme Honor, EVEN
AS ((...)) we honor the Father. This is so necessary a part of the Christian
Duty, that men cannot pay the proper honor to THE HEAVENLY FATHER, unless they
thus honor THE SON, also, with supreme Honor; for) HE THAT HONORS NOT THE
SON (that is, He that honors not the Son, even as he honors the Father --
for this is necessarily implied from the preceding Context) "HONORS NOT THE
FATHER " How dangerous, therefore, is the doctrine of some modern Clergymen,
who have seceded from the Church of England, merely because the Litany, and
other Parts of our excellent Liturgy, express Divine Honor to THE SON OF GOD!
What mental blindness! not to perceive that we are bound to honor THE SON (not
merely for his own sake, but also) for the sake of our HEAVENLY FATHER "which
has sent him," that the FATHER, in return, may have mercy on us, for the sake
of his ONLY SON! For the Scriptures assure us, that we cannot honor the
Father, if we do not honor the Son; -- and the Jews of old were warned by the
Psalmist concerning the necessity of "Honoring the Son," lest they should
perish from the right way! (...) Kiss THE SON, lest he be angry, and ye perish
(from) the way, (Psalm. ii. 12.) The literal sense of this passage is fixed by
the preceding context -- I will declare the decree -- JEHOVAH has said unto
me, Thou art MY SON; this day have I begotten thee, v. 7.


, WHICH HAS SENT HIM. John v. 17 -- 23.

The Scriptures attribute Eternal Honor and Glory to THE SON, and that jointly
with THE HEAVENLY FATHER -- Blessing, and HONOR, and GLORY, and POWER, be unto
him that sits upon the throne, AND UNTO THE LAMB, for ever and ever. And the
four beasts (or animals The Redeemed out of the twelve tribes of Israel, which
are represented by the figures that anciently distinguished the standards of
the four principal tribes in their encampments round the tabernacle. This
opinion has been adopted by the great Sir Isaac Newton -- The people of Israel
(says he) in the wilderness encamped round about the tabernacle, and on the
east side were three tribes under the standard of Judah, on the west were three
tribes under the standard of Ephraim, on the south were three tribes, under the
standard of Reuben; and on the north were three tribes under the standard of
Dan, Numb. ii. And the standard of JUDAH was a Lion, that of EPHRAIM an ox,
that of REUBEN a man, and that of DAN an eagle, as the Jews affirm. (Compare
this with Revel. iv. 7. And the first beast (was) like A LION, and the second
beast like A CALF, and the third beast had a face as A MAN, and the fourth
beast (or animal) was) like a FLYING EAGLE. Rev. iv. 7.
) Whence were framed (says Sir Isaac Newton) the Hieroglyphics of Cherubims
and Seraphims, to reprepresent the people of Israel. A Cherubim had one body
with four faces, the faces of a lion, an ox, a man, and an eagle, looking to
the four winds of heaven, without turning about, as in Ezekiel's vision, chap.
i. And four Seraphims had the same four faces with four bodies, one face to
every body. The four beasts are therefore four Seraphims standing in the four
sides of the peoples court; the first in the eastern side with the head of a
lion, the second in the western side, etc. and all four signify together the
twelve tribes of Israel, out of whom the hundred and forty four thousand were
sealed. Apoc. vii. 4. Observe. on the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apoc. p. 259.


representing the Redeemed Hosts of Israel) said, AMEN. (Rev. v. 13, 14. See
also the 12th verse.)

Thus we find, that HONOR, and GLORY, and POWER, belong UNTO THE LAMB FOR
EVER! He had indeed, for a time, laid aside this SUPREME GLORY (this Glory
which is attributed to him jointly with him that sits upon the Heavenly
Throne) that he might become "the Son of Man," and by Obedience For as BY ONE
MAN'S DISOBEDIENCE many were made sinners, so BY THE OBEDIENCE OF ONE shall
many be made righteous. Romans v. 19.
in fulfilling the Law Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the
Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Matthew. v. 17.
, and all Righteousness And Jesus answering, said unto him (John the Baptist)
Suffer (it to be so) now: for thus it becomes us TO FULFILL ALL RIGHTEOUSNESS.
Then he suffered him. Matthew. iii. 15.
, even as A MAN, might retrieve the dignity and lost privileges of HUMAN
NATURE: but the Divine Glory was again to be restored to him, though he now
partook of the Nature of his Creature Man; nay, the Son himself, even when a
Man, claims the Glory of his Heavenly Father! -- And now, O Father (said he)
GLORIFY THOU ME WITH THINE OWNSELF, WITH THE GLORY which I had WITH THEE before
the world was. John xvii. 5. See also p. 308.

It was not only in his Divine Nature, that THE SON was to be thus glorified,
but expressly as "MAN;" so that the Nature of MAN is indeed exalted in Christ
to the highest pitch of glory! -- Behold THE MAN, whose Name is THE BRANCH
(says the Prophet Zechariah) he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall
BUILD THE TEMPLE of the Lord That is -- "The Holy TEMPLE in the Lord," (i. e.
in Christ) "in whom" the Faithful are BUILDED together for an habitation of GOD
through THE SPIRIT. Ephesians. ii. 21, 22. See also p. 305 -- 307.


: even he shall BUILD THE TEMPLE of the Lord; and he shall BEAR THE GLORY,
(that is, even he, -- THE MAN that is called the Branch, shall BEAR THE GLORY)
and shall SIT and RULE UPON HIS THRONE; and he shall be A PRIEST UPON HIS
THRONE, [that is, a ROYAL PRIEST, after the order of that Righteous King, The
Lord (Jehovah) has sworn, and will not repent. Thou art A PRIEST FOR EVER
after the order of MELCHIZEDEK, or "the righteous King." Psa. cx. 4. Compare
with Heb. v. 6 -- 10. and also with Heb. vii. 1 -- 11.


, who was KING of SALEM, or King of PEACE For this MELCHI-SEDEC, King of Salem,
Priest of the most High God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of
the Kings, and blessed him, to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all;
first, being by interpretation, KING OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, and after that also King
of Salem, which is, King of Peace, etc. Heb. vii. 1, 2.
] and the Counsel of PEACE shall be between them both. (Zechariah vi. 12, 13.)
The throne or kingdom here promised, was also to be an everlasting Kingdom,
though given to Christ, expressly as "Son of Man;" for it is certainly the same
Kingdom foretold by the Prophet Daniel, -- I saw in the night visions, (says
Daniel) and behold (one) like THE SON OF MAN came with the clouds of heaven,
and came to the ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And
there was given him DOMINION, and GLORY, and A KINGDOM, that all People,
Nations, and Languages, should serve him: HIS DOMINION IS AN EVERLASTING
DOMINION, WHICH SHALL NOT PASS AWAY, and HIS KINGDOM (that) WHICH SHALL NOT BE
DESTROYED. Dan. vii. 13, 14. Compare this with chap. ii. 44. wherein the same
Prophet informs us, that -- in the days of these Kings (meaning the Kings, or
rather Kingdoms, which succeeded the fourth great Kingdom or Roman Empire)
shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall NEVER BE DESTROYED: and
the Kingdom shall not be left to other People, (but) it shall break in pieces,
and consume all these Kingdoms, and IT SHALL STAND FOR EVER. The Psalmist had
also previously declared -- Thy Throne, O GOD, is FOR EVER AND EVER. Psalm. xlv.
6. Which the Apostle Paul has applied expressly to the Son. Heb. i. 8. These
Prophecies of an Eternal Kingdom, proclaimed by the Prophets under the Old
Testament, were confirmed by the Angel GABRIEL, when he declared the Eternity
of CHRIST'S Government: -- And behold (said he to the Blessed Virgin) thou
shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his Name
JESUS (which signifies A SAVIOR. See note in p. 225.) He shall be great, and
shall be called the Son of the Highest: and THE LORD GOD shall give unto him
THE THRONE of his Father David. And he shall REIGN over the House of Jacob FOR
EVER ( -- (...)): and of HIS KINGDOM THERE SHALL BE NO END ((...).) Luke i. 31
-- 33. The Apostle Paul, nevertheless, informs us of a time, when he (Christ)
shall have DELIVERED UP THE KINGDOM TO GOD, EVEN THE FATHER; when he shall have
put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power. (meaning ALL POWER that in any
degree is opposite or inimical in its Nature to his KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS)
For he must REIGN till he has put all Enemies under his Feet. 1 Cor. xv. 24,
25. And again, in the 28th verse -- And when all things shall be subdued unto
him, then shall THE SON ALSO HIMSELF BE SUBJECT UNTO HIM THAT PUT ALL THINGS
UNDER HIM, THAT GOD MAY BE ALL IN ALL. The two last mentioned texts, when
collated with the preceding declarations concerning the Eternity of Christ's
Kingdom, would contain an irreconcilable difficulty, were it not clearly
demonstrable, that "the Son of God" is really included with THE ALMIGHTY FATHER
in the Eternal BEING JEHOVAH, and consequently is truly GOD! For the fact is,
that he is called JEHOVAH and GOD in many unquestionable passages of Scripture,
in some expressly, in others by necessary implication, (several examples of
which are already cited in this Tract) and no inference to the contrary can be
justly drawn from any of the texts which my learned friend (before mentioned)
has laid before me as proofs of an opposite sentiment!

Most of these indeed are such as relate to the Son, merely in his mediatorial
Office as MESSIAH, or the Anointed of JEHOVAH; -- as Psalm. ii. 2. The kings of
the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together against the
Lord, and against his Anointed. Psalm. ii. 2. And when they heard that, they
lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou art God,
which have made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is; who by
the mouth of thy servant David have said, Why did the heathen rage, and the
people imagine vain things? The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers
were gathered together against the Lord, and against his Christ. Acts iv. 24,
25, 26. But unto the Son (he says) Thy throne, O God (is) for ever and ever: a
Scepter of righteousness (is) the Scepter of thy Kingdom. Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity: therefore God (even) thy God, has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Heb. i. 8, 9. The Lord said
unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand: until I make thine enemies thy
footstool. Psalm. cx. 1. For he must reign till he has put all enemies under
his feet. 1 Cor. xv. 25. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
glory, may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom, and revelation, in the knowledge
of him, etc. which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and
set (him) at his own right hand in the heavenly (places). Ephesians. i. 17.20. Has
in these last days spoken unto us by (his) Son, whom he has appointed heir of
all things, by whom also he made the worlds. Heb. i. 2.


compared with Acts iv. 24, 25, 26. also Heb. i. 8, 9. -- Psalm. cx. 1. 1 Cor.
xv. 25. (which is the particular text now under consideration) Ephesians. i. 17.20.
and Heb. i. 2. And others relate particularly to Christ's ministry, whilst he
dwelt personally as a Man upon earth; -- as Isai. xi. 2. And the Spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of
counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. Isai.
xi. 2. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me
to preach good tidings unto the meek; he has sent me to bind up the broken
hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to
them that are bound. To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day
of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn. lxi. 1, 2. The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
poor: he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised. Luke iv. 18.
lxi. 1, 2. compared with Luke iv. 18. -- These prove indeed that he is
inferior to the Father as touching his Manhood, and all of them demonstrate his
subordination to the Almighty Father in the ministry and gracious offices which
he had undertaken for the restoration of mankind; but none of them afford the
least shadow of contradiction to the texts wherein his Divine Nature is
declared! One particular text, however, remains to be mentioned, which at first
sight, seems to militate against my general argument -- viz. Psalm. lxxxiii. 18.
-- That (men) may know that thou (i. e. GOD mentioned in the 1st and 13th
verses) WHOSE NAME ALONE IS JEHOVAH, (art) the most High over all the earth. --
Now, it is strictly true, indeed, (though I do not think it the proper
translation of this text, see pages 233 -- 236.) that God ALONE is JEHOVAH,
because Jehovah alone is God For who is God but Jehovah? Psa. xviii. 31.
; and the Scriptures assure us, that there is but ONE JEHOVAH, (Deuteronomy. vi. 4.)
or One "ONLY WISE GOD." (Romans xvi. 27. 1 Timothy i. 17.) And therefore, when the
Son of God is called JEHOVAH, or GOD, he is not so named, as being distinct or
separate with respect to that ONE Eternal Being, JEHOVAH, or GOD, but as being
included in that Divine Nature, or GOD, whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, and as
being ONE with the ALMIGHTY FATHER! which was declared by the Son himself; -- I
and the Father ((...)) WE ARE ONE. (John x. 30.) I am in the Father, and the
Father in me. (John xiv. 11. xvii. 21. and x. 38.) And therefore, though the
Son shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, -- and shall also
himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all
in all, (as declared in the texts cited above from 1 Cor. xv. 24 -- 28.) yet,
as the Son is in the Father, and the Father in him, and as "all things that the
Father has are" the Son's (John xvi. 15.) and as he must of course be
glorified with the Glory which he had with the Father himself before the world
was, (John xvii. 5.) it is manifest that he will still reign in and with the
ALMIGHTY FATHER in that Eternal Being of GOD, which will then "be all in all!"

In the above mentioned text of St. Paul, it is said, that He (Christ) must
reign, till he has put all enemies under his feet, and that the last enemy
(that) shall be destroyed is DEATH. (1 Cor. xv. 25, 26.) This opens to us the
time that Christ will deliver up the kingdom. DEATH, that last enemy, will be
effectually destroyed, when all men, that are redeemed by Christ, are risen
from DEATH! The world itself (where alone Death reigned) and all that is
desirable in it, will then not only be "burned up," (2 Pet. iii. 10.) but will
be made the seat of eternal Horror and "everlasting Fire," (see Notes in pages
130 and 142.) and the irrevocable decrees of the Son of MAN, in his final
Judgment upon MEN and ANGELS, will by that time have taken place! Here, then,
is an end of the whole Christian Dispensation! What need can there be of a
Redeemer, a Mediator, or of a Judge, after the Fate of all Mankind is
determined! -- It is no lessening, therefore, of the Son's Dignity, that he
then delivers up the several charges which he had undertaken in obedience to
his Father's will, when the same shall have been completely executed and
fulfilled! -- The generality of Commentators agree, that it is Christ's
Mediatorial Kingdom which will then be delivered up; but they should also have
mentioned that Sovereignty, which is still of higher degree, that glorious
Sovereign Authority, which is of unspeakable Dignity; I mean that of sitting as
SUPREME JUDGE OF THE UNIVERSE! An Authority of which even the Almighty Father
has divested himself -- For the Father judges no Man, but has committed all
Judgment unto the Son (and the supreme Dignity of the Trust is fully declared
by the reason of its being given); that all (Men) should honor the Son, even
as they honor the Father. (John v. 22, 23.) Nay, not only Men, but Angels must
honor him; for the word ALL ((...)) includes Angels as well as Men; and we
read expressly, that Angels are required to WORSHIP HIM And again, when he
brings in the first begotten into the world, he says (says the Apostle to
the Hebrews) And let ALL THE ANGELS OF GOD WORSHIP HIM. Heb. i. 6. Compare with
the Greek version of Psalm xcvii. 7.


, which would be gross idolatry, if Christ was not truly GOD, and One with the
Father in the Eternal Being JEHOVAH! And when the important Trust shall have
been fulfilled, and completely executed, that Divine Authority and
Jurisdiction, as supreme Judge (which had been committed only to One of the
Divine Persons) shall be delivered up, together with all other offices of
distinct or separate Authority, that GOD MAY BE ALL IN ALL. And in GOD,
undoubtedly, the Son of God shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever: and
of his Kingdom there shall be no end! -- Agreeable to the Angels Prophecy. Luke
i. 33.

The Scriptures indeed are every where filled with clear Testimonies concerning
the Divinity of our BLESSED REDEEMER, so that the command to honor him, "even
as we honor the Father," is perfectly consistent with all the rest. And
therefore, unless we HONOR the Son with SUPREME HONOR, even as we honor the
Father, we fall short of the command; and, for want of due Faith, cannot expect
to obtain of the Father that glorious and heavenly Gift for the necessary
improvement of Human Nature, which our REDEEMER has promised to them that ask
in his Name, even the Spirit of Truth, (John xv. 26.) which will guide us into
all Truth. (John xvi. 13.)

The supreme, or equal Divine Nature of THE HOLY SPIRIT, is not less clearly
declared, in several parts of Scripture, than the Divine Nature of THE SON OF
GOD, notwithstanding that some other parts of Scripture express a manifest
Subordination of Office; as that he shall NOT SPEAK OF HIMSELF; but whatsoever
he " SHALL HEAR, (that) shall he speak John xvi. 13. Upon this Augustine has
remarked, that AUDIRE illi SCIRE est, SCIRE vero ESSE. Ab illo a quo precedit,
illi est ESSENTIA SCIENTIA et AUDIENTIA. Semper AUDIT Spiritus Sanctus quia
semper scit. (Tract. 99). But the true sense of this Hearing and Speaking of
the Holy Ghost will be best understood by comparing the text with another
passage of Scripture, wherein God's Revelation by his Spirit is further
explained. St. Paul, speaking of the things which God has prepared for them
that love him, intimates, that -- GOD has REVEALED (them) unto us BY HIS
SPIRIT: for the Spirit (says he) searches all things, yea, THE DEEP THINGS OF
GOD. For what Man" (continues the Apostle) "knows the things of a Man, save
THE SPIRIT OF MAN which is in him? Even so" ((...), so also) "the things of GOD
knows no Man but THE SPIRIT OF GOD. 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11. Thus by comparing
spiritual things with spiritual (agreeable to the Apostle's advice in the next
verse but one, ver. 13.) we learn how to understand what is said of the Holy
Ghost's Hearing what "he shall speak:" for the manner of his knowing, or being
acquainted with "the things of God," we find is plainly compared to the
knowledge of the Soul in a Man, respecting the things of a Man; and surely a
stronger declaration of supreme and infinite Knowledge could not have been
made! He therefore that searches the deep things of God, speaks not of
himself, because he speaks "the things of God," and of course the things of
Christ, because "all things that the Father has" (said Christ) "are MINE:
therefore said I" (continues our Lord) that he (i. e. the Spirit) shall take of
MINE, and shall show it unto you. John xvi. 15.


;" and that he is sent or given by the Father Our Lord said to his disciples --
I will pray THE FATHER, and HE shall GIVE you another COMFORTER, that he may
abide with you for ever; (even) the SPIRIT OF TRUTH, etc. John xiv. 16, 17. --
But the Comforter (which is) the Holy Ghost, whom THE FATHER WILL SEND in my
Name, he shall teach you all things, etc. Chapter xiv. 26.


; and also by the Son -- It is expedient for you (said our Lord to his
disciples) that I go away: for if I go not away, THE COMFORTER will not come
unto you; but if I depart, I WILL SEND HIM unto you. John xvi. 7. Compare this
with chapter xv. 26. -- When THE COMFORTER is come, whom I WILL SEND unto you from
the Father, even THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH, which proceeds ((...), proceeds out)
from the Father, he shall testify of me. This text affords an ample proof of
the Divine Nature of the HOLY SPIRIT, and shows, that he is not like other
Spirits, a created Spirit, but, on the contrary, proceeded out from the Father,
as Grotius remarks -- Non creatus aliquis Spiritus, sed qui de patris ipsius
substantia procedit et ab ipso emanat. (...), ut Athenagoras loquitur. The
Divine Word, in like manner, proceeded out from the Father, as I have already
remarked, see p. 261.


; and again, that he is declared to be "the Spirit of Christ" Of which
salvation, ( meaning "the salvation of souls" mentioned in the preceding verse)
the Prophets have enquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the Grace
(that should come) unto you: searching what or what manner of time THE SPIRIT
OF CHRIST which was IN THEM did signify, when it testified beforehand the
sufferings OF CHRIST, and the glory that should follow 1 Pet. i. 10, 11. From
hence it is manifest, that this Spirit of Christ is the same identical Spirit
of God ((...) THE SPIRIT OF JEHOVAH) which spoke beforehand the sufferings of
Christ by the Prophets in old time; so that the Spirit of God is unquestionably
the Spirit, also, of Christ, agreeably to what our Lord himself declared, All
things that THE FATHER has are MINE, (see page 308.) and therefore the
Almighty Operations of the Holy Spirit manifested the Glory of the Son as well
as the Glory of the Father -- He (said our Lord, speaking of THE SPIRIT OF
TRUTH) shall glorify me: for he shall receive of MINE, and shall show it unto
you. All things that THE FATHER has ARE MINE: therefore said I, that he shall
take of MINE, and show (it) unto you. (John xvi. 15, 16.) Compare this with
John xvii. 10. -- And all mine are thine (said Christ to his Heavenly Father)
and thine are mine; and I AM GLORIFIED IN THEM.


, as well as "the Spirit of God!" -- yet (I say, notwithstanding these
expressions of Subordination) the supreme or equal Divine Nature of THE HOLY
SPIRIT is clearly revealed in several parts of Scripture. The Prophet Isaiah,
for instance, has declared the Divine Omnipotence of the Spirit in the
strongest terms; -- in terms which prove, that "the Spirit of God" is a free
and independent Spirit, and is truly God of the same supreme Divine Nature, or
Eternal Being, with the other Two Divine Persons; for this Prophet expressly
applies to "the Spirit of God" the same supreme Attributes of Creation and
Almighty Power, which in other parts of Scripture are occasionally attributed
to the other Two Divine Persons!

But hear the words of the Prophet himself, dictated by that same Spirit. --
Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted out heaven
with the span, and comprehended the dust in a measure, and weighed the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? Who has directed THE SPIRIT
OF THE LORD, (or rather the SPIRIT OF JEHOVAH (...), for thus exactly is the
Spirit of the Lord commonly expressed in the Old Testament, when mention is
made of his inspiration or coming down upon the Prophets) or who (being) his
Counselor, has taught him? With whom took he counsel; and (who) instructed
him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and
showed to him the way of understanding? (Thus the Prophet clearly insists on
the independency of the free Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is LIBERTY!
2 Cor. iii. 17. -- Take not thy HOLY SPIRIT from me. Restore unto me the joy of
thy salvation, and uphold me with thy FREE SPIRIT. Psa. li. 11, 12.


Spirit of the Lord) -- Behold, the nations (are) as as a drop of a bucket, and
are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he takes up the isles as
a very little thing. And Libanon (is) not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts
thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering! All nations before him (are) as
nothing: and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. (Isaiah xl.
12 -- 17.) The Prophet afterward proceeds to speak of GOD ((...)) without
further distinction of Persons, having already, in the preceding part of the
chapter, clearly distinguished the Person of the Son of God under the title of
"Jehovah," and "our God," whose Advent was to be proclaimed by the voice in the
wilderness, and of whom Sion and Jerusalem were directed to say unto the cities
of Judah, Behold your God, (see p. 248 -- 258) and having also expressly
distinguished the Spirit of Jehovah, and proclaimed his Divine Attributes and
supreme Dignity, (see ver. 12 -- 17. last cited) he now proceeds to speak of
GOD (in the 18th verse) without further distinction of Persons. To whom then
(continues he) will ye liken GOD? or what likeness will ye compare unto him?
(ver. 18, etc.)

The Spiritual Nature of GOD is surely so far above our finite comprehension,
that it cannot be explained or expressed by any likeness or comparison
whatsoever! -- But yet, as we may clearly perceive and understand, by what is
revealed to us, that the supreme Attributes of Creation and Almighty Power are
applied expressly to the Holy Spirit (as in the above cited text of Isaiah)
which in other parts of Scripture are equally attributed to THE FATHER AND THE
SON, we may reasonably conclude, that the supreme Dignity of the HOLY SPIRIT
must necessarily consist in his entire Union and Equality with the Father and
with the Son in the Divine Nature, or GODHEAD See note in p. 322. and note
(148) in p. 371.
-- that ONE eternal and glorious Being, JEHOVAH, which is, and which was, and
which is to come, THE ALMIGHTY! (Rev. i. 8. see also p. 239.)

This entire Union of THE HOLY SPIRIT with the Almighty Father and the Son, in
the One Eternal Being of GOD, is a necessary doctrine, without which THE
ALMIGHTY POWER, attributed in the Scriptures to the Holy Spirit, cannot be
reconciled to that other indispensable Article of our Faith, the Unity of God!

In the Book of Job (chapter xxxiii. 4.) the Spirit is declared to be the Creator!
THE SPIRIT OF GOD The words here rendered "the Spirit of God," are (...), which
are both Noun Substantives, and therefore ought not to be construed -- the
Divine Spirit, as in the Greek version ((...), etc.) but the Spirit of God, as
it is rendered in the Chaldee Paraphrase or Targum (...), and also in the
Syriac version (...) for in both these, the Article of the Genitive Case is
added to the second Substantive, to mark the sense of the Hebrew in such cases,
though that most ancient language has no Article to express the Genitive Case.


has MADE me, and THE BREATH (a term synonymous to SPIRIT) of the Almighty
has given me Life. In the account also which Moses has given us of the
Creation, we read, that the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
(Genesis i. 2.) And the Psalmist attributes the Creation to THE SPIRIT jointly
with the Divine WORD; -- By the WORD of JEHOVAH were the heavens made: and all
the host of them, by the BREATH (or SPIRIT Or SPIRIT -- for the word here
rendered Breath, is (...), i. e. the very same Hebrew Noun, by which the Spirit
is most commonly expressed in Holy Scripture.


of his mouth. (Psalm. xxxiii. 6.) And afterward, when the Divine WORD was made
flesh and dwelt among us, he himself expressly attributed to the Spirit of God
Attributed to "the Spirit of God." -- Our Lord said to the Jews -- If I cast
out Devils BY THE SPIRIT OF GOD, then the Kingdom of GOD is come unto you.
(Matthew. xii. 28.)


those mighty WORKS, to which he appealed for the truth of his doctrine
concerning his Unity with the Almighty Father (see p. 287.) and which, at
another time, he expressly calls the Works of his Father! If I do not the works
of my Father, believe me not. John x. 37.
So that without the doctrine of the Unity of the Divine Nature, this
application of the same Attributes to different Persons could not be understood!

St, Paul also attributed to THE POWER OF THE SPIRIT OF GOD I have therefore
whereof I may glory, THROUGH JESUS CHRIST, in those things which pertain unto
God. For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which CHRIST HAS NOT
WROUGHT BY ME, to make the Gentiles obedient by word and deed, through MIGHTY
SIGNS AND WONDERS, BY THE POWER OF THE SPIRIT OF GOD; so that from Jerusalem,
and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ.
(Romans xv. 17 -- 19.)
the miracles, which he wrought "through Jesus Christ," in preaching his Gospel
to the Gentiles. Nay, even the miraculous Conception of the Blessed Virgin
(from whence the Holy Child Jesus was called "the Son of God") is expressly
attributed to the Holy Ghost by St. Matthew -- She was found with Child of the
Holy Ghost (i. 18.) for that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost.
(i. 20.) Compare this with Luke i. 35. -- The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
etc.

The glorious Title (...) -- the Power of the Highest, which immediately
follows these words concerning the Holy Ghost in the last mentioned text, is by
several learned Commentators attributed also to him, viz. the Holy Spirit " Et
Virtus Altissimi, i. e. Spiritus Dei (qui Virtus Dei, Luc. xxiv. 49.)
efficacissimus." Lucas Brugensis, as quoted in Pole's Synopsis. And Grotius, on
the 17th verse of this chapter, says -- Quoties (...) nominatur SPIRITU
nominato, vis quaedam SPIRITUS solita major indicatur, ut infra 35. (meaning
the 35th verse, the text in question) Actor. x. 38. 1 Cor. ii. 4. 1 Thessalonians. i. 5.


; and a Title nearly similar is certainly attributed to the same Spirit, even
by our Lord himself, when he foretold the fulfilling of God's promise in the
Gift of the Holy Ghost. -- And behold (said he) I send the promise of my Father
Compare with John xiv. 16 -- 26.
upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with POWER
FROM ON HIGH. (Luke xxiv. 49.)

Similar Titles are also given to the Son of God; for even in his ministerial
Character as Messiah, or Christ, after he had taken Human Nature upon him, he
is called THE POWER OF GOD, AND THE WISDOM OF GOD. (1 Cor. i. 24.) Surely these
are Attributes of the Divine Nature, and Titles of supreme Dignity!

The Power of Justification must certainly be also accounted a Divine
Attribute, and as such can belong to none but GOD; for it is GOD that
JUSTIFIES (Romans viii. 33.) but yet both Justification, and Sanctification
also, (another Divine Attribute) are expressly attributed to the HOLY SPIRIT,
jointly with CHRIST! -- But ye are washed, but ye are SANCTIFIED, but ye are
JUSTIFIED, in the Name of the LORD JESUS, and by ( or in) THE SPIRIT of our
God. (1 Cor. vi. 11.)

To give Life, also, is not less apparently an Attribute of THE DIVINE NATURE
than Creation, whether we speak of mere Animal Life, or the Spiritual or
Eternal Life, but more especially the latter, and yet this ALMIGHTY POWER is
attributed both to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit! For though it is GOD who
quickens the dead, (Romans iv. 17.) and who quickens all things; (1 Timothy vi.
13.) yet the Son also is called a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. xv. 45. and
quickens whom he will, ((...), John v. 21.) and by the same authority we know
likewise, that it is THE SPIRIT that QUICKENS! (John vi. 63.) In consequence
of this Almighty Power the Son is called THE PRINCE (or Author) OF LIFE And
killed the PRINCE (or Author) OF LIFE ((...)) whom GOD has raised from the
dead; whereof we are witnesses. (Acts iii. 15.) See also a note in p. 336.


, and the Spirit is expressly entitled -- the Spirit of LIFE (There is)
therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, but after THE SPIRIT. For the Law of THE SPIRIT OF LIFE in
Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin and death. Romans viii. 1, 2.

-- And after three days and an half, THE SPIRIT OF LIFE from God entered into
them: and they stood upon their feet, etc. Rev. xi. 11.


.

Add to this, that the Spirit is expressly entitled the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might And THE SPIRIT OF JEHOVAH shall
rest upon him (viz. upon the Branch from the Stem of Jesse), the Spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of
knowledge, and the fear of the Lord; etc. Isai. xi. 2.
, the Spirit of Holiliness And declared to be THE SON OF GOD with POWER;
according to THE SPIRIT OF HOLINESS, by the resurrection from the dead. Romans i.
4.
, and THE SPIRIT OF GLORY -- For THE SPIRIT OF GLORY and of God rests upon
you. 1 Pet. iv. 14.
! These expressions of Dignity and Power are unlimited, and do certainly
include the highest or supreme degree of the several recited Attributes, even
the infinite Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, etc. of GOD, because they are
attributed to that glorious Spirit, which searches all things, yea, the deep
things of God! (1 Cor. ii. 10.) and they are attributed to him, also, as
essential Properties, which are so eminently his, that he is even named from
them -- the Spirit of Wisdom -- the Spirit of Might -- the Spirit of Glory; as
Christ is also entitled -- the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, (see p.
367.) and "the Lord of Glory," see pages 283, 284.

These Titles and Attributes cannot (in that eminent and essential degree in
which they are attributed both to the Son and Holy Spirit) belong to any Being
that is not truly God, and Jehovah: and it is clearly revealed to us, that
there is but One Jehovah Hear, O Israel, the Lord (or Jehovah) our God, is ONE
JEHOVAH. Deuteronomy. vi. 4.
(as I have before remarked in pages 241 -- 244) who is the only true God; the
God of Israel When GOD delivered the Law to his people Israel, he said -- I am
JEHOVAH THY GOD, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage. Thou shall have no other Gods before me. Exodus xx. 2.


; and yet we learn by the Scriptures, not only that CHRIST is truly GOD, and
JEHOVAH (of which I have already produced many authentic proofs from Scripture
in pages 216 -- 354) but that THE HOLY GHOST is also JEHOVAH, and consequently
is included likewise in the Unity (...), (...), of the Deity, or Godhead. This
is a scriptural expression for the Nature of God; for we read in Col. ii. 9.
that in him (i. e. in Christ) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead ((...),
of the Deity, or Divine Nature) bodily! Nearly the same word (but in the
Nominative Case, viz. (...)) is also used in Romans i. 20. Another expression for
the Divine Nature, or Deity, we read in Acts xvii. 29. viz. (...). That there
is but One Divine Nature is a necessary doctrine, because there is but One God;
and though it is difficult for our finite understandings to comprehend how
Three Divine Persons are included in that One God, yet these scriptural
expressions for the Divine Nature ((...), and (...)) afford great relief to our
conceptions of that necessary doctrine, for there is no difficulty in
comprehending, that Three Divine Persons may be united in One Divine Nature,
(...), or (...). And hence also it is a necessary doctrine, that the Son, (and
not less the Spirit likewise) is equal to the Father as touching the Godhead
(though inferior and subordinate in some other respects) because it would be
absurd to contend for the Unity of the Divine Nature, if the least degree of
Inequality respecting that Nature, or Existence, be admitted! See pages 242 --
244.


of the Deity or Godhead!

The Holy Ghost is Jehovah, because it is he who "limiteth a certain day,"
saying in David, Today, after so long a time (see St. Paul's Commentary on the
95th Psalm) as it is said, Today if ye will hear HIS VOICE (the Holy Ghost
refers them to THE VOICE of another Person, who appears by the Apostle's
argument to be the Messiah) harden not your hearts. Heb. iv. 7. In the
preceding chapter the Apostle tells us expressly, that it was the Holy Ghost
who said these words -- Wherefore (says he) as the HOLY GHOST SAYS -- Today
if ye will hear HIS VOICE, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in
the day of temptation in the wilderness: when your Fathers tempted ME (says
the Holy Ghost) proved ME, and saw MY WORKS forty years. [But in the several
accounts which Moses has given us of these glorious Works and Transactions, we
find them mentioned as the Works of Jehovah, and by St. Paul they seem to be
attributed to Christ For they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them:
and that Rock was Christ. 1 Cor. x. 4. And again in the 9th verse -- Neither
let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of
serpents.


; and therefore if the Holy Ghost was a mere ministering Spirit, employed only
as an agent in Jehovah's Works with Jehovah's Power, and was not also truly
Jehovah himself, he (the Spirit of Truth) could not have called them his
Works.] Wherefore I was grieved (continues the Holy Ghost, still speaking in
David) with that generation, and said, They do always err in (their) heart; and
they have not known MY ways. So I swear in MY wrath, they shall not enter into
MY rest. Heb. iii. 7 -- 11. Surely these are expressions of supreme Authority,
which could not be used by any Spirit that was not truly Jehovah!

Again, in the 10th chapter of the same Epistle (15th verse) we read -- (...),
etc. -- THE HOLY GHOST also is a witness to us: for after that HE had said
before, This is the covenant that I WILL MAKE with them, etc. The text to which
the Apostle apparently refers us is in Jeremiah, xxxi. 33. where we find, that
it was Jehovah, who said these words by the Prophet!

See also the two verses preceding -- Behold the days come, SAYS JEHOVAH, that
I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, etc. (Jer. xxxi. 31.) And
afterward in the 33d verse (the text quoted by St. Paul as words said by THE
HOLY GHOST) the Prophet adds in the Name of JEHOVAH -- But this (shall be) the
covenant that I WILL MAKE with the House of Israel; after those days, SAYS
JEHOVAH, I will put MY Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and will be THEIR GOD, and they shall be my people. This text is expressly
attributed to the Holy Ghost by the Apostle, and the next verse is joined by
the Copulative (...) (and) as the words of the same Divine Speaker -- AND they
shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying,
KNOW JEHOVAH: for they shall all KNOW ME [saith THE HOLY GHOST, this being a
regular continuance (as I before remarked) of the words attributed to him by
the Apostle] from the least of them unto the greatest of them, SAYS JEHOVAH:
for I will forgive their iniquity (and none but God can forgive sins See a note
in p. 294. marked.
!) and I will remember their sin no more. (Jer. xxxi. 33, 34.)

This Promise is apparently to the same effect, as that which JEHOVAH had
before proclaimed by his Prophet Isaiah, viz. -- And all thy children (shall
be) TAUGHT OF JEHOVAH. Isai. live. 13. To these texts, therefore, our Lord
probably referred, when he said to the Jews -- 'It is written in the Prophets,'
And they shall be ALL TAUGHT OF GOD. Every man therefore that has HEARD, and
has LEARNED OF THE FATHER, comes unto me. John vi. 45. Thus, the being taught
of God, is manifestly esteemed by our Lord to be the same thing as hearing and
learning of the Father, for he mentions these circumstances apparently to
illustrate what he had before said (in the preceding verse) concerning the
Father's drawing the true Believers -- No man (said our Lord) can come unto me,
unless THE FATHER, which has sent me, DRAW him, (John vi. 44.) so that
Christ's reference to what was written in the Prophets on this subject
(especially as he applies these Prophecies to the Drawing and Teaching of the
Father) seems, at first sight, to make against my argument, which was to show,
that the Prophecies here cited were the Words of THE HOLY GHOST, speaking in
the Prophets under the Title of Jehovah! But this is so far from being a real
objection, that it is truly a confirmation of the former argument concerning
the speaking of THE HOLY GHOST, when we consider, that the Drawing of the
Father, and the Teaching of God, is effected only by the Spirit of God! For the
same Apostle (John), who recorded our Lord's reference to the Prophets last
cited, tells us in his First General Epistle (ii. 20.) how this Teaching of God
is communicated. (...). -- And ye have AN UNCTION from the Holy One "From the
Holy One" -- That is ( says Dr. Whitby) From JESUS CHRIST, emphatically so
called Acts iii. 14. Apoc. iii. 7. But then that UNCTION (says he) is the HOLY
SPIRIT, which he has given to them that believe. For he being ANOINTED WITH
THE OIL OF GLADNESS ABOVE HIS FELLOWS, Psa. xlv. 7. ANOINTED BY GOD WITH THE
HOLY GHOST, Acts x. 38. This Grace (says the Dr.) is given to Christians,
ACCORDING TO THE MEASURE OF THE GIFT OF CHRIST, Ephesians. iv. 7. And we all
beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
likeness, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. iii. 18. Vol. 2. p. 759.


, and ye KNOW all things. (1 John ii. 20.) This Unction, or Anointing, is
generally understood by Commentators to signify the Influence of the Holy
Spirit By the UNCTION here, and the ANOINTING, ver. 27. is meant the HOLY
SPIRIT, whose Gifts and Graces are diffused throughout the whole Church, and to
every living Member thereof. Rev. Francis Fox, M. A. See his New Test. with
references, printed in 1722. p. 999. -- Thereby are signified the gifts of THE
HOLY GHOST, bestowed on Believers, whereby they are consecrated to God, Psa.
xlv. 7. Heb. i. 9. (Assembly's Annotations). In Novo Testamento ubi omnes sunt
Reges et Sacerdotes, per UNGUENTUM intelligitur QU^E VIS DEI GRATIA, ut diximus
Hebr. i. 9. et Iac. v. 14. EXIMIe vero ILLA per quam SPIRITUS nobis in singulis
circumstantiis suggerit, et Christi praecepta et monita quae cuique tempori
sunt idonea. Joh. xiv. 26. Grotius. See also the opinion of Dr. Whitby in the
preceding note. But the Scriptures themselves teach us plainly, that the
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit is to be understood by the Unction or Anointing
-- THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD JEHOVAH is upon me, because JEHOVAH has ANOINTED me,
etc. Isaiah lxi. 1. Compare with Acts x. 38. -- How God ANOINTED Jesus of
Nazareth with THE HOLY SPIRIT, and with Power. See also note in p. 381.


, and the Effect of that Influence is further explained in the 27th verse of
the same chapter -- But THE ANOINTING, which ye have received of him, abides
in you, and ye need not that any man TEACH you: but as the same ANOINTING
TEACHES you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie: and even as it has
TAUGHT you ye shall abide in him. (1 John ii. 27.) And it is manifest, that
this "Anointing, which teaches all things," is to be understood of THE HOLY
SPIRIT; for the Apostle Paul informs us, that the Communication of this
Knowledge or Teaching from God is by the Holy Spirit -- Eye (says he) has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which GOD has prepared for them that love him. But GOD HAS REVEALED (them)
UNTO US BY HIS SPIRIT: for THE SPIRIT searches ALL THINGS, yea, THE DEEP
THINGS OF GOD. For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him? Even so THE THINGS OF GOD knows no man, but THE SPIRIT OF
GOD. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but THE SPIRIT WHICH IS
OF GOD [or rather THE SPIRIT OUT OF GOD, (...), that is, which proceeds forth
((...), see John xv. 26.) "out of God," see note 132 in p. 357]; that we might
KNOW the things that are freely given to us of GOD (whereby it is manifest,
that we obtain this Knowledge of the things of God by the Holy Spirit). Which
things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which
THE HOLY GHOST TEACHES This Teaching of the Holy Ghost is also fully declared
by our Lord's promise of that Heavenly Gift to his disciples -- But the
Comforter (which is) THE HOLY GHOST (says our Lord) whom the Father will send
in my Name, HE SHALL TEACH YOU ALL THINGS, etc. John xiv. 26. And again, When
he, THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH is come, he will guide you INTO ALL TRUTH, etc. John
xvi. 13.


; comparing spiritual things with spiritual. But THE NATURAL ((...), or Animal)
MAN receives not the things of THE SPIRIT OF GOD, [How urgent and importunate
ought we therefore to be in claiming, on all occasions, the gracious Promises
of Spiritual Assistance (see p. 200 -- 202) as the Nature of Man is declared to
be thus miserably deficient without that Heavenly Gift, the neglect of which is
the first foundation of Infidelity and Scepticism] for they are foolishness
unto him; [even the things of infinite Wisdom (for such must be the things of
the Spirit of God) are foolishness to the mere Natural Man!] neither can he
know (them) because they are SPIRITUALLY discerned. But he that is SPIRITUAL,
judges all things, etc. (1 Cor. ii. 9 -- 15.)

The glorious Effect of Christ's Promises upon those who duly claim them, is
principally (as I have before remarked, see p. 196 -- 202) that we shall
"partake of the Divine Nature!" But how can that Effect take place, if the
Spirit of God, and of Christ But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if
so be that THE SPIRIT OF GOD dwell in you. Now if any man have not THE SPIRIT
OF CHRIST, he is none of his. And if CHRIST (be) IN YOU (i. e. in you by his
Spirit, mentioned in the preceding sentence) the body (is) dead, because of
sin, but the Spirit (is) life, because of righteousness. But if THE SPIRIT OF
HIM that raised up JESUS from the dead, DWELL IN YOU, he that raised up CHRIST
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal mortal bodies BY HIS SPIRIT that
DWELLS in you. Romans viii. 9 -- 11. Here we find "the Spirit of God," and "the
Spirit of Christ," distinctly mentioned in the same context, though the
spiritual Effects of both are undoubtedly the same, because both these titles
belong to one and the same Holy Spirit, as St. Paul elsewhere declares -- "For
through him" (says the Apostle, speaking of the reconciliation, or uniting of
the Gentiles, and the commonwealth of Israel, through Christ) we both (i. e.
Jews and Gentiles) have access BY ONE SPIRIT unto the Father. Ephesians. ii. 18. This
One Spirit, therefore, must necessarily be understood, not only when "the
Spirit of God" is mentioned, but also whenever we read of " the Spirit of the
Son Because ye are Sons, GOD has sent forth THE SPIRIT OF HIS SON into your
hearts. Gal. iv. 6.
," -- the Spirit of Jesus I know that this shall turn to my salvation, through
your prayer, and the supply of THE SPIRIT OF JESUS CHRIST. Phil. i. 19.
, or the Spirit of Christ, (see note in p. 357); for as Christians are builded
together for AN HABITATION OF GOD THROUGH THE SPIRIT, (Ephesians. ii. 22.) so
likewise it must be THROUGH THE SAME SPIRIT that they become AN HABITATION OF
CHRIST, -- if Christ be in you, etc. because the same text informs us, that --
if any man have not the SPIRIT OF CHRIST, he is none of his.


, (see page 357), the Spirit of the Father, and of the Son, by which alone we
can have communication with either Compare the preceding note in page 383, with
the note in p. 385. -- See also page 292.
, is not really Divine? We are taught by a multitude of texts throughout the
New Testament, that MAN by Nature is capable of receiving THE HOLY SPIRIT
within him; so that the Human Body is expressly called in Scripture the Temple
of the Holy Ghost What, know ye not that your BODY is THE TEMPLE OF THE HOLY
GHOST, (which is) in you? which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? 1 Cor.
vi. 19.
; and therefore, if THE HOLY GHOST were not really and truly GOD, of the same
Divine Nature with THE FATHER (for there can be but ONE Divine Nature, as there
is but ONE GOD, which I hope is already clearly demonstrated, see pages 241 --
244) how improper would be the idea of comparing Man to a Temple? For
Christians are not only called the Temple of God 2 Cor. vi. 16. -- And what
agreement (says the Apostle Paul) has THE TEMPLE OF GOD with idols? for ye are
THE TEMPLE OF THE LIVING GOD: as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk
in (them) and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And this
In-dwelling, or Inhabitation of God in the Faithful, is declared in Scripture
to be "through the Spirit," which affords an ample proof, that the Spirit is
truly GOD! In whom (says St. Paul to the Ephesians, ii. 22. speaking of Jesus
Christ) ye also are builded together for AN HABITATION OF GOD THROUGH THE
SPIRIT. Thus the true Christian does really become a TEMPLE OF GOD, "for where
God dwells is a Temple," as Grotius remarks Templum est ubi DEUS habitat. In
piis habitat Deus PER SPIRITUM SANCTUM. Sunt igitur TEMPLUM DEI. Grot. Annot.
Tom. IV. p. 482.
; and GOD dwells is good men BY HIS HOLY SPIRIT. " Therefore (says he) are they
THE TEMPLE OF GOD." This Inhabitation, or In-dwelling of the HOLY SPIRIT in the
Temple of GOD, is plainly declared by the Apostle Paul in another text -- "Know
ye not" (says he) that ye are THE TEMPLE OF GOD, and that THE SPIRIT OF GOD
DWELLS IN YOU? If any man defile THE TEMPLE OF GOD, him shall God destroy:
for THE TEMPLE OF GOD is holy "is holy," -- " being sanctified by THE HOLY
GHOST." Romans xv. 16.
, which (Temple) ye are. 1 Cor. iii. 16, 17.


, but expressly (as I have already remarked) the Temple of the Holy Ghost, as
if the terms were synonymous!

Too many Temples, indeed, through the Depravity of Mankind, and the Influence
of Devils, have been dedicated to those, " which by Nature are NO GODS!" But
that was only amongst men -- "who knew not God." (Gal. iv. 8.) But shall we
conceive of the inspired Writers of the New Testament, that they would also
DEDICATE Temples to a Being, "which by Nature is no God!" For if we could
suppose it true, that THE HOLY SPIRIT by Nature is no GOD, the TEMPLE OF THE
HOLY GHOST would be no better, in that one respect, than Heathen Temples! And
therefore, if we really believe the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of God, we
must necessarily believe that THE HOLY GHOST is really and truly GOD; for
otherwise we should not have been required by the Holy Scriptures to esteem our
Bodies as the Temple of the Holy Ghost! And as it thus appears to be a
necessary conclusion, that THE HOLY GHOST is truly GOD, it is equally a
necessary doctrine, that he is also JEHOVAH -- " For who is GOD" (i. e. truly
God) " except JEHOVAH?" Compare this with Ps. lxxxvi. 10. -- Thou art God
alone, that is, Thou (JEHOVAH) art God alone, for the whole Psalm is a prayer
addressed to JEHOVAH -- " Bow down thine ear, O JEHOVAH," etc. -- See also
Isaiah xxxvii. 16. and compare th^se texts with the note in p. 323. concerning
those persons, whose title of "Gods," was merely nominal.


Psa. xviii. 31. And therefore, though THE HOLY GHOST is clearly revealed to us
in Scripture as a distinct Person from THE FATHER and THE SON, he must
nevertheless be included in that One Divine and Eternal Being, JEHOVAH; and
accordingly, in that supreme character, he revealed the Divine Will to the
Prophets! Of this I have already produced some remarkable, and (I trust)
incontrovertible proofs, and therefore shall only request my reader's attention
to one more example of it. Well spoke THE HOLY GHOST (said the Apostle Paul to
the unbelieving Jews at Rome) by Isaias the Prophet unto our Fathers, saying;
Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand;
and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive. For the heart of this people is
waxed gross, etc. Acts xxviii. 25. But when we turn to that part of Isaiah's
Prophecy to which the Apostle refers us, as the SAYING of THE HOLY GHOST, we
find it was JEHOVAH which spoke to the Prophet! -- I heard (says the Prophet)
the VOICE of the LORD (Adonai) saying, Whom shall I SEND? and who will go for
US? (speaking expressly in a Plurality of Persons). Then said I, here (am) I;
send me. And HE said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, (or in hearing)
but understand not; and see ye indeed (or in seeing) but perceive not. Make the
heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
heart, and convert, and be healed See some Observations on this passage in my
Tract on several important Prophecies. 2d Edit. pages 222, 223, and 228 -- 235.


. Then said I, LORD, (or Adoni) how long? And HE answered, Until the cities be
wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly
desolate, etc. Isai. vi. 8 -- 11.

Now the Lord, or Adoni, who then spoke to Isaiah, was represented to the
Prophet (see the beginning of the chapter) as sitting upon a throne high and
lifted up, and his train filled the temple, etc. and one cried unto another,
(that is, the Seraphims mentioned in the preceding verse) HOLY, HOLY, HOLY (IS)
JEHOVAH OF HOSTS, the whole earth is full of his glory, etc. (ibid. 1 -- 3.)

Now, notwithstanding that the Lord JEHOVAH is represented in this Divine
Revelation as speaking in the Plural Number ("who will go for us"), and that
the threefold repetition of the Epithet Holy, in the proclamation of God's
glorious Title, Jehovah of Hosts, seems to correspond with the abovementioned
Idea of a Plurality of Persons being comprehended in that One Eternal Being
JEHOVAH, which then revealed himself to Isaiah, yet the Apostle Paul expressly
attributed the Revelation to the Holy Ghost, as being the Divine Person which
then spoke! Well SPOKE THE HOLY GHOST (says he) by Isaias the Prophet, SAYING,
Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, etc. Who then shall
presume to say that THE HOLY GHOST is not really and truly GOD; when it is
apparent by the citations already made, that the glorious Name JEHOVAH, which
includes THE DIVINE NATURE OF THE FATHER, and OF THE SON, is expressly
attributed also to THE HOLY GHOST?

Without a due sense of this supreme Dignity of the Holy Spirit, we should form
but a very unworthy idea of the real Dignity of HUMAN NATURE, which (as I have
already shown) is not only capable of receiving the Gift, or internal
Communication, of that glorious and eternal FREE SPIRIT See note in p. 360.
OF GOD, as a Principle of Action, but is absolutely entitled even to claim
that wonderful participation of the Divine Nature! to claim it, I say, by a
written Charter of Privileges, which can never be taken from us (as God's Word
cannot fail), he having bound himself to us on certain reciprocal conditions by
an irrevocable covenant (as sure as his Word) that MAN might be FREE indeed! We
are FREE (I say) having now a free Choice, through Christ, to partake, if we
will "If we will." For, notwithstanding all that has been said and wrote
concerning Predestination and Reprobation, yet it must surely be our own fault,
a depravity in our own choice, or will, if we partake not of "the Tree of Life!"

No man (indeed) can come to me (said that Divine Person, who alone is THE WAY,
and THE TRUTH, and THE LIFE," John xiv. 6.) except the Father, which has sent
me, DRAW him: and I (said he) will raise him up at the last day. (John vi. 44.)
But though this Drawing depends on the Will of the Father, yet no just argument
arises from thence against the free Will of MAN, because we have ample
assurance on the part of the Almighty, that his Good Will to DRAW us will not
be wanting, if we seek him as we ought, and do not resist his Divine Grace in
our hearts; of this Good Will his affectionate remonstrances from time to time
by his Prophets bear unquestionable testimony. -- Why WILL ye die, O House of
Israel? For I HAVE NO PLEASURE in the death of him that dies, says the LORD
JEHOVAH, wherefore turn yourselves, ((...) in Hiphil. cause ye to turn; i. e.
the repentance must be by your own will and deed) "and live ye." (Ezekiel. xviii.
31, 32.) And again, GOD swears by himself, that we may have full assurance of
his Will in our favor, if our own Will is not wanting! -- Say unto them (as) I
LIVE, says the LORD JEHOVAH, I have NO PLEASURE in the death of the wicked;
but that the wicked turn from his way, and live: turn ye, turn ye, from your
evil ways: for why will ye die, O House of Israel? Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.

These texts, indeed, are assurances of God's love to the House of Israel; but
in Christ, even the Gentiles are entitled to claim them, being now engrafted on
the stock of Israel (see p. 296) and are thereby rendered Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise. (Gal. iii. 29.) And under the New Covenant,
also, God has confirmed these assurances of favor on his part, if we are not
wanting to ourselves, promising us that we shall receive, if we will but ask
(see note in p. 395) -- For THE LORD is not slack concerning his promise, as
some men count slackness; but is long-suffering to us ward, NOT WILLING THAT
ANY SHOULD PERISH, BUT that ALL should come to repentance. 2 Pet. iii. 9. From
hence it follows, that, if any perish, it is not by God's Will, (though he
certainly foreknows their destruction) but by their own wilful Abuse of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil; for we are assured also by another Apostle, that
GOD will have ALL MEN to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the Truth.
(1 Timothy ii. 4.) The Word ALL (says the learned Mr. Francis Fox on this text)
here stands for EVERY MAN; for so it is used ver. 1. where we are commanded to
pray for ALL MEN. Hence (says he) we may argue, that if God WILLS the Salvation
of ALL MEN, and would have ALL come to the acknowledgment of the Truth, then he
affords ALL sufficient MEANS and GRACE, in order to their obtaining Salvation;
because without this they cannot be saved. (See John vi. 44. quoted in the
beginning of this note). If any therefore perish, it is not because God DENIES
them GRACE and HELP, but because they are WANTING TO THEMSELVES, and WILL NOT
BE PREVAILED WITH to USE the assistance he affords. Their destruction,
therefore, is not FROM any peremptory DECREE of God's, but FROM THEMSELVES. New
Testament with references, p. 867. note.


, of the Tree of Life (see note in p. 310) from which our first Parents were
unhappily excluded in this world!

But these glorious Privileges being granted to Human Nature only through the
Merits of that "Son of Man," who voluntarily took our Nature upon him, we must
always remember, that our Title to the Benefits of the free Covenant,
beforementioned, is valid only when claimed in his Name, and for his Sake, as
we ourselves are otherwise totally unworthy of them; for he alone is "the Way,
and the Truth, and the Life;" and no Man comes unto the Father, but by him.
John xiv. 6.

He has, therefore, particularly instructed us how to claim the Privileges of
Human Nature, assuring us by re-iterated And I say unto you (said our Lord
Jesus) ASK, and it shall be GIVEN you: seek, and ye shall find: KNOCK, and it
shall be OPENED unto you. (For our Lord had just before given a parable of a
man's going to his friend's house even at midnight, and knocking at the door to
borrow bread). For every one, that ASKS, RECEIVES: and he that SEEKS,
FINDS: and to him that KNOCKS, it shall BE OPENED. If A SON shall ask bread
of any of you that is A FATHER, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish,
will he for a fish give him a serpent? or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer
him a scorpion? IF YE THEN, BEING EVIL, know how to give good Gifts unto YOUR
CHILDREN: how much more shall your HEAVENLY FATHER, give the HOLY SPIRIT to
them that ASK him? (Luke xi. 9 -- 13.) " And whatsoever ye shall ASK in MY
NAME" (said our Lord JESUS) " that will I DO" [an ample proof, as I before
remarked, of his being truly GOD in Effect and Power, as well as in Name; and
that he and the Father are ONE, as he himself not only said, but proved by his
Works; so that we must necessarily understand, as there is but ONE GOD,
(Jehovah) that he is included with THE FATHER in the ONE Eternal Being JEHOVAH]
that THE FATHER may be glorifed in THE SON. If ye shall ask any thing in MY
NAME (our Lord JESUS again repeated and enforced his gracious promise) I WILL
DO (it). If ye love me (said he) keep MY commandments, (and who has a right to
command, but GOD? -- Our Lord, nevertheless, immediately afterward declares
the ministerial Office, which he had condescended to undertake for our sake, as
Mediator between GOD and Man, himself being both!) And I (said he) will PRAY
THE FATHER, and he s^ll give you ANOTHER COMFORTER, (or ADVOCATE, see ABp.
Sharp's Sermons, 5 vol. Disc. 2d.) that he may abide with you for ever; even
THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH, (here the Three Divine Persons are distinctly mentioned
together, in their separate personal functions under the Christian
Dispensation) "whom" (i. e. the Spirit of Truth) the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not, neither knows him: but ye know him: (and of course
all other true disciples of Christ know him, as the promises are to all, and
cannot fail) for he dwells with you, and shall be IN YOU. John xiv. 13 --
17.) Again, I say unto you (said our Lord JESUS) that if two of you shall agree
on earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them
of MY FATHER, which is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered together
IN MY NAME (i. e. in the Name of JESUS) there AM I in the midst of them. (Matt.
xviii. 19, 20.)

These, and many more such, declarations of Christ, are the reiterated Promises
(mentioned above) on which the restored Dignity and Privileges of Human Nature
are firmly founded, and may be effectually secured, if the future building be
raised thereupon with the plumb line of Integrity, and be afterward maintained
with Perseverance to the end of life! "He is faithful that promised." (Heb. x.
23.) Wherefore, be strong, and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid: for
THE LORD (Jehovah) THY GOD, he it is that does go with thee, he will not fail
thee, nor forsake thee. (Deuteronomy. xxxi. 6.)


Promises, tendered in the most urgent and affectionate manner, that Prayers in
his Name shall certainly be effectual; that is, provided there be no wilful
Defect on our part; which conditional Clause is always to be understood,
wherever Promises of Blessings are delivered in Holy Scripture.

Let us therefore be mindful, that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy (to be compared) with the glory which shall be revealed to us, (Romans
viii. 18.) (...), that is, toward us, or respecting ourselves; referring,
probably, to that Eternal Weight of Glory with which Human Nature is capable of
being invested after the sufferings of this present time, as signified by the
same Apostle in a parallel passage of another Epistle -- For our light
affliction (said the Apostle) which is but for a moment (i. e. comparatively
speaking) works for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of GLORY! 2
Cor. iv. 17, This further Revelation of God's Will [variously expressed in the
New Testament When Christ (who is) our life, shall APPEAR, then shall ye also
appear with him IN GLORY. Mortify therefore your members, etc. Col. iii. 4. For
our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for THE SAVIOR, THE
LORD JESUS CHRIST: who shall change our vile BODY, that it may be fashioned
LIKE UNTO HIS GLORIOUS BODY, according to the working, whereby he is able even
to subdue all things unto himself. (Ph. iii. 20, 21.) Beloved, now are we the
sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know, that
when he shall APPEAR, WE SHALL BE LIKE HIM: for we shall see him as he is. And
every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure. 1
John iii. 2, 3. But some (man) will say, How are the dead raised up? and WITH
WHAT BODY do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened,
except it die: "And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that BODY that
shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other (grain), but
God gives it A BODY as it has pleased him, AND TO EVERY SEED HIS OWN BODY.
All flesh is not the same flesh, but (there is) one (kind of) flesh of men,
another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, (and) another of birds, etc. -- So
also (is) the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised
in incorruption: it is sown in dishonor; IT IS RAISED IN GLORY: it is sown in
weakness; IT IS RAISED IN POWER: it is sown a natural ( or (...), animal) BODY,
it is raised A SPIRITUAL BODY. There is a natural (or animal) body, and there
is a spiritual body. And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living
soul; the last Adam (was made) a quickening Spirit, etc. -- And as we have
borne the image of the earthy, WE SHALL ALSO BEAR THE IMAGE OF THE HEAVENLY [
i. e. of the Lord Jehovah from HEAVEN, mentioned in the 47th verse, see also
pages 181 -- 285, 294 -- 308.]. Now this I say, brethren, that FLESH AND BLOOD
cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither does CORRUPTION inherit INCORRUPTION
By this latter part of the sentence (i. e. neither does corruption haberit
incorruption) the Apostle explains what he meant by the flesh and blood which
"cannot inherit," etc. "ita explicat" (as Grotius justly remarks) "quid
intelligi voluerit per (...) et (...)." It is manifest from the whole context,
that the Apostle, by flesh and blood in this text, meant only corruptible and
perishable flesh and blood; for it is not the substance or solidity of flesh
and blood, which cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven, but only the
corruptibility, or dissoluble and corrupt quality of it, as another learned
commentator (Slater) has remarked -- Non intelligit CORPORIS SUBSTANTIAM, sic
enim resurget. Job xix. 26, 27. sed qualitatem corruptam. Pol. Synop. Vol. V.
page 539.

We have incontestable evidence, by the resurrection and ascension of our Lord,
that the real human substances of "flesh and bones" (of which his revived body
consisted) can, and does inherit the kingdom of heaven. -- Our Lord was
particularly careful to convince his disciples of this truth after his
resurrection, saying -- Behold my hands and my feet, THAT IT IS I MYSELF
((...), thus insisting upon the identity of his own person) handle me, and see
(thus urging his disciples to receive undeniable conviction by all their
senses) for A SPIRIT (says he) has not FLESH AND BONES, as ye see we have. And
when he had thus spoken, he showed them (his) hands and (his) feet. Luke xxiv.
39, 40. Now this was not to convince them merely, that the hands and feet,
which he then showed, were "flesh and bones," but that they were also (to
undeniable demonstration) the same identical "flesh and bones" that had been
publicly nailed to the cross; for our Lord showed them likewise his side, John
xx. 20. undoubtedly that same wounded side which had been pierced with a lance;
for it was manifestly on account of the wounds, which he had received in his
flesh, that he now pointed out, as unquestionable evidences of his identical
body, those particular parts thereof (his hands, feet, and side) in which the
principal wounds had been made, agreeable to the predictions of the Prophets
(Ps. xxii. 16. Zech. xii. 10. and xiii. 6, 7.) and at the same time, he
submitted himself to the most critical examination of those select persons,
whom he had chosen for witnesses -- It is I myself (says he) handle me and see,
etc. That our Lord appealed to the evidence of real wounds in his flesh, is
further demonstrated by the declaration of the Apostle Thomas, when he had
heard the account of our Lord's appearance from the other disciples: for Thomas
answered them, saying -- Except I shall see in his HANDS the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into
his SIDE, I will not believe. And accordingly, this palpable and unquestionable
demonstration was graciously allowed him, even in the presence of the former
witnesses; for -- After eight days, again the disciples were within, and THOMAS
with them: (then) came Jesus, the doors being shut, AND STOOD IN THE MIDST, and
said, Peace (be) unto you. Then says he to THOMAS, reach hither thy finger,
and behold MY HANDS; and reach hither thy hand, and (thrust) it into my side:
and be not faithless, but believing. (John xx. 24 -- 27.) And after our Lord
had at several other times, (1 Cor. xv. 4 -- 8.) visited, instructed, and
confirmed his disciples concerning the truth and reality of his resurrection,
and other necessary doctrines, he at length ascended from among them toward
heaven, even while their whole attention was fixed upon him -- "While they
beheld" (says the text) he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their
sight. And while THEY LOOKED STEADFASTLY ((...)) toward heaven, AS HE WENT UP,
behold two men stood by them in white apparel; which also said, Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? THIS SAME JESUS, which is taken up
from you INTO HEAVEN, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go INTO
HEAVEN. (Acts i. 9 -- 11.) Thus we have incontestible evidence concerning the
identical substance of our Lord's revived body, "Flesh and Bones;" and
therefore with certainty we know that the Human Body (consisting of solid and
palpable substances of "Flesh and Bones") is capable of inheriting the kingdom
of heaven; and consequently we must understand that the Flesh and Blood
mentioned by the Apostle, which cannot inherit, etc. must necessarily mean
corrupt and mortal Flesh and Blood, before it has undergone the promised change
to incorruption and immortality, as explained above; for our Lord's body (it is
manifest, if all these circumstances are considered) could not possibly have
undergone any other change than that of being "RAISED INCORRUPTIBLE," whereas,
before, it was corruptible (or liable to injuries) and mortal, or it could not
have suffered and died: and in like manner all the rest of the " dead shall be
raised INCORRUPTIBLE;" as the resurrection of Christ is the pledge of our hope,
he being declared "the first fruits of them that slept." 1 Cor. xv. 20. I shall
not apologize to my readers for the length of this note, because the subject of
it very materially concerns the Nature of Man; and all mankind are personally
interested in the assurances we have, that even the Body (as well as the Soul)
shall one day be raised to immortality and eternal duration; nevertheless, I
confess, that I should have neglected to treat upon this very material part of
my subject (as I conceived that the doctrine was sufficiently understood, and
generally received among Christians) had not a new pamphlet, on very different
principles, been put into my hands, at the very time when I had proceeded in
transcribing the above note for the press, even to the very sentence where I
have placed the mark of reference; so that I thought myself obliged to add
these remarks upon the text, in order to guard against the plausible
insinuations in the said Tract.


. Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: (for the
trumpet shall sound "For the trumpets SHALL sound," ((...)) says the Apostle;
but the Author of the New Pamphlet, mentioned in the preceding note, boldly
insinuates, that it shall NOT sound! And as this Author has thought proper to
conceal his name, I hope I may censure his opinions with less reserve, because
he cannot suspect me of any personal dislike to an unknown author; and must
therefore consider my severity as levelled merely against his erroneous
doctrines, and not against himself.

Do you take the LAST TRUMPET (says he, in page 13.) to be some instrumental
sound? etc. -- The word LAST, (says he again) evidently implies a FIRST: now
who is he that heard the instrumental sound of the FIRST Trumpet? Thus, on the
strength of a mere sophistical quibble, he ventures to found his opposition to
the clearest evidence of scripture, that the Trumpet SHALL SOUND, and the dead
shall be raised, -- as if these great articles of the Christian Faith, the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the awful summons to the Judgment Seat of Christ,
could possibly be set aside by such superficial reasoning! For though we may
not be able to answer his question, viz. Who is he that heard the instrumental
sound of the FIRST Trumpet? Yet any plain honest Christian, who reads his Bible
with a proper humble disposition, can easily inform him, who they were (even a
whole nation at once) that really and truly heard the actual sound of a former
heavenly trumpet. See the 19th chapter of Exodus; wherein the instrumental
sound is clearly expressed by two different technical Hebrew names of an
instrument, well known among the Israelites, which seems to have been a kind of
horn or cornet. The use of such instruments is particularly recorded in Joshua
vi, 4, for seven of them were sounded by the priests at the taking of Jericho.
The sound only of one instrument (bearing two different names) was heard at
Mount Sinai, though it is described as being loud to a most tremendous degree,
being a heavenly trumpet. And answerable to this the future heavenly trumpet,
foretold by St. Paul, is mentioned in the singular number, viz. the trump of
God. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 16. -- Now as the sounding of the former trumpet was
previously appointed and foretold, as the awful signal to apprize the
Israelites of the Coming of Jehovah upon Mount Sinai, and to summon them up to
the Mount (see Exodus xix. 11, and 13.) so the actual tremendous sounding of
that former trumpet (see verses 16 and 19) is an incontestible earnest or
pledge to us (even upon the principles of this author's own argument) that we
ought to expect an actual sounding also of the last trumpet, because it is as
clearly appointed to be the awful signal of the future Coming and Appearance of
the Messiah to judge the world, as the former trumpet was of the descent of
Jehovah upon Mount Sinai, so that the ingenious hypothesis of this Author about
the soundless summons of the last trumpet falls at once to the ground!

There is such ample evidence (God be thanked) of outward transactions
throughout the whole account which Moses has given of God's coming down upon
Mount Sinai (or Horeb, which is only a different part of the same mountain)
that the literal sense of his relation cannot, without the most glaring
perversion, be enveloped and darkened by the delusive mist of figurative
sophistry! And the same, indeed, may be said of what is revealed to us in the
Scriptures concerning the future Coming and Appearance of the Messiah to judge
the world; but this Author nevertheless (presuming upon the supposed force of
his insidious quibble about the last trumpet) ventures openly to profess his
disbelief of the actual future judgment of the world by Christ; and boldly
asserts, that there will be no such process hereafter. The judgment seat (says
he) is in every man's heart; and it is there, and THERE ONLY, that man can, or
EVER WILL, feel acquittance, or CONDEMNATION, etc. (Note in p. 25.) And this
unscriptural doctrine he has attempted (in a preceding part of his book) to
illustrate by an example drawn even from Scripture itself! When Paul stood
before Felix (says he in p. 20.) Felix stood before the judgment seat of
Christ; else what made him tremble? What but the secret condemnation he felt in
his breast? But give me leave for a moment to treat this Author in his own
evasive style, by answering question with questions, though I by no means wish
to avoid giving him a direct answer to his trembling system! -- Would not Felix
have had much less cause to tremble, if (with the spirit of our modern Author)
he had conceived that there would never be any other condemnation, than that
which he felt within himself? And again -- Did not Felix tremble whilst (or as)
the Apostle "reasoned" ((...), a genitive case taken absolutely, as the
grammarians say, i. e. to mark the precise interval of any action, or
corresponding circumstance, as that it happened during the very time that the
Apostle reasoned) "of righteousness, temperance, and THE JUDGMENT TO COME
(expressly (...), or the future judgment) so that the Apostle could not
possibly mean the present internal condemnation, which at that very interval of
time caused Felix to tremble? Acts xxiv. 25. But this author not only denies
the future JUDGMENT OF CHRIST, but also, it seems, the future RESURRECTION OF
THE DEAD! He feels" (speaking in p. 23. of a man that has the witness within
himself) " that he is RISEN WITH CHRIST; and so experiences with St. Paul, THE
POWER OF HIS RESURRECTION: and being made A PARTAKER OF THE FIRST RESURRECTION,
flesh and blood then convinces him what it is, etc. Now, as he thus asserts,
that he is "made a partaker of the first resurrection," and that there will be
"no process hereafter," nor judgment of Christ, besides that which (as he
conceives) is in every man's heart, it necessarily follows, that (with respect
to himself, and such other "truly awakened such") this Author must suppose the
resurrection to be already past! This is a leading principle, which, being once
admitted, all the other doctrines, which this Author has labored to inculcate,
must necessarily follow as concomitant circumstances: the perusal of his book,
therefore, enables us to form a very probable idea of the particular doctrines
held by those very ancient heretics, Hymeneus and Philetus; for though this
author himself (a similar spirit) conceives, that his doctrines are not only
uncommon, but n^w, etc. and accordingly (in his preface) apologizes for "the
untrodden path," yet his path is very old, and so strongly marked in antiquity,
that the leading principle abovementioned, on which almost all the rest
depends, was described more than 1700 years ago, even by St. Paul himself, who
mentioned the promoters of it expressly by name, and warned us against the
pernicious effects of their errors in the strongest terms -- Their word (says
the Apostle) will eat as does a canker: of whom is HYMENEUS and PHILETUS; who
concerning the truth have ERRED, saying, that the RESURRECTION IS PAST ALREADY;
and overthrow the faith of some. 2 Timothy ii. 17, 18.


) and THE DEAD shall be raised INCORRUPTIBLE, and we shall be CHANGED. That is,
we living men, whoever we are, that shall be found alive, and remaining in the
body at that awful period, "shall be changed;" for the Apostle had before
declared, that "we shall not all sleep" (that is, in death) but we " shall all
be CHANGED," viz. both Dead and Living shall be changed from corruptible to
incorruptible Beings, though the manner of THE CHANGE will be different in
these two different states of mankind, the Dead will be RAISED incorruptible,
but the Living shall be instantaneously rendered so, "in the twinkling of an
eye." Thus the change will be made in the property or quality of our living
bodies, and not in the identity of them. It will be an annihilation or
dissolution of corruptibility, and not of substance; for the substance, on the
contrary, will be rendered indissoluble and eternal; even that substance which
now is subject to so many fatal accidents, diseases, and death) For THIS
CORRUPTIBLE must put on INCORRUPTION, and this mortal (must) put on
IMMORTALITY. [So that it is, manifestly, "this" same mortal body, "this"
earthly tabernacle in which we now live, that shall hereafter "put on"
immortality and incorruption -- We that are in (this) tabernacle do groan (says
the same Apostle in another place) being burdened: not for that we would be
UNCLOTHED, but CLOTHED UPON, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. 2
Cor. v. 4. and this is further explained in the former text, viz.] So when THIS
CORRUPTIBLE (says the Apostle) shall have PUT ON incorruption, and THIS MORTAL
shall have PUT ON immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written; Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? etc. 1
Cor. xv. 35 -- 55.


concerning the sure and most certain expectation, that we may entertain, of
being invested with ETERNAL GLORY in the world to come, (if we persevere in the
true Faith and Practice of Christianity in this world); completes our Charter
of Privileges and Immunities, or, "the perfect Law of Liberty," which THE
ALMIGHTY has been pleased to tender to his Creature Man!

-- Who (then) shall separate us from the love of Christ? (shall) tribulation,
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As
it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as
sheep for the slaughter). Nay, in all these things, we are more than
conquerors, through him that loved us. For I am persuaded (said the Apostle to
the Romans) that neither death, nor life, nor angels, (that is, the angels of
Satan) nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. (Romans viii. 35 -- 39.

Here is a noble declaration of that "perfect Liberty," to which Christ has
restored mankind! that glorious Dignity of "Human Nature," which even the
poorest and meanest persons amongst us (the distressed, the hungry, and the
naked) are capable of attaining by Perseverance in Faith, and Resolution in
observing and keeping, on their Part, THE CONDITIONS (The conditions of our
reciprocal covenant with God.) Let us but satisfy ourselves that we perform the
conditions which Christ has required of mankind, in order to salvation (which
conditions are all summed up in these two words, Faith and Repentance) and we
may be as certainly assured that we belong to God, and are entitled to his
favor, as if we saw our particular names recorded in a book, among them that
are appointed to salvation. Away, therefore, with all fears and doubts
concerning our eternal Predestination. Let us never be solicitous in enquiring,
whether God has decreed such a particular number of persons (in exclusion to
the rest of mankind) to eternal life; or, if he has done so, whether we be in
the number of them; but let us take care to secure our own duty. Secret things
belong to the Lord our God; but the things that are revealed, to us, and to our
children, that we may do all the works of his law; as we have it in
Deuteronomy. Let us take care to obey God's commandments: let us live as well
as we can, and if we do so, it is certain we cannot miscarry; and if God has
made any such Eternal Decrees concerning the lot of particular persons, it is
certain likewise that we are in the number of those that are predestined to
eternal salvation, provided we continue in our faith and obedience. ABp.
Sharp's Sermon -- "Of the Fewness of those who shall be saved." Vol. III. p.
111.


of our reciprocal Covenant with God!

Let us therefore (like the Apostle) approach unto the Throne of Grace, in full
Assurance of FAITH, always remembering, that a SOUND FAITH must be the
principal Foundation of our Pretensions to the promised Dignity and Privileges
of HUMAN NATURE, and that by Perseverance in the true Faith, and a continual
Renewal of those inestimable Claims, from time to time, while we remain in this
world, we may be as confident as the Apostle, that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from THE LOVE OF GOD, which is in CHRIST JESUS our Lord; because, through him,
God has put it absolutely in our own Power (whatever our temporary Afflictions
and Sufferings may be in this Life) to attain an "ETERNAL WEIGHT OF GLORY:" 2
Cor. iv. 17. -- For which cause we faint not ( though our outward man perish)
being fully persuaded that he, who PROMISED, is able also to PERFORM.

The Defects of this Tract, wherever the Reader discovers any, are certainly to
be attributed to the fallible Author, whose Name is prefixed; but whatever may
seem praiseworthy, and instructive therein, to GOD ALONE!

"SOLI DEO, GLORIA ET GRATIA."

INDEX OF TEXTS referred to in the foregoing Work; OF THE Various TOPICS
discussed; AND OF THE Different AUTHORS referred to.

INDEX OF THE TEXTS referred to in the foregoing Work.
GENESIS.
Chap. Verses Pages i. 2. 368. ii. 17. 11.14. iii. 4, 5. 19. 17 to 19. 22. 19.
28 n. 22. 20.43. 311 n. 313 n. xiv. 2. 92 n. 22. 240. xviii. 19. 91. 23 to 25.
88 n. 33. 92 n. xxii. 1. 188 n. 2. 267 n. 6 to 8. 267 n. 18. 267 n.

EXODUS.
iii. 14. 259 n. xviii. 25. 326 n. xix. 403 n. 11 to 13. 404 n. 16.19. 404 n.
xx. 2. 371 n. xxiii. 17. 228 n. xxx. 12 to 16. 104. xxxii. 9, 10. 80. 7 to 17.
83. 27. 240. 31 to 33. 96 n. xxxiii. 18.20. 215.217 n. xxxiv. 23. 228 n.

LEVITICUS.
xvii. 2. 52. xix. 18. 68. 28. 156.

NUMBERS.
ii. 339 n. xiv. 7. 84. 11 to 20. 86. 13 to 20. 86 n. 20 to 22. 88. xvi. 1 to
40. 94. 10 to 22. 88. 19. 92 n. 41 to 48. 96. xx. 12. 97 n. xxv. 15. 166. 18.
165 n. xxvii. 12 to 14. 97 n. 17. 325 n. xxxi. 8. 166. xxxi. 16. 165 n. 325 n.
20. 165.

DEUTERONOMY.
i. 326 n. 9 to 17. 328 n. 13. 328 n. 16, 17. 324 n. iv. 37. 97 n. vi. 4.
242.275.320. 321.350. 371. 4, 5. 241. 5. 278 n. 16. 278 n. viii. 16. 189 n. x.
20. 337 n. xviii. 18 to 20. 104 n. xxii. 44. 278 n. xxiii. 23. 278 n. xxxi. 6.
397 n. xxxii. 22. 131 n.

JOSHUA.
vi. 4. 403 n. vii. 19. 240. xiii. 33. 240. xviii. 4. 327 n. xxii. 16, 17. 325
n. 22. 241. 24. 240.

JUDGES.
vi. 39. 189 n. xi. 23, etc. 240.

1 SAMUEL.
xvi. 14. 190. xx. 31 to 14. 102. xiv. 1. 189 n. xviii. 33. 109. xxiv. 17. 105.

1 KINGS.
xviii. 12. 183 n. xxii. 20 to 23. 137 n.

2 KINGS.
ii. 16. 184 n.

1 CHRONICLES.
xxi. 1. 190 n.

2 CHRONICLES.
xix. 6, 7. 324 n. xxxii. 26. 136 n. 31. 136 n.

JOB.
xix. 26. 130 n. 26, 27. 400 n. xxxiii. 4. 363. xlii. 7. 215.

PSALMS.
ii. 2. 347. 7. 331.338 n. 12. 338 n. x. 16. 238 n. xi. 6. 144 n. xviii. 31.
349.387. xxii. 16. 401 n. xxiv. 1. 27 n. xxvi. 2, etc. 189 n. xxxiii. 6. 364.
xlv. 265.344. 6. 263. 7. 378 n. 379 n. xlvii. 2.7. 27 n. l. 23. 225 n. li. 11,
12. 360 n. lviii. 11. 145 n. lxxxii. 6. 323 n. lxxxiii. 1. 349. 13. 349. 18.
233.282. 349. lxxxvi. 10. 387 n. xc. 268 n. xcv. 372. xcvii. 7. 353 n. c. 5.
148 n. cii. 19. 266 n. 23, 24. 266 n. 268 n. 24. 266 n. 25 to 27. 265. cvi. 32.
97 n. cx. 1. 216 n. 260 n. 278 n. 347. 4. 342 n. cxv. 16. 27 n. cxviii. 22. 225
n. 26. 279 n. cxxxix. 46 n. cxliii. 2. 49.51. cxlvi. 9. 238 n.

ISAIAH.
i. 24. 228 n. vi. 1 to 3. 390. 8 to 11. 289. 9. 223. 9, 10. 223 n. 10 to 14.
277 n. vii. 15. 31. 15, 16. 45. x. 16. 228 n. xii. 2. 331. 348. 369 n. xix. 4.
228 n. xxv. 8. 214. xxviii. 16. 225 n. xxxiv. 6.9, 10. 132 n. xxxvii. 16. 387
n. xl. 248. 277 n. 3. 248.252. 281 n. 3.5. 221. 3 to 11. 257. 9. 220. 9, 10,
11. 252. 11. 263. 12 to 17. 360, 361. 18. 213.361. xli. 4. 270. 10. 269. 13,
14. 270. xlii. 1 to 3. 247. 5 to 8. 246. 318 n. 319. 6. 245. 8. 282. xliv. 6.
271. 13. 376. xlv. 21 to 23. 272. 7. 134 n. xlviii. 12. 271. liii. 1. 280 n. 5.
268 n. 7. 221 n. 267 n. live. 5. 295 n. lviii. 3. 22 n. lxi. 1. 279 n. 379 n. 1,
2. 331.348. lxii. 11, 12. 226 n. lxv. 2. 302 n.

JEREMIAH.
xxiii. 300 n. 5, 6. 298 n. 6. 263. xxxi. 31. 375. 33. 374, 375. 33, 34. 376.
xxxiii. 6. 303 n. 16. 296 n. 303 n. 304 n. xxxv. 17. 301 n.

LAMENTATIONS.
iii. 38. 137.

EZEKIEL.
viii. 14. 163 n. xii. 2. 223 n. xviii. 31, 32. 393 n. xxiii. 11. 393 n.

DANIEL.
ii. 44. 344. v. 6. 144 n. vii. 13, 14. 344.

MICAH.
iv. 301 n. 10. 301 n. v. 301 n. 1. 301 n. v. 1, 2. 262. 2. 262. vi. 9. 301 n.

ZECHARIAH.
vi. 12, 13. 343. vii. 7. 301 n. 11 to 14. 302 n. 14. 302 n. xii. 10. 401 n.
xiii. 6, 7. 401 n.

MALACHI.
iii. 1. 228. 281 n.

MATTHEW.
i. 18. 365. 20. 365. 21. 225. 22, 23. 277 n. iii. 3. 277 n. 5. 185 n. 220 n.
11. 249. 15. 308. 341 n. iv. 149. 1 to 11. 184 n. 7. 278 n. 10. 337 n. v. 18.
132 n. 17. 340 n. 17, 18. 337 n. 29, 30. 130 n. 33. 278 n. vi. 7, 8. 159 n. 33.
193, 194. vii. 12. 75. 7. 197. viii. 28 to 32. 177. 31, 32. 179 n. 32. ibid.
xi. 10. 227. 229. 12. 227 n. xii. 28. 364 n. 48 to 50. 324 n. xiii. 14. 223 n.
xviii. 19, 20. 397 n. xix. 23, 24. 29. xxi. 22. 197. xxii. 37. 278 n. 44. 216
n. xxiii. 35 to 39. 98 n. 37 to 39. 303 n. 38. 98 n. xxiv. 15 to 21. 98 n. 30.
223 n. 35. 132 n. xxv. 14. 24. 14 to 30. 24. 27 n. 41. 131 n. 132 n. 142. xxvi.
39. 268 n. xxviii. 18, 19. 235 n. 19. 200 n. 20. 260 n.

MARK.
i. 149. 2. 227 n. 3. 277 n. 5. 185 n. 12, 13. 184 n. ii. 5 to 12. 295 n. v.
12. 179 n. 13. ibid. 180 n. ix. 24. 197. 45, 46. 131 n. xii. 29. 275. 30. 278
n. 36. 278 n. xvi. 19. 260 n.

LUKE.
i. 31 to 33. 345. 33. 354. iii. 35. 365. 366 n. 4. 277 n. iv. 149. 12. 278 n.
18, 19. 279 n. 18. 331. 348. vi. 12. 278 n. 31. 75. vii. 27. 227 n. viii. 32.
179 n. 33. ibid. x. 16. 230. 27. 278 n. xi. 9 to 13. 198. 396 n. xii. 19, 20.
25. xiii. 7. 26. 13. 50. 35. 98 n. 279 n. xiv. 2. 27. 9. 195. xvi. 2. 27 n. 17.
132 n. 25. 30. xvii. 29, 30. 144 n. xix. 37, 38. 279 n. xx. 42. 278 n. xxii.
31, 32. 149. 53. 139 n. xxiii. 30. 50. xxiv. 17. 366 n. 35. 366 n. 39, 40. 400
n. 44. 268 n. 49. 366 n.

JOHN.
i. 1. 310 n. 1 to 14. 222 n. 257. 5. 224. 9. 258. 310 n. 14. 332 n. 18. 262.
19. 224 n. 23. 277 n. 23 to 26. 277 n. 29. 267 n. 29 to 31. 222 n. 29 to 36.
251. ii. 5. 200 n. 16. 332 n. 19. 206 n. 19 to 21. 96. 26 to 31. 282 n. 29.
295. 30. 281 n. 31. 281. iv. 9. 222 n. v. 17. 315. 17 to 23. 338. 18. 334. 21.
315. 338. 21, 22, 23. 235 n. 22, 23. 318. 353. 26. 336 n. vi. 44. 377. 392 n.
394 n. vi. 45. 377. 53 to 55. 312 n. 57 to 58. 312 n. 63. 362. 64. 146 n. 70.
146 n. viii. 34. 55 n. 44. 148 n. 261. 154 n. 53. 261. 58. 260. x. 6 to 11. 287
n. 11. 257. 287 n. 15. 308. 30. 285. 321. 328. 350. 31 to 38. 325. 34. 325 n.
37. 364 n. 38. 350. 39. 329. xi. 50. 267 n. xii. 6. 146 n. 13. 279 n. 31. 141
n. 195. 38. 280 n. 45. 222 n. xiv. 6. 53. 148 n. 392 n. 395. 9, 10. 285. 11.
350. 13, 14. 314. 13 to 17. 397 n. 16, 17. 357 n. 16 to 26. 366 n. xiv. 23.
292. 26. 357 n. 379 n. 381 n. 28. 320. xv. 26. 355. 381. xvi. 6. 309. 13, 355.
381 n. 14. 308. 15. 351. 356 n. 15, 16. 358 n. xvii. 5. 341. 351. 10. 358 n.
15, 236 n. 308. 17. 291. 21. 350. xviii. 11. 268 n. xix. 17. 267 n. xx. 17. 245
n. 20. 400. 24 to 27. 401 n.

ACTS.
i. 9 to 10. 402 n. ii. 34. 279 n. iii. 14. 378 n. 15. 363 n. 14 to 16. 336 n.
iv. 5 to 12. 225 n. 12. 315. 24, 25, 26. 347. v. 4. 230. x. 38. 366 n. 368 n.
378 n. 379 n. xvii. 27, 28. 217. xvii. 29. 322 n. 372 n. xxiv. 25. 405 n.
xxviii. 25. 388.

ROMANS.
i. 4. 369 n. 20. 371 n. 20 to 32. 136 n. ii. 14. 37. 14, 15. 37. iv. 17. 368.
v. 53. 7. 100. 12 to 14. 48. 19. 340 n. 21. 48. viii. 1, 2. 369 n. 9 to 11. 383
n. 17. 264. 18. 398. 29. 265. 33. 367. 35 to 39. 98 n. 37. 310. ix. 3. 97. 5.
294 n. xii. 5. 296 n. xiv. 7 to 13. 274. xv. 16. 386 n. 17 to 19. 365 n. xvi.
27. 350.

1 CORINTHIANS.
i. 24. 367. ii. 4. 366 n. 8. 284 n. 9 to 15. 382. 10. 370. 10, 11. 356 n. ii.
13. 356 n. 14. 212 n. iii. 11. 295. 16, 17. 386. v. 129. vi. 11. 367. 19. 384
n. 20. 330. x. 4. 373 n. 16. 314. xiv. 33. 135. xv. 4 to 8. 401 n. 20. 402 n.
24, 25. 346. 24 to 28. 350. 25. 347. 25, 26. 351. 28. 346. 35 to 55. 407 n. 45.
368. 47. 280.308. 53. 130 n. 53, 54. 214 n. 56, 57. 31 n.

2 CORINTHIANS.
ii. 10, 11. 129. iii. 17. 360 n. 18. 378. iv. 4. 220. 17. 398.410. v. 4. 407
n. 17. 200. vi. 16. 385 n. xi. 14. 138 n.

GALATIANS.
iii. 28, 29. 300. 29. 296 n. 393 n. iv. 6. 383 n. 8. 386 n. v. 14. 77.

EPHESIANS.
i. 3 to 17. 245 n. 17 to 20. 331.348. 22, 23. 306. ii. 2. 141 n. 18. 383 n.
20. 295. 20 to 22. 306, 307. 21, 22. 342 n. 22. 384 n. 385 n. iv. 7. 378. 27.
128. vi. 128 n. 11, 12, 128.141. 12. 138 n. 27. 128.

PHILIPPIANS.
i. 19. 384 n. ii. 9 to 11. 315.

COLOSSIANS.
i. 12.14. 139 n. 14.19. 218 n. 15 to 19. 218. ii. 9. 219.236. 253. iii. 4. 398
n.

1 THESSALONIANS.
i. 5. 366 n. iv. 16. 404 n.

2 THESSALONIANS.
i. 7. 143 n. ii. 9 to 12. 135 n.

1 TIMOTHY.
i. 17. 217 n. 350. ii. 1. 394 n. 4. 394 n. 5. 307. 322 n. iii. 16. 223 n. 252
n. iv. 1 to 3. 157 n. vi. 16. 217 n. 221 n. 13. 368.

2 TIMOTHY.
ii. 17.15. 406 n. iii. 16, 17. 214 n.

HEBREWS.
i. 1, 2. 264. 1 to 4. 219 n. 2. 231.343. 3. 217.219. 6. 353 n. 8. 344. 8, 9.
264.347. 9. 379 n. 10, 11, 12. 268. ii. 11. 324 n. 14, 15. 139 n. 16. 265. 17.
265. iii. 7 to 11. 374. iv. 7. 372. 15. 149. 268 n. v. 6 to 10. 342 n. vii. 1,
2. 343 n. 1 to 11. 342 n. ix. 14. 208. 22. 51. x. 15. 374. 23. 198. 397 n. 26,
27. 145. 27. 49. 29. 208. xiii. 8. 264.

JAMES.
i. 13. 137. 188 n. 13 to 15. 137 n. 14. 121 n. ii. 19. 50.145. 322 n. iv. 1 to
4. 121 n. 7. 129. v. 1. 30.114. 14. 379 n.

1 PETER.
i. 10, 11. 358 n. ii. 5. 295. iv. 14. 208. 369 n. v. 5. 264. 8. 129.

2 PETER.
i. 2 to 4. 201. ii. 4. 130. 139 n. 11. 147. 19, 20. 55 n. iii. 6, 7. 143 n. 9.
394 n. iii. 10. 132 n. 143 n. 352.

1 JOHN.
i. 5. 147 n. 5 to 7. 138 n. ii. 2. 267 n. 20. 378. 27. 379, 380. iii. 2, 3.
399 n. 8. 135 n. iv. 8. 148 n. 9. 222 n. 16. 293. v. 7. 138 n. 9. 216. 11. 216.
11 to 13. 311 n.

JUDE.
6. 125 n. 133 n. 139 n.

REVELATIONS.
i. 4. 239. 7. 224. 8. 362. 17, 18. 269. ii. 7. 311 n. iii. 7. 378. iv. 7. 399
n. 8. 239. v. 12, 13, 14. 339. vi. 15, 16. 50 n. vii. 4. 340 n. xi. 11. 369 n.
16, 17. 240. xix. 20. 143 n. xxii. 14. 313 n.

INDEX OF THE Various TOPICS discussed in this Work.
A.
AARON. See Moses. Abraham. Remarks on his attempt to sacrifice his son, 79.
His remonstrance to the Almighty, 88, agreeable to that due exertion of Reason
which GOD requires of his creature Man, 89. See Moriah, Moses. Accents (Greek)
essential sometimes to the meaning and proper construction of the sacred text,
253 n. Adam. No descendant of his, though ever so rich, has any right to eat
the bread of idleness; nor can do so without offense against his own soul, and
the universal ordinance of God, Genesis iii. 17 to 19. p. 22, 23. Adam and Eve.
See First Parents, Bread of Idleness, Man, Human Nature. Adonis. Etymology of
that name, 227 n. See Thammuz. Affections (natural). Their superiority to
self-love, instanced from the brute creation, 9, 10. Are principles of action,
108.111. But not rules of obedience, 112. Instanced in the avaritious man,
ibid. In drunkards and gluttons, 114. In the vices of lust, gaming, etc. 115.
African Slave Trade, encouraged by the English government, 205. African Traders
and American Slave-holders, are petty tyrants, and destroyers of mankind, 10.
Alexander Severus. His favorite maxim, 68. Appetites, not rules of obedience,
33. See Affections. Arabians, Turks, etc. Their detestable arbitrary
governments in Judea, 302 n. Arbitrary Power. See Despotism, Arabians, etc.
Aristotle. Just answer of his, 74. Athanasius. His creed defended against the
Rev. Dr. E. Harwood, 256 n. See Unity of God. Avarice, defeats self-love, 114.
Author. Not his design to define what is the universal principle of action, but
to point out what it ought to be, 56, 65. His reasons for introducing religious
topics into Tracts of Law, 198. 212. A sincere advocate for liberty of
conscience, 210 n. See Brook, Fool of Quality, Human Nature, Religious
Melancholy.
B.
Balaam. His counsel promoted the service and worship of Devils, 166 See
Fornication. Baptismal Vow. Resistance to evil spirits, a necessary article
thereof, 122. Beads, used by Mongulian priests and nuns in their devotions,
like the Roman Catholics, 158 n. and among the idolatrous Calmues and Chinese
159 n. by the Great Lama of the Tartars, and by the priests of the idol Menipe,
162 n. Bread of Idleness. No descendant of Adam can eat thereof, without
offense against his own soul, as well as against the universal ordinance of
God, pronounced against our first parents after the fall, 23. Bread and Wine.
See Communion. Brook (Mr. of Dublin). His Fool of Quality applauded by the
author, 105 n. See Author. Brutes, never violate the universal principle of
SELF-LOVE, 171, except for a reasonable cause, 173. But one instance of their
being actuated by evil spirits, and that by the express permission of our Lord
himself, 174. See Devil, Man.
C.
Calmucs. See Beads. Cambridge MS. condemned by the best critics, 254 n. 255 n.
Chinese. The idolatries of their priests are, in many respects, like those of
the Romish priests, 159 n. See Beads. Christ. His promises, relative to the
gift of the Holy Ghost, are clear and absolute, 196. Is always with his church
on earth, 217. In him only can God be seen, 220. Included in the Eternal Being
JEHOVAH, 230. Is One with his Almighty Father in Eternal Existence, in that
BEING of Eternity, JEHOVAH, 258 -- 275. 294. Was affected (through the weakness
of that Human Nature, which he had taken upon him) with all the horrors of an
approaching, agonizing death, 268. Was not only JEHOVAH in name, but in effect
and reality, 269. 271. And in power and glory, ibid. and seq. IS LORD OF ALL,
276. ABOVE ALL, 281. The LORD FROM HEAVEN, 283. The LORD OF GLORY, 284. OVER
ALL, GOD BLESSED FOR EVER, 294. Truly and essentially the SON OF GOD, as well
as the SON OF MAN, 309. Is, in the most effectual manner, to us, the TREE OF
LIFE, 312 n. The same supreme honor due to him, as to the Father, 317. Our
Lord's expression, My Father is greater than I, considered, and explained, 320.
Christ was not only glorified in his divine nature, but expressly as MAN, 341.
By Christ's resurrection and ascension is incontestably proved, that the real
substances of flesh and bones can, and do, inherit the kingdom of heaven, 400,
401, 402 notes. See Eternal Word, Jesus, Communion, Father and Son, GOD, Human
Nature, John the Baptist, Paul, Socinians, True Believers, Commentators on
Scripture. Church of England. Articles and Liturgy thereof, how cautiously
worded, 209. Its Articles, etc. defended, 210 n. See Jehovah, Mental Blindness,
Non-subscribing Clergymen, Trinity. Church of Jerusalem. Their happy manner of
living in common, 107 n. Church of Rome. Similarity of the antichristian
ceremonies in that church to the religious forms of worship amongst the ancient
and modern Heathens, 156, et seq. forbidding to marry, a doctrine of devils,
ibid. See Papists, Mongulians, Heathens, Chinese, Tartars, Monks, Nuns, and
Beads. Cicero. His just definition of law, 30. Of the law of nature in man, 33.
Clearly describes the natural instinct of the knowledge of good and evil, under
the title of common sense, 34. Claromonian or Clermont MS. See Cambridge MS.
Clergymen. See Nonconforming Clergymen, Mental Blindness. Commentators on the
H. Scriptures. Grotius and Vitringa have erroneously attributed the title of
Jehovah our Righteousness (which the scriptures give to Christ alone) to
Jerusalem. Also Mr. W. Lowth, and the Authors of the last English version, 296
to 304. Common Sense. See Cicero, Knowledge of Good and Evil. Communion. In
what manner the bread and wine received therein are the BODY AND BLOOD OF
CHRIST, 312 n. See Papists. Confucius. Just maxim of his, 74. Conscience. Few
men so bad, as not to be sometimes sensible of its accusations, 38. 49. A
principle of action, 44. Men seldom fall into gross crimes, till they have
gradually stifled it, 53. See Knowledge, Reason, Sinderesis. Cremensis
(Joannes). Remarkable story of him, 168 n.
D.
David. Was not actuated by self-love, when he tendered his own life, to save
those of his subjects, 102. The nature of his crime, in numbering the people,
explained, 103. His natural paternal affection was more powerful than
self-love, in the case of Absalom, 108. See Satan. Day of Judgment. Dreadful
state of this world after that awful and tremendous day, 352. See GOD, Hell,
Last Day, Last Trumpet, Sharp (Archbp.) Death. The penalty of breaking the
first and only penal law, 14. Its not being inflicted immediately after the
fall, affords no objection to Moses's relation of that transaction, 14. 21. No
elevation of station will exempt us from it, 25. Penalty of labor added
thereto, ibid. The consideration of this universal doom to death and labor,
ought to incite us as a principle of action, 28. Death is not the only object
of the sinner's fear, 51. The time when, and by what means, death will be
destroyed, 351. See Fall. Demoniacal Possessions. Their reality defended, 175
n. et seq. See Case of Saul in the Appendix. Also Gadarene Demoniacs. Demons.
Have no power over the brute creation, 175 n. See Devil, Satan, Enemies, Evil
Spirits, GOD. Depravity of Mankind. Not universal; so that the universal
principle of action in man is not to be drawn from thence, 56. See Man.
Desires. Not unlawful in themselves, but in their excess, 120 n. Despotism
(political), and arbitrary power, prevail almost throughout the world, 205.
Devil. Is not merely a name, 117 n. 123. His personality asserted by Archbishop
Sharp against Mr. Hobbs, 123 n. Not to be understood as one particular being,
but as the whole company of evil spirits, 124. Proved from scripture, 128, et
seq. Commonly understood of the prince, or chief of the fallen angels, 140.
Worshipped by the name of Satan by the heathen Tartars, 159 n. Has no power
over brutes, but by divine permission, 176 n. Forbidding to marry, a doctrine
of devils, 156, et seq. See Satan, Enemies, Evil Spirits, Demons, Fallen
Angels, Balaam, Human Nature, Man. Divine Nature. Man entitled to partake of it
through Christ, 196 to 202. This participation of the divine nature is the
glorious effect of Christ's promises, to those who duly claim them, 382. See
Man, Human Nature, Christ, Holy Ghost. Doing as we would be done by. The true
Christian RULE OF ACTION, and a fundamental axiom of the law of nature, 75. The
ONLY PATERNAL PRECEPT to which the Creator has graciously reduced the rule of
obedience, 76. Ought to be the UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLE OF ACTION IN MAN, 78. See
Puffendorff. Doctrine of Devils. See Church of Rome. Drunkards and Gluttons.
Their deplorable state, 114.
E.
Enemies (spiritual). Their influence a distinct principle of action in man,
18. 117. They take a most dangerous advantage, though unperceived, of all
immoral, carnal affections, 119. See Devil, Demon, Satan, Evil Spirits. English
government. See African Slave Trade, Slavery in the Colonies. Eternal Word.
Though in the beginning with God, and was God, yet, under the gospel, became
the angel, or messenger of God, 226, 227. Proceeded out from the Father, 261.
See Christ, Jesus, Son of God, John the Baptist. Evil Spirits. Resisting them
an express article of the baptismal vow, 122. Are used to fulfill the eternal
judgment and justice of the Almighty upon the unrighteous, 137 n. And may then
be said to become principles of action in man, ibid. The propriety of calling
them angels of darkness, 132, et seq. Foreknow their own certain damnation,
145. Human Nature liable to their temptations, (150, 190.) if we do not resist
them, as the scriptures command us, 192. When men neglect the due resistance,
these spirits gain such advantage over them, (193.) that at last men will
become personal enemies, even to themselves, 194. See GOD, Human Nature,
Demons, Fallen Angels, Devils, Satan, Enemies Spiritual.
F.
Faith, in the Three Divine Persons of the Trinity absolutely necessary to
salvation, 200 n. 209. See Human Nature, Jehovah, Trinity. Faithful, are ONE in
the Father and the Son, 292. but we must be careful to distinguish between the
unity of the FATHER and the SON, and the unity of the faithful in them, 293.
See Father and Son. Fall of Man. History of it considered, 11, et seq. An
enquiry into the principles of our own nature more important than any other
branch of natural philosophy, 12. Death not being inflicted on the day of the
transgression, affords, no just exception against the truth and propriety of
the relation, 14. See Bread of Idleness, Death, Reason. Fallen Angels.
Difference between them and the good, 125 n. See Devil, Satan, Evil Spirits,
Demons, Enemies (spiritual), Spirits. Father (Almighty) and Son, are ONE in
many respects, which cannot, with the least propriety, be attributed to the
unity of the church in Christ, 294, 305. See Faithful, Man. First Parents. The
nature of the penalty due for their transgression, was clearly revealed to
them, and was as clearly understood by them before they fell, 15. See Bread^ of
Idleness, Reason, Sin. Forbidden Fruit. See Tempter. Fool of Quality, the
author's reason for quoting it, 106. n. Fornication, its baneful consequences;
being a snare to enslave men to spiritual adversaries, and to idolatry, 166, et
seq. Freedom (true). See True Freedom. What it is, p. 196, 197.
G.
Gadarene Demoniacs, their case examined and explained, 175, et seq. Gentiles,
have universally demonstrated a sense of the precept of doing as we would be
done by, even without the assistance of scripture, 73. Ghost. See Holy Ghost.
Gluttons. See Drunkards. GOD. Delivered a clear and express law to man before
the fall, 14. which was the first and only penal law, ibid. and which he
himself cautioned them not to transgress, 16. Never judges men without law,
like the arbitrary princes of this world, 21. Love of him, the great first
principle of all duty, 79. his command ought to supersede all natural affection
and self-love, 79. requires his creature, man, to judge of right and wrong, 89.
is said in scripture to do what he only permits, 135 n. 178 n. his servants,
sometimes left to themselves, 136. he sometimes uses the very devils as
instruments of his justice, 137 n. difference between his agency and
permission, 178 n. wickedness of ascribing to his agency the agitations
occasioned by the inspiration of unclean spirits, 181 n. 190 n. he tempts no
man, 188 n. his command to Abraham to sacrifice his son, was no temptation to
evil, but a trial or proof of faith, 189 n. has lodged the power of admitting
or resisting evil spirits or damons, entirely in the human breast, 190. a
perfect knowledge of him only to be attained in heaven, 213. It is our duty to
cultivate our limited knowledge of him, 214. is a spirit, and cannot be seen
with human eyes, 217. but in Christ, who is the image of God, he can be seen;
and in him alone can be fulfilled that ancient prophecy to the Jews, that they
should SEE THEIR GOD, 220. All flesh shall literally SEE Christ at the DAY OF
JUDGMENT, 223. See Christ, Eternal Word, Happiness, Jehovah, Knowledge of Good
and Evil, Moses, Political Liberty, Sodom. Gods. See Judges and Magistrates.
God's Word. The extreme danger of paying any attention to any doctrines or
interpretations, which in the least contradict the literal or most obvious
meaning of it, 18. See Scriptures, Eternal Word. Gospel. See Eternal Word.
Greek Accents. See Accents. Grotius. See Commentators on Scripture.
H.
Happiness. The pursuit of it not the universal principle of action, neither is
it the proper rule of obedience, as advanced by a learned law-commentator, 57,
et seq. There is nothing so liable to be misunderstood, as happiness, 65. None
equal to that acquired by a perfect knowledge of God, 213. Harwood (Rev. Dr.
E.) An indiscreet alteration in his new edition of the Greek Testament, 253.
Dangerous presumption of that alteration, 254 n. which has but one single Greek
MS. to support it, ibid. See Athanasius. Heathens (Eastern). Similarity of
their religious ceremonies to those of the Papists, 157, et seq. Shameful rites
of the ancient heathens, 162, et seq. See Church of Rome, Beads, Chinese,
Prostitution, Tartars. Hebrew Scriptures. Supplementary words never allowable,
but where absolutely necessary to complete the sense, 297 n. Hell. A real place
of material fire, 130 n. Probably the present terrestrial globe may hereafter
become that place of eternal fire, 131 n. The objection that the world will be
consumed, and therefore will not feed an everlasting fire, is of no force, 132
n. The above conjecture confirmed by Archbishop Sharp, 142. Hobbes (Mr.) His
judicious opinion of the Law of Nature, 68. See Devil. Holy Ghost. Mankind have
a free choice, either to admit that heavenly gift, or the contrary spirit of
the prince of darkness, 196. Every one who claims that gift properly, will
undoubtedly receive it, 198. The divine nature of the Holy Spirit is as clearly
declared in scripture, as that of the SON OF GOD, 355, et seq. The Holy Spirit
is not, like other spirits, a created spirit, but proceeds out from the
Father, 357 n. The almighty operations of the Holy Ghost manifested the glory
of the Son, as well as the glory of the Father, 358 n. Is truly God, of the
same supreme, divine nature, or eternal being, with the other Two Divine
Persons of the Trinity, 358. His entire union and equality with the Father and
the Son, in the Divine Nature, or GODHEAD, proved, 362. Is declared to be the
Creator in Job, and by the Psalmist, 363. Power from on high, justification,
and sanctification (all divine attributes) expressly attributed to the Holy
Ghost, jointly with Christ, 367. Similar titles given to the Son of God, and
the Holy Spirit, 367, 369. The power of giving life, especially life eternal,
attributed both to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, 368. If we really believe
the holy scriptures to be the word of God, we must necessarily believe that the
HOLY GHOST is really and truly GOD, 387. See Christ, GOD, Man, Virgin, Unity of
God. Holy Spirit. See Holy Ghost. Honesty. Is the best policy, even for a
selfish man to pursue, 7. Human Nature. Is really liable to the impulse and
inspiration of evil spirits, 150. But is still equally capable of divine
inspiration, and to partake of the divine nature, 196 to 202. Human nature, and
the principles of human actions, cannot be easily defined, without the
assistance of religious topics, 198. It was human nature alone that was to be
exalted and restored, by that peculiar union with the divine nature in Christ,
whereby all mankind are rendered fellows and brethren to him, 264. Is capable
of being exalted and dignified, even in this life, 292. Is exalted to eternal
glory, but only in, by, and through Christ, 309. The means of retrieving its
lost dignity pointed out, 309. That dignity cannot be properly known or
understood, without a right faith in the dignity and divine nature of Christ,
312. The necessity of such a faith, 314. The glorious privileges granted to
human nature are only through the merits of that Son of Man, who voluntarily
took our nature upon him, 394. God has instructed us how those privileges are
to be claimed, 395. See Christ, Man, Sin. Human Sacrifices. Amongst the
heathens, accounted for, 153. Account of one in North America, 154 n.
J.
Jehoshaphat. His wise charge to his judges, 324 n. Jehovah. A name no where in
scripture attributed to any person that is not included in the unity of the
Godhead, 233. The complicated etymology of that name, 236. Each person of the
Holy Trinity is occasionally mentioned in scripture under that distinguishing
and peculiar name of the SUPREME GOD, 245. That name given to the Almighty
Father, the First Person of the Holy Trinity, 245 to 248. Secondly, To Christ
the Son, 248 to 355. And, Thirdly, To the Holy Ghost, 355 to 382. Many learned
men do not perceive, that the glorious Name JEHOVAH, (the peculiar Name of the
ONE SUPREME GOD) is clearly in the scriptures attributed to the Son of God,
330. Their objections answered, 330, et seq. The threefold repetition of the
epithet Holy, in the proclamation of God's glorious title, Jehovah of Hosts,
seems to correspond with the idea of a Plurality of Persons comprehended in
that One Eternal Being, JEHOVAH, 390. See Christ, GOD, Commentators on
Scripture, Holy Ghost, John (the Baptist) Trinity. Jehovah our Righteousness.
Jefferies (Lord Chanc.) Character of him and Genesis Kirk, from Rapin, 62 n. See
Sharp, Archbp. Jesus. The meaning of that name explained, 224 n. See Christ,
Eternal Word. Jews. Have never returned to their own proper country since the
general dispersion foretold by Zechariah, 302 n. Which has continued more than
1700 years, and they shall not be restored till they are converted, 303 n.
Their judges and magistrates originally elected by the people, as all public
officers (in strict justice) ought to be, 325 n. et seq. See Judges and
Magistrates, Law of Nature, Newton, Paul (St.) Inspiration. See Human Nature.
Involuntary Servitude. Agreed by all the best writers to be contrary to the Law
of Nature, 3. John (the Baptist). The Messenger of the Eternal Word, 227, 228.
Was the long-expected Voice in the Wilderness foretold by Isaiah, 281 n. And
the extraordinary messenger of JEHOVAH foretold by Malachi, 281 n. Gave the
highest testimony that could be of Christ's heavenly power and divine
existence, 282 n. See Eternal Word. Jonathan -- was not actuated by self-love,
in his noble and virtuous friendship for David, 100. Could not submit, like
modern statesmen, to do evil, that good might come, 101. Isaac. See Abraham,
Moriah. Israel. See Political Liberty. Judas became a Devil, and how, 146 n.
Judges and Magistrates. In what sense they are called Gods, and Sons of the
most High, by the Psalmist, 323 n. Which is no degradation from the title and
dignity of the REAL SON OF GOD, 324 n. See Jews. Justification. See Holy Ghost.
K.
Kings -- ought constantly to study the Holy Scriptures, 103 n. See Judges and
Magistrates, Monarchs. Kirk (Gen.) See Jesseries. Knowledge of good and evil
-- seems plainly to be the grand principle, whereby men, who have not the law,
are a law unto themselves, 36. It is an universal principle, 57. 64. But not
the universal principle of action, 65. Duly exerted, promotes our love of God,
79 et seq. That very knowledge is now (through the mercy of God) become a
principle of action (if used as it ought) to incline us to RIGHTEOUSNESS, and
lead us to the Tree of life, 310. See Cicero, Reason, Scripture Evidence, Sin,
Tree of Life.
L.
Last Day. Terrible and striking description of it, by Archbp. Sharp, 144. The
resurrection of Christ's body, a proof to us that flesh and bones can inherit
the kingdom of heaven, 400. See Day of Judgment, Hell. Last Trumpet. Answer to
objections about the future sounding thereof, 402 n. Law. See GOD. Law of
Nature. The author does not intend to give a regular definition of it, 1. All
pretensions to an unlimited authority of any man or men over others are
contrary to it, and to natural equity, 2. Jewish constitutions not always
consistent with it, 3. Opposers of it censured by Puffendorff, 4. Unreasonable
to search for it amongst slaves, 55. Cannot be properly understood, without a
competent knowledge of those spiritual beings, by whom our minds are liable to
be influenced, 191. See Author, Hobbes, Involuntary Servitude, Reason. Liberty
of Conscience. See Author. Life. The FORFEITURE of it the declared penalty of
breaking the first penal law, 14. See Death. Litany. See Trinity. Liturgy. See
Trinity. Love of hoarding. See Self-love. Lowth (Mr. William). See Commentators
on H. Scripture. Lusts of all kinds are principles of action, which unavoidably
produce oppression, and other evils, 6.
M.
Man -- by apostasy may become a sort of devil, 146. Exemplified by the case of
Judas, 146 n. Why more depraved than the brute creation, 173. Through the
privileges of the Gospel, MAN may become a new creature, and a partaker of the
divine nature, 200 n. In what his dignity and superiority over the rest of the
creation consists, 201. 288: which cannot be attained without the inspiration
of God's Holy Spirit, 211. The unity of the FATHER and the SON with the church
is a topic necessarily included in a Tract on the Nature of Man, 291. The means
of retrieving his lost dignity pointed out, 309, et seq. which is not to be
accomplished, but through Christ alone, 311 n. Man is called a Temple in the
New Testament, 384. The doctrine necessarily arising from thence, 384, et seq.
See Christ, GOD, Holy Spirit, Divine Nature, Human Nature, Depravity, Reason,
Temple. Magistrates. See Judges and Magistrates. Marriage. The forbidding it a
doctrine of devils, 156, et seq. Its wicked tendency, 167 n. See Church of
Rome. Melancholy. See Religious Melancholy. Mental Blindness, of some modern
clergymen, who have seceded from the Church of England, because the Litany, and
other parts of our excellent Liturgy, express divine honor to the SON OF GOD,
338 n. See Trinity. Monarchs -- should not despise the reasonable remonstrances
of their subjects, 83. The right of remonstrating proved from scripture, 83.
See Kings, Judges and Magistrates. Mongulians, or Mogulians. Their idolatrous
customs similar to those of the church of Rome, 158, et seq, n. See Church of
Rome, Papists, Beads. Monks (Heathen). Have a grand monastery in Crim Tartary,
157 n. See Church of Rome, Papists, Devil. Moriah (mount) -- the place where
Abraham was commanded to sacrifice his son Isaac, and likewise the place where
the BELOVED SON OF GOD was really sacrificed, as the propitiation for our sins,
267 n. Moses. His remonstrance to God approved by the Almighty, as also that of
Aaron, 91. His zeal for the glory of God, 81. 84. et seq. Moses' manner of
seeing God explained, 215. See GOD, Self-love.
N.
Natural Affection. See Affections, GOD. -- Equity. See Law of Nature. --
Philosophy. See Fall. Nature. See Law of Nature. Neighbor. The duty of loving
our neighbor as ourselves enforced, 68. A maxim almost universally
acknowledged, 73, 74. Is the true Christian rule of action, 75. and the only
paternal precept to which the Creator has reduced the rule of obedience, 76.
See Doing as we would be done by. Newton (Sir Isaac). His account of the
encampments of the Israelites in the wilderness, 339 n. His explanation of the
four beasts in the Apocalypse, 340 n. Non-subscribing clergymen. The doctrine
of the Trinity the principal cause of their objections to the Church of
England, 209. Reasons why their petition to parliament could not be granted,
210 n. See Church of England, Mental Blindness, Trinity. Nuns. Women bound to
celibacy, contrary to nature, amongst the heathen Tartars, Chinese, etc. 157.
Orders of them amongst both the ancient and modern heathens, 157. See Church of
Rome, Devil.
O.
Original Sin. Nature of it explained, 17 to 48.
P.
Parents. See First Parents. Papists. A public promulgation of some parts of
their religion ought not to be tolerated, and why, 210 n. Their manner of
adoring the sacramental bread, unjustifiable and idolatrous, 314 n. See Beads,
Chinese, Church of Rome, Heathens, Tartars, Mongulians, Monks, Nuns. Patriotism
and Brotherly Love has superseded self-love in many instances, 95 -- 99. 102.
Paul (St.). His anxiety for the eternal welfare of the Jews, 97. His wishing
himself accursed from Christ explained, 97. His disinterestedness, and
unbounded affection, 97 to 100. See Christ. Penal Law. See Death, Life.
Philosophy -- is vain, if the philosopher is unacquainted with himself, 12.
Polish Brethren. Some of them notorious Socinians, 253 n. See Socinians.
Political Liberty. The glorious state of it, with which God was pleased to
bless his people ISRAEL, 328 n. and three preceding pages. Popery. See Papists,
Church of Rome. Power from on High. An attribute given by our Lord himself to
the Holy Ghost, 366. See Holy Ghost. Pride. In temporary honors and worldly
possessions, the folly thereof, 203. Is a principle of action, 203. See Satan.
Pride (spiritual), and pride of learning, their bad tendency, 206, et seq. See
Satan. Priests. The immoral tendency of forbidding them to marry, 167 n. See
Marriage, Church of Rome. Prince of Darkness. See Devil, Satan. Principles of
Action. See Happiness, Affections, Author, Conscience, Death, Depravity of
Mankind, Doing as we would be done by, Enemies, Evil Spirits, Knowledge of Good
and Evil, Reason, Satan, Self-love, Sinderesis, Temptations, etc. etc.
Prostitution, and a promiscuous use of women promoted by Satan, as a sacred
rite amongst the heathens, and why, 159, et seq. Psalm cii. Something
peculiarly deep and mysterious therein, 266 n. Puffendorff. A position of his
examined, 69, et seq. Has well defended the general rule of Doing as we would
be done by, against Dr. Sharrock, 70.
R.
Reason, or the knowledge of good and evil, was unlawfully assumed by our first
parents, 11. 43. 192. Is the cause that sin is imputed to us, 30. A divine
attribute, which the Gentiles acknowledged, 31, 32. Is properly the grand
principle, or law of nature, or conscience, 37. Man not endowed with so ample a
portion of it before the fall, 41, et seq. A rule of obedience, 33. God
requires us to exert it, 89. See Knowledge of Good and Evil, Sinderesis,
Conscience. Religious Melancholy. The author precluded from making any remarks
of his own thereon, by the observations of his grandfather, Archbishop Sharp,
150 n. See Sharp, (Archbp.) Religious Topics. See Author, Human Nature.
Remonstrance. See Monarchs, Abraham, Moses. Riches -- are a continual snare of
temptation, as well to acquire them unjustly, as to expend them improperly, 29.
Roman Catholics. See Church of Rome, Papists, Monks, Heathens, Tartars. Rules
of Action and Obedience. See Affections, Appetites, Doing as we would be done
by, Neighbor, Reason, Death, Sinderesis.
S.
Sadducees (modern) -- answered, 122 -- 196. See Evil Spirits. Satan. His
success in misleading mankind, a distinct principle of action, 19. Draws us
into temptation, by enlarging our desires, 119 n. The devil at present
worshipped by the name of Saitan among the Tartars, 159 n. Provoked David to
number the people, 190. Pride the occasion of Satan's fall, 203. His device, in
promoting man's assumption of forbidden knowledge, is completely turned against
himself, 310. See Devil, Evil Spirits, Enemies Spiritual, Demons, Wicked
Spirits. Saitan. A name amongst the Calmues for one of their idols, 160 n.
Sanctification. See Holy Ghost. Saul. His melancholy, or madness, not a mere
natural disorder, 191 n. An evil spirit the real agent which troubled him, 190
n. See Case of Saul (Appendix). Scriptures. We cannot reject any part of the
scripture evidence, without a manifest perversion and abuse of our hereditary
knowledge of good and evil, 286. We are obliged to believe the scriptures,
though we do not fully comprehend them, 288. See Hebrew Scriptures,
Commentators on Holy Scripture. Self-love -- is not the universal principle of
action, (7, et seq. 61, et seq.) even in brutes, 11. 96. Bad actions manifestly
tend, even in the opinion of the offenders themselves, to defeat the most
essential purposes of self-love, 63. Patriotism and brotherly affection
manifestly superseded self-love in Moses and Aaron, (95, 96.) and also in St.
Paul, 99. Was not the ruling principle of action in Jonathan, 100. nor in
David, 102, et seq. Self-love must yield to the love of hoarding, 113. See
Avarice, David, Jonathan, Moses, Paul. Servitude (involuntary). Illegality of
it pointed out, 2, et seq. Sharp (Archbp.) Remarkable instance of his truly
Christian behavior to Judge Jefferies in his misfortunes, 62, 63 n. Extract
from his sermon on the day of judgment concerning hell, 142 n. His sermons
recommended as an antidote against religious melancholy, 150 n. See Day of
Judgment, Reason, Last Day, Hell. Sharrock (Dr.) See Puffendorff. Sin -- is
imputed to us, whether rich or poor, through the knowledge of good and evil,
that additional faculty acquired by human nature, through the transgression of
our first parents, 30. In what manner it is the sting of death, explained, 49.
See Original Sin, First Parents, Human Nature, Knowledge of Good and Evil,
Reason. Sinderesis -- sometimes treated as distinct from reason and conscience,
though in fact it is the same, 39, et seq. A principle of action, 40 n. 41 n.
See Reason, Conscience. Slave. None so miserable, as the man that is a slave to
his own passions and desires, 55. See Law of Nature. Slavery in the Colonies --
is favored and encouraged by the English government at home -- a national
disgrace! 205. Socinians. The manner in which they endeavor to evade a certain
scripture testimony of the divine nature of Christ, 230. confuted, 231, et seq.
That evasion it as vain as it is wicked, 236. A mistaken doctrine of theirs,
(293. 305.) proved to be unjust and false, 307. See Polish Brethren. Sodom.
God's gracious condescension to Abraham, when he remonstrated in behalf of the
condemned inhabitants thereof, 91. See Abraham. Son of God. See Christ Jesus,
GOD, Holy Spirit, Jehovah, Judges and Magistrates, Mental Blindness. Sons of
the most High. See Judges and Magistrates. Sorrow. The Hebrew word so rendered
in Genesis iii. more properly signifies labor, 21 n. Spirit. See Holy Ghost.
Spirits -- may converse with us by secret illapses without our perception, 118
n. See Enemies (Spiritual) Satan, Devil, Demon, Evil Spirits. Sting of Death.
See Sin. Suicide. The maxim, that all who commit it are mad, erroneous, 171.
Otherwise accounted for, 173.
T.
Tartars -- have monasteries for heathen monks and nuns, 157 n. See Devil,
Church of Rome, Papists. Temple. Man is a temple, "the temple of the Holy
Ghost," -- "the temple of God," 384, 385. The doctrine necessarily arising from
this revelation, 384 -- 388. Temptations. We ought not to murmur at God's
permitting them, 121. Why they are permitted, 135 n. Will become principles of
action, if not carefully resisted, 150. That the temptation of our Savior was
a fact, not a vision, proved, 184, et seq. Tempter -- was well acquainted with
the nature of the forbidden fruit, 19. See Enemies (Spiritual) Satan, Devil,
Evil Spirit, Demon. Thammuz, or Adonis. Manner of mourning over him among the
ancients, 163. Thompson (Rev. Mr.) His doctrine concerning the law of nature,
very convenient for tyrants and slave-holders, 5. Translators of the Bible. See
Grotius and Vitringa. Tree of Life. See Christ, Knowledge of Good and Evil.
Trinity. That doctrine is to be received more by faith than by human
comprehension, 212. The incommunicable name, JEHOVAH, never applied by the
sacred writers to any persons but those of the Holy Trinity, 235. The doctrine
of the Trinity, as received by the Church of England, strictly consistent with
the scripture doctrine of the Unity of the Godhead, 244. Some clergymen have
seceded from the Church of England, because the Litany and Liturgy express this
doctrine, and attribute divine honor to Christ, 338. The clear distinction of
the Three Divine Persons in the Holy Trinity, as revealed even in the Old
Testament, 245, et seq. The true nature of the unity thereof must still remain
a mystery, because our finite understandings cannot comprehend a perfect
knowledge of the ETERNAL BEING, 285. The Three Persons clearly distinguished by
the prophet Isaiah, 360. And by our Savior, 396 n. See Faith, Christ, Holy
Ghost, Jehovah, Non-subscribing Clergymen, Unity of God, Unitarians. True
Believers. Their unity in Christ, explained, 295 to 309. See Faithful. True
Freedom. What it is, 196, 197. Trumpet. See Last Trumpet. Truth -- more
dangerous than falsehood itself, when blended with falsehood, 20. Tubourai
Tamaide (an Otaheitan). Remarks on his behavior, 36. Turks. See Arabians, etc.
Tyrants. It is necessary for them, either to misrepresent, or to deny the law
of nature, 5. See Thompson.
U.
Vestal Virgins. See Nuns, Heathens, Church of Rome. View of the Soul. Extract
from a treatise so called, 110 n. et seq. Virgin (Blessed). Her miraculous
conception expressly attributed to the Holy Ghost, by St. Matthew, 365.
Vitringa. See Commentators on Scripture. Universal Principle of Action in Man.
See Doing as we would be done by, Happiness, Self-love. Unitarians. Some of the
mistaken people, who vainly call themselves Unitarians, hold doctrines which
are inconsistent with our belief in the Unity of God, 242, 243. Unity of God --
an indispensable article of our faith, yet are we equally bound to acknowledge,
that Three Divine Persons are included therein, 241. Athanasius, a strict
assertor of this doctrine, 255 n. Without the doctrine of the Unity of the
Divine Nature, the application in scripture of the same attributes to different
persons, could not be understood, 364. The Holy Ghost included in that Unity,
371. To contend for the Unity of the Divine Nature, if the least degree of
inequality therein be admitted, is absurd, 243, 244. 372. See Holy Ghost,
Jehovah, Trinity. Unlawful Affections -- ought to be carefully guarded against,
lest any of them should become the reigning principle of action, and should
lead the poor enslaved mortal to eternal destruction, 116. Unlimited Servitude.
See Law of Nature.
W.
Wicked Spirits. See Evil Spirits. Word Eternal. See Eternal Word.
Y.
Ynca Manco Capac. Wise precept of his, 75.
INDEX OF THE Different AUTHORS referred to.
A.
ABEN EZRA, 238. Alexander Severus, 68. 73. Anacrisis Apocalypsios, 297 n.
Answer (the author's) to the Rev. Mr. Thompson, 2 n. Arabic version, 219 n.
Aristotle, 74. Assembly's Annotat. 379 n. Athanasius, 254 n. 255 n. 256 n.
Athenagoras, 357 n. Augustine, 355 n.
B.
Bishop's Bible, 304 n. Bracton, 4 n. 8. Brook (Mr. of Dublin) 105 n.
Broughton (Mr. Hugh) 219 n. Brugensis (Lucas) 366 n. Burkitt (Mr.) 97. Burton
(Rev. Mr.) 268 n. Buxtorf, 237, 238.
C.
Cambridge MS. 254 n. 255 n. Carniades, 5. Chaldee Par. 363 n. Chandler (Bp.)
224. Christ's temptations real facts, 188 n. Chrysostom, 97 n. Cicero, 6. 31.
Claromontan or Clermont MS. 254 n. 255 n. Commentary on Isaiah (Louth's) 134 n.
Commentary (Jewish) on some of the Psalms, 238. Common Eng. version, 1611. 304
n. Complete Christian Dictionary, 204 n. Confusius, 74. Cowell, 4 n. Critica
Sacra, 216.
D.
Day of Judgment, Sermon on the manner of it, by Archbp. Sharp, 142 n. De Dieu
(Mons.) 219 n. De la Vega, 75. Demoniacks of the N. Test. Essay on, 177 n. 186
n. 191 n. Deodati, 134. Diogenes Laertius, 74. Doctor and Student, 12. 39. 42.
44 n. Dutch annotations, 136 n. Dutch embassy to the Cham of Tartary, account
of, 159 n.
E.
Erasmi Paraphrasis in Evang. Joan. 217 n. Essay toward reconciling the
numbers of Daniel and John, by the Rev. Mr. Burton, 268 n. Evangelical
discourses, 119 n. Ezekiel, 182 n.
F.
Fleta, 4 n. Fool of Quality, 105 n. 108 n. Fox (Rev. Francis, M. A.) 379. 394
n. Friendly admonition to drinkers of gin, brandy, etc. 115.
G.
Gomarus (Fr.) 255 n. Greek Test. new edit. of, by the Rev. E. Harwood, D.D.
252 n. 254 n. 255 n. 256 n. Greek Test. (Wetsten's) 2d edit. Preface to, 255 n.
Grotius, 296 n. 303 n. 357 n. 366 n. 379 n. 385 n. 400 n.
H.
Hales (Dr. Stephen) 115. Hebrew text, 297 n. Herodotus, 164 n. 165 n. Hill
(Dr.) 254 n. Hobbes, 68. 70. 123 n. Huetius, 304 n.
I.
Jackson (Dr.) 55 n. 121 n. Ides (Mr. Isbrant's) 157 n. Inquiry into the nature
and design of Christ's temptation, 181 n. 185 n. 186 n. 189 n. John (St.) 182
n. Justin, 3 n.
K.
Kennet (Basil) 69 n. Kimchi (Rabbi) 304 n. Kircher (Athanasius) 161 n.
L.
Lactantius, 5. Lampridius, 68. Lardner, 176 n. Lafitau, 155 n. Last English
translation, 297 n. Law of Liberty, or Royal Law, 77. -- of Retribution, 178.
234 n. 299 n. -- of Nature and Nations, 69. Le Brun, 157 n. 159 n. Le Clerc
(Mons.) 255 n. Leigh (Mr.) 216. Louth (Rev. Mr. William) 134 n. 296. 304.
M.
Marcinus, 74. Mastricht (Ger. Van.) 255 n. Maundrel's Travels, 163 n. Mede
(Joseph) 68. Moeurs des Sauvages Ameriquains, 156 n.
N.
New Test. with references, 394 n. Newton (Sir Isaac) 339 n. Novis Orbis
Regionum et Insularum, etc. 157 n.
O.
Observations on various subjects, 256 n. -- on Daniel and the Apocalypse, 340
n. Old English translation, 297 n. 304 n. Oration Philippica, 57 n.
P.
Paris (Matt.) 167 n. 168 n. Patrick (Bishop) 165 n. 166 n. 326 n. Paul (Father
Mark) 157 n. Pain (Mr. John) 119 n. Pearson (Bishop) 304 n. Pole's Synopsis,
366 n. 400 n. Puffendorff, 4. 69. 71, 72. 74.
R.
Rapin, 62 n. Remarks on several very important Prophecies, 249. 389 n.
S.
Scaliger, 268 n. Seneca, 74. Septuagint, 275. 327 n. Sermon (Bp. Chandler's)
before the King, 226. Sharrock (Dr.) 68. Sharp (Archbp.) 123 n. 128 n. 145 n.
150 n. 395 n. Sharp (Dr. John) 99 n. Simons (Father) 254 n. 255 n. Slater, 400
n. St. Germain MS. 255 n. Sykes, 176 n. Symphonia Prophet. et Apost. 99 n.
Syriac version, 219 n. 234. 327 n. 363 n.
T.
Targum, 363 n. Thompson (Rev. Mr.) 2 n. 3. 5. Tindal, 304 n.
U.
Velthusen (Dr. J. C.) 223 n. 256 n. View of the Soul, 100. Vitringa, 134 n.
296 n. 297 n. 300 n. Univ. Hist. 162 n. 163 n. 164 n. Vulgate (Latin) 253 n.
W.
Wetsten, 255 n. Warburton (Dr.) 178 n. Whitby (Dr.) 378 n. 379 n.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 12. for compouna read compound.

130. line 6. for (...), r. (...).

134. -- 2 n. dele the c. after Isaiah.

144. -- 14 n. dele IT.

161. instead of woman r. women.

186. instead of, by a comparative consideration of our own bodies, r. by a
comparative consideration of the contrary nature of our own bodies, etc.

191. line 8, for as, r. that.

199. line 1. for carefully, r. usefully.

201. line 18. for KONONOI, r. KOINONOI.

216. line 13. for 1 John xiv. 9. r. John xiv. 9.

252. last line, n. for 1766, r. 1776.

278. n. line 7. for (...) r. (...).

327. line 3. 2d n. for it, r. is.

296. line 4. after see p. add 339.

339. line 17 n. for sebond, r. second.


