A NEW METHOD Of Curing the APOPLEXY.

WITH An APPENDIX, containing some OBSERVATIONS upon the Use and Abuse of
PHYSIC.

BY JOHN CATHERWOOD, M. D.

Juvatque novos decerpere flores.

Lucret. LONDON; Printed by J. DARBY, for W. TAILOR at the Ship in
Paternoster Row, J. BROWN without Temple Bar, and EDWARD SIMON at the Black
Bull in Cornhill. M.DCC.XV.

TO The COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS.
THE following Discourse of Arteriotomy, and the Mis-application of Medicines,
being a Subject of no little moment to the Welfare of Mankind, I submit it
entirely to your severest Censure, as being the best Judges both of the Nature
and Force of my Arguments. I ask no Favor; for if I am wrong, Favor to me
would be Cruelty to the rest of the World; and if I am right, then certainly
you, who do Justice to every body, will not deny it to,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant. John Catherwood.

PREFACE.
A Man who offers to the World any thing not before known, or not generally
understood, must expect to meet with two sorts of Adversaries; who will not fail
to assault him, tho they are as inconsistent with each other, as with the
Truth: that is to say, some People will deny the Invention as either not
practicable, or not useful; whilst others at the same time, who are convinced
of the Worth of it, will tell you, that it was long before known and practiced,
and that you must not challenge to your self the Glory. Thus our Immortal
Harvey, when he happily discovered the Circulation of the Blood, was attacked
on both sides; and tho I will not pretend to compare what I here offer with his
noble Discovery, yet it will not he despised when it is considered that the
Circulation of the Blood is a Speculation not so immediately useful as what you
have in the following Sheets, which is to rescue Men in the Agony of Death.

They who say the opening an Artery is not to be practiced but in extraordinary
Cases, own it to be a Remedy when all others fail, but at the same time would
not have it practiced till all Remedies are too late.

They who say this is an Operation used of old, will not, I hope, quarrel with me
for preferring the Antiquity of Truth before the Novelty of Error; at least I
will not quarrel with them, being much more intent upon doing Service to Mankind,
than acquiring Reputation to my self.

They who alledg that Evacuation by an Artery makes a greater Expense of
Spirits than by a Vein, will find themselves so fully confuted in the following
Treatise, that I need say nothing more here. In short, I take the great and
sacred Rule of Physic to be the Observation of Nature and her Dictates; Quo
Natura tendit. Now I would ask my Adversaries to produce one Instance where
Nature ever relieved her self by a Vein; and if there he no Instance of it,
then to use that Vessel is to cross Nature. Thus we see that the vast Quantity
of Blood which often issues from the Nose, as well as the great Discharge by
the Piles (as they are vulgarly called) is still Arterial Blood. But the most
notable Instance is the menstruous Blood in Women, which sometimes flows from
'em in Streams to an unknown Quantity, and is discharged from the Arteries in
the Uterus and Vagina: whereas should it proceed from the Veins, it would be
impossible for 'em to subsist under it.

It is plain therefore that the Doctrine I advance is agreeable to the Dictates
of Nature; and if Nature be for me, I don't much care who is against me.

A NEW METHOD Of Curing APOPLEXIES, AND Other Distempers of the HEAD.
NOtwithstanding the various Treatises that have been writ by learned and
ingenious Men, as well ancient as modern, on this Subject, which have been
handled with the greatest Accurateness as to the Theory; yet for the Method of
treating it through the whole Course, particularly at its first Appearance, I find
nothing writ more foreign from the Purpose: For by bleeding out of the Veins,
and other usual Methods of Practice, they prey upon and exhaust the animal
Spirits, and confirm the Distemper, rather than relieve the Patient.

But not to detain the Reader with the Measures others have taken, and still
persist in; I shall only offer my own Thoughts, and the Method by which for
some Years past I Have found such happy Success, as well in Flanders, as
elsewhere, confirmed by a few Observations. Therefore without any further
Introduction, I shall just describe this Disease, and proceed.

It Is then an Apoplexy when the Body is suddenly deprived of the chief Animal
Faculties, as well internal as external, and all voluntary Motion, so that the
Animal Spirits are either denied a Passage from the Brain, or an Entrance into
it; the Ventricles or Pores of the Brain being either compressed from a
Contusion, or obstructed from a Plethora, Poisons, Medicines endued with a
Narcotic Faculty, which so alter the Blood, Lymph, and other Fluids, as to
render 'em unfit to pass freely through the Arteries of the Brain, whereby, through
the violent Impetus of of the Heart, the Blood is so wedged in, that it causes
a Stagnation; and oftentimes Polypuses are formed in the Carotids, Sinus's, and
Vertebral Arteries, so that all the Spirits indulgent Nature can rally to
support the Fabric, are detached to the Muscles of the Thorax, to perform
Respiration, without which the Patient is inevitably lost.

Now since the Brain is the Seat of this Disease, 'twill not be at all improper
to take notice of its Structure, as well as its Use, before I proceed any
farther. There are then two Substances which constitute the Brain, viz. the
Cinericious, being the Exterior, called the Cortical; the inner, from its
Whiteness and Softness, the Medullary: the former of which, according to
Malpigius, is nothing but a Gland of the conglomerate kind, or a Heap of small
oval Glands contiguous with each other; to each of which is affixed an Artery
that brings the Blood, by the means of which Glands the Matter constituting the
Animal Spirits, is secern'd from its purer and subtler Parts: from hence the
Veins carry back the refluent Blood, that is unfit for generating of Spirits;
and then the Nerve, or Root of a Nerve, in which, as in an excretory Duct of a
Gland, the Spirits just now perfected, are carried into the Medullary
Substance, as a Storehouse or Magazine, and from thence through the whole nervous
System, for the Benefit of conveying Sense and Motion to the Animal Economy.

Now since not only the Cortical Substance of the Brain, but the Medullary
also, and even the Nerves themselves are interspersed with an infinite Number
of excessive small Blood Vessels; whatever causes an Obstruction in them, or
makes 'em too turgid, causes an Apoplexy in some degree or other, by pressing
on the Nerves, and so preventing the Circulation of their Fluid.

To diminish then the Quantity of Blood from the Veins, is what all have had
immediate recourse to as their chief Refuge and Asylum, either from the
Frontal, Jugular, Cephalic, or Mediana for a Revulsion; whereas that is now
exploded, the Laws of Circulation not admitting it: and if this did not answer
their Expectation, the Patient was given over as in a desperate Case; according
to this of Hippocrates, speaking of an Apoplexy, Venae sectio, ni juvet,
occidet; or this of Celsus, to the same purpose, Sanguinis detractio, vel
occidit, vel liberat. Which is enough to convince us how prejudicial such
Evacuations from the Veins were found, and how uncertain the Practice was
observed to be, even by the Ancients; tho, for want of a better, it has
unhappily been persisted in to this present time.

'Twas indeed in many Cases frequently used by the Ancients, but now become so
much in vogue, that it is ordered almost on all Occasions, except in Cachectic
Persons, or those grown Hydropical by impoverished Blood, Diseases contracted
by Hunger, Fatigue, etc.

Let the Obstruction be where it will, tho at the Fingers end, opening a Vein
must relieve it. I cannot indeed wonder that the Ancients did it, being in a
manner Strangers to Anatomy, and knowing nothing of the Circulation of the
Blood: but since, by the indefatigable Industry of the Moderns, that Part of
Learning is arrived to such Perfection, I admire there is not more notice taken
of the Inconveniences that attend Phlebotomy; but it is past over as an
Operation to be attempted by any Person, at any Season, regard being only had
to the Strength of the Patient, touching of the Nerve, Tendon, or its
Aponeurosis.

But if by an Obstruction, Apoplexies, or any Distemper incident to the Head is
caused; to make a more copious Evacuation, and speedy Derivation, the Discharge
must be made by opening the Jugulars: which Operation falls so far short of
their Intention, that it proves far more dismal in its Consequences; by so much
the more effectually confirming the Obstruction, by how much the nearer the
Ligatures approach the Part affected.

Experienced Surgeons indeed will use no Ligature round the Neck, for fear of
Suffocation in Apoplexies and Squinanceys but only let a Stander-by compress
the Jugular, on the contrary side, with his Thumb, and fix their own just below
the Place where they design their Aperture. But too many use Ligatures, and
either apply the middle of the Fillet behind the Neck, the two Ends being
brought before and twisted; or turn one End over one Clavicle, and under the
contrary Axilla, and so the two Ends are brought before and fastened: both which
are very pernicious, particularly the latter, which by pressing on the Axillary
Vein, stops the refluent Blood; by which, besides confirming the Obstruction,
as before mentioned, Syncopes, Palpitations, Tremors, and the like are caused:
for whatever thwarts or crosses the circular Progress of the Blood, produces
these Effects.

But even bleeding in the Arm, the Tediousness of the Operation is such, and
the Advantage that can be expected from it so small, I can by no means be
reconciled to. For first the Ligature must be strained, in order to cause the
Veins to swell, for the more commodious introducing the Lancet; which perhaps
after all requires the Surgeon's Frictions, to force the Blood to the intended
Incision: and this is not sufficient, but often there must be hot Clothes, and
the Arm plunged in hot Water; and then when the Aperture is made, by the
Misapplication of the Bandage, the Skin relaxes, the Orifice closes, and
obstructs its Passage: and when the Impetuosity of the Blood abates, the
Ligature is again slackened, that as much Blood may pass into that Part by the
Arteries, as will suffice for the intended Evacuation. During which time, the
Obstruction is confirming; for the Blood in the Veins steers an easy Course
from narrower Passages to broader Channels, through their soft Tunicles, quite
different from those of the Arteries; whose Coats being elastic, particularly
in the large Trunks, give a Velocity to the Blood, which if intercepted, causes
the Blood to be so turgid in the capillary Vessels of the Brain, even to
extravasate, and obstructs the Spirits in the Sensorium Commune, the first
Course of all Nervous Distempers; as Palsies, Cramps, Convulsions, Apoplexies,
Emaciations, and insensible Decays, without any visible Cause, that it would
even pose Persons of the best Judgment to account for it; as also that
Chronical Distemper, the Hydrocephalus, or watery Humor in the Head, which
proceeds from extravasated Lymph, occasioned by the Compression of the
Lymphatics.

What has been said will be sufficient to convince any unprejudiced Person, of
the Inconveniences that attend Phlebotomy. If we reflect on the first Rise of
this Operation, 'twill not much heighten our Esteem of it. Pliny, in his
Natural History, tells a whimsical Story of the Hyppopotamus, or Seahorse;
who, when he finds himself heavy or indisposed, seeks out the sharpest pointed
Thorn, with which he pricks a certain Vein of the Leg; and after a Quantity of
Blood is drawn, stops the Wound with Mud: a very poor Precedent, that we are
obliged to have recourse to for this Operation.

But all the proposed Ends will be answered by opening an Artery. Tho I Am well
assured this Hypothesis will be exploded by the greatest part of the Faculty,
it being not only what is uncommon, but also their being unacquainted how the
Operation is to be performed, and the hazard of attempting it, will occasion
the following Objections, to render this Method trifling and inconsiderable.

Some fancy with Celsus, that an Artery once cut, by reason of its Systole and
Diastole, from the Solution of its Fibers, cannot again consolidate and grow
together, but forms a Thrombus.

Others have had Stupidity enough to affirm, that those Vessels must be past
through with a Needle and Thread, in order to reunite them.

Again, there are those who will allow of it in some Cases; yet own that they
contract, retire within the Flesh, are cicatrized there, and so cease from
their Office of conveying Blood to that Part.

There are also some, that after they have been prevailed upon to acknowledge
the Possibility of their Reunion; yet still object against the Inconveniences
of Bandages, which must necessarily be continued for several Days.

But when these Objections have been answered by ocular Demonstration, they will
undertake to prove, that the Blood in the Arteries, and that of the Veins, does
not in the least differ in their component Parts; and that both being continued
Tubes, it matters not out of which the Evacuation is made. Whereas there is no
greater difference between the Fluid contained in the Lympheducts and Nerves,
than between that in the Veins and Arteries: that of the Arteries being of a
more lively, florid, scarlet Color, more subtle and spiritous, and the Vehicle
that conveys the Alimentary or Nutritious Particles, which in their progressive
Motion, press upon those Glands whose Pores are adapted to admit of such Juices
as serve either for Accretion, Nutrition, or Reparation: whereas the Venal
being only the Refuse of those Secretions, returns to the Heart, that so by
filling its Coronary Vessels and Ventricles it may be enabled to perform its
Motion of Contraction and Dilatation, which, if its Reflux be intercepted by
Bandages, it must necessarily be deprived of, and consequently such Effects are
produced as before mentioned. So that this Objection is as trifling and
frivolous as the rest.

These being so easily answered, another unanswerable Objection is started,
viz. That that Branch, which we durst attempt to draw Blood from, is so small,
as not to admit of a plentiful Discharge.

But the most powerful Argument to answer all these Objections, is
Demonstration. I Have used this Method in all Cases where diminishing the
Quantity of Blood is required, whether in Apoplexies, Quinancies, Inflammations
of the Lungs, Pleurisies, Asthma's; in all sorts of Fevers, whether
intermitting, continual, or malignant, without the least mischievous Accident
attending it. But this Precaution must be used, that it be such an Artery as
immediately passes over a Bone, which are none but those of the Head; and of
these the Temporal Artery is the Principal, it being the most considerable
Branch of the Carotid, which passing over the Os Temporale, admits of a double
Compress. This may be opened with less Danger, and with far greater Success
than any Vein; and I Have frequently seen it run with as continued a Stream, as
from the Arm.

By this time there is no room to doubt but the chief Difficulties are removed;
and because so few are accustomed to this Operation, I shall just mention how
it is performed; which is thus. Press your Finger on the Vessel, above the place
where you design your Aperture, and your Thumb on the said Vessel beneath, to
keep the Skin smooth, and the Vessel from rolling; then introduce your Lancet,
raising up its Point to cut through the Vessels and Teguments, but not by
Punction, as too many do in opening the Veins; by which means you may make as
plentiful a Discharge as you please, without being liable to the
afore-mentioned Inconveniences that attend Phlebotomy.

After which, you have nothing else to do than to place your Thumb on the
Orifice, and press it against the Os Temporale; so that if a Thrombus should
arise, it is soon dispersed, and in a few Minutes the Lips of the Orifice will
unite. This done, you may either use a Pledgit of Lint with a Plaster, or if
you please, the Compress with the circular Bandage, which is sufficient without
the least Occasion of Styptics.

This Aperture gives an immediate Check to the impetuous Velocity of the
ascending Blood; which by the Systole or Contraction of the Heart is projected
to the Head by the Carotids and Vertebral Arteries, and by means of their
Semilunary Valves prevent its Return to the Heart by the same Vessels; so that
in an instant it relieves the Patient, without preventing the Blood, Lymph, and
Nervous Fluid, from performing their circular Tour, which by Ligatures must
necessarily be intercepted.

Suppose several Springs send out as many Rivulets, which after various
Turnings and Windings unite and form a River, which is received in a Basin;
wherein an Engine is fixed, which, with its repeated projectile Force, throws
the Water into several Tubes, in order to be conveyed to and supply all Parts
of a City: now should there be an Obstruction in the Pipes, the Engineer may as
well expect to remove it by diverting and diminishing the Water in the
Rivulets, by a different Current, as a Physician may expect to remove an
Obstruction in the Arteries, by ordering bleeding out of the Veins.

But there is no occasion to introduce Similies to prove what is so very
obvious.

It Is the part of a Physician to assist Nature, by observing nicely the various
Steps she takes to repulse the Enemy. Natura curat Morbos, says Celsus. The
Dogmatist, that can reason learnedly on a Disease, but has not thoroughly
considered the Nature of it, and the Method of Cure, falls far short of a mere
Empyric, who practices only by Experience without any Foundation of Learning;
so that it is not the being a learned Philosopher, an accurate Anatomist, that
entitles a Man to be a great Physician. That successful Practitioner, Dr.
Radcliff, never pretended to any of these Qualifications, nay took a Pleasure
to disown his Knowledge in them; but who in his time so happy to strike at the
Root of a Distemper!

The Father of Physic, Hippocrates, when the Art was in its Infancy, especially
that part of it, Anatomy, how ignorant was he of some Parts of Learning, that
the Moderns glory in, and value themselves upon? as appears from the confused
Account he gives, that the Veins take their Rise from the Liver: and speaking
of an Artery, he means the Aspera Arteria; and then calls the Ureters Veins,
and makes a Jumble of Nerves, Veins, and Arteries. But then who so great and
successful a Practitioner ever before or since?

Tho I Am not unsensible that several Authors have touched on this Subject, yet
what first induced me to the Opinion of Arteriotomy, was, that I don't remember
ever to have read or heard of Women liable to Apoplexies, unless from Poisons,
Opiates, or Mismanagement of some foregoing Distemper. For however Authors
differ in their several Hypotheses laid down to account for the Periodical
Purgations of Women, whether this menstruous Blood offends in Quantity or
Quality, it matters not to my present Purpose; but whenever this Effervescence
is raised, whether Natural, Periodical, or provoked by Emenagogues, it
occasions an Aperture of the Mouths of the Vaginal Arteries, and not of the
Veins.

The Haemorroides, or Piles, by some vicious Ferment irritating the tender
Fibers of the Arteries, by them is discharged incredible Quantities of Blood.
Borellus relates a Story of a certain Tailor, who lost Ten Pounds by those
Vessels, and yet recovered.

How many Instances have we had of profuse Haemorrhagies of the Nose? Bartholin
mentions one who bled forty eight Pound in three Days, without the Loss of
Life. It Is well known that bleeding at the Nose removes Obstructions and Pains
of the Head, whether proceeding from an Ebullition or Redundancy of Blood. And
whence is this Discharge but by an Anastomosis, or Spontaneous disjoining of
the Capillary Arteries, occasioned by a convulsive Contraction of the Coats of
a larger Artery? which must necessarily give an extraordinary Distention to the
next, till the Blood can be no longer contained, but bursts out with
Impetuosity, even to Pounds; whereas a few Ounces, discharged by the Veins, has
thrown the Patient into Faintings, Swoonings, and occasioned even Death it self.

Now since indulgent Nature is so clear in her Dictates, points out an exact
Method how we may free her from the Insults of the common Enemy, Diseases; it is
unreasonable we should not fall in with her Measures.

By this time I hope any unprejudiced Reader will be reconciled to Arteriotomy,
and not be byas'd by Custom to prefer that of Phlebotomy.

Phlebotomy preceding, the next Intention is exhibiting Emetics; which from
Observation I shall prove to be so far from relieving the Patient, that it
proves very pernicious.

For before the Vomit is administered, it is easy to suppose to what a degree the
Glands of the Brain are filtrated, and perhaps the Sanguiferous Vessels and
Lymphatics burst. This extravasated Blood and Lymph discharged into the Sinus's
of the Brain, and there coagulated and lodged: what Relief can possibly be
expected from an Emetick, which is diametrically opposite to their former
Intention of bleeding out of the Jugulars? For in this there is some color of
Reason to expect the Removal of the Obstruction; from that there is no room to
hope for any thing but a Confirmation of the Distemper; nor truly in any other
Disease, unless when the principal Seat is in the Stomach and Intestines, to
discharge the morbific Matter, collected in the Primae Viae. Then an Emetic is
not altogether unseasonable; tho even then other Measures may be taken less
hazardous, and equally advantageous. But in this Case: Vomits are as contrary
to true Practice, as this Operation to Nature; the Fibers of the Stomach being
so disposed, as to discharge its Contents through the Intestines: but by these
irritating Vomits the Diaphragm, Intercostals, and Muscles of the lower Belly
are so stimulated, that by means of their violent Contraction, they force 'em
through the Oesophagus: for what with the violent convulsive Motion of the
abovesaid Muscles, together with the Quickness of the Organs of Respiration,
the Blood is precipitately hurried and projected to the Brain with that Force
as to increase the Extravasation. How then it is possible reasonably to expect
Relief from it, I cannot conjecture. An ancient Physician, speaking of an
Apoplexy and its Cure, lays down this as a Rule: Vomitoria fugienda, ne
suffocationis periculum augeatur, et caput repleatur. Nay, in his Purgatives he
would not allow the least Quantity of Antimony, it being also endued with a
vomiting Faculty: Antimonium non convenit, cum vomitum simul moveat; such sort
of irritating Medicines being sufficient of themselves to produce Apoplexies.

And I, for my part, verily believe, that were the Bills of Mortality nicely
examined into, and the Causes of those Casualties strictly inquired after; they
would be found more owing to the irregular Administration of improper
Medicines, than to any peccant Matter in the Fluids, or any external Cause
whatever.

What I have said I shall only confirm with two or three Observations, and that
as concisely as possible.

Obs. 1.
There was one Mr. Roach of Bristol, who for a long time had labored under an
Asthma, attended with a violent Cough till almost suffocated; but after he had
expectorated this viscid Phlegm, was relieved: but the Disease increasing, and
despairing of Relief, he applied himself to me, informed me he had been so
afflicted for many Years, that at Spring and Fall he had very severe Fits of
the Gout; so that what with one and the other, he was rendered incapable of
prosecuting any Business. I exhibited Medicines of a warm attenuating kind, to
disentangle and carry off the vicious Matter, promote Expectoration, fortify
the Stomach and Lungs, which effectually completed the Cure. After which he
could endure the Fatigue either of walking or riding, was able to dispatch his
Affairs with his usual Alacrity and Pleasure. But since my Removal from
Bristol, his old Indisposition returning afresh, he had immediate Recourse to
his former Chip-in-Pottage Doctor, that safe Physician that never did him any
good nor hurt, till he prescribed that innocent harmless Vomit, that extolled
Indian Root, Ipecacoanna; which he had no sooner taken with a Draught of
Carduus Tea, but presently he complained of a Dizziness, and that every thing
appeared to him to have a circular Motion: which he had no sooner said, but he
dropped down dead.

Some may imagine that this Accident was not owing entirely to the Emetic, but
a Plethora; and had bleeding preceded, in order to have emptied the Vessels,
the Patient might have been saved: which Objection, tho I could answer with
several Instances, I shall only mention one.

Obs. 2.
Mr. Snow, a Broker of about Seventy Years of Age, being on the Exchange, was
taken with a violent Fit of an Apoplexy, and fell down as dead; but by means of
Cordials, after some time began a little to recover; by which time a Surgeon
came, and took away about Sixteen Ounces of Blood from the Arm. I (being
accidentally introduced by a Friend, who desired my Advice) prevented his
taking away a greater Quantity, but ordered that he might be carried home in a
Chair; which Motion contributed mightily to a free and uninterrupted
Circulation, insomuch that he began to have a regular Pulse. I advised that
this Motion might be continued, finding a natural Warmth all over his Body,
which with administering comfortable Draughts, would be sufficient to answer our
end. But a certain Apothecary coming, whose Advice was more prevalent with the
Patient's Friends, administered a Vomit under the pretense of a Cordial: this
not immediately operating, in less than half a quarter of an hour was about to
repeat it; which he confidently affirmed would answer his End, and to confirm
his Assertion, assured his Friends he was that moment come from a Gentleman
taken after the same manner, and relieved by the same Method; but they had only
his own Word for it, to which I could give but very little Credit. This poor
unhappy Gentleman however was lost by this Treatment.

I could enumerate Instances of this kind from my own Observation, of the ill
Effects of Vomits; whether Bleeding had preceded, or been omitted. I shall give
one, to show that it is safer to rely on Nature it self, to observe its various
Steps, and endeavor to assist her only with refreshing Cardiac Draughts; than
to have recourse to Physicians unacquainted with the Nature of this Disease, as
too many are; tho from Persons of such penetrating Judgment, ready Wit, and
bright Parts, greater things might be expected.

Obs. 3.
William Whittington Esquire; of Stapleton near Bristol, now High Sheriff of the
County of Gloucester, near eighty Years of Age, returning home alone from the
City on a gentle Pad, was seized with an Apoplectic Fit, fell back on his
Horse, his Legs stiff and extended, and to all Appearance dead; but being
overtaken by some returning from a neighboring Market, who took care to convey
him to an adjacent Alehouse, where they poured Brandy down his Throat, as also
a Glass or two of Canary: by which Method, together with repeated Frictions all
over his Body, he came to himself, was sent home in his own Chariot, where he
no sooner came, but jocosely called for his Staff of Life, and Support of old
Age, meaning a Bit of Bread and a Glass of Canary. The next Day he took a
gentle Cordial purging Draught, and without the use of any other Medicines
recovered; only never mist the returning Fit twice a year, which increased in
its Violence Spring and Fall, till a violent Fever followed the last, which he
not expecting to conquer, sent for me: and having before observed what seemed
to be most advantageous, and by what Method Nature was most relieved, without
cramming him with Medicines, I advised him to nothing but to drink old Canary
as a Ptisan, by which alone he was perfectly recovered; and ever since has been
freed from those kind of Fits.

Not only Phlebotomy, unseasonable Use of Emetics, but Cathartics also, if not
well adapted to the Disease, may prove very prejudicial to the Patient. Other
Diseases mismanaged may and often do terminate in an Apoplexy.

Obs. 4.
An Inhabitant of Bristol, that kept a Public House on the Castle-Green,
laboring under a Dropsy in the Abdomen, accompanied with an Asthma and
Jaundice, being rather the Effects than Cause of the Disease; employs a Limb of
the Law, that is dwindled to an insignificant Branch of Physic; who assumes the
Title of Doctor, tho he is much better qualified for a Jack-pudding, having a
Genius peculiarly adapted to Mimic, and attempts to ape that great Practitioner
Dr. Radcliff in his Prognostics, assuring his Patients, that by such a time
they need not despair of their being perfectly relieved, which generally
happens according to his Predictions; for he seldom fails of curing ing 'em of
all Distempers, having no less than AEscalapius for a Precedent, who thought it
not worth while to attempt prolonging the Lives of those that were enfeebled,
and exhausted, lest they should live to beget Children as infirm as themselves,
and so be rendered unfit Members for any Society. He, without a long Demur,
pronounces the poor Hydropical Patient to be in a fair way of Recovery, gives
him great hopes to expect a Cure in a few days, prescribes your Gummy Resinous
Cathartics, which rendered the Crasis of the Blood more unfit for assimilating
its Serum, by weakening Digestion, and producing Crudities; which brought on a
complete Apoplexy, that in six hours time after the Dose was administered,
carried off the Patient. In the place of which, had he evacuated the Serum by
proper Remedies, prevented its farther Increase by fortifying and corroborating
the Stomach, restored and strengthened the Crasis of the Blood, dislodged the
Viscous Matter that adhered to the Plicae, or Folds of the Stomach, by warm
attenuating Stomachical Specifics; the poor unfortunate Man might have now been
in perfect Health.

Others again mightily rely on the Use of Clysters, and such as are of a sharp,
acrid, irritating Nature, to relieve those Affections of the Head, Epilepsys,
Lethargys, Palsys, Apoplexys, and the like; Revulsionis ergo. But this Method
of deriving Humors from one place to its opposite, is now laid aside, as
before hinted: for in this Case the Intestines themselves are Paralytically
affected, and will scarce retain a Clyster, if at that time injected: if it
does remain, it only affects the Inteslines and Primae Viae, and is not the
least serviceable in averting Vapors from the Head.

Cupping and Scarifying is wonderfully in vogue with some, for the above
Reasons, of Revulsion and Derivation: but the Attraction of the Cupping-Glass
has so little Effect, the Number who use them so few, and those so
inconsiderable, it is scarce worth while to spend time to confute such erroneous
Methods.

The next thing that comes to be considered, is Blisters; which too many
mightily rely on, without reflecting on the ill Effects they have in some
Cases, and on some Constitutions; especially those of a Scorbutic Habit of
Body, in extreme hot Constitutions, when for the want of Serum the Blood boils.
In old Persons, whose Balsamic Particles of the Blood are for the most part
exhausted, and too great a Quantity of corrosive Serum is left; to such the
Application of Blisters does more hurt than good: for by the too great Action
of the Caustic Salts that enter the Pores, and insinuate themselves into the
Mass of Blood, the Parts are so stimulated, as to cause violent Stranguries,
voiding of bloody Urine; forcing also Substances of Matter, resembling Fat, so
large as would be thought incredible, to pass through so narrow a Passage as
that of the Vrethra. Now since the Inconvenience that necessarily attends such
Methods is so great, and the Advantage that may reasonably be expected from 'em
so small; they are fitter for the Practice of Empirics and Scaramouches, than
regular Physicians: But I would not tire the Reader's Patience with a long and
tedious Discourse, and shall therefore only add a few more Observations, and
conclude.

Obs. 5.
A Cornish Man, of about Thirty Six Years of Age, who had been very much
addicted to those violent Exercises of Cudgelling, Wrestling, Hurling, for
which that County, during the time of their Revels, is very remarkable;
quitting his Employ for the more immediate Service of his Queen and Country,
goes for Flanders; but being unacquainted with the Fatigue of several Marches,
and unaccustomed to take up with such slender Fare, was seized with a slow
lingering Fever, which terminated in a Deprivation of the Use of his Limbs.
After which manner he continued in the Hospital during the whole Campaign; at
the breaking up of which, he was committed to the Surgeon's Care of the
respective Regiment, till the opening of the next Campaign; and then was again
received into the Hospital, in a much worse Condition than when he left it,
being perfectly emaciated, having crusty Ulcers on the Backs of his Hands, and
on his Shin-Bones, resembling Venereal Nodes; the Bones also carious, several
Absesses formed on the Head, with fiery Botches or Carbuncles, occasioned by
the sharp Caustic Lixivious Salts, with which the Blood abounded. He fell under
my Care, but all means proving ineffectual, he died in a few days. I indeed
suspected his Case at first to be Venereal; but being a Person bearing a good
Character, and protesting he had been at no time conversant with Women, I
thought it would be requisite to endeavor to discover from what Cause those
direful Effects arose. In order thereto, I first resolved to examine the Brain,
and had no sooner made my Incision on the Scalp, but I perceived the Cranium to
be foul and carious; which, in taking it off, I found had reached not only the
inner Lamina, but also both Meninges, and even the Cortical Substance of the
Brain: in performing which, notwithstanding there issued a vast Quantity of
Serum, yet in the third Ventricle, by the Glandula Pinealis, was lodged near a
Pint of Lymph, and that so very viscous and ropy as to be denied the least
Passage. In the Infundibulum was also an incredible Quantity of viscid Serum,
much thicker than the first; and the Glandula pituitaria filtrated like a
cancerated Gland. This Discovery contributed mightily to my Satisfaction; and
'twas very evident that the Train of this poor Fellow's Misfortunes proceeded
not from any Venereal Cause, but from those Falls and Bruises he had formerly
received; which when Nature was indulged, the Spirits buoyed up, the Fibers
firm and elastic, each part could better perform its Function, and so prevent
the ensuing Disease: but when reduced to mean Diet and scanty Allowance,
exposed to Heats and Colds, inseparable Concomitants of a Military Life; the
Spirits flag and become languid, the Fibers lose their wonted Elasticity, and
become lax, the Blood loses its Tone; in short, the whole Animal Economy is so
disordered, that the vigorous Attack of a Disease meets with a very feeble
Repulse. For by these severe Shocks the Lymphatics and sanguiferous Vessels
being frequently broke, the extravasated Blood and Lymph is discharged into the
Sinus's of the Brain, where it coagulates and becomes so viscous as not to be
able to pass those narrow Canals, but lie congested there, and is not only the
Source of dreadful Symptoms, but the Cause of Death it self.

Obs. 6.
A certain Gentlewoman of Ghent in Flanders accompanying her Spouse to Batavia,
of which he was Major Commandant till his Decease, in her Return from thence
was taken very ill; for which Indisposition the Surgeon of the Vessel advised
her to the Use of the Cold Bath: but whether owing to his Ignorance or her
Neglect, she omitted emerging her Head. She was no sooner got out of the Bath,
but immediately her Head and Face was so swollen, as to deprive her both of
Sight, Speech, and the Use of all her Limbs. At her Arrival at Amsterdam,
Consultations were held by the best Physicians concerning her Case, with very
good Success as to the abating the Swelling of her Head, and Recovery of
Speech; but as for retrieving the Use of her Limbs, she found no manner of
Benefit, but remained void of all Sense and Motion. Thus despairing of Help,
she returned to Ghent, and applied her self to the Physicians of the French
Hospital, who were then in that Garrison, but with as little Advantage as the
former. In this Condition was she for some Years confined to her Bed, and
reduced to a mere Skeleton; the Bones of the Carpus and Metacarpus, those of
the Tarsus and Metatarsus being distorted to a Deformity; nay, the very
Phalanges of the Fingers and Toes were dislocated by the Contraction of the
Tendons. She then had recourse to the Town Physicians: but neither their
Inunctions of penetrating Oils, camphorated Spirits; their Aromatics, or
volatile Sudorifics, to correct and discharge this peccant Matter, that
intercepted the nervous Fluid; nor their Decoctions of the Woods, Fomentations
or Hot Baths, availed any thing: of she entertained no longer Hopes of being
relieved.

But after that Memorable Battle at Ramillies, on May 23. 1706. the Victory
being obtained over the Duke of Bavaria, by that Victorious General, his Grace
the Duke of Marlborough, which occasioned the speedy Reduction of all the
Netherlands, the British Hospital removed to Ghent; and I accidentally took
Lodgings under the Roof of this miserable Gentlewoman, who being informed I
belonged to that Hospital, was very importunate with me to use my utmost
Endeavors to remove her Indisposition.

Her Case being very uncommon, and the Success precarious, I could not promise
much to raise her Expectations; yet being unwilling to discourage her, I took
my leave with an Assurance of considering her Case, and get the Opinion of
other Physicians, whom I consulted: but their concluding that 'twas a perfect
Atrophy, dissuaded me from attempting that which was so improbable of being
accomplished.

My last Observation suggested to me, that this Numbness and Deadness proceeded
from the Obstruction of the nervous Fluid, occasioned by the viscous glutinous
Matter lodged in the Sinus's of the Brain; which, if it could be diluted by the
Power of Medicine, so as to be carried off by its proper Vessels, I then
thought I might expect Success: so communicating my Thoughts of her Case, and
the Method I designed to prosecute for the Cure, to the ingenious Dr. Laurence,
then Physician General to her Majesty's Forces in Flanders, he approved of my
Method, as the most probable to recover my Patient, and establish my Character.

This encouraged me to undertake the Cure. What flushed me more with Hopes of
Success, was, that in a short time her Menstrua flowed; which before, during
the whole time of her Illness, were totally suppressed: after which, in three
Weeks time, she was capable (with the Assistance of another's Arm) to walk to
Church, and by degrees acquired her former Health and Strength, to the great
Surprise of all that knew her deplorable Case. In a short time after she was
married, and delivered of a strong and healthy Child.

This confirmed me in the Opinion, that let a Chronical Case be never so
intricate, it is in the power of Medicines (if rightly applied) to remove it,
supposing there is not too great a Petrefaction, or Loss of Substance in the
Parts affected: For the Truth of which, I could produce several Instances, were
it not a Digression from my present Design.

Obs. 7.
A robust young Fellow, at the Siege of Brussels, Anno Dom. 1706. receiving a
Shot through the Metatarsus; after the Wound was well digested, Suppuration
promoted, and he in a fair way of Recovery, only complaining mightily for want
of Sleep, the Physician, in his Tour of Visits, ordered him a gentle Hypnotic
Draught: but the Apothecary's Man, in distributing the Medicines, gave him also
to the Quantity of seven Grains of Laudanum (Mistakes of which kind in the
British Hospital are seldom or ever known) the next Morning, to my Surprise, I
found him dead. The Nurse informed me what Pills he had taken, how jocose,
pleasant, and merrily disposed he was, that he sung very cheerfully, and a
short while after dozed away.

The next day, in opening his Head to see what Discovery I could make, I no
sooner reached the Meninges, but I found some of the Vessels distended to a
prodigious degree, others burst, from whence issued an incredible Quantity of
Blood; and from the Sinus's came (as near as I could judge) to the Quantity of
three Quarts that was extravasated.

Here Is an Instance of an Apoplexy from Laudanum, which convinces me that its
Narcotic or Hypnotic Faculty proceeded neither from an occult Quality, or
intense Coldness, either by coagulating or environing the Particles of Blood or
Spirits, and so preventing their Motion: for since by a Chemical Analysis we
find it gives a copious Quantity of fetid Oil and Volatile Spirit, it plainly
consutes that Assertion of its being cold; but on the contrary, it dissolves
the Texture of the Blood, renders the Humors more fluid, hurries the Spirits
into disorderly Motions, and the Heart, by its repeated Systole, projects the
Blood with too great a Velocity to the Brain.

Indeed when the Opium begins first of all to insinuate it self, it rarifies
the Arterial Blood: this being rarefied, the Spirits then, not so much fettered
with bloody Particles, are in a greater quantity, and with more ease, secern'd
by the Glands of the Brain, and conveyed in a greater Copia by the Nerves through
all Parts of the Body; which produces that Passion of the Mind, Joy: but when
by this Rarefaction the Arteries are so distended, as to compress the Nerves,
and retard the Circulation of their Fluid, Comatose Distempers must there
necessarily be produced. Hence it is, that administering Opium in the beginning
of Fevers, the Smallpox, and the like, where the Blood is already in too great
a Ferment, instead of answering the Intention of composing the Patient, throws
him into Deliriums, and even Madness it self, hurries him headlong and
distracted out of the World.

Obs. 8.
Mr. Kilbraith, a Merchant of Bristol, about Forty Five Years of Age, laboring
for many Years under a Hypocondriac Melancholy, continued under the Physicians
hands for a long time; but was so far from reaping the least Benefit from their
Prescriptions, that he daily declined, and lost his Appetite; nay, the very
Sight and Smell of Meats were so offensive as to create a Nausea, till at
length he had contracted a Complication of Diseases: then he committed himself
to my Care, who in a short time had the good Fortune to be the Instrument of
his Recovery.

Some time after having an Affair at the Bath, and there meeting with a
Gentleman of his Acquaintance, he was prevailed upon to bathe himself; but what
with sweating, the Vitriolic, Sulphurous, or Bituminous Effluvia of the
Waters, he became faint, heavy, and rendered almost Lethargic: however relying
too much on the Strength of Nature, he neglected the Use of Means, till one
Night being taken with a Contraction of the Nerves, and soon after seized with
a few Convulsive Paroxysms; I was sent for the Morning following, and advised
him to air and exercise himself with gentle Riding: he no sooner attempted to
rise, and placed his Feet on the cold Floor, but was immediately seized with a
violent Fit of an Apoplexy, and in a moment became cold, stiff, and to all
Appearance lifeless. At this surprising Accident, the whole Family ran out to
rally some of the Neighborhood to their Assistance, left me alone, where I
accidentally found a small Bottle of Spirits of Hartshorn, which I poured down
his Throat; and at their Return I desired he might have a Friction all over his
Body: which proved so successful, that I soon perceived a Pulsation and
Respiration. I then took Sixteen Ounces of Blood from the Temporal Artery, and
in less time than ever I observed from the Arm; after which, I prescribed what
I thought proper for his Case. Other Physicians who were also sent for, came,
and to my Face approved of my Method of treating him, but after my Departure
they ridiculed it as mischievous and hurtful, saying 'twas the only way to draw
the Distemper to, and confirm it in the Head. Whether Ignorance or Malice had
the Ascendant, or whether equal Parts of both contributed to furnish their
Upper Rooms, it matters not: but my Affairs obliging me to go a few Miles from
thence, I desired the Surgeon, if he was threatened with a returning Fit, to
introduce his Lancet into the same Orifice, and take such a Quantity as might
be requisite; but at the Attack of the next Fit, these judicious Gentlemen
prevented the Surgeon, and dissuaded the Friends, by amusing them with the
dangerous Consequence that must necessarily accrue, till the Blood flew
impetuously out of the Mouth and Nose; and then, when 'twas too late, they
consented. However, after this second Discharge he immediately recovered his
Sense and Speech. At my Return, his Friends informed me what had happened, and
that 'twas owing to those Physicians, that they had not strictly observed my
Method; at which being about to leave him, I was prevailed upon, by his
importuning me so earnestly, to tarry. I was entirely of the Opinion, that the
Vessels of the Brain were burst; but however I desired a Consultation with Dr.
Bave of Bath, and acquainted him with my Proceedings, which he approved of, and
gave him my Opinion of the Desperateness of his Case, which he also feared. But
the other Physicians, tho their Companies and Opinions were desired, yet
thought fit, as they had sneaked off, to abscond, who being too conscious to
themselves of the irreparable Prejudice they had already done; giving only this
shuffling, trifling Excuse, That truly Dr. Bave was so singular as to consult
with none but such as had been educated at Oxford; whereas that ingenious, as
well as ingenuous Gentleman, who is a Credit to the University where educated,
an Advantage to the Town where he resides, and to such that have Recourse there
for the Benefit of the Waters, regards the Qualifications of a Physician more
than the Place where qualified. After some Medicines prescribed, the Doctor
returns without entertaining the least Hopes of his Recovery; but the Patient
resting well that Night, his former Physicians concluded then he was in a fair
way of doing well. I took liberty to inform 'em how great Strangers they were
to his present Case; and that when they were in the greatest Expectations of
his being out of danger, that then they would have most reason to fear his
being snatched away: which happened accordingly; for the very ensuing Night,
whilst jocose and merry with his Friends, he was seized of a sudden, and had
just time allowed him to bequeath his Soul to God that gave it, and so expired,
snorting and discharging a vast Quantity of Livid Blood from his Nostrils.

This to me is an evident Proof that this Gentleman was entirely lost by this
Neglect, the Disease being too violent, and too sudden to be conquered by
internal Medicines; whereas had the Artery been opened, as I ordered, it might
have prevented the returning Fit.

Obs. 9.
Mr. Jeffrey Pinnel, a very considerable Man of the City of Bristol, returning
from Morning-Service, and reflecting on the manifold Mercies bounteous Heaven
had bestowed on him, particularly acknowledged the large Share of that
inestimable Jewel, Health, which from his Infancy he had enjoyed without the
least Interval of Sickness; and that notwithstanding he was so much advanced in
Years, he could discern no sensible Alteration as to his good Habit of Body:
but in the mean time, inclining his Head with a Design to buckle his Shoe, he
fell down as dead on the Floor; which (being a Stone Pavement) made a
considerable Contusion on his For^head. He was immediately lifted up, and what
with Frictions and Cardiac Draughts, was recruited to that degree, that in the
space of three Hours he became very sensible; and amongst several Physicians
that were mentioned to him, he was pleased to send for me, informed me of his
manner of being seized, that he was then very Costive, and had a Suppression of
Urine; but the Pulse being not very irregular, I deferred opening the Artery: so
at that time I prescribed only Laxatives and Diuretics, and took my leave,
desiring him to acquaint me at the first Appearance of the returning Fit; which
happened the following Morning at Four a Clock: at which time the Fit was so
exceeding severe, that he was almost suffocated, and his Face discolored like
one strangled: the Artery being then turgid and quick (as it always is in those
Cases) I immediately took away about Sixteen Ounces, which I had no sooner
done, but he asked me what I was doing. I ordered him to be raised out of his
Bed (being there too much confined) and conveyed into a more airy Room; which
occasioned him to make Water very plentifully: But after a strict Enquiry, I
found that the Concussion given the Brain, and the Symptoms attending it were
such, that the Vessels must necessarily be broke, and that there was but small
Hope left to expect his Recovery; which I freely told his Friends, they being
very pressing with me to give my real Sentiments, and desirous of a
Consultation, which for their Satisfaction I approved of. So they sent for Dr.
-- at Four in the Morning, who, notwithstanding he had given his Word of Honor
to be immediately there; yet, after his usual way, kept 'em in expectation till
Eleven, at which time assuming his usual haughty Air (to insinuate himself into
the Opinion of the Vulgar) he enters; but being informed who was above, in
order for a Consultation, this brazen Oracle turns on his heel, and pronounces
these Words, With this I consult, and none else, pointing to his Breast, the
Thorax being equally as well furnished with Brain, as the Cranium. But tho he
was mightily reflected on for this imperious Air, it is every Person's Duty to
judge charitably, and put the most favorable Construction that 'twill bear: I
for my part would impute it to an innate Modesty, being conscious of his
Ignorance in that Case; and that offering his Opinion, would be but exposing
himself without the lead Service accruing to the Patient: Galen and Hippocrates
suiting no more his Genius, than Cook or Littleton. But not to harp too long on
such an untunable String, I Will wave this, heartily wishing (for the Benefit of
those unfortunate distempered Persons that fall under his Care) that for the
future he may have better Success, than from his Knowledge in the Faculty of
Physic can reasonably be expected.

I continued in the Use of proper Means, but for the Reasons before mentioned
could not expect his Recovery; for tho to appearance he was much better, yet
the next day about Eleven in the Forenoon, he fell into a cold clammy Sweat,
and for the Space of almost an Hour shorted excessively, foamed at the Mouth,
and expired.

Some perhaps may say this might have as well been omitted as inserted, the
Patient dying; but this may serve to confirm my Assertion, that Arteriotomy is
so much preferable to Phlebotomy, there being no Parallel Instance, that ever
the latter had so speedy an Effect to recall the Senses.

The two following Observations, tho I formerly published them in a Latin
Dissertation on this Subject, which is annexed to this Treatise; yet for the
Benefit of those who are not so well acquainted with that Language, being so
remarkable, I could not omit giving them a place here in the English Tongue.

Obs. 10.
A certain Person, of about Forty Years of Age, who had lived luxuriously in
his Youth, being reduced to Poverty, and from a thriving Tradesman become a
private Sentinel, went to bed in perfect Health, but the next Morning was found
dead. I resolved to open and examine his Head, and had no sooner sawn through the
Cranium, and reached the Meninges, but the Blood sprung out from those torn
Vessels with that Violence, as if an Amputation had been performed on the Leg
or Arm of a living Person; which had it been timely discharged, by opening the
Artery, his Life might have been preserved.

Obs. 11.
A young Fellow about Thirty, who had been sickly for a considerable time; but
when on the Recovery, I asked him, how he did? he told me, he was tolerably
well: but in a quarter of an hours time News was brought me that he was dead. I
immediately went to him, discovered a small Respiration, and could just
perceive a Pulsation in the Temporal Arteries, which I opened on each side; and
after having bled very freely, he presently began to discourse with me: two
hours after I took more Blood from the same Orifices, and a third time a
considerable Quantity: by which means, with the use of warm comfortable
Medicines, he perfectly recovered.

Thus during the time of my being in Flanders, as there were many Cases of this
nature offered, so I never neglected embracing all Opportunities by them, which
more and more confirmed me in the Opinion of Arteriotomy.

Obs. 12.
I shall only add one Instance more of the Mismanagement of Diseases, and the
irregular Administration of Medicines, and conclude. 'Twas on the famous
William Penn Esquire; who being of a Plethoric Habit of Body, and Lethargic, was
one day seized with Convulsions at his Table, and falter'd in his Speech:
immediately their Family Physician was sent for, who took the usual Method of
treating him, till at length it terminated in an Intermitting Fever, which was
so ill managed, that 'twas six Weeks before he could be removed to his Country
House. Being at Bristol six Months after, he was seized with another Fit of the
same kind, but much more severe: a Learned Physician was then employed, who,
scorning to jog on in the old beaten Lane, Pack-horse like, was more pompous in
his Prescriptions; as appeared by ordering his Antilethargic or famous Cephalic
Powder, which by virtue of an occult Quality, (could it but have insinuated it
self into every Crevice of the Cranium) would have worked Wonders: but these
Circumforaneous Scouts wanting the Parole, could not pass, the Ports of the Os
Crebriforme being so well guarded with Nerves, Veins, Arteries, and so closely
lined with Membranes; so that this Specific Powder not answering Expectation,
this worthy Gentleman left him, who after some moderate days Journeys arrived
at his Country Seat at Ruscomb near Reading, where he was seized with a third
Fit. Their Physician was then sent for from London, who prosecuted his former
Method, only with this difference, that he ordered Cupping, Scarifying; and
then applying the strongest Epispastics, this barbarous Treatment caused dismal
Stranguries; and the little Urine he made was with great Pain and much
Difficulty, and of a bloody Tincture, intermixed with coagulated Matter,
resembling Lumps of Fat, so large, that 'twould be thought incredible to pass
the Vrethra. By this Severity (tho entirely owing to a good Constitution) he
was not killed, yet it confirmed a Hydrocephalus or Dropsy in his Head, which
caused a sensible Decay through all Parts of his Body, deprived him of his Speech,
and the use of his Senses: and in this desponding State the Doctor left him.

All which Misfortunes might have been prevented by bleeding in the Artery, at
the first Appearance of the Disease, and falling in with my Measures before
mentioned.

I was then sent for, and succeeded so Well, that in a few days he was
apparently better; so I left him to the Care of his Apothecary, and in about
ten days time paying him a second Visit, I found him quite another Man: he had
reassumed his wonted Briskness and Alacrity; and thus continued for some Months
in a very good State of Health, till this unhappy Accident: having two
Fontinels betwixt the Scapula's, on one of which a Protuberance rose like a
Boil, which threw him into a violent Fever; this Tumor increased to a
prodigious Size, extending it self from the lower Angle of the Scapula, all
over the Clavicle. My being sent for to Bristol, to visit an ancient Lady (who
had formerly been my Patient and best Benefactrix) obliged him to make use of
the former Physician, and a Metropolitan Surgeon: but a Friend of Mr. Penn
being very importunate with me, I waited on him with all Expedition, found they
had applied Cataplasms in order to bring it to Suppuration, and had attempted
to lay the Abscess open, but through Fear had only scratched the Teguments. I then
took the Probe, and introduced it eight or nine Inches, and made a deep
Incision, from whence a considerable Quantity of Pus discharged it self. Then I
ordered a Digestive to destroy whatever Fungus might remain; main; by which
means he was immediately freed from the Fever, without the least Occasion of
being cramb'd with febrifuge Draughts, Powders, and Bolus's that lay so
plentifully prepared for him; so I left him to the Care of a Surgeon in
Reading, an ingenious Man, who completed the Cure effectually: and now he
enjoys as large a Measure of Health as ever.

This Operation of Arteriotomy, that the Generality are so timorous and
cautious of attempting, I Have not only performed and ordered for Adults, but
even on Infants themselves. One particularly who fell under my Care, was the
Child of a distempered Parent, who as soon as born was attended with
Convulsions, and at six Weeks old was seized with one so violent, that none had
the least room to hope for Life: but at the taking away a small Quantity of
Blood from the Artery, the Child was in an instant relieved, looked cheerful,
pleasant, and immediately took the Breast, which for some time before the Fit
he had refused, and so with the Use of proper Medicines perfectly recoverd.

This Treatise I don't doubt but will meet with some who will approve of it, as
well as other prejudiced Persons that will be as ready to contemn and condemn
it. But what I Have writ was entirely owing to a Sense of my Duty to my
Fellow Creatures, without either consulting the Applause of the former, or
valuing in the least the malicious Censures of the latter.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
FINIS.
APPENDIX.
MY Bookseller having assured me, that a Book without an Appendix is like a
Play without an Epilogue, I immediately addressed my self to write one; but the
Difficulty was, to fix on the Argument, among so many as offered themselves to
my Thoughts. At first I resolved to demonstrate that the Animalcula did not
enter the Vterus till they had impregnated one of the Ova in the Ovaria; and
when there maturated, fall from thence into the Tubae Fallopianae, and lastly
into the Womb. Then I thought I would expose (as the Practice deserves) the use
of Oils, Syrups and Diuretics in Distempers of the Stone, and confirm my
Opinion by undoubted Observations, showing that such Applications generate the
Stone, but never dissolve or carry it off; and instead of Syrups, Oleaginous
and Tartarous Liquids, to recommend the Use of Malt Liquors: and at the same
time to show that Gravel is not producd from any Deficiency in the Kidneys, but
a Disorder in the Bowels arising from Indigestion. At another time, I thought
it would be no unuseful thing to the Town, to demonstrate that the
Consumptions, which we frequently meet with, arise not from any Tendency in
Nature, but from the mischievous Effects of improper and ill-apply'd Medicines
in venereal Cases.

While I was thus in suspense, a Book casually fell into my hands, of
Observations on Bezoar-Stones, with a Vindication of Sugars, etc. in which I
saw there was copious Matter to remark upon: but finding in it a Letter from
Dr. Cook of Bristol, which extols this new Chalk Medicine above all others, I
shall confine my self to that part of the Book, and show the World, by a few
Observations, how little this Medicine deserves the Praises given it.

Obs. 1.
Mrs. Paget, the Wife of a noted Man in Bristol, had for many Years been
afflicted with the Cholick and Stone, but small ones, and at some Seasons of
the Year more violent than others. Under this Misfortune she applied to Dr.
Cook, and his Underlings, who in vain used their celebrated Medicine, with
their Laudanum Doses, till she was brought upon a Rack, and continud so for six
or seven Months. I being sent for (and being appriz'd how she had been used)
gave her some things of a warm attenuating Nature, by the Help of which she
discharged vast Quantities of a hard compact Substance, that was generated in
her Stomach, with much Choler and Bile. Afterward she had an Evacuation
downwards of great Numbers of Stones that were hardened in the Bowels,
occasioned by this Chalk mixing it self with the Flame in the Stomach; by which
means they were lapify'd by the Heat of the Liver, as Chalk will be before the
Fire when mixed with Water. Upon the second Application, many more came away,
some smaller, and some greater. The third time she discharged one as large as a
big Walnut, which I have now by me, and which shows where it was fastened to the
Ductus Bilearius, and the Furrows made by the Peristaltic Motion of the Guts;
and by pricking of it you bring out the very Chalk, as appears from mixing it
with Water, that gives a Color like other Chalk. From that moment she was
relieved from all Complaints; and falling asleep for some hours, she waked
perfectly refreshed. I used some things which I thought proper to recover the
Tone of her Stomach, etc. She now enjoys a good State of Health, and has
continued well ever since.

Obs. 2.
Mr. Cooper, Undersheriff of Bristol, taking a Cold, and thereupon falling
into Vomiting, with Pains in his Bowels, sent for Dr. Cook, who ordered him the
abovementioned never-failing Medicine in Powder, with a composing Draught;
which was so far from relieving the Patient, that he awakd after two hours
Sleep with great Oppressions and continual Reaching. And when upon a Repetition
of the Medicine, he grew worse, I was called; when I came, and found him in
cold Sweats and continual Vomitings, I looked to see what had been given him,
and found half a dozen Papers of this Medicine, and a Vial of cooling Julep,
with the Powder at the bottom. His Case being past remedy, I took my leave of
him, and he died the next Morning.

The following Observation will show how much the Doctor himself depends on the
Infallibility of his inestimable Medicine, as he calls it.

Obs. 3.
Mrs. Hannah Alton, Daughter to the Alderman of that Name in Bristol, had a
Spring-Ague, of which I cured her; but by eating unripe Fruit, and taking Cold,
she fell into an intermitting Fever with a Cough. In which Case some officious
Friends (as such are never wanting) prevailed with her to put her self into the
hands of Dr. Cook, and some of his Understrappers, well enough known in the
City; who giving her ( secundum Consuetudinem, but not secundum Artem) Chalk,
Milk, and Laudanum Draughts, the Distemper gained Strength (as how could it do
otherwise) and the abused Patient threw up great Quantities of Chalk and
curdled Milk together; the Cause instead of the Cure of her Disease. These
Symptoms puzzled the poor Doctor, and he had no other way to save his own
Credit, but by recommending her to Dr. Slare, then at the Bath, whom he highly
extolled on this Occasion. Dr. Slare continues in the former Method, only adds
Bath-Waters to the Plaistring; but the Compactness of the Substance, before
formd in the Stomach, being too firm for the Waters to disentangle, in order to
expectorate, they were forced down through the Pyloris, by the Weight of the
Waters, which relaxed that Orifice of the Stomach to such a degree, that it
could no more contract it self: add to this, that the continual Defluxion of
that sharp corrosive Matter that had so long been pent in among the Folds of
the Stomach, inflamed both it and the Guts so greatly, that she fell into
continual Purgings till she expired. The Doctors had now no way left to excuse
themselves, but by charging all upon the Bath-Waters, which, God knows, were
very innocent of this poor Lady's Death. But the noblest Medicines are hurtful
when ill applied, and the greatest Blessings are fatal when they pass through
unskilful Hands.

Obs. 4.
Alderman Stephens his Lady of Bristol, having been in an ill State of Health
for many Years, and used diverse Physicians, but especially Dr. Cook, when she
found her self growing worse, sen for me. When I came, I found her reaching,
and very much convulsed; what she brought up, was hard Substances, not properly
Pleghm, but somewhat wrapped in Pleghm. Her Vomiting had followd her for some
Years past, and would continue with very little Intermission for three Weeks at
a time. Upon Enquiry what she had principally took, I found it was the Pouders
and Composing Draught. Hereupon I prescribed her some proper things to
disintangle the preternatural Substances generated in the Stomach; which had
their Effect: the Convulsions soon abated, and after voiding a number of Worms,
and particularly one of half a Yard long, and as sharp at both ends as a
Needle, the Convulsion and the Stone both left her. By proper Prescriptions
afterward, I cured her of one of the most complicated Distempers that I have
ever met with in my Practice.

Obs. 5.
Mr. Prankara's Wife of Bristol, being attended with Cholick Pains, was
disciplined by Dr. Cook in the old manner, with Chalk Medicines and composing
Draughts. When I came to her from the Country (where I then was) and found the
Course she was in, it being the Evening, I prescribed nothing; but coming the
next Morning, found her dead. Upon Discourse with her Mother, I perceived the
Doctor had been there again after me, and repeated his Medicine, which in a few
Hours threw her into such Convulsions as ended in Death.

Obs. 6.
Mr. Davis of Bristol's Wife being ill of a Complication of Distempers, had at
length, by the Care of Dr. Cook's Creatures, a fixed Pain in her Back, in so
much that if she slipped her Foot by Accident against any thing, she would fall
down as dead with the Agony of the Pain. I being sent for, took the same Method
which I used with Mrs. Paget; that is, I disentangled a vast many little Stones
that had petrified in her Bowels, and upon the Ductus Bilearius: which was no
sooner effected, than she recovered and did well, and was afterward delivered
of a brave Boy, tho she never had a Child before.

By this Observation it appears how easily the Misapplication of Medicines
destroy the Constitution, and the chief Faculties of Procreation; from whence I
am of Opinion, that there is neither Man nor Woman, but who is qualified to
procreate, or might be made so: Of which I could produce Instances more than a
few, if it were proper.

Obs. 7.
Captain Scot's Wife of Bristol, being an infirm Woman for many Years, and
being treated in the same manner as the Persons beforementioned, was at length
thrown into a Jaundice and Scurvy, with a Deprivation of her Limbs, and a
continual Strangury; in which deplorable State she continued for seven Years,
and then fell into a Dropsy all over her Body. It was then I was called, and by
taking Methods suitable to the Dictates of Nature, as I have always done, and by
the Grace of God ever shall, she was so wonderfully relieved, as to be able to
walk a Mile to her Dinner, who could not before move out of her Chamber. I
followed these happy Beginnings with such Prescriptions as brought her to a
perfect State of Health; so that she has been several times since at London.
Upon the whole matter I would observe, that the Fault lies not in the Medicines
so much as in the unskilful Applications of them; and particularly I affirm,
that I have made use of the Bezoar and Gascoin Powder with admirable Success,
and have found it to be the best of Cordials. Until therefore Dr. Slare gives a
few Instances of the pernicious Effects of the Bezoar Stone and Gascoin Powder,
for the many I have produced of his admired Chalk, and many more that I can; I
hope he will allow me (at least I shall allow my self) to prefer the former.

I have now only one Observation more, to show how different Effects arise from
the same Medicine at different Times.

Obs. 8.
Captain James Grant, of Brigadier Grant's Regiment, had a Fever and Ague after
the Battle of Mons to a violent degree, and received no Benefit from the Bark;
but had his Ague for six Hours in twelve: at length being brought in a Litter
to Brussels, he fell under my Care. I gave him some things proper to
disentangle and carry off the Load of Matter which oppressed his Stomach, and
then waited for the Return of his Fit, which, as I expected, was more moderate
than before. After this, I prescribed the Bark, and told him, with some
Assurance, that his Fit should return no more; which, tho he did not in the
least believe, yet he found it to be true. Thus it is plain, that it is of no
consequence that a Medicine be a good one, unless it is applied in a proper
Case, in a due Manner, and when the Patient is fitly prepared and disposed to
receive it. If. the Instrument of Music be never so well in tune, yet there
will be no Harmony when the Strings are touched by an ignorant Hand. When some
Animals play upon Organs, there must needs be hideous Music. And to be
sincere, I am very much afraid that this is honest Dr. Slare's Case; of whom
and of my Readers I take leave for the present, having first presented the
Public with (the only thing valuable in his Book) his Recommendation of Malt
Drink, and Dr. Cook's Letter, which so highly applauds this miraculous Medicine.

THE Consideration of Grass for Beasts, leads me to Corn; namely, the Staff of
Life for human Kind; of the four Grains, Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats; of each of
these Bread may be made very wholesome and good. It is true, if you chew and eat
any of these, they do not give so signal a Sweet to our Taste, as what is
really contained in them, and will soon be made to exert that Sweetness. For
Example, if you do but wet any of these Corns in common Water, you will stir up
some active inherent Principles, which will ferment and swell the Grain, and
make it to grow (as the Malsters call it.) This gives them notice of spreading
it abroad to dry, which may be done in the Sun; but for Convenience is
performed on a Kiln, by the Admission of Heat from the Fire made beneath it.
This is now called Malt; if you eat a Grain or two, you will discern it to be
sweet; if you boil it in Water (after it has been powdered or ground) it will
give a sweet Tincture, commonly called Wort; you may boil it to the Consistence
of a Syrup: And this Product of Corn somewhat agrees with Mellossus, which if
it be spread upon Bread, it adds considerable Nourishment to your Bread, and
would be esteemed a good Banquet, and pleasant Entertainment, did we not abound
with so many other more refined and dainty Sweets, and easier to come at. Thus
Mellossus is commonly given to Schoolboys with their Bread; nor can I think it
bad Food for Children, because more mischief may be due totheir new spungy or
dowy, and not well baked Bread, than to the Indian Sweet. It is this sweet
Decoction of Malt that makes your great Variety of fine Ales and Beer, much
more wholesome, more pleasant and fit for English Bodies, than your admired
Wines, whether Rhenish, French, or Florence; for these do abound with gritty,
tartarous Matter, very apt to lodge in the Kidneys, and lay the Foundation of
the most intolerable Distemper in the World, the Stone; or if they be so happy
to escape that, the Gout will make an Attack on the Joints of the Toes or
Fingers of a potent Drinker, and tear and swell the tender Parts, and sometimes
mercifully thrust out those Tophi or Stones into the extreme Parts, which
otherwise would probably have been cast upon the too sensible and passive
Kidneys: but none could ever charge our soft and balsamic Ale with breeding
any sort of sandy or tartarous Matter in the Barrel, and I think not in the
Body. I cannot forbear mentioning an Observation of my good Friend Dr.
Cyprianus, who told me long since, he had cut above fourteen Hundred Persons
for the Stone, but never observed that he cut any Alehouse Keepers, but many
Vintners. He always advised his Patients that feared the Stone, or were
concerned with that excruciating Disease, to drink soft Ale, the newer the
better: for he condemns most or all four Juices, as apt to breed the Stone, or
increase it.

Dr. JOHN COOK of Bristol, to Dr. FREDERICK SLARE at Bach.
Dear Sir, January 5. 1713/14.
I Received your kind Letter and the Manuscript, of which I cannot give an
adequate Encomium. It is an impartial Trial and Condemnation of Bezoar by the
Laws of Chemistry, Reason, and Experience. Oh how useful might our Profession
be rendered to the Poor, as well as to the Rich, if all the chargeable part of
our Materia Medica was thus examined fairly; and whatever appeared insipid,
inodorous, unactive and indissolvable in mild Menstruums and very gentle Heats,
should be judged unworthy to be depended on for the Cure of Diseases! The
Reformation of the Errors and Cheats of the Materialists would be a very great
Advantage to Mankind, who are too often in as much danger from the true Terra
damnata of Medicine, as from those Diseases which Quiet and Abstinence do
frequently cure I have now for near thirty Years past used the Sal Absynthii,
and the Creta you mention, with wonderful Success, in Distempers of the Stomach
and Bowels, and in Fevers: but I always thought Bezoar and Pearl fitter for a
Lady's Closet or Neck, than for a Cordial, unless for a profuse and wanton
Cleopatra. All the precious Gems should be sent back to the Jewellers,
Leaf-Gold to the Gilders; nay, I could for my part also return the Musk and
Amber-Greese to the Perfumers. The All-wise and Merciful Creator and Preserver
of the Universe has supplied poor unworthy Mortals with the most efficacious
Medicines, to be had in most Countries upon easy Terms; nay, most Endemic
Distempers have very proper Remedies to be gotten cheap in the same Region. But
to return to your most accurate Analysis of this false, tho celebrated and
precious Antidote, I will read it over once or twice more; for it will afford
still fresh Delight to me, who can scarce forbear interceding with you, that
the Respublica Medica, may be made happy in the sight of these most useful
Discoveries: for all say, Bonum quo communius eo melius. And this being a dear
Imposture, it must be for the public Good to detect it. I hope you will pardon
this Freedom, which your Favors and Friendship does encourage me to use. I
must beg a sight also of your Obsertions made on, and the Cures performed by
the Bath-Waters; which, together with this excellent Discourse, shall be
carefully returned, with a due Sense of Gratitude, by,

SIR, Your most Obliged, and Faithful Friend, JOHN COOK.

FINIS.

