PHARMACOMASTIX: OR, THE OFFICE, USE, and ABUSE of APOTHECARIES explained; the
present degenerate State of PHARMACY, with its manifold CORRUPTIONS and
ADULTERATIONS, considered; and some ESSAYS on reforming thereof: Humbly
addressed to A MEMBER of PARLIAMENT, with Intent to show the necessity of
amending and continuing a temporary STATUTE, for preventing Frauds and Abuses
committed in the making and vending unsound, adulterate, and bad Drugs and
Medicines, now near expiring.

By the AUTHOR of the SCHEME on which the said STATUTE was founded.

SALUS populi suprema Lex. DUBLIN: Printed by S. POWELL, For ABRAHAM BRADLEY,
at the two Bibles in Dame-street. MDCCXLI.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 12. for designed, read deigned. p. 10. l. 31. after he, add has.
p. 18. l. 10. after be, add sold or. p. 28. l. 31. for prospect left, r.
prospect left. p. 32. l. 1. for late a, r. a late. ibid. l. 19. for
malpractices, r. mal-practices. p. 22. l. 33. for shilling, r. shillings. p.
24. l. 25. for paultry, r. paltry. p. 27. l. 34. for though, r. when. p. 38. l.
13. for pourtraits, r. pourtraite. p. 49. for these, r. those. p. 53. l. 26.
for ome, r. some. p. 55. l ^4. for distillment, r. destillment. p. 64. l. 25.
for the, r. a.

PHARMACOMASTIX: OR, THE OFFICE, USE and ABUSE of APOTHECARIES explained, etc.
SIR,
SINCE PHYSIC alone among all the useful sciences, has at this time the
misfortune to be unrepresented in Parliament, and as the STATUTE for preventing
Frauds and Abuses in the making and vending unsound, adulterate, and bad Drugs
and Medicines; is now near expiring, I hope it may not be improper to show the
necessity of continuing that Act, and to offer some Amendments thereto, which
the artful evasions and corruptions of mercenary artificers have rendered
absolutely necessary.

Your early acquaintance with the nature and constitution of Parliaments, your
weight in our national Assembly, and your extensive benevolence, have pointed
you out the fittest patron and advocate for a Scheme wholely calculated for the
public Benefit, to correct the many enormous Abuses in PHARMACY, and
consequently to promote the health and temporal happiness of a considerable
part of mankind. Therefore I shall venture, without any farther apology, to
submit the following lines to your serious consideration.

There is no well regulated country where the LEGISLATURE has not made some
provision for the preservation of the health of the Body natural, as well as
for that of the Body politic; yet pity it is, that in most, for want of due
Information, all the Laws hitherto enacted in regard to Medicine, have fallen
far short of it is good intentions. For as an Evil whose source or cause is
unknown must be remediless; so is it scarce possible, that the Frauds or Abuses
in any art or trade, though ever so pernicious to society, can be prevented or
punished by law, until they are first discovered and made apparent to the
lawgivers. -- If some of the honest artists or tradesmen of every occupation,
would ingenuously disclose the secret corruptions of their respective callings
(without which they may for ever escape the cognizance and censure of the
LEGISLATURE) we might then hope for a general reformation. But alas! we are too
like the Ephesian smith in scripture, ready upon every attempt to purge us from
iniquity, to cry out with him, The craft is in danger.

The natural, fragile structure of the human Frame, which has rendered it
subject to sundry inevitable vicissitudes, from the force of external bodies,
from the alterations of the air, the nature of the aliments, and from the very
vital actions, has made the hecling art in general, of all others the most
useful and necessary for the support and well-being of mankind, and nearly
coaeval with the Creation Boerh. Instit. Medic. Prolegom.
. So sensible were men in all ages of the usefulness and dignity of Physic,
that it has ever been held in the utmost reverence and esteem. The inventors or
improvers of this noble art were by the ancients ranked among the Gods, and
styled sons of Gods, and the hands of Gods. It was a long time practiced by
heroes only, or the sons of Gods, Aelian de. animal. lib. ii. cap. 18.
being deemed too sacred for profane hands. The Heathen, Jews and primitive
Christians agreed in paying the utmost respect to the healing art, believing it
of divine and heavenly origin Cicer. Tusculan. Quaest. lib. 3. Hippoc. de
pris. medicina S. Aug. de Civit. Dei.
. Hence we find the greatest honors possible were conferred on the ancient
physicians in the most wise, polite, and politic states. They were generally
caressed or envied by kings and princes who designed to study, and endeavored
to acquire and practice their inestimable art. Many natural productions as well
as artificial preparations to this day retain the Name of a royal discoverer or
inventor. And two Mesue and Avicen.
of the most considerable ancient physical writers whose works are extant at
this time, were, one the son of a king, the other a sovereign prince. The
Athenians so justly prized the worth and excellency of the divine Hippocrates,
that they initiated him into their grand mysteries; they presented him with the
freedom of Athens in a crown, (a royal diadem) to the value of a thousand
pieces of Gold, and settled a considerable stipend for his maintenance during
life, at the public expense. -- They likewise made a law prohibiting all women,
bondsmen, or slaves meddling with Physic: as they did likewise in Locris, which
decreed, that disobedience to the directions or prescriptions of Physicians
should be punished with death. Julius Caesar made all Physicians that should
settle in Rome, freemen and denizens Sue^on.
; and when, for some reasons of state, a succeeding emperor banished the Greeks
that city, yet the Physicians, though all Greeks, were exempted. It is also
observable that the first alien known to obtain his freedom of that once
glorious city was a Physician Arcagathus.
. The Physicians of the college of Milan are dignified with an order of
knighthood, and wear to this day golden Collars Joh. Bapt. Sylvatic.
. Innumerable other instances might be produced, if necessary, to show, that
medicine and the medical sages were ever respected and esteemed, admired and
encouraged, all the World over. See Celsus, Senert. Inst. Med. Moaebii Synops.
epitom. Inst. Med. Le Clerc Hist. de la Medecin. Friend's History of Physic.
Harris's Pharmac-anti-empyr. and Pr^f. to Fuller 's Pharmacop. extemper.

If the healing art was thus honored in the ruder, early ages, how much does it
deserve our regard and attention with the many considerable improvement of the
moderns, which were to the ancients utterly unknown?

There can hardly be any one insensible of the value of HEALTH and LIFE, since
the very first impulse of nature prompts every creature to use all ways and
means to preserve them: And nothing but an uninterrupted enjoyment of health
can render any man regardless of so invaluable a blessing. It was the dreadful
contagion which raged in Rome about the 301st year after the building that
city, where there were not then found Physicians enough to attend the sick
Dion. Hal^carnas.
, that first made the robust Romans sensible of the Use and Excellency of
PHYSIC, which they afterward so generously encouraged, and so amply rewarded.
Salus populi suprema lex esto, is a precept which was once religiously
observed, in its fullest extent, by every worthy Roman senator. And though it
might not have been originally pronounced or received in this sense literally,
yet I apprehend the application of it merely to the bodily health of the
people, can be no wide deviation from the sense of the wise author; since the
general welfare of the community depends upon the health of it is Members.

PHYSIC or MEDICINE is the art by which our lives and health are preserved and
restored. And abuses or mal-administration in any branch thereof must
necessarily prejudice or subvert the whole. This cannot be charged upon Physic
or Surgery, for it may in truth be affirmed, that this Kingdom was never so
happily provided in that way, as at present, with men of both professions
inferior to none in Europe, in erudition, judgment, and probity. But PHARMACY,
or the apothecary's art in particular, which ministers in an especial manner to
the two former branches, namely Physic and Surgery; though the good success of
both most considerably depends thereupon, is lest neglected and uncultivated,
overrun with errors, abuses and frauds. And though there are no corruptions in
any art so pernicious and destructive to the public, as those of Apothecaries,
yet (melancholy consideration!) none are so little liable to discovery or
punishment. Deceits in most trades are perceptible to the generality, and are
not only in some sense cognizable by law, but as they must sooner or later be
discovered by the customers, common policy will direct most tradesmen to some
integrity in their callings. But as the most baneful frauds in Pharmacy, being
never suspected, are seldom or never perceptible to the public, though often
felt, (few or none besides Physicians, Surgeons, or Apothecaries, being
sensible of the evils in this way,) so none transgresses with more case and
security, than the dishonest apothecary. He may destroy the reputation of the
most careful and judicious physicians and surgeons, and murder thousands of
their patients, his bill is nevertheless paid, and he is still unsuspectedly
entertained, caressed and employed by the surviving Families. A little artifice
can tinsel or varnish over the most vile frauds or perfidious neglects of the
unjust apothecary. If he can command a brazen front, with an hardened, servile
conscience, it is enough, all is safe. For his vassal apprentices, who only can
be privy to his villainy, are hushed, they are obliged to keep his secrets
without distinction.

AS PHARMACY is a most useful and necessary art, nay, according to one of the
fathers of physic Celsus. See J. D. Horst. Inst. pharmac. L. ii. C. i.
, the most useful branch of medicine, when in a state of purity and perfection,
so it is the most pernicious and destructive, when it is not exercised with the
utmost integrity, care, fidelity and good understanding. No knave so vile, so
dangerous to society as a bad apothecary. The rapacious highwayman, a professed
enemy to mankind, bids the unwary traveller stand and at the peril of his life
part with his money: But the dishonest apothecary, a more subtle kind of
robber, pretends a friendship for his Customer, yet takes the same opportunity
with the former (which the love of life and health, and dread of death that
human Nature is possessed with, amply affords him,) and so robs thousands of
their fortunes, giving them only some vile, useless drug in exchange; by which
their lives are always endangered and often destroyed. And yet notwithstanding
the apothecary is never in the least suspected; so that the orphan may often pay
him for the death of his parents, parents for that of their children, widows
for their husbands, and so forth: and perhaps gratefully acknowledge the great
care and tenderness of their worthy apothecary, though he might have been more
instrumental to their death than the disease.

For these reasons, the apothecaries have no temporal advantages in, nor any
incitements to honesty or integrity in their calling. For while men can buy the
most base and worst commodities, and may without detection, substitute them
for, or sell them at the same rate with the best and most genuine, we shall
probably be infested with such mercenary wretches as will prefer their own
ill-gotten gain, to a clear conscience and the safety and welfare of their
neighbors; the far greater profit arising from illegal trade.

I would not be hereby thought to charge all the worthy apothecaries of this
kingdom, with ignorance, disingenuity, or disintegrity; far be it from me! I am
well assured that we have some, as judicious, as skilful, and as honest in
their way, as any in Europe. But as it may not be allowable to point at the
indentical guilty persons, either by naming the one, or exempting the other, so
I am obliged to make the charge in general against the whole fraternity, my
self not excepted. So let him whom the cap fits wear it -- Shakespeare's. Hamlet.
let the galled jade wince. -- It is through a real concern for the just, good
men, that are indiscriminately blended with the unjust, and for the scandalous
disrepute which the excellent art of Pharmacy is fallen into, together with the
long train of evils which attend the public in general, from the base craft and
corruption of avaricious falsifiers of medicines, that I am urged to this work.

I have a long time had a conflict with myself about this important
undertaking. I must confess I some time feared the united powers of the wicked
against me, having on the like occasion heretofore, fatally experienced the
strength of the confederate Opponents of reformation: And above all, I avoided
taking upon me a task, to which I am conscious of, and confess my inequality.
But at length laying aside all selfish fear, and finding none of the many more
capable inclined to engage in such a just and necessary warfare, I have at all
hazards presumed to give you the following informations, and to submit these
just (though indigested) Observations to the wisdom of the LEGISLATURE; from
whose paternal care and benevolence alone, we may expect the due encouragement
of Virtue, and the suppression of Vice of every kind. If my weak endeavors
answer any useful purposes, I have my full recompense in being but ever so mean
an Instrument of effecting a public good. I hope the merits of the Cause, for
which I am but a slender advocate, and the simplicity and honesty of mine
intentions, will gain your attention, plead for the weakness of my performance,
and supply the want of Rhetoric and Oratory.

In order to lay this matter properly before you, I judge it expedient,

I. To consider the rise and primitive state of Pharmacy, and from the best
authority to point out the proper Office and Duty of, and the requisite
Qualifi^ations for an Apothecary. In which I shall c^nsorily endeavor to
explain the difference between Apothecaries and Druggists.

II. To show the present state of Pharmacy, and how far the m^dern deviate from
the proper Office and Duty, and fall short of the qualifications of the a^tient
true Ap^th^^ries; in which fatal degeneracy it will appear, that it is scarcely
possible for a man to learn that Art fully, and then to get an honest
livelihood by that profession solely, let his knowledge and understanding in it
be ever so considerable, unless he had the good fortune of an extraordinary
genius, which may lead him to study it properly, and of ga^ning a set of
customers who pay uncommon deference to his judgment and integrity.

III. To lay open some of the most inconsiderable and obvious Frauds and Abuses
in this way, whether through ignorance or design of Apothecaries or Druggists;
and to point out some of the most pernicious sophistications of Medicines, with
the evil consequences thereof. And

IV. and lastly, To offer some means to prevent such horrid mal-practices for
the future; whereby the KING is not only basely defrauded in his just Revenue,
by which every Subject must suffer; but also the PUBLIC is robbed of the chief
blessing of this life, Health, and the means of restoring it; and the fair and
honest Apothecary is crampt and restrained in the lawful discharge of his
function; being undersold by the fraudulent and dishonest.

I. In the pure, primitive ages of the healing Art, the physician not only
prescribed, but collected, prepared dispensed, and administered medicaments, as
well as performed chirurgical operations. For the now three distinct branches
of Medicine, called Physic, Pharmacy, and Surgery, were (till about the time
of Herophilus and Erasistratus) managed by one and the same hand Cells. Pref. l.
i. Le. Clerc. hist. de la Med. p. ii l. i. c. ix.
. But finding it too laborious and burdensome, and according to a trite
aphorism of the father of Physic, Hippoc. Lib. i. Aph. i.
that the lise of man was too short to comprehend fully, or to complete the
knowledge of that sublime Art, it was judged expedient to divide it into these
three different parts, that having less to study in each, it might become less
tedious and prolix, insomuch that every student may hope to arrive at a
competent degree of knowledge in that branch which he chose for his peculiar
study: Whereupon the three distinct offices of Physician, Apothecary, and
Surgeon, were instituted.

The Physicians, on account of seniority and superlative erudition, are justly
allowed the pre-eminence of the two other brethren, which, indeed, I think that
profession merits of all others, divinity only excepted. A Physician must have
a most liberal education: He must be well versed in all the learned languages,
in natural history, in all parts of Philosophy, in Anatomy, the animal
Economy, the histories of distempers, their natures, signs, Symptoms, causes,
diagnostics, prognostics, indications of Cure, etc. He must likewise be well
grounded in the theories of the Chemic and Galenic pharmacies and of
surgery. For according to the wise author of medicine, Hippoc. lex.
natural endowments, learning, a proper place for study, education from
infancy, industry and time, are requisite to constitute a physician; in
consequence of which we find, the education of such is in schools and
universities, seminaries of polite literature, where all things are learned to
complete the physician and the gentleman. Thus must a physician be qualified
before he can undertake the care of the sick in any, the slightest disorder:
And he who made the greatest progress in that admirable art, even the divine
sage, Hippoc. Epist. ad Democrit.
is not ashamed to confess, that though he was now advanced in old age, and got
to the extremity of life, he had not yet arrived at the end of physic. Whence
it follows that physic is the deepest and most extensive study, and it is
practice the weightiest and most important charge, that human nature can
possibly undertake.

SURGERY now usurps the second rank; and though it has had a worse fate than
physic, in falling some time into the hands of ignorant and illiterate men, yet
it is knowledge is again happily revived among us, and all those who make a
figure in that profession, are not only men of learning and erudition, but
inferior to none in Europe in judgment and understanding in that excellent art.

For some centuries Surgery 1 as well as Pharmacy, 2 Friend's Hist. Phys
Vol. 2. p. iii.
was subservient and ministerial to PHYSIC. The first Surgeons (...) l'
A^^st. Polit. L. iii. C. ii. Medicines mainaeuvre and (...) ^^^^^ace^tique. Le
Cl^r^ Hist. de la Medicine, p. ii. p. 47.
and Apothecaries after the division of Medicine into these three branches,
being taught by the PHYSICIANS, (...) ou Medicines Architect. ibid.
were by them solely directed and conducted in the exercise and discharge of
their respective functions. So that the then Surgeons never bled, opened
tumors, amputated limbs, nor performed any other operation in their
profession; nor did the Apothecaries apply, or administer any medicine, but in
consultation with or by the advice or approbation of the Physicians. Yet as it
is now essentially necessary to complete a Surgeon, that he be a man of
learning, a perfect master of anatomy and of course well acquainted with the
animal economy, and his object being one, and his practice being grounded on
the same principles and rationale with Physic, (with this only distinction,
that one treats the external, the other the internal disorders of the human
Body,) it does not seem unreasonable, that such Surgeons, should bleed and
perform other operations in that way, and even prescribe, especially external
applications, upon their own Judgment solely.

But the case is quite otherwise with Apothecaries: For although they should be
good scholars, and necessarily conversant with the writings of the learned who
treated on their profession, yet does their requisite Readings no where
instruct them in anatomy, or the animal economy, nor in any of the many other
necessary qualifications of physicians, or surgeons, the knowledge of the
Materia medica only excepted, the apothecary's office, his very appellation in
all the known languages denotes. Thus among the ancients, Medicus sellularis
implied an apothecary or one who prepared and dispensed medicines. As did
likewise Pharmaceuta and Medicamentarius. In like manner Apothecarius an
apothecary from Apotheca, a shop, warehouse or repository, or (in the more
common acceptance,) a place where drugs or medicines are kept or sold; and he
may be aptly called a Physic-Shop-keeper: also Pharmacopaeus, a maker, preparer
or compounder of medicines. And likewise Seplasiarius, from Seplasia, a
marketplace in Capua, once a famed mart for drugs and perfumed ointments. And
the sole proper business and office of an Apothecary, is, to collect or procure
at due times and seasons, from the proper places, the several, usual medicinal
productions of Nature, the simples of the Mineral, vegetable and animal
Kingdoms; to select and prepare, to decompound or compound them according to
Art, by the directions of Physicians, and by their prescriptions only, to
dispense, administer, or apply them. Renod. Inst. pharmac. c. 2. Geo. Wolf.
Wedel Pharmae. Proaem.
To qualify him for which undertaking he should be well versed in natural
history, as far as it regards Mineralogy, Botonalogy, or Zoology, and
rationally as well as experimentally grounded in the knowledge of the Galenic
and Ghemic Pharmacies; which is a large Field for a man to exercise his talents
in learning; and it must well employ his time every season of the year after,
if he intends discharging the duty of his office strictly and faithfully.
Pharmacopola is an injurious name, improperly given to an Apothecary. The
Pharmacopolae of the ancients seem to have been such as were employed by
artists in collecting or procuring the simples; they were mere venders of
drugs, and pretended to no art or knowledge beyond that; but as these men in
time degenerated into knaves or quacks, they became hateful to society, and the
name of Pharmacopola, with most writers since implies, a canting hawker, a
false quack, or a deceitful mountebank. How applicable this appellation, in the
worst sense, may be to some dealers in medicine, who call themselves Druggists,
I shall not here determine; but we have the satisfaction to observe, that that
trade is again revived; for in London, Marseilles, Amsterdam, Rotterdam,
Leghorn, Hamburgh, and most other regular trading cities in Europe, the
Druggist is none other than a mere Merchant of Drugs, and in the best sense of
the word, Pharmacopola.

So different a profession from Physic was Pharmacy deemed, that not above a
century passed, since the Grocers Company in London dispensed medicines. But it
was at length found expedient, that some should separate from that body, who
should take upon them the entire management of the medicinal part of that
trade, that by applying themselves solely to an affair of so great importance
to the public, they might cultivate and attain to a competent knowledge in so
useful and necessary an art. Whereupon Pharmacy was revived, and the
Apothecaries throwing off all encumbrances, betook them to their proper
profession, in which they soon became eminent, were taken notice of, and
encouraged by the learned, and grew into such favor with King James the First,
that he incorporated them by Royal Charter, and used to call them his own
company. Thus they became a distinct society from the grocers.

The illustrious college of physicians of Augsburgh, which was the first, that
I find, who took the pains of compiling, and published the celebrated Augustane
Dispensatory, has most minutely and justly laid down the qualifications for and
the office and duty of an Apothecary, from whom, with some few amendments from
other authentic writers, I make the following abstract.

As PHARMACY is a most considerable branch of the HEALING ART, being the
physician's chief agent, so the apothecary should be a just good man, and
principally grounded in the knowledge of his profession.

He should in general be untainted in his morals, and of a perfect sound
understanding, endowed with a just reverence for the SUPREME BEING, and the
true principles of the CHRISTIAN RELIGTON; pious and faithful, just and
equitable; humane, benign, affable, placable, merciful and ready; mild and
bountiful to the poor and indigent; ever preferring public to private gains;
vigilant and regardful of the dangers and necessities of the sick; in acts of
mercy and charity, diligent and unwearied; not covetous, penurious, or
mercenary; for in buying of drugs, he is to prefer the testimony of a clear
conscience, the good of his neighbor, and his own credit and reputation, to
ill gotten riches or lucre. Wherefore, he is to procure gemine good drugs and
medicines at any rate, rather than by buying at the vilest, dispense adulterate
or bad medicines, and deceive his unwary customer to the peril or prejudice of
his life or health. He should be sober and regular in all his conduct; no
gamester, sot, or drunkard; nor prone to libidinous concupiscence or venery.

These premised, his capacity is next to be considered. He must not only have a
strong natural genius to lead him to this art, but he must be a good scholar,
to enable him to read the ordinary prescripts of physicians and surgeons,
which (from the difficulty of translating them with any certainty into the
vulgar tongues, and for other obvious reasons,) are all over Europe wrote in
Latin, and especially, that he may acquire a thorough knowledge of his
profession, by consulting the works of the learned, who treat upon the several
branches thereof.

The Authors recommended, are Dioscorides, Galen, Aegineta, Aetius, Mesue,
Nich. Proepositus and Myrepfius, Pliny, Corn. Celsus, A. M. Brasavolus, Valor.
Cordus, Anut. Foesius, Fuchsius, Garcias ab Horto, Nich. Monardes, J. B.
Sylvaticus, Fernelius, Joubertus, Renodoeus, Melichius, Coudenbergius; also,
Mathiolus, Lonicerus, Tragus, Lobelius, Poena, Dodonoeus, Tabernamontanus,
Quercetanus, Job. Jac. Weckerus, Heurnius, Oswald. Crollius, etc. To which must
now be added G. Agricola, Fer. Imperatus, B. Caesius, Worm, Casp. and Joh.
Bauhin, Salmasius, Schroeder, Zwelser, Morrison, Ray, Tournefort, Ang. Sala, J.
Hartman, Mynsicht, the Hoffmans, Clusius, Piso, Bontius, Marcgravius, Wedelius,
Le Mort, Dale, Stahl, Boerhaave, and many others; besides the several
collegiate dispensatories of Augsburgh, London, Bruxels, Edinburgh, Paris,
Leyden, Plague, Ghaunt, etc. from these the apothecary can best learn the
medicinal parts of the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms, with their
proper n^^^es and synonyma in the Arabic, Greek, Latin, and vulgar tongues:
These will teach him to discern the good from the bad, and to select the true
and genuine, from the false and sophisticated: and in short, from them he can
collect the generic marks and characteristics of the simple, with proper
instructions for preparing, and necessary animadversions on, the compound
medicaments.

Having laid these solid foundations for his future practice, his Economy
comes next under consideration.

His shop should be situate in a convenient, open, temperate place, not exposed
to damps, winds, dust, smoke, or stench. And as it contains sundry distilled
liquors, wines or vinous infusions, tinctures and sirups, electuaries,
consections and conserves, which too much heat will render vapid or mothery,
ferment, sour, or otherwise spoil; and which excessive cold will chill and
freeze, congeal, crystallize, or otherwise prejudice: A vintner need hardly
observe a greater exactness or regularity in adjusting the temperature of his
cellar or vault, than an Apothecary should in that of his shop or store-room.
Wherefore he should avoid the extreme heat of the sun, which on one hand he is
exposed to, all the summer months, and on the other, the extraordinary cold of
the winter: For which reasons, that aspect is most eligible which affords the
greatest mediocrity. Nor should it be exposed in any, to the many
inconveniences and evils of open unglassed windows and doors, nor made more
intemperate by fires made on particular occasions only, either in summer or
winter.

And that the medicines may be handled cleanly and neatly, (those for internal
use more especially, which are taken with the greater reluctance and disdain,
the more sordidly they are observed to be treated) the Apothecary is to keep
his shop and utensils sweet, pure, and clean; and with indefatigable diligence,
furnish it with the usual commodities at due seasons, and preserve them for
future use in fit receptacles and convenient places.

He is not to sell or administer, nor suffer, or cause to be administered to
any, (without the immediate license of a Magistrate, or the prescription of a
judicious Physician) any sort of poison or poisonous drugg, philtres,
provocatives of terms or abortion, opium or laudanum, strong vomitives or
purgatives, nor other such like powerful medicines, especially the Chemical
preparations of Mercury and Antimony.

He should be strictly just and faithful, cautious and circumspect, in the
dispensing and preparing the ordinary prescriptions of Physicians, as well as
the officinal compositions. Nor should he rashly or conceitedly, substitute any
one thing for another in a medicine, trusting to his own judgment or
knowledge, nor omit the least or meanest ingredient hi any composition
whatsoever, without the advice, consent, or approbation of the prescriber, or
some other skilful, prudent physician. But with religious fidelity, care and
integrity, dispense all prescripts in quality and quantity, truly and exactly,
according to the literal sense of such prescript or recipe. He is to keep an
exact registry of all such recipe's, and the originals, carefully filed. He is
to keep such as are for secret complaints from being exposed. He is to repeat
no medicine without the direction of the prescriber. See prolegom. Isagog. in
pharmac. August. Cap. i. I. D. Horstij Inst. pharmaceut. Part. i. Cap. ii.
Hoffman. Clav. pharm. Schroed. p. 29.

So sensible were the wise senate of Augsbourg of the use and necessity of
these rules, that they made some excellent laws, as well to enforce the
observation thereof, as to regulate the practices of physic, pharmacy and
surgery in every other instance: And the senate of Ghaunt also took much the
like method.

Among other statutes it is enacted, "That no apothecary, shall so far swerve
from his duty, as to interfere with the proper office of a physician or
surgeon; and that none presumes to sell or administer medicines (strong
purgatives and provocatives especially) without the prescription of a
physician; lest by the rash, ill-judged, or untimely use of the most
efficacious remedies, the health of the public may suffer, and the best
medicines fall into contempt and disrepute; physicians only being the proper
judges of the fit subjects and just times of administering such remedies." --
"The apothecaries are obliged to prepare and compound all their medicines by
the college dispensatory, See the King's proclamat. prefixed to the London
dispensat.
and to sell them at the rates fixed by the senate." "All quacks, empirics,
mountebanks, and such like impostors and pretenders to medicine whatsoever, not
found legally qualified, are expelled the state." See the decrees and statutes
of the senates of Augsbourg and Ghaunt, annexed to their several dispensatories.

The apothecaries of Paris are obliged, not only to conform to the
dispensatory, strictly and literally, but are likewise prohibited to vend or
administer any medicines whatsoever, without the prescription of one of the
faculty of medicine or one of the King's physicians. See an arret of parliament
prefixed to the Parisian dispensatory.

Nothing assuredly can contribute more to the improvement and benefit of the
healing art, than the professors of the different branches thereof; applying
themselves entirely to the study and practice of their respective callings. And
this was certainly the wise design of our predecessors in dividing it into
those three several parts; and were it yet further subdivided, it is probable
it might be brought to greater certainty and rendered more generally beneficial
to mankind, than it can be in an aggregate state; since the meanest branch can
sufficiently employ the whole attention and understanding of a man. We find
that many of the ancients were of this opinion Herodot. L. ii. S. 84.
, and that it was approved by the late celebrated doctor Harris of London
Pharm^c. Anti-Empiric. p. 217.
. What considerable discoveries and improvements have already been made in
physic in general by these divisions, are very obvious to all that are
conversant with the history of medicine. Physicians by appointing proper agents
for the more operose and mechanic parts of their profession, threw off all
encumbrance and obtained more time and leisure for study. Surgery was
cultivated under the same management and both have arrived at the extraordinary
pitch of eminence we now see them in, under these wise Regulations. Pharmacy
too, while it kept within the proper bounds, shone and flourished; for it is
observable, that no set of men made a better figure in their way than the
apothecaries that retained their integrity and kept within the just limits of
their Occupation; which the works of many of them amply testify. Of these are
Ferrantes Imperatus a Neapolitan, who wrote a most excellent natural history,
28 books in folio; John Parkinson of London, who wrote the Theatrum Botanicum
and Paradisus Terrestris; Thomas Johnson of the same, who emaculated and
augmented Gerard's Herbal, all in large folio; Moses Charas of Paris, who wrote
a very useful dispensatory, in large quarto; Peter Pomet of the same, a mere
druggist, who wrote a history or drugs in folio; M. Lemery, who wrote a course
of Chemy in octavo, an universal dispensatory, and a dictionary of drugs in
large quarto; and M. Homberg, who made many improvements and discoveries in the
Pharmacies See Memoires de l'Acad. Roy. de Sciences.
, who were both honored for their eminence with the degree of doctor of
medicine. At present Mr. Joseph Miller and Mr. Isaac Rand of London, deserve
honorable mention; as do Messieurs Bolduc and Geoffroy of Paris, whose worth
and merit none can be a stranger to, who reads the memoirs of the Acad^my Royal
of Sciences. I have reserved to bring up the rear, the brightest ornament of
his profession, the late learned and ingenious Mr. SAMUEL DALE, whose excellent
Pharmacol^gia has rendered him well known to all the physical world. For though
he lived in Brantry in Essex, yet was his merit so well known to the
illustrious college of physicians of London, that before he published the last
edition of his works, which he greatly augmented and improved, he was honored
with a license to practice physic. With him let me remember that great and
laborious artist and curious naturalist, SEBA of Amsterdam; whose prodigious
Musaeum with the history thereof, five large volumes in folio, must render his
memory famous to latest posterity.

II. While Pharmacy was practiced by such able hands as those, Physic which has
so great a dependence upon it, must have flourished. But such became the
insatiable avarice of most of the apothecaries, that they could not long
content themselves with the ample profit that arose upon the sale of their
proper commodities and manufactures; but envious of their elder brethren of the
faculty of physic, they now endeavored to imitate them, as the frogs in the
fable did the oxen, (and indeed with much the same success) and sought after
new methods of increasing their sordid gains. This they effected by
treacherously and surreptitiously invading the provinces of physicians and
surgeons, and alluring the populace under the specious pretense of giving
advice in physic and surgery gratis. Which fatal delusion readily ensnared
the ignorant vulgar, who could not be sensible of their gross ignorance and
manifest incapacity for such an undertaking, nor apprehend that these very
bountiful gentry, took care to tax their medicines with their invaluable
advice; so that their prescriptions (of which it must be confessed they are
always most liberal) are now charged infinitely more than their real value, or
what those of physicians and surgeons, (though of more intrinsic worth, being
certainly better adapted to particular exigencies, to the constitution and the
indications of cure,) might be made up and sold for. And thus by iniquitously
enhancing the prices of remedies and giving them in unnecessary abundance, they
clandestinely acquired unmerited fees, equal to those justly due to the most
regularly educated and most experienced physicians or surgeons.

That this is the present case, every intelligent, candid apothecary must
confess. And these fallacies might be further evinced beyond dispute, were the
generality to be made sensible of the just rates of medicines and the most
monstrous, extravagant bills they are frequently charged. To see two drachms of
Sal p^unel not worth a penny, disguised with some insignificant color, and an
unintelligible, pompous title, and sold for sixteen pence, must surely move
your contempt and indignation! Who without abhorrence and surprise, could see
sham: Gasgoin's powder, without a grain of bezoar, sold at five shilling the
dram, when (by omitting that only dear ingredient) it could not have cost the
maker one penny? Yet these and many such like impositions are daily pract^sed
by mercenary quacks, and by them judged necessary and their undoubted right, on
account of their extraordinary skill, great care, frequent visits, and trouble
in attending and prescribing. I have known a gentleman's bill, who sickened on
Monday and died the Wednesday following, amount to above five pounds, though his
careful apothecary had but a street's breadth to cross between his shop and the
patient's lodging. It is more than probable, that if the unhappy sufferer took
to the value of his bill in medicines, it was the cause of his death, and
would, though he had the most athletic constitution; but to acquit his apothecary
of this murder, every one of the profession must confess, that no man could
well require or consume medicines to that value in the time. Then what
physician could expect so much for his attendance in the ordinary manner for so
long?

It must be allowed that all artists have a just right to charge upon their
wares, the necessary expenses and trouble that attend the preparing and vending
them; but those of apothecaries in the sale of their commodities without doors,
they have unnecessarily and unjustly brought upon themselves, for the most
part; so let the world judge their merit, in imposing such an iniquitous tax
upon the public.

Some perhaps will in goodnature, urge in favor of their worthy apothecary,
that for a bill of ten pounds he is often put off with five or six. A modest,
humble creature! His merit as well as demerit, is best known to himself. -- It
is true some apothecaries may think themselves well paid with half their bill,
and it is not improbable they often are too well. For while they can swell
their accounts to what size they please, by the quantities of medicines they
prescribe, and charging what they will, it is likely care will be taken to suit
the bill to the humor of the customer, so that if he should pay but a fourth
part, they are sure to be no losers. But which of them will remit one penny of
their bill on their own accord, be it ever so highly rated, to such as do not
wrangle for it? And is not whatsoever ever they receive over and above the real
value of the medicines justly disposed of, the most base and wicked extortion?
-- Such apothecaries would probably join in the impious breathings of GARTHS
Diasenna, if they thought their goods were too low rated.

Thrice happy were those golden days of old,
When dear as Burgundy ptisans were sold;
When patients chose to die with better will,
Than live to pay the apothecary's bill.
And cheaper than for our assistance call,
Might go to Aix or Bourbon spring and fall.
Dispensatory, Cant. iii. The extraordinary, unlimited gain arising from these
horrid usurpations, has now tempted the apothecaries utterly to forsake their
proper and immediate office and duty. For instead of pursuing the true means of
learning pharmacy, (reading the Works of the celebrated writers upon that
subject, such being generally in Greek or Latin, languages to which most
dealers in drugs are entire strangers,) they have totally neglected and
forsaken it, and in the room of such authors furnished themselves with only
some vile English dispensatory, the despicable cob-webs of some poor illiterate
wretch, who quacked for a livelihood and spun these paultry traps for ignorant,
unwary Flies. Such were the memorable star-mongers and voluminous quacks,
Culpeper and Salmon, and the erroneous, conceited scriblers, Quincy and
Alleyne; whose dispensatories, practices of physic, and other such like
fallacious quack-books, (which will not bear reading by any that have read the
originals, being calculated only for such mean, illiterate reptiles, as addict
themselves to that vile, pernicious Trade of quacking,) can but prompt a man to
think he understands physic, and practice it, when a better education must
convince him of the contrary, and make him tremble at the thoughts of the
stupendous task.

Thus has Pharmacy been perverted and debased. For though held by the ancients in
the second rank, yet is it now deemed the last and meanest of the three
branches; and indeed under the present mismanagement and depravity, it may of
all trades be reckoned the vilest and most despicable; and instead of being
useful, it is become apparently destructive to society. A footman or porter may
now adays pass for an apothecary, we see shops daily served and attended by
such, or ignorant women. I have known an apothecary's shop served by a journey
man of a certain mean mechanic trade, who knew not a letter in the alphabet.
Nay, a wretch who conversed more with brutes than men; the stable-tender or
groom of a certain eminent apothecary, has been exalted from rubbing of horses
heels, to attending his master's table, and thence to wiping of compters and
pounding mortars; and being translated from his master's to a shop of his own,
acquired so much craft as to pass for an apothecary, lived in repute among his
neighbors for many years, and died not long since in very considerable
circumstances. Hence the calling is become so vile and scandalous, that few,
besides the meaner sort, put their children to learn it, and so contemptible
are those after a most servile and tedious apprenticeship, that a journeyman
tailor, or shoemaker, or any of the meanest handy-craft trades, shall get
better wages than a journey man apothecary, of ever so good understanding in
his profession, the most ignorant being capable of serving most of our common
shops, which consists chiefly in retailing medicines made up by a nominal
druggist, as incapable of preparing, as an apothecary of prescribing them
justly; or bought from a poor, ignorant herb-gatherer, who both frequently sell
one thing for another of ever so different qualities, which impositions are
implicitly over-looked by master and man; neither thinking the knowledge of
simple or compound medicines material, or necessary, nor their preparation or
composition his proper occupation, they lay themselves out for practicing
physic and surgery; for which as well as their own profession, the reading a
false English dispensatory is reckoned a sufficient qualification. So, quacking
being the principal business of a modern apothecary, he generally goes through
that himself, therefore needs no judicious emanuensis, any raw-boy being soon
made capable of the ordinary business of his shop; for which reason, rather
than pay journeyman's wages, apprentices are multiplied at any rate, and at all
hazards. Whence we come to have more apothecaries' shops than any city in
Europe in proportion: We are within eight or ten equal in number with those of
Paris, which I think is allowed to be six times as populous as Dublin.

But this fatal degeneracy has now made such a progress, that we really forget
or know not what we should be. For regardless of the worth and dignity of our
art and of the public benefit, the apothecaries have neglected and abandoned
it, and in the vain pursuit of another, (like Aesop's dog) quitted the real
substance for an empty shadow; so, losing their art, have dwindled into vile,
fallacious quacks, vain and audacious pretenders to physic and surgery, and
destructive hawkers of medicine. The very method of educating youth in this
calling, is either quite forgotten, or, so far perverted and changed from what
it must have been heretofore, that it is by great accident if ever we happen to
see any one of common understanding in that profession* few having more than
the undeserved name of apothecary, and that only because he lived in some mean,
servile station for a time, with one of tha^ appellation. These pretenders are
above the ordinary business and attendance of a shop; that with then is quite
out of the question; they fly at higher game You may see some of these would-be
doctors in all parts of the town in quest of prey. One dressed with all the
formality of a prig, another affecting a dirty slovenly mien, and an unnatural,
sullen grimmace, instead of the natural gravity which must necessarily possess
men of understanding in the important practice of physic. The first shall
assume a most pedantic, dogmatic air; the second, an illfeigned, awkward,
hippocratic leer: and either shall smell, taste, or inspect excrements, examine
the visage and tongue, and feel the pulse with great solemnity; then, in a long
spun, uncouth jargon of ill-chosen, unintelligible, technical words, enough to
raise the admiration and puzzle all the nurse-keepers in Christendom, shall ask
a poor languishing patient, a set of tedious, impertinent, commonplace
questions, which he cannot possibly understand, and consequently cannot answer.
But the wily quack, with a self-sufficient look, and a weighty, revolving humh!
-- cries, so, -- ay, -- very well, -- hemh, -- I thought so, -- I apprehend
you, and so forth. Then armed with fatal pen, ink, and paper, he prescribes
largely, some stinking, mothered waters, fermented sirrups, pernicious burning
spirits, ungrateful, medicated brandy-juleps G. Harvey.
, or at best, unwholesome and unsavory punch, which the prescriber (to whom
indeed their worth is solely known) calls specific or alexipharmic, and takes
care often to repeat, because he would not have his patient die for want of a
cordial, (as it is termed) or rather, that he may sell his wares and have an
opportunity of charging for his visits; though he does not know, but he hereby in
effect signs the poor sufferer's death-warrant, though he meant only to draw a
small bill in his own favor. Yet ask this mighty sham-doctor, how the meanest
compositions in his shop are made? whence this or the other simple ingredient?
what it is distinguishing marks and characteristics? or the like; I will venture
to answer for him rather than betray his ignorance, he will confess he bought
them from some hon^st druggist. No, no; he does not stoop to such mean things,
he practices physic; like GARTH'S Colon,

In trifling show his tinsel talent lies,
And form the want of intellects supplies.
In aspect grand and goodly he appears,
Revered as patriarchs in primaeval years.
Hourly his learned impertinence affords,
A barren superfluity of words.
The patients ears remorseless he assails,
Murders with jargon where his medicine fails.
Dispens. Cant. ii. Let us now take a further view of such an apothecary and
see how he can teach pharmacy.

The apprentice of such a master, begins with a small smattering of grammar
rules, and sometimes none; which he (least Tyro should soon discover his
ignorance and illiterature, or in time out do him) judges sufficient. His fund
of sense, genius, or other abilities, are never considered, being indeed but
trifling to a modern Apothecary, for a little acquired craft may make a mere
block-head, or even an Idiot, pass for an Apothecary. His apprenticeship
commences, with the servile drudgery of the most abject slave; as for
instruction of any kind he must not expect it, his master, who shines among his
nurse-keepers and co-equals, had none: So that to learn his trade, the only
prospect left, is to follow the good example of master, which in this instance
is not attended with much difficulty, and therefore requires but few documents.
For although he deigns to suffer his vassal to make up some few physicians
prescriptions, (out of pure complaisance to the elder brothers of the faculty
of physic, or insuperable love of pelf,) yet he never sullies his own delicate
hands with any preparation; his fingers are made for nobler purposes, feeling
of pulses, (in other words) picking of pockets. Nor does he think it needful he
should, when from certain half bred or mungrel apothecaries, falsely called
druggists, he can buy almost every preparation or composition, or rather
substitutes for any, cent per cent. cheaper than any honest man can make them;
nothing need be wanting while there is any thing of the same or like appearance
in the shop. The poor deluded boy is told, that master by experience knows this
or the other base and foreign substitute to be equal, if not the same, with
whatever he is pleased to vend it for. Thus is he to learn his future
occupation!

At length the slavish apprenticeship ended, the miserable, unedisied drudge of
a vile quack is now become a master. -- Of what? -- Why of a shop only
forsooth. -- See him already by example, if not by precept, thorough paced, not
only in the little mean insinuating artifices and tricks of quacks and ordinary
haberdashers of drugs; but likewise imbued with the base penury and sordid
craft of pinching on the one hand the industrious wretch, who for want of
better employment seeks a miserable livelihood, by gathering the herbs or
reptiles of the earth, and extorting on the other, an exorbitant profit from
the pitiful farthing of the most necessitous. Having observed it needful while
an apprentice, he chiefly studied the asiucia medica, the querks and artifices
of physic-^obbers, rather than the necessary qualifications of a good
apothecary, to which he is yet a stranger. He therefore apes something of the
dress and mien of a physician, well knowing, that esteem is oftener gained by
artifice and outward appearance, than by real worth ^r merit; and then by
fawning, cringing, dissimulation, and the like, gains a set of acquaintance and
customers in low life, by whom he is extolled, till, by degrees or accident, he
rises a step higher, and so is soon (like Moliere's faggot-maker, though not
always by stripes) persuaded to think himself a Doctor. His customers he now
calls patients, in imitation of his superiors, and had he called them
sufferers, the appellation would be still more expressive and significant,

His sole care is now to vend the destructive magazine of perishable
shop-trumpery, which is not very difficult to effect, when the quack has pushed
himself into some repute with the vulgar, among whom he must have many
Jack-calls, by whom the skilful physicians and surgeons are artfully decried
and falsely vilified, who might by abstinence, diet, air, or exercise, or by
dexterity of hand or bandage, perhaps without the use of a shop-medicine, cure
sundry maladies, for which the physic-shopkeeper bears them mortal enmity, as
they do not promote his trade unnecessarily, with the usual fallacious
insinuation of his unparallelled skill and judgment in physic and surgery,
and his thorough acquaintance with the practice of both, from the number of
recipes, which come into his hands: but above all, the cheapness of his advice
and attendance; being said to charge no more than the bare prices of a few
necessary, cheap Remedies; which is the principal recommendation. His character
thu^ established, he has frequent opportunities of putting off his commodities
at any rate, and this he take care to improve by raising so many dangers and
difficulties, that he keeps his poor sufferers in as wretche^ a state of dread
and dependence, as the wicked an^ ignorant quack Coctier did the timorous king
(...) France Lewis xi. Mezeray;
. These abject vassals of an usurping apthecary, (to palliate, cure, or prevent
some imagina^^ or fictitious distemper,) are never to cease takin^ medicines,
being persuaded they cannot live an ho^^ longer than they are crammed with some
unnecessa^^ nauseous part or other of his decaying shop-lumber, t^^^ after many
filthy, expensive drenches, harrassed natu^^ sinks under the oppressive weight,
or by her own strength breaks the bonds, and he is pleased to take the honor of
the cure, and to pronounce them in statu sano. If a bleeding or any chirurgical
operation should be wanting, provided it be such as his ignorance and
incapacity may not too plainly appear in, and wherewith he may consume plenty
of Styptics, Litus's, Balsams, Liniments, Ointments and Plasters, it is done by
the apothecary, cito, tuto, and jucunde, and that too without the least help of
a surgeon; which the sick are told to be quite unnecessary, as physicians in
other cases; the fees of both being pretended to be saved by the quack. As a
thrifty ale wife, to avoid excise, gave her customers ale gratis, paying two
pence for the toast and nutmeg put into each quart.

Moreover to confirm the populace in their vain notions of their apothecary's
judgment in physic, he has generally the artifice to become the basest
plagiary. For among the customers, he uses on every occasion, or rather abuses,
the prescriptions, and even borrows the very words of the family-physician.
Thus he steals the doctor from himself! (if I may be allowed the phrase)
insomuch, that when by force he is called in and consulted, it is ten to one
the prejudiced patients will say, that the doctor said and directed the very
same things which the worthy apothecary did before, in this or some other case,
which they think, or perhaps are told, was the same.

I cannot here overlook that most abominable practice of some apothecaries and
druggists, who not only personate one another, by assuming the name of their
neighboring brethren, in order to steal their customers, but a certain
audacious quack has been known to personate a late physician of his name, and
to recommend himself after as an apothecary. These base artifices lead them to
make repetitions of prescriptions which they never saw, being on another's
file. How fatal such horrid guess-work must often prove, to the patient and
proscriber, is easily judged; and how late a gentleman of figure suffered by
this sort of chicane, as well as his physician, I shall not say, lest it should
too far injure a certain pert, young quack apothecary, whose rashness in this
instance, will, I hope, prove a warning to him for the future.

Thus admirably equipped with craft and artifice, and with impudence and
assurance, (the inseparable attendants of ignorance) this monstrous, amphibious
animal, this wretched cebler in medicine, who has not in reality a single
qualification for a physician or surgeon, nor perhaps even for an
apothecary, vainly pretends to the knowledge of the three, and so takes upon
him the sole care and management of the sick in all distempers and disorders;
acute or chronic, physical or chirurgical cases are all alike to him, well
knowing that his incapacity is not obvious to the unhappy parties concerned! he
hardily persists in his malpractices, being blinded with ignorance, prompted by
avarice, and having his conscience hardened by an early contracted habit of
iniquity, till he has rendered the unhappy sufferers immedicable; and then
(seldom or never before) permits a physician or surgeon to be called in; or
rather, if he can, brings in some poor pretender to, or mercenary tool of,
either profession, to justify his apparent misconduct, or to take the honor of
giving the tortured sufferer the Coup de Grace.

I shall beg leave to give one melancholy instance of this kind our of many. A
certain unfortunate man, who too much confided in the boasted skill of a bold
presumptuous quack, committed himself to his care for a certain, slight, secret
disorder: The apothecary judging it the only way to make a penny of the
patient, proceeded to administer medicines by wholesale. For within the compass
of three months he gave him above forty doses of mercurial physic, with sundry
other costly drenches, which brought a considerable flux of humors upon the
affected part: to which he then made diverse unctuous applications, till at
length it became cancerous. Lastly he had recourse to salivation, but with no
better success, the patient grew sensibly worse: Yet the Quack to dispel the
growing doubts and suspicions of the poor abused man, called in a reputed
physician, to justify his mal-practice, and assist him in the cure. The doctor
being unable to satisfy the unhappy sufferer in his distrust of the quack, he
called in better assistance, and had his life with great difficulty saved, by
the amputation of the distempered member. Notwithstanding all this gross abuse
of the miserable patient, this unworthy apothecary, who may be presumed to be
the principal cause of the greatest evil attending this case, makes a most
extravagant large bill, with a charge of twenty shillings to his coadjutor the
doctor, annexed.

By these and such like unnatural transgres^^ons, is the apothecary led out of
the way of his du^y, and bred an utter stranger to all parts of his proper
calling. By this vile craft he gets his bread, no wonder then he should be
firmly attached to it. This is all he learns, all he knows, all he practices,
all he teaches: And this he finds sufficient to recommend him: He indeed
generally takes care to secure an interest in some party or club, whether
religious or politic, no matter with how little reason, provided he espouses
and defends their principles with a good stock of blind zeal and violence, he
is sure of the Society's favor, so he may securely neglect his true
profession. He therefore employs his whole time in quacking or stroling over
the town in quest of prey. For to avoid the dangerous imputation of having
nothing to do, no practice, (as the phrase is,) he must never be found at home;
not to be seen in his noisome shop except by accident to prescribe for some
sudden emergency, or perhaps sometimes to edify by reading over his own
ill-chosen, stolen recipe's, there carefully filed more for show than use: That
done, he must hurry forth, and rush through the streets as if he had so many
calls, that he cannot tell which first to answer: While the principal part of
his business, furnishing the shop and serving the wretched customers, is left
to some mercenary shamdruggist, a miserable herb-gatherer, and a raw
apprentice. The very Druggist, who in all other nations in Europe is but
Pharmacopela, a mere drug-merchant, is with us, not only a physician and
surgeon, but also a Galenic and Chemic apothecary; a seller of druggs,
medicines, vernices, oils, paints or colors, poisons, etc. a Jack of all
trades, and in truth, master of none -- For bad as the usual education of an
apothecary may be, if it could be yet worse, he may make a good modern druggist
enough. And it is demonstrable, that, among the many who assume that name,
there are not above two in Dublin that have any right to it. These who are, if
possible, worse quacks than the apothecaries, and generally worse qualified in
every respect, were the first who introduced that blackest villainy of
sophisticating, and debasing of medicines to gain fame and applause by
underselling their honest brethren; and you shall now find most of them ready
to make up the prescriptions of physicians and surgeons, brought to them by
the ignorant vulgar, (who alone indeed entrust them with such,) at any rate
they are offered, even though they cannot read them, and though they may be
composed of sundry medicaments to them utterly unknown. How must the unhappy
patient and prescriber suffer, whose prescriptions fall into such unworthy
hands?

Thus wretchedly is pharmacy taught and practiced now adays. How foreign to
the manner of the ancient, true apothecaries, is, I hope, evident from the
foregoing; and how contradictory to reason, justice, and common sense, is, I
believe, to every rational unprejudiced man, obvious. Yet, that under the
present fatal mismanagement, it is, and must continue so, is, I think, most
demonstrable. For a man who takes the greatest pains to learn that art, and
acquires the most extraordinary knowledge, and all the requisite qualifications
therein, and ever so strictly, and diligently attends to the vegular calls of
his profession, and discharges the duty, and proper office of an apothecary, if
he does not most audaciously and adventurously, quack in all cases without
distinction, he is surely deemed but a blockhead, and may remain to the
generality unknown, and starve: or perhaps have the comfort of being reputed,
in his narrow circle of acquaintance, a good, honest fellow, but no apothecary;
that is to say, no quack; and is therefore despised, because, he has the candor
and integrity, not to intermeddle with any business, but his own, nor to
attempt things beyond his sphere. In short it is not such a man that is with us
deemed an apothecary, no, it is the most despicable of all human beings, a
wretch ignorant of all arts, yet pretending to the greatest; a false,
dissembling sycophant, that poor, shallow mimick, or untowardly ape of a
physician, surgeon and apothecary, the vile, deluding quack! Where then is
the encouragement to excel in this art, when the most ignorant of it, are, by
the generality, preferred, and most esteemed?

I am well apprized that these will appear strange innovations to some of the
brethren, as well as to those who have not only let the pretended apothecaries
into the secrets of their families, but also Indiscreetly committed the care of
their health and lives, into such unworthy hands, and suffered themselves to be
blindly, and implicitly governed by them. Yet even those upon impartial
examination, and serious consideration, will find them literally just and true.
It requires no great depth of sagacity to sound these ambitious pretenders, and
to find how unfit and incapable they are, to practice the profession, whose
name they undeservedly bear, and how much more that of physic and surgery.
How many are there among us so palpably ignorant, in a most material branch of
their professed art, as to be daily imposed upon, not only by their druggist,
but even by the simple herb-gatherer, who both frequently impose upon them, one
thing for another, though ever so different in their nature and properties? Is it
not notorious, that thapsia or deadly carrot, for turpeth, gout-wort, or herb
gerard, for master-wort, English black maidenhair, for the black and true
maidenhairs, spurious germander, for ground pine, burnet, for saxifrage, male
fern, for osmond-royal, fig-wort, for solomon's seal, wallpepper or stone crop,
for small houseleek, cypress for savin, stinking black horehound, for the
white, bugle, for betony, and many such like pernicious impostures, are daily
palmed upon the ignorant apothecaries, notwithstanding the most apparent
disparity in their outward appearance, as well as in their virtues and effects?
And is not the common excuse of our apothecaries, upon the examiners condemning
any drugg or medicine, in their shops, that they bought it at an high price
from Mr. such an one, a druggist? Did not about sixty apothecaries and
druggists, oppose the Bill for preventing Frauds and Abuses in Pharmacy, and
jointly assert many gross absurdities and falsehoods, and make many most
frivolous equivocations, in their case offered to the House of Peers, in the
year 1735? did they not therein call castor a cod, and cassia fruit a cane,
like a sugar cane? and what less than the darkest ignorance, or the most
consummate perversity, could thus prompt them to trifle with so august an
assembly? Did not two apothecaries of some eminence, in the year 1739,
advertise Mrs. Stephens's medicines, for sale, long before the materials could
possibly be had, or prepared? and did not these worthy brethren afterward
employ a certain, abandoned, infamous quack, (once well known to watchwen, and
midnight magistrates, to bailiffs, proctors, churchwardens, etc.) to vilify
him, whom they only suspected, to have detected their abominable deceit? In
charity, I hope, and am willing to believe, all this, and more, the effects of
pure, confirmed ignorance; which, though equally pernicious with design, there is
not at present the least prospect of removing: For since it is not worth while
to spend any time or pains, to learn a disregarded profession, by which so
little profit is to be gained, as by true Pharmacy, (the bare name being enough
to garnish the quack, nay, to dub him a doctor in his own, and the vulgar
eyes,) it can hardly be otherwise expected, as the livelihood of most
apothecaries, now adays, depends upon their hawking about and quacking with
such of their weak, unguarded neighbors, as suffer themselves to fall a prey
to their perfidious craft and avarice.

It is most wonderful, and to those who are not thoroughly acquainted with the
proper office and duty of an apothecary, inconceivable, what an abject state of
depravity and degeneracy the apothecaries of this age are fallen into; and such
in time must be the case of physic also, from the necessary mutual connection
of each art, with the other: But moreover, it cannot be long worth any man's
while to spend the best part of his life, and much of his fortune, in tedious,
laborious studies, deep and accurate researches, into the most hidden, and
remote recesses of nature, when no distinction is made between him, and so base
a pretender to physic, as an illiterate, unbred apothecary; more especially
when it is in the power of such, to prevent his doing the good he seeks in his
profession, to elude his best skill, and frustrate all his hopes and intentions
of cure, by ignorance, dishonesty, or neglect, which must soon bring him, and
the whole art, into the utmost contempt.

But it is yet more surprising, that these very men should so far have deceived
the public, as to have their pernicious quacking and tampering, with the health
and lives of the people, still countenanced by many persons (in other respects)
of good sense, and some of the best families. To see an hawking apothecary,
that worst kind of mountebank, in dearth of trade, run strolling through the
streets, gaping for prey, must, surely move the contempt and indignation of
every considerate man, who knows how he should be employed. Yet pursue him but
a little further, you will find the cringing vagrant, a still greater object of
your disdain. That learned physician, and ingenious humorist, Dr. Mandeville,
gives the following true and lively portraits of one of these mercenary
seekers. Treatise upon hypochondriac and hysteric passions, p. 216.
"I have seen (says he) an apothecary in an idle afternoon, go to the house of
a person of quality, who made use of him; there happened to be none at home,
but children and servants, who from the highest to the lowest were in perfect
health; if here he came for business, (you will say) he was disappointed, but you
are mistaken; the courteous gentleman, with an engaging familiarity, accosts
every servant in the house, and puts off a purge to the cook, a vomit to the
butler, a box of pills to one of the footmen, and a pot of Lucatellus's balsam
to old nurse. The children absolutely refusing to take any physic, at least
inwardly, he coaxes little master into the use of a charming dentifrice, and a
sweet smelling collyrium, to rince his mouth with after it, that shall preserve
his teeth, and make them look like ivory, though he should eat nothing but sugar
and sweetmeats all the day long; to pretty miss, he will send a lotion for her
hair, and a (cosmetic) paste for her hands, that shall render one as bright as
silver, and the other whiter than snow; with a beautifying wash to the maid,
that assisted in persuading them. The affable Gentleman has every body's good
word; the children are pleased, the servants commend him, my lady is obliged to
him: and ten to one but the first opportunity of driving that way, her coach
stops at his door, and she thanks him for the care he took of her family in her
absence." -- Admirable encouragement to vending the shop trampery at any rate,
unnecessarily! Sure every rational, unprejudiced man, must judge this, and such
like mean artifices of apothecaries, more culpable and more pernicious to the
public, than the paltry harangues of a brawling mountebank, to a rude rabble,
as such only will hear him; whereas the former have recourse to all ranks and
degrees of men.

How the more rational and better sort of people come to acquiesce under these
heavy grievances, in the most tender point, and suffer the greatest impositions
in matters of the last moment, without ever having even attempted a redress, is
astonishing: But as it must now be owing to their not knowing the abuses and
cheats, long custom having made them familiar, it is to be hoped, that, when
the evil consequences thereof are laid open, every good man will concur in
taking some measures to prevent them for the future.

Sure there is nothing more inconsistent with common reason, than the taking
apothecaries from their proper office and station! I never saw a patient that
was not desirous the apothecary should himself prepare whatsoever medicines,
should be prescribed for him; and if he is employed in quacking, and his time
devoted to that alone, how is it possible he can see his customers justly
served? But if none other evil had arose from the taking apothecaries from
their occupation, and encouraging them to quack, and thereby to neglect their
immediate office and duty, than subjecting the public to the grievous tax, of
consuming as much of the apothecaries drugs, and at such a rate, as they think
proper, methinks that should have deterred men from it sufficiently. Should any
of the most reputable and creditable artists, or tradesmen besides, be employed
in furnishing a family with their goods, will any one say to such, come and see
me, examine mine house, and send me as much of your commodities as you think
requisite for me? I believe no man, in his senses, could be so weak: And yet,
why should people repose more confidence in apothecaries, than in other
tradesmen, in the like instances? they are but men, and although there may yet be
among them some not unworthy of Sparta, in her primitive purity, yet this is
too great a trust, to be reposed in mere mortals: For they have shops like
other tradesmen, and these too furnished with perishable wares, which they
must, therefore, vend the more expeditiously: Had they capacities for
practicing physic or surgery, they ordinarily have no gratuity allowed them
for the supposed good they do, or for their trouble, but what they procure for
themselves, by charging it on their medicines, which, with giving them in
great, unnecessary abundance, they assuredly take care of, being left entirely
their own carvers. And were they as well qualified for that weighty undertaking
as Hippocrates, it is hardly to be expected that they should be such saints, as
to refuse or neglect procuring payment or recompense for their extraordinary
labors, or what they call their art, especially while it is left at their
option; the ready way to effect which, is, by stuffing the unhappy sufferer
with much nauseous, and (probably) unnecessary or improper medicines, even in
such slight disorders, as nature, without their impertinent interruptions,
could better throw off, by her unassisted powers. -- "If a fish-monger, or
poulterer, (says Mandeville,) should go to a customer's house after dinner,
when the master and mistress were abroad, advise the servants, one to a fine
salmon, the other to a dozen of turkey pouts, and send them home accordingly,
would you not think them very impudent rascals?" Most certainly: And yet the
officious quack apothecary is equally guilty with either, both having put off
their wares, where they knew they were not at all wanting or necessary, with
this aggravation, that the former gave some things useful, and of known value,
but the latter things entirely useless, at best, of small intrinsic worth; to
the taker, of none, unless by accident, and perhaps very dangerous and hurtful.

The cause of the groundless notions usually entertained, of the skill and
judgment of apothecaries, in physic and surgery, and the cheapness of their
advice, is a vain, vulgar prejudice, industriously propagated by artful quacks,
and their servile tools and emissaries. From the apothecaries, seeing the
practice of physicians and surgeons, in sundry distempers and disorders,
with the great numbers of the prescriptions of both, which necessarily come
into their hands, it is insinuated and imagined, that they must understand the
whole art of healing in all it is parts, as well as those who have made it their
sole study and practice, for many years: And this is the reason, why
apothecaries are usually first called to the sick, by which means, they are in
fact rendered the jack-calls of physicians and surgeons; in as much as it is
manifest, that they often make work for both, by multiplying patients, and
rendering many cases worse, and more inveterate, than when they were first
consulted, if the unhappy sufferers have the good fortune to outlive their
expensive, injudicious tamperings for any time.

It may now perhaps be advanced as heretofore, upon another occasion See
Observe. on the physician's Bill, 1725.
, and it must be allowed, that a thorough bred, experienced apothecary, who
knows the faces, qualities, and virtues, of simple and compound medicines, (to
which I must add, who understands anatomy, and the animal economy, and knows
the histories, causes, and diagnostics of distempers, without which, he can
never be capable of making just observations on the effects of remedies, or
curing diseases,) may be as safely confided in, as the graduate of any
university: And the same may be said of an old nurse-keeper. -- It is certain,
a gang of lawless thieves and vagabonds, founded the greatest commonwealth in
the world, and promulged the wisest human laws for the punishment and
suppression of vice, and the encouragement of virtue Vertot's Romans Revol.
. But sure we are not to expect the like from every set of Benditti? Nor suffer
any evil to be done, that good may accrue? Why then should the present race of
apothecaries, who neither have, nor can pretend to the requisite qualifications
of physicians, or surgeons, be allowed to sport with the health, lives, and
fortunes of the public, at their discretion? When it is evident, they should
not be trusted with the care of the sick, in any disorder, nor even in their
own profession, till they have first given open proofs of their understanding
it. Nothing should induce you to give any men such an unreasonable, and unjust
toleration. Our happy constitution is such, that no man, or body of men, can
make a monopoly of any art, science, or trade: for a meritorious person,
amesnable to the laws, may be admitted to profess, or practice any occupation
whatsoever. If any man is conscious of his knowledge, or capacity in medicine,
he may present himself to the college of physicians, and sue for a license to
practice, which, having answered the proper examitions, they are obliged to
grant, they cannot refuse: So that an apothecary, or any other person, found
duly qualified, may obtain a license, to practice physic: But we find none of
our apothecaries have, in any instance, legally qualified themselves for such a
weighty undertaking, most contenting themselves with no better a Diploma than a
shop, garnished with sundry empty, painted, and labelled vessels, with it is
windows adorned with monstrous, or strange, useless animals, as tortoises,
toads, etc. how then are they to be trusted in matters of such importance? Are
they not rather to be industriously avoided, and justly despised?

To attain to a competent knowledge in pharmacy, and afterward to discharge the
office, justly and faithfully, must require more time than apothecaries can
properly spare, who attempt arts, for which they have laid no sort of
foundation: And as none of them, have performed any of the requisites for a
physician, or surgeon, and few, or none, even those for an apothecary, I
think it as arrogant, and as impudent in an apothecary, to presume, to practice
physic or surgery, or to pretend to any skill or judgment in either, as it
would be in the most illiterate printer or bookseller, to pretend to the
Mathematics, or any other branch of Philosophy or Literature, merely because he
printed sundry learned books, in these sciences, for sale; or, for a
colorgrinder, (to use Mandeville's words,) to painting, only because he grinds
the several colors, and perhaps prepares the palate and pencils for his
master, and sees him frequently paint. The apothecary, it is true, may
frequently see patients in all manner of distempers and disorders, hear and see
the most judicious physicians and surgeons, accurately examine their various
complaints, may peruse their several prescriptions, nay prepare and administer
them. The printer likewise may see the best manuscripts of the most celebrated
authors in all branches of Philosophy, may print and reprint them, and have
thousands of impressions to dispose of: And the color-grinder also, may daily
see his master execute his best skill and most sublime designs in drawing, and
may (by his directions) make up and lay out in due order upon the palate, the
several proper colors, and also provide the several necessary pencils and tools
for painting the same. And yet, notwithstanding, each must probably remain in
the darkest ignorance, and continue utter strangers to physic, philosophy, and
painting, until regularly initiated into the rudiments, and duly and
methodically instructed in the several rules of the respective arts; and all
that such may be said to know in them, are a few technical words, learned by
rote or accident, which can serve only to impose upon the ignorant. These
impostors, it is certain, may shine among their kind, and even deceive men of
sense and learning in other matters for a while, but they can never stand the
test of proper judges. Happy indeed, were it for the public, had the pretenders
to these three arts, been equally conspicuous to the world. If so, it is more
than probable, there would be more botches observed in the practice of the
pretenders to physic and surgery, (to say nothing of downright murders,
which are usually hid by the friendly grave-digger) than there are to be seen
in the nocturnal works of the printers of last speeches and ballads, or in the
vile, insignificant daubings of the pretenders to painting on the paltry signs
in all the streets in town.

As to the cheapness of the advice of apothecaries in physic or surgery, it
is a most false and deceitful insinuation. It Is value will best appear by
considering their qualification. If it appears they have none, as I think it
must, what is their advice worth? Should it not be avoided as a pest? I know it
is objected by some, and made a handle by quacks, that the fees of physicians
and surgeons are too high, and that people in low life, cannot purchase
their attendance or advice. I have in some measure answered these objections
already, Page 31.
I shall endeavor to obviate them further. It is true, there is no nation in
the world at this time, that so justly prizes the merits of physicians and
surgeons, or so nobly rewards both, as Great Britain and Ireland: For from
our natural freedom, no restraint has been laid on rewarding just deserts in
any instance. Yet notwithstanding, there are no people in Europe, even where
fees are lowest, that may be better attended than those of these Kingdoms, did
not officious, selfish quacks interfere.

There is no set of men, who deserve better of the public, than physicians and
surgeons; none have been and are more publicly and privately beneficent. The
extraordinary munificence of Dr. Radcliffe, and Sir Hans Sloane in England; of
our Sir Patrick Dun, and Dr. Stevens; with many others, are monuments which
must attest this truth to futurity. And I can affirm on the other hand, that I
never met with an object so despicable, that could not command the advice and
attendance of numbers of physicians, and surgeons of the first rank, upon
its own terms: And that I have often known physicians to refuse fees from
tradesmen of good circumstances, and yet attend them constantly for many days
after, without any other obligation that that of humanity. Is not this much
better than to be subject to pay rigorously the smaller fees, and to have the
bodies liable to be detained, dead or alive, for payment; as we hear it is in
some neighboring nations? Our poor have no reason to complain in this
instance, of any thing mere than the oppression of quacks. The houses of our
physicians and surgeons are open to, and they are as ready to succor, the
poor sick as the opulent. Are not our Infirmary and Hospitals attended gratis?
-- It were well for apothecaries, as well as surgeons in low life, that none
but real objects could partake of these Charities. --

III. I now come to my third head, namely, to lay open some of the most
considerable frauds and abuses of apothecaries and druggists, and to point out
some of the most pernicious sophistications of medicines, with the evil
consequences thereof.

It is commonly said, that physicians and apothecaries kill more than they
cure. -- However ludicrous or satirical this phrase may sound, it is a
melancholy consideration, that the ill-natured sarcasm often proves just, and
is likely to continue so, until the apothecaries and druggists, are brought
under some proper regulations, which may restrain them from hawking and
quacking, and confine them within the just limits of their respective callings.
For into such an abyss of depravity and degeneracy, are these men fallen, by
their grasping at matters beyond their sphere; that now (through ignorance or
dishonesty) there is scarce a medicine of any worth to be had genuine; the
knowledge of many of the most valuable simples is utterly lost, and in their
room, some vile and foreign counterfeit, as quacks for apothecaries, foisted
upon the unwary Public. For corruption by long impunity hardens the offenders,
multiplies the number of the guilty, and is now so far from being deemed
scandalous in this way, that it is really become fashionable.

Before I proceed to wilful errors, it may not be impertinent, first, to expose
some arising from the ignorance and illiterature of apothecaries, being
probably the principal causes of many more, and which may produce as evil
consequences as any others.

The works of the most authentic medical writers, are in Arabic, Greek, or
Latin. The best known names of distempers, as well as of medicines, the exotic
druggs especially, are in these or some other foreign Languages, often
compound; and most of the technical words in medicine, are also compound, though
mostly of Greek and Latin. We do not as yet know an English name for one
vegetable in twenty. For as physic took it is origin in the eastern parts of the
world, and is not as yet truly naturalized to our tongue and idiom; it has
hitherto been found so uncertain and difficult, to reduce the terms of art, and
names of medicaments, into any other tongue than the Latin, properly and
expressively, that all the colleges of physicians in Europe, have not only been
obliged to give their dispensatories in Latin, but in many to admit an entire
Greek word or phrase, as being least ambiguous, most expressive and
significant. And this is the principal Reason for writing, extemporaneous
prescriptions also in Latin. This made it necessary for apothecaries to
understand the learned languages; and they were in all ages sensible of it;
until of late, some hirelings sprang up, who, finding what a propensity people
had to quackcry; judged they might scribble that way for the vulgar, to gain a
livelihood, and so presumed to translate the works of the learned in physic,
into the vulgar tongue; which false, pretended trannslations, being seldom or
never read by any that understand the originals, have passed with their
manifold errors unobserved to this Day. Among these erroneous, hackney
translators, the most celebrated among the apothecaries at present, I may say
the most in fashion, is the late famous Dr. Quincy, a Quondam apothecary of
London. Who it is said wrote for bread in a Jail. What right he might have had
to annex M. D. to his name, I have not yet been able to learn with any
certainty; unless he followed the good example of his worthy predecessor
Salmon, who, being called to account for putting these letters after his name,
upon the specious title pages of his many volumes of fulsome falsehood and
nonsense, it is said, declared he did not mean them for Medicinae Doctor, but
for Medicamentorum Donator. In which sense Mr. Quincy, and every other
apothecary, has, no doubt, without leave of an University, a right to use them.

The ignorance of the present set of apothecaries, and their unacquaintance
with the learned languages, puts them under a necessity, instead of observing
the original London Dispensatory, and preparing and dispensing their medicines
thereby, as the KING'S Proclamation prefixed to it enjoins, to use a spurious
translation of that Dispensatory by the aforesaid Quincy; in which he has
committed the most gross and dangerous mistakes. For instance, in the Sirup of
Marshmallows, a composition of softening, cooling, pectoral, and diuretic
Herbs, etc. He renders Adiantum album and nigrum (capillary herbs, called black
and white Maiden-hairs) black and white Hellebores, an harsh, drastic,
purgative root, and an acrid and almost caustic and vomitive one, in the room
of mild, safe, balsamic Plants, so plainly repugnant to the intended virtues of
that medicine! He has rendered sesquiunciam, one ounce and an half, half an
ounce, even in a composition, wherein there are above six pounds sterling
difference in the expense of that medicine, when dispensed by the Dispensatory,
and the same done by his translation; besides the virtue of the remedy's being
abated in proportion to what is omitted of the principal ingredient. The same
author leaves out several things prescribed by the College Dispensatory, in
many compositions, omits directing the several parts of simples thereby
directed to be used, and in short, commits many unpardonable errors and
omissions too tedious to enumerate, which are swallowed implicitly by the
ignorant and illiterate, to the unspeakable detriment of the public. In another
of his pharmaceutic works, His Praelectiones pharmac. by Dr. Shaw, Lect. ix.
he teaches the apothecary how to substitute, and gives even a list of such
things as he justifies the substitution of for others. Among these he says,
that balsam capivi may be given for balm of gilead; styrax, for balm of tolu;
saffron for bezoar; bole for dragon's blood, for carthamus seed mustard seed,
and other such like shocking incoherencies. Yet all these, however dangerous
and destructive to society they may prove, are in some sort excusable in these
who could have known no better; at least they are more pardonable than the many
wilful frauds and corruptions, which the apothecaries and druggists, have been
so long accustomed to, that like a liar who has told his false tale so often
over, that he at length brings himself to believe it truth) they have so far
hardened their consciences, as to judge the most vile and pernicious
counterfeits, not only justifiable, but as good as the true and genuine
medicines; and so have generously reduced the prices of many compositions, by
half less than any honest man can sell them. By which means, several have
become such absolute strangers to the very faces of medicines, that they have
been known to reject the genuine, when offered to sale, and prefer the most
base substitutes or adulterations.

The unparalleled, naked villainy of the English druggists, which ours, as far
as they can, imitate, is the principal cause of the many abominable
sophistications of medicines. I am well informed, that these avaricious
falsifiers, who are well versed in robbing their KING and COUNTRY, were so
audacious and so impudent, as to declare, in a Body before the British
Parliament; in answer to the preamble of a bill, passed in the reign of KING
GEORGE the first, of GLORIOUS MEMORY, "That they did not vend any unsound, or
adulterate drugs or medicines, to the prejudice of his Majesty's good subjects
of Great Britain; but that all such they sent to IRELAND" -- And they thought,
no doubt, their useless scraps and offals, too good for us; because we find by
woeful experience, that the latter part of their wicked assertion, they daily
verify. For though the British privy council did this unhappy island the justice,
to retort this answer upon the same worthy set of men, when, by the instigation
of their Irish correspondents, they opposed the bill, passed here, in the year
1735, and so, unanimously recommended it to the Royal Assent; yet no means has
hitherto been found, to prevent this being the common sink of all the corrupt,
or decayed drugs of England.

The abuse of the draw-back, given to encourage trade and exportation in
England, proves now a manifest injury to the KING'S Revenues, and an
insuperable impediment to following our trade here honestly; which must
necessarily be destructive of the health and lives of the people of this
kingdom. For the dread of discovery, and due punishment, upon exposing bad
drugs to sale in London, together, with the advantages arising by the draw-back
upon sending them to Ireland, though they were quite rotten and useless, will
always be a motive to infest us with the refuse of all their sortments, the
very cullings of their drugs, nay, the mere sweepings of their
drug-ware-houses. For when a Londoner imports a drug, and pays the duty, he
removes it to a warehouse, and sorts it, and what proves so unsound or decayed,
that he cannot with impunity, or credit, sell there, he transports to Ireland,
swearing it to be within the limited time, and consigning it to a proper
correspondent. It arrives here, the correspondent receives it, pays the duty,
which (if not taxed in our Book of Rates, wherein most drugs are much lower
rated than in England) it is valued upon oath, by the Londoner's directions,
perhaps, not as many pence as it was first valued shillings; the duty is
accordingly paid, and a certificate thereof returned to the London transporter,
who is thereby entitled to draw-back the duty paid at first importation, for so
much as was entered in Ireland; except a small matter not exceeding two and an
half per cent. or thereabouts. So that Rubarb, whose duty upon importation in
England, is six shillings and ten pence the pound, draws back upon exportation
about six shillings and four pence, and most other drugs in like proportion.
For this cause, the most vile drugs, which can escape the examiners in London,
are sent hither; the saving the draw-back, if they got no more for them here,
(where, by the by, a customer is never wanting for such) being a sufficient
encouragement. This is so notorious a practice, that our importers often openly
confess it, and the English merchants are so expert at this trade, that they
send their correspondents invoyces, with the draw-back calculated and deducted
from their accounts. I have known about twenty pounds of damaged Rubarb sent by
a merchant in London, to an apothecary in Dublin, upon commission, with
directions to sell it expeditiously, for whatever he could. And although there
was not a single ounce sound or fit for use in the cargo, yet a certain great
druggist bought it, at about a fourth of the then current price of good Rubarb,
and dyed it to impose upon his customers.

Familiar instances of these abuses, almost every entry of drugs, and I believe
of many other merchandises affords. I shall mention but a remarkable one made
by a late celebrated druggist, about the year 1728. He imported eight hundred
weight of Jesuits Bark, entered it at the custom-house, valued upon oath, at a
groat per pound. The land-officer, Mr. Craven.
surprised at this strange undervaluation, not knowing the quality of the drug;
before he would make a seizure, (which, if undervalued, he had a right to)
advised with that faithful, eminent chemist, the ingenious Mr. Maple, who, upon
examining it, assured him, that it was not worth one penny a pound, having not
a single characteristic of the drugg it was entered for, by which it might be
even known. -- This instance shows the cause, in confirmation of the
observations of some learned physicians, Harris Pharm. Anti-Empir. p. 190.
why one dram or two of Peruvian Bark succeeded better formerly, than some
ounces now a days.

Thus is the KING most ungenerously robbed of his just revenues, and thus are
the health and lives of his subjects endangered, or destroyed, by the
iniquitous confederacy of the English and Irish Druggists, particularly in
their gross abuse of that great encouragement to trade, a draw-back. And as
such vile pernicious stuff as this is daily imported and sold by mercenary men
among us, who have nothing to recommend them but their underselling every fair
dealer, it is plain a faithful apothecary, who chooses the best commodities at
any rate, for the good of his customers, and his own private satisfastion, must
appear a most extravagant extortioner to all such as cannot distinguish the
qualities of Medicines, and consequently, he cannot expect a livelihood by his
profession, if he persists in candor and integrity!

Besides the many impositions we are liable to in this way from abroad, there
are many of our own manufacture equally pernicious to the public, of which give
me leave to instance but a sew.

When Gum Ammoniac in the crude, impure mass is sold at about ten shillings the
pound, yet is the plaster (made by dissolving it in vinegar of squills and
juice of hemlock, straining and boiling it to a proper consistence, in which it
loses very considerably of it is weight, besides the trouble and expense that
necessarily attends the operation) so debased, as to be sold for less than a
fourth of the price of the Gum.

Calbanum has suffered the same fate. It is a substance of much the like
texture with the former, and must be strained or otherwise depurated, to render
it fit for use, by which it suffers much the same loss with the Ammoniac: Yet
notwithstanding, so long have people been accustomed to fraud in this medicine,
and so familiar is the substitute now become, that the generous, genuine Gum is
utterly rejected by the good-women and others; and so hardened are the very
falsifiers grown in this wicked practice, that the pretended Druggists in
effect confess it; For I have it under the hand of one of them in a Bill of
Rates, that he sells the strained for little more than one third of the price
of the crude Galbanum.

So base is the counterfeit sold for Balsam Capivi, which is a natural tear or
juice issuing upon incision of a certain tree in America, that it is openly
sold with us for less than the King's duty upon importation of that drug.

When such barefaced villainy is committed in the simple drugs, what may we not
expect in the compound Medicines? Since the more compound or mixed a remedy is,
the better opportunity there must be for cheating, by substituting the basest
for the best, or leaving out the dearest and principal ingredient in the
composition, in order to deceive the customers, and undersell the honest
compounder.

To point out all the abuses in this way, must (alas!) be no less than a
comment upon the dispensatory, which would be too tedious and prolix, and by
reason of the difficulty of comprehending the nature or effects of frauds in
Pharmacy, without some knowledge in Physic, as well as a good understanding in
that art, I have chose to mention but ome of the most obvious.

When Jallap Root is sold for six or seven shillings the pound, yet is the
Resin, extracted at great expense and labor, though sixteen ounces of one, will
not afford two ounces of the other, so vilely sophisticated, as to be sold by
our Druggists for two shillings an ounce.

The more compound and expensive a Medicine is, the more art and industry is
used to sophisticate or debase it. Thus the Treacle of Andromachus, which takes
it is name from the physician of Nero the tyrant, who invented it, and the
Mithridate, which takes it is name also from it is royal author Mithridates king
of Pontus, both which have been received into all the Dispensatories, and ever
since deemed the Capital Medicines in all the shops in Europe; and of which the
wise States of Venice have taken such special care in the composition, that
they are not to be dispensed in the republic but under the inspection of
Magistrates appointed for that purpose, whence the former got the common
appellation of Venice-Treacle, because for a long time none was reckoned good
that was not made there; although it is most certain, that it may, and has been,
as justly and faithfully dispensed and prepared here as there, or in any other
place whatsoever: These noble Medicines, which for such a tract of time have
stood the test, and were ever held in the highest esteem, are now fallen into
such disrepute and contempt, through the frequent debasings and adulterations
they have undergone, that it is rare to find either ever prescribed for
internal use by physicians.

The temptations to dishonesty are certainly greater in our trade than in any
other whatsoever, from the prodigious gains and assured secrecy that attend our
worst Deceits. Most are capable of distinguishing frauds in the ordinary
necessaries of life; but as some branch of medicine alone can apprehend those
in Pharmacy, so the apothecaries transgress undiscovered, or even unsuspected,
openly, easily, and securely. Few Medicines have suffered more by the hands of
dishonest operators, than those (once) justly famed compositions, just now
mentioned; the one of which consists of above seventy, the other of about fifty
ingredients, mostly very rare, the products of the most remote parts of the
World, and consequently difficult to be had sound and genuine; yet are both so
wretchedly debased by mercenary artificers, that they are daily openly sold for
less than half the first cost of the true composition: Nay, the very
inscription and seal, clapped upon the Treacle of Venice by the inspecting
magistrates, is now artfully counterfeited in London, and put upon pots or
canisters of their own vile manufacture to deceive the ignorant and unwary; and
this kind you may sometimes see hawked here as well as in England, by a
pretended Venetian sailor, who perhaps never crossed the seas.

It is well known to every physician and good apothecary, that Spirit of
Hart's-horn (properly speaking) consists of nothing more than the volatile
Salt, dissolved in the radical Humidity, and blended with a small portion of
the native exalted oil of that Animal, extracted from his horns by fire,
according to art; and it is celebrated uses and virtues are too well known to
require any panegyric. Yet this most admirable Medicine is now so basely
counterfeited, that the few who have it genuine cannot pretend to sell it
without loss; being undersold by all the avaricious falsifiers of medicines,
who make what they unjustly give that name to, and impose upon the public in
it is room, of no better materials than stale piss, brine, soot, and roche-lime.
And nevertheless this adulteration has so far gained ground and prevailed, that
nothing but the pungent, quick-smelling spirit of piss will go down with the
generality, being so long accustomed to this vile, excrementitious distillment,
which strikes the senses so much more quick and piquant, that they pronounce
the other dead or vapid.

Spirit of Sal Ammoniac is directed to be made with Salt of Tartar; but because
lime is cheaper, and affords more spirit, it is mostly used for it, though the
spirits raised by both are extremely different.

How unequal the effects of true spirit of hart's-horn and that of piss, and
spirit of Sal Ammoniac with salt of Tartar and that with lime, may be upon the
human body, I must leave to the learned in, physic to determine; but this I can
say from actual observation, that true spirit of Hart's-horn and that of Sal
Ammoniac with salt of Tartar, are, in their own natures, truly alkaline, and
produce a considerable contrast, or ebullition, upon mixture with acids: Those
with lime, the contrary -- whence I think it reasonable to judge their
respective virtues and methods of acting extremely opposite.

I could lay mine hand upon a certain venerable, antique Gentleman, who
occasionally personates a Physician or Surgeon, an Apothecary, Chemist or
Druggist, and GARTH 's Colon Dispensary, Cant. ii.
,

In morals loose, but most precise in look.

Who takes a shorter and easier method of counterfeiting these spirits, though
equally foreign to the true, and, perhaps, equally pernicious with the former
sophistications. He takes Sal Ammoniac one part, Potashes two parts, and
common water a sufficient quantity to dissolve the whole: when dissolved, he
strains, and puts one part in a glass, falsely labelled, for spirit, of Sal
Ammoniac, and the other, tinged yellow, in one, more unjustly titled, for
spirit of Hart's-horn; and sells both at a most exorbitant price, under the
respective false denominations aforesaid, by the iniquitous use of the name of
a certain considerable Chemist beforementioned, on whom he fathers many other
spurious compositions.

Unassisted reason, without any great knowledge in Physic or Chemy, may show
what a contrary effect these cheats must produce, from the genuine medicines;
and it is not difficult to conceive how both Patient and Prescriber must suffer
by the use of this horrid imposture: For it is evidently but a mere solution of
these crude salts, and consequently laden with the caustic Potashes, as well
as the marine salt in the Sal Ammoniac; both which compose a third kind, very
repugnant to the properties of either spirit of Sal Ammoniac or Hart's-horn,
and which is so fixed as not to be raised by any degree of fire; whereas what
is truly volatile alone, (which only can answer the intentions of those who
prescribe either spirits) is elevated by the gentlest heat.

The Tincture of Castor, another admirable remedy, is likewise basely
sophisticated. It is ordered by the learned Authors of the Dispensatory we are
to follow, to be extracted with spirit of French wine rectified, first
distilled from Castor, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, Lavender Flowers, and some
other aromatic, nervous medicines, and this is called spirit of Castor; which
must undoubtedly render the tincture more powerful and effectual for the
purposes designed. Yet, notwithstanding, quite regardless of it is virtues or
effects, you will find the apothecaries great strangers to this medicine. I
have heard one of the most eminent among them, a man of great reputed honesty
and understanding say, in the presence of some considerable Members of the
College of Physicians, that this spirit is good for nothing, and that brandy
extracted as good a tincture from the Castor. It must indeed be confessed, that
brandy, or the common, foetid, foul, Malt or Molossus spirits, which are most
frequently used upon this and the like occasions, instead of spirit of wine,
will acquire as deep a color from Castor and such like substances, as the
spirit of Castor, or any other spirit, of equal strength with them, can do; and
that may perhaps suffice such as only aim at the basest rate to counterfeit the
external form or appearance of a medicine, to answer their own mercenary ends
alone. And we know deceptions are attempted in this kind, where the very
similitude is wanting: For this same false, reddish tincture has been sold for
the spirit, which is pure and limpid.

I would ask any candid man, conversant in Pharmacy, a few Questions, which he
cannot, without concern, answer. Is it not known, That common Copperose, a
nauseous and unwholesome drug, is sold for Salt of Steel, an agreeable, safe,
and efficacious medicine, and even at a rate but little less than that of the
genuine, the better to cover the deceit? That New England Castor, though vastly
inferior in virtues, and of a very different make and appearance from the
Russian, which we are always ordered to use, is taken and sold for that, only
because a pound of the former seldom exceeds in value one ounce of the latter?
That pot or gravelled Ashes, of about a groat the pound, is sold for the fixed
Salts of Tartar, of Wormwood, and other vegetalles, which are not to be made
without great trouble and expense; and notwithstanding the extraordinary
difference that appears between them upon experiment See Hoffman. Obser. Phys.
Chym. p. 219. Boerhaav. Elem. chem. Tom. ii. p. 34.
? That Suet, or some animal fat, but slightly impregnated with Mace, is sold
for the expressed Oil of Mace, at less than the very spice can be sold for?
That common Barbados Aloes, of about twenty pence a pound, is used in many
compositions, and sold for the Succotrine Aloes, worth about eight shillings
the pound? That Saffron is omitted in many medicines wherein it is ordered, or
Spanish or bastard Saffron used instead of British, notwithstanding the
greatest disparity in their virtues and prices? That Molossus, or common
Treacle, is used in several electuaries, and other medicines, instead of the
Sirups directed? That common, white Bryony Root, bought at about two pence the
pound, is mixed with, and sold for, Jallap, worth about six shillings the
pound? That Jallap, and other harsh purgatives, are used in the lenitive
Electuary and Daffey's Elixir, instead of Sena? That common Resin is mixed with
and sold for Resin of Jallap? That two considerable nominal Druggists bought up
several hundred weight of a certain astringent dying stuff, seized by an
ignorant examiner of drugs at the Custom-house for Sena, of which it had hardly
any outward resemblance, and to which it was diametrically opposite in quality,
mixed it with, and sold it for Sena? That Gamboge is mixed with, and sold for,
Turpeth Mineral? That red Lead is mixed with the red, and white Lead with the
white Precipitates of Mercury? And that Spanish White, or Whiting, of about a
groat a stone, is sold for white Lead which is worth so much the pound? and
(some say) even for Diaphoretic Antimony? Do not most seeds lose their
medicinal virtues with their vegetative quality? and yet, are not the seeds
sold among us, usually such, the very useless sweepings of Seed-mongers-shops?
Is not the Vinegar of Squills generally made with green instead of dry squills,
which are ordered by the Dispensatory; though it is apparent to common reason,
that they are rather preserved, than yield their virtues in that manner? and
this only, because that root loses about one half of it is weight in drying? I
wish I could say no more! and I am sorry to say, that every sensible man, who
has taken pains to learn and pry into the secrets of our Pharmacy, must know
these and many more, and must answer these Quaere's in the affirmative.

Thus have I endeavored to lay before you a short sketch of the most common,
wilful abuses of Apothecaries and Druggists, which alone may show, how the
Dishonest injure the KING 's Revenues, impose upon the Public in general, and
prejudice every branch of the Healing Art, the Apothecaries in particular, the
honest of whom are grievously oppressed by the fraudulent. See p. 52.

As these are the effects of sordid avarice and degeneracy, no honest
intelligent man can, with a clear conscience, conceal them. Such errors as
proceed from pure, simple ignorance, as destilling Sal Ammoniac in iron, tin,
or leaden pots, when every operator of judgment must know, that, that Salt,
from it is known subtilty and aptness to enter the pores of metals, and dissolve
them, was by the Chemists called, The Key to Metals; and it has been proved by
a most accurate observer Stah^l, Fundam Chym. dogm. and experim. c. v.
, that all metals are sensibly affected by destilling spirit of Sal Ammoniac
from them, and that, consequently, nothing but glass can withstand it is
penetrating force effectually; as likewise destilling sundry spirits, oils, and
waters, and the boiling or infusing sirups, decoctions, infusions, oils,
ointments, etc. in untinned copper bodies or vessels, which manifestly alters
their properties; and their levigating testacious and other hard bodies upon
soft stones, by which means, Cursor's-stream black flag has been often sold for
Crabs-claws, Corral, nay, for Pearl, Bezoar, and other precious stones, if they
ever used any, after being first infected by powdering in a soft brass mortar:
These, I say, I could pass over in compassion and charity, and not impute them
as crimes to any; they, indeed, call for reformation; but wilful and apparently
pernicious corruptions and abuses cry aloud for a scourge.

When apothecaries become such obstinate, hardy malefactors, what can it tend
to less than the utter subversion and ruin of physic, which is so connected
with, and has so great a dependence on, pharmacy, that they must necessarily
rise and fall with each other? -- I would ask the judicious tender physicians
and surgeons, are they not often in more pain than some of those they
prescribe for, when they do not know what shop their prescriptions may fall
into, on the due preparation of which the health or life of the patient, as
well as their credit and reputation, depends? How vain and uncertain are all
their most accurate observations on diseases and the effects of remedies
rendered by the various diversification of their prescriptions; when the same
recipe shall produce different effects, according to the several shops it has
been prepared in? Who can presume to prescribe the well-known doses of the most
powerful and efficacious chemical medicines, the mercurial preparations
especially, when less than a sixth of an ordinary dose has been found to induce
the most baneful symptoms? -- But hap what will, the apothecary knows he is
sase; let him but vend his wares, it is all he seeks. As for mischances, those
can only fall upon the patient and prescriber, and if, perchance, he is
suspected, as he attends closely, and, perhaps, for that end, he speaks first,
and soon acquits himself with impunity; and though conscious of the badness, or,
at best, uncertain of the goodness of his medicines, having bought, not
prepared them, frames many artful excuses, and never fails to heap the scandal
of their ill success on the defenseless prescriber, which is justly due to his
ignorance, dishonesty, or neglect.

Bad as the consequences of the forementioned corruptions prove, it were happy
they had extended no farther. But this contagious degeneracy has now made such
a surprising progress, that we have not only lost our art, but, with it, the
knowledge of many of the most valuable simples, and use, in their stead, the
most foreign and unnatural substitutes. Thus, for a small testaceous
production, found in the stomachs of fresh water crabs, or craw-fishes, called
Lapides, or Oculi Cancrorum, Crab's-eyes, we do not blush to sell some small
pellets of outlandish clay, artfully molded into the same form; even though it is
obvious that they do not retain the least resemblance of the properties or
virtues of the true Crab's-eyes. -- Some of our learned naturalists Hoffman.
Obs. phys. chym. lib. ii. obs. i. Boerhaav. Elem, chem. Tom. ii. p. 241. Geoff.
Lectures on Matter. Med.
affirm, that what we now use for Nitre is extremely different from the Nitre
of the ancients, in appearance and effects. In like manner, that noble styptic
and vulnerary, Roman Vitriol, is not to be seen among us; yet we do not scruple
selling for it Hungarian or Cyprus Copperose, though of quite another nature, and
as different in color and appearance, as well as effects, as green from blue.
-- A man can hardly hear the name of Arsenic without horror, from the frequent
deadly effects of that drug; and yet we are well assured, that the Arsenic of
the Ancients was no more a poison, than any other active medicine; for the
yellow, called Auri-pigmentum, and the red, called Sanderacha, were both given
internally by Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Avicenna, Fallopius, and others. M.
Geoffroy, aforesaid, says, that the Indians drink wine infused in arsenical
cups as a sovereign remedy; and it is most certain that we never have had any
just complaints, or even mention, made of the least ill effects from either,
until the factitious kind (a most incorrigible poison, and utterly unknown to
the ancients) falsely usurped it is name and place; whereby the true native
Arsenics, being more rare, became quite neglected, and are now buried in
oblivion Hoffm. Obs. phys. chym. lib. iii. obs. i. Boerhaav. Elem. chem. Tom.
i. p. 26, 27.
. Thus likewise Turpentine, a balsamic exudation from the Terebinthus or
Turpentine-tree, and even that from the Larix or Larch-tree, which is yet more
common, and called Venice-Turpentine (though improperly) is now scarcely ever
seen, and hardly known, among us; because the cheaper substitutes of the resins
of firs, pines, etc. and their oil (which is falsely called, and sold for, oil
of Turpentine) blended together by fire, is sold in it is place by the
druggists, vastly cheaper than the genuine can be imported for. This vile cheat
has been often openly detected in this kingdom. An experienced artificer in
frauds, well versed in thus counterfeiting the works of Dame Nature, and who
produced more Turpentine, in his way, annually, than many of the largest trees
in the Venetian territories, had his artifice brought to light by his
composition's taking fire, and burning his and some neighboring houses in a
certain great city; and though he might have justly dreaded another fate, yet has
he lived to apply to himself a phrase taken from the regeneration of the
Phaenix, often misapplied by canting, false chemists, Damnum reparabitur Igni;
which is, indeed, verified. For, that base incendiary has, by that accident,
been raised out of dust, ashes, and poverty, by the generous (but misapplied)
contribution of the citizens. -- We have an account of one that died a martyr
to this cause in the country Dublin Journal, Aug. 9, 1740.
. -- If any honest industrious man should be at the pains to procure these
things genuine, what must he do with them? Long disuse has rendered them now
unknown, and besides, his customers can only judge of the different rates, and
not the qualities, of medicines; so he is reckoned an extravagant extortioner,
and loses their favor and custom, and the commodities may lie upon his hands
till they perish before he can sell them to advantage. Thus, unlike all other
artists, is the just, conscientious apothecary to be requited!

I could now most willingly drop the ungrateful task of exposing men's faults,
were it not necessary to a perfect cure, to dive into the bottom of their
morbid state. In hopes, that when all are exposed to open view, you with the
rest of the great physicians of the STATE when next in consultation assembled,
may apply some remedy to this cursed, chronic distemper.

It may be thought probable, when men might, in the most considerable
instances, gratify their shameful avarice with the greatest secrecy and
impunity, that they would not hazard a discovery, (though there was no law to
punish them) by a more open transgression, which every body may detect: But see
how a long habit of iniquity, at once obdurates the hearts, and captivates the
senses of the feeble, wicked, wretch!

The apothecaries and druggists not content with the fairest opportunities of
defrauding the public in almost every other respect, must deceive every
customer, patient or prescriber, by altering the weights and measures directed
by ours, and almost all other collegiate dispensatories in Europe, for I can
affirm, that they are not smaller in any.

When a physician writes for an ounce of any medicine, he expects eight drachms
of sixty grains each, according to the table of weights prefixed to the
dispensatory; but he unexpectedly falls short of about fifty four grains. For
instead of the medical the civil or avoir-du-poize weights are used, each ounce
of which contains but about seven drachms and six grains of the former weight.
The evils arising from this practice are not in many cases less detrimental to
the public, than the frauds and abuses already mentioned in medicines.

All the officinal compositions, and extemporaneous prescriptions, are so
calculated by the prescribers, that if duly prepared according to their
intentions, they must necessarily know to the greatest exactness, the quantity
of the principal, and indeed of every respective ingredient contained in a
dose, or any given quantity of the mixed medicine. Thus for instance, four
scruples of Venice Treacle are known to contain one grain of opium, half a
dram of the Earl of Warwick's powder, eighteen grains of scammony, and so
forth. Without knowing this to the greatest certainty, no man can safely
prescribe; for by this rule it is, that all mixed or compound medicines are
dosed and prescribed. But as the weights are now confounded, it is not possible
for a physician to adjust the dose of any composition with the least certainty.
Suppose, for example, an electuary is prescribed; in every ounce of which it is
intended there should be ten or twenty grains of opium, or of any strong
purgative or other active medicine, of so great energy, that it required the
greatest accuracy in the dosing. This electuary instead of being dispensed by
the proper weights, is done partly by the avoir-du-pois and partly by the
medical; for the pounds, ounces and half ounces are of the former, but the
drachms, half drachms and scruples of the latter denomination in our shops. So
that instead of ten or twenty grains in one ounce, or eight drachms, here is
the like number of grains in seven drachms and six grains of this electuary:
And as the same disproportion holds in all other compositions, the grains not
varying in any weights, so the physician in this respect too, is exposed to the
most dangerous deception; for his patients must be frequently over dosed in the
chief, active ingredients in his prescriptions, and in the more simple, under
dosed, as every ounce given wants almost one eighth. This dire confusion
increases with the weights; for the medical pound is above two ounces l ghter
than the avoir-du-pois What a doubtful, inconsistent medley must such
compositions be, as are dispensed thus unjustly and irregularly?

The same irregularity has likewise confused the medical measures; which are
gallons, pints or pounds, and ounces, used in the dispensation of certain
liquids. For though apothecaries may have just ounce measures, yet if four ounces
of any simple water are prescribed, the naggin is most commonly used, which
wants about half an ounce of the intended, just measure. This is of the same
consequence with the errors in weights; as laudanum, opium, etc. which are
weighed, are often intended to be conveyed in proper doses, in certain
proportions of juleps, etc. which are mostly measured. -- How unlikely then is
the best physician to cure his patients, when though he should get good
medicines, which is above twenty to one against him, yet they are assuredly not
dispensed by the weights or measures he expects or intends: So that it is great
odds, his prescriptions are by this means too frequently abused or misapplied!

One thing more (though out of place) I must here observe my brethren yet to
blame in, and that is the unprecedented, evil custom of keeping several
destructive poisons and poisonous drugs, not at all used in medicine,
promiscuous in their shops, with sundry other drugs of great and near
resemblance in outward aspect; which are often handled, weighed in the same
scales, powdered or otherwise prepared in the same mortars or other utensils,
and upon the same compters, where diverse medicines are handled, weighed or
prepared.

Insatiable avarice, which begot an inordinate desire of extending the
profession of pharmacy, to grasp at things out of it is way and reach, for the
sake of lucre; first made apothecaries poisoners in any instance, and probably
the words pharmacus, and pharmacum, synonymous for apothecary, villain or
poisoner, remedy or poison. -- Sure no man can be insensible of the dire
effects of handling or keeping poisons near medicines, when it is notorious
that the baneful dust of such, nay the very effluvia of some, contaminate the
very ambient air, and consequently every thing it touches. Can it be from any
other cause than their too near vicinity to the factitious Arsenic boxes, that
so mild and inoffensive things as burnt Heart's horn and cream of Tartar have
often induced the most dreadful sickness and vomitings, and to some proved
deadly? unless the cream of Tartar is adulterated, as we have too much reason
to doubt, with Willis, Riverius, and Harris Pharmacolog. anti-empiric, p. 150.
and seq.
. Have we not had many melancholy instances of fatal miscarriages in this way,
from such shops as deal in poisons? And if these do not convince the mercenary
apothecaries and druggists of their errors, and dissuade them from this
dangerous practice for the future, the force of reason will probably prove
fruitless, and we may expect relief in this, as well as the forementioned
grievances, from nothing less than a severe, rigorous law.

No apothecary or druggist in London transgresses in this instance.
Color-selling there, is a quite distinct branch of trade: And the color-men who
profess that alone, are as ignorant of medicinal drugs (if possible) as any of
our pretended apothecaries or druggists. This gives them more leisure, and
makes them more careful and solicitous to improve, and cultivate that business.
Whence we find the colors, oils, vernices, etc. are with them properly treated,
and so to be had pure and good in their kind: which is more than our color-men
can say for these or any of their proper commodities.

If apothecaries and druggists had not fallen into a most abject state of sloth
and stupidity, it would not have been necessary to make this second application
to PARLIAMENT, for laws to restrain them from this manifest evil at least. They
might consider, that hitherto they have been treated like ancient Spartans,
while their crimes lay hidden; but to risk a discovery of all, by such
transgressions as must be obvious to vulgar eyes, is surely the worst policy:
Methinks those that will steal, should, like the Spartan youth, let the Fox
tear the loins, and even consume the bowels, rather than it should appear who
stole him; unless he, through a sense of penitence, discovers.

I shall now close this section with one short reflection.

If this cursed apostasy, this fatal degeneracy, which we here complain of, and
most earnestly desire to be reformed, had tended to no worse an evil, than the
ruin and subversion of one of the most ancient, noble and useful ARTS, to say
nothing of it is bringing it is eldest twin-sister, PHYSIC (which must
necessarily rise and fall with it) to the ground, and was not attended with
that dismal train of evil consequences to mankind in general which we daily
discover, sure the vile miscreants who have brought it to this low pass, and
rendered it destructive instead of useful to the public, must be deemed most
highly culpable, and the most unworthy members of human society; as the
destroyers of useful arts are deservedly reckoned more criminal and despicable,
than the inventors or improvers of them have been accounted beneficent and
honorable. And since it is apparent, that PHARMACY is an Art which the three
first ranks of men among the ancients, to wit, KINGS, PRIESTS, and PROPHETS,
did not disdain to cultivate and occupy, as both sacred and profane histories
evidently testify; an art which is the mother and nurse of many others; and
which in it is purity contributed to the preservation, not only of the living,
but likewise of the dead Bodies of the illustrious; in fine an art which, under
GOD, is one of the principal agents in preserving the noblest machine of the
Almighty's creation from disorder, in restoring it when disordered, and when by
time it is springs and movements are worn out, and it is actions thereby cease,
keeps it from corruption and decay for many ages: And since it is now manifest,
that this excellent art has been effaced, perverted, and almost quite
obliterated, by the pernicious abuses, corruptions and frauds of apothecaries
and druggists, surely the subject of it is restoration and reformation well
deserves the serious attention of PARLIAMENT; as by the wise interposition of
that alone, we may hope to see PHARMACY rescued from the hands of barbarous
assassins, revived, and once more shine in it is pristine luster and beauty,
restored to it is original use, worth and dignity. This is all that now seems
wanting to bring the practice of physic to it is primitive certainty, which by
the forementioned errors and impositions, has been long rendered precarious and
uncertain.

IV. Order now leads me to the fourth and last thing proposed, namely, to offer
some means to prevent such horrid mal-practices for the future, etc.

I have in the foregoing, endeavored with the greatest care and impartiality
to state the case of pharmacy, to the best of my power. As the distemper is
most inveterate, perplexed, and complicate, so to prescribe adequate remedies
for it, requires a consultation. But from the unjust opposition and ill usage I
met with from the fraternity, in my late attempt to reclaim the profession, I
can neither ask nor expect their assistance or concurrence in this Essay.
Therefore, as necessity requires it, I must alone venture to offer my best
thoughts upon the whole, though it is an hard task, and prescribing, in either
physic or law, not my proper province. -- Before my prescriptions are put in
practice, let my worthy seniors justly correct and reprove me; I shall receive
their amendments with pleasure, and shall cheerfully assent with every good
man, that shall rationally treat this luxuriant evil.

When the source of a distemper is known, the method of cure is least
difficult; and when the cause of a disorder is removed, the effect of course
must cease. The former I think I have discovered, the latter there are various
ways of bringing about. Physicians, as far as it may be consistent with reason,
and the safety of the sick, gratify their taste and adapt medicines to their
gouts and weakly appetites. We know of old, that the distempered apothecaries
and druggists, have the most vitiated palates and very weak, squeamish
stomachs, and that they never yet could relish or digest any remedy given to
alter or amend their morbid habit of body. Though many mild, rational attempts
were made to restore them to their natural health, they would never consent to
use the means directed. At length, wearied with trying all the just methods,
that must with sensible men have prevailed, the college of physicians finally,
began to treat them, as real Maniacs required, with Helleborine and other
drastic remedies, which indeed had no better effect; for like true Bethlemites,
they spurned the medicines, and when by force they were poured down their
throats, they spewed them in their Archiators' faces. This will need no
explanation when you recollect the violent opposition both publicly and
privately made to the bill depending in the House of Commons in the year 1725,
to prevent abuses in the practices of physic and pharmacy. In like manner in
the year 1735, when the act now in force took it is rise in the House of Lords,
though the whole fraternity privately and publicly confessed a reformation
greatly wanting, and though some of the most eminent among them approved of the
means then proposed, yet did they jointly, unanimously oppose it, and published
a case which they laid before the house; in which they asserted many weak
falsehoods, and made sundry, trivial and ridiculous evasions, to prevent farther
inquiries being made into their habitual frauds, or any laws passing to
restrain them from their long accustomed, evil practices. These instances I
think necessary, to show, how averse these men are and ever have been to
reformation. I am sorry to say it looks, as if they had loved darkness rather
than light, because their deeds were evil. For since no man can fear that truth
and integrity can suffer by an open examination or any fair test, sure this
aversion thereto is another plain proof of the necessity for some effectual
law; which I humbly conceive may be made very conveniently by adding a few,
proper clauses to the present act: And I submit it to your judgment, whether
or no, it may be expedient to make the following amendments in that bill, and
whether they may or not, answer the good purposes designed.

1. That the College of Physicians, the better to enable them to execute this
act, be empowered to increase the number of their fellows The Charter of the
College of Physicians of London is con^^med by 14. and 15. Hen. 8. Cap. 5. s.
2. and 10. Geo. 1.
.

2. That the said College of Physicians be authorized to try and examine all
persons whatsoever who now do, or hereafter shall make, prepare, sell, or
expose to sale, any medicines, or keep any, whether simple, or compound for
that purpose, and to license such, and such only, as they shall find duly
qualified, as apothecaries The College of Physicians is empowered by Charter of
W. and M. to examine Physicians, Apothecaries, Chemists, Druggists and
Midwives, and to license such and such only as shall be found duly qualified,
and to punish other.
, chemists or druggists.

3. That no person whatsoever may presume to make, prepare, administer, or
vend, or keep for that purpose, any drugg, or medicine whatsoever, whether
simple or compound, after a day appointed, unless he has stood such
examination, and has obtained a license or qualification, under the hands of
the President and Censors for the time being, and the seal of the said College
of Physicians.

4. That no apothecary, chemist or druggist, may take an apprentice to learn
his or their art or mystery, trade or occupation, before such intended
apprentice first stands and answers the same examination which is deemed
necessary for those who enter the University of Dublin, and produces a proper
certificate of his due qualification, under the hand of the Senior Lecturer of
Trinity College, Dublin, for the time being: Which said apprentice, so examined
and qualified, may be bound and shall be enrolled, and his said certificate
registered in the company or corporation of barbers and surgeons,
apothecaries and peruke-makers, or Guild of St. Mary Magdalene, in Dublin; and
shall according to the manners and customs of the said Guild and City, serve an
apprenticeship of seven years at the least: And farther, that no such
apprentice after such service, shall presume to make or prepare, dispense,
administer or vend, any medicine or medicinal drugg, whether simple or
compound, until he has farther qualified himself by a due examination in
pharmacy, etc. to be made by, or before the president, censors and fellows, of
the College of Physicians aforesaid, with twelve free, licensed apothecaries,
in such manner, form and place as to them shall seem meet: And that the said
College of Physicians, may be obliged and empowered to try and examine, every
such person or persons, as shall produce a certificate from his, or their
master or masters, or in case of his or their master, or matters death, or
refusal, from the master and wardens of the corporation of barbers and
surgeons, apothecaries and peruke-makers, or Guild of St. Mary Magdalene
aforesaid, of his or their qualification and service as aforesaid, at any of
their Charter-meetings in every year. Which said College of Physicians, may be
empowered and authorized to license such and such only, as they shall judge
capable of his or their profession, under the hand of the president and censors
for the time being, and the seal of the College of Physicians aforesaid The
Corporation of Barbers and Surgeons, etc. being desirous as much as in them
lies to promote the public Good, have, by virtue of the Powers granted them by
Charter, to make bylaws for the good of their Society; ordained, that no
Surgeon nor Apothecary shall hereafter be admitted free of this Corporation,
until he is first examined and found qualified by a Committee of twelve men of
his Occupation, and the President End Censors of the College of Physicians.
.

5. That the better to examine the topical medicines, two surgeons, being
freemen of the Guild of St. Mary Magdalene aforesaid, be obliged to attend with
the apothecaries to assist the examiners, in their searches and visitations of
the shops, etc. of apothecaries, etc. and that the said examiners, with their
assistant apothecaries and surgeons, shall severally wear the gowns, or
other proper habiliments of their respective stations in the College or City,
and shall be attended by the beadles of the said College and Guild of St. Mary
Magdalene respectively, properly attired, in their visitations.

6. That the better to enforce the execution of this act, and the more
effectually to empower the said examiners, and assistant apothecaries and
surgeons, to discharge the power and trust vested in them by this act, a
civil officer may be appointed to attend them, and to execute their decrees All
Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Constables, etc. are obliged to assist the
President, etc. of the College of Physicians of London. 32. Hen. 8. C. 42.
Sect. 6.
.

7. That no apothecary, chemist, druggist, or other person whatsoever, who
makes, prepares or sells medicines for payment or livelihood, may take upon him
to prescribe for the sick in any disorder whatsoever, except in cases of
necessity, as in the country, where neither physicians or surgeons may be
timely had It has been holden, that if a person duly authorized to be a
Physician or Surgeon undertakes a Cure and the Patient dies in his Hands, he
is guilty of Felony. 1 Hawk. P. C. 87.
, and that they may not on any account or pretense whatsoever, sell or
administer, nor suffer or cause to be sold or administered, strong vomitives or
purgatives, nor provocatives to Venery, Abortion or the Terms; such as
Antimonial, mercurial and chalybeate preparations, Cantharides or Spanish
flies, Scammony or Resins of Jallap or Scammony, Gamboge, Savin, etc. nor
Quicksilver, nor Opium, or any preparation of either, to any, without the
prescription of a known physician.

8. That no person may obtain a certificate of the entry of any drug or
medicine, unless the assistant apothecaries in Dublin, or any two apothecaries
in any other port, having first taken the examiners oath before the magistrate
of the place, or the next justice of the peace of the county, where such entry
is made, who shall have power to administer and receive the same, shall certify
to the proper officers, under their hands, that the drugs or medicines, so
entered, are truly the same they are entered for, and that they are sound, pure
and genuine.

9. That no apothecary, chemist, druggist, or other person whatsoever, who,
after a day appointed, shall keep, sell, expose to sale, or keep for that
purpose, white, yellow, or red Arsenics, or other paints, or dying stuffs, used
only by painters, dyers, and such like artificers, and not safely or commonly
used in physic or medicine, may be allowed to make, prepare, or administer, any
medicine or medicinal drug, whatsoever; whether simple or compound; nor may
such persons as keep Arsenics, etc. for sale, vend them, or any other poisonous
drug, to any one, without the license of a magistrate, where such are sold.

10. That the assistant apothecaries and surgeons, may be chosen by the
corporation of barbers, and surgeons, apothecaries, and peruke-makers
aforesaid, at the usual times and places, and in the ordinary manner of choosing
the several officers of the said corporation; giving due notice to the college
of physicians, who shall approve and swear the same. In London the wardens of
the company assist the examiners. 10. Geo. 1.


11. That the two assistant apothecaries and the master, or one of the wardens
of the corporation of barbers, etc. for the time being, being an apothecary,
shall have full power and authority, to hear and receive complaints, and to
examine the bills or accounts of apothecaries with their customers, and to tax
or reduce the same, as to them, or a majority of them, shall seem just and
reasonable.

12. That all apothecaries and chemists, may be obliged to observe strictly,
and prepare and dispense their several drugs and medicines, for officinal use;
by whatsoever Dispensatory the College of Physicians shall direct or appoint.
And that the capital compositions as the treacle, mithridate, and whatsoever
other medicines they shall require, shall not be dispensed or compounded
without giving public notice to the examiners and assistants, who shall examine
and inspect such dispensation.

13. That the said examiners and assistants, may have power to view, try, and
examine all scales, weights, and measures, used in the shops of apothecaries,
etc. and to seize, all such as shall not be made according to the standard of
the appointed Dispensatory, or otherwise false or defective; with authority
farther, to punish whomsoever is found to offend in this manner.

14. That it may be lawful for the Lord Mayor of Dublin, if the College of
Physicians neglect, and for the chief magistrate of any city, besides Dublin,
borough, or town corporate, or for the High Sheriff of any county, to summon
any two, or more Physicians in such city, etc. or county, to administer to them
the examiners oath, and with them to enter in the day time the shops, etc. of
all apothecaries, etc. within such city, etc. or county, and therein to search
for, view, and examine all druggs and medicines therein kept; and to condemn,
and publicly to destroy, such as the said physicians shall find unsound,
adulterate, corrupt, or decayed. And likewise to view, try, and examine all
scales, weights and measures; and to seize all such as they shall find false,
defective, or excessive, etc. with a clause for an appeal to the College of
Physicians, giving damages to the appellants, against such physicians, in case
the said college does not ratify their sentence or decree.

15. That no druggist, or wholesale apothecary, or chemist, who supplies any
retailers with drugs or medicines by wholesale, may presume to dispense,
prepare, or make up any physician's, or chirurgeon's, prescriptions: Nor may
such be chosen, or serve, as assistants to the examiners appointed by this act.

16. That no examiner, assistant, or civil magistrate, appointed by this act,
shall serve above one year, and not for four years after.

17. That all physicians of the college, and all apothecaries and surgeons
of the corporation of Barbers and Surgeons, Apothecaries and Peruke-makers,
or Guild of St. Mary Magdalene in Dublin, or any of them, may be exempted from
serving on juries or inquests, and all other offices ecclesiastic, civil, or
military, (those of the said college and corporation only excepted) if they, or
any of them, shall require it The same privileges and immunities are granted to
the Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries of London, by the 32 Hen. VIII.
c. 40. s. 1. 3 Hen. VIII. c. 11. s. 1. and 6 Will. III. c. 4. s. 3. The Barbers
and Surgeons company is allowed, for anatomical uses, the bodies of four
executed felons annually; and their chatter is confirmed. 32 Hen. VIII. c. 42.
s. 1.2.
.

18. With general saving clauses and provisions for appeals, rewards or
gratuities, penalties, etc.

The reasons for these several proposed amendments, I hope, are evident from
the foregoing; if not, I believe I shall be able to show them when required.

Although I have been obliged to protract this Letter beyond the intended
length, in order to give a just, clear Notion of the whole matter, and to
obviate any difficulties or objections that may arise, or be made against it,
by designing men; yet I must beg you will with patience, and your usual candor,
now hear me a few words in mine own behalf.

From the unexpected ill treatment I met with in a former weak attempt of this
kind A short scheme for preventing frauds and abuses in pharmacy, 1735. on
which the present Act was founded.
, it is easy to conceive what I may now expect from many of the Gentlemen who
call themselves Apothecaries, Chemists, and Druggists Tit^es by which most
Apothecaries, Druggists, etc. registered themselves by the Act in the year 1736.
, though I flatter myself I do in some sort deserve the thanks of every man, who
would honestly follow any of these occupations; my design being only to show,
who is properly and truly an apothecary or druggist, and what the proper office
and duty of each; together with the necessity of their adhering to their
immediate respective professions, solely, diligently. Notwithstanding, I look
for the taunts and outcries of the multitude of ignorant, idle, selfish, and
invidious men, among us, against me, in every shape. However, I shall not think
myself obliged to take the least notice of self-interested back-biters, nor
their pyratical Missionaries, who will probably, as before, go about
industriously to blast my credit, and asperse and villify my character; not
even Remarks upon the Scheme for preventing frauds and abuses in Pharmacy, etc.
wrote by a certain Quack Apothecary.
anonymous, scribbling privateers, or hackney-pamphleteers.

Some will perhaps advance with the humorous Garth Dispens. Cant. iii.
, that,

That juggler which another's slight will show,
But teaches how the world his own may know.
To this indictment I shall, according to form, plead, Not Guilty, and so put
myself, for trial, on my customers and the public.

But the grand insinuation in my prejudice, which has heretofore been made and
will now probably be revived, is, that regardless of all public good, in
unreasonable aversion and apposition to my fraternity, and by way of
advertising and extolling my self, by depretiating them, I have turned a
reformer, being in every instance acted more by selfish mercenary views, than
any other. -- This, I hope, to every considerate unprejudiced reader, will
appear as malicious, and as groundless, as the rest of their base detraction is
false and uncharitable. I challenge any man to say, I was ever once known to
lessen the just merits of any apothecary or druggist whatsoever. Had I none
other motive than common policy, I should not attempt to recommend my self to
the world by such low, mean artifice: moreover, let it but be considered, did I
heretofore, or do I now offer ought to the detriment of any honest, just
apothecary, chemist or druggist? If I have, I declare it the effects of mere
inadvertency; for it is not to be reasonably imagined, that I should knowingly
do any thing to the prejudice of a profession, which I have made my choice, by
which I have hitherto lived, and still purpose to follow, as long as the same
excellent set of customers, which have hitherto dealt with me, and most nobly
and generously encouraged me, are pleased to continue their unmerited favors.
In the next place, I submit it to the judgment of every candid breast, what
mercenary views I could have had in this undertaking. I believe it is evident,
though I was at great expense, and much trouble in writing and printing, and in
attending the parliament in the year 1735, that, instead of gaining any selfish
advantages thereby, or in any sort soliciting for such, I have been a
considerable sufferer, if it were by none other means, than bringing upon me
(though I hope undeservedly) the implacable hatred and enmity of all the
apothecaries and druggists. And I hope there are some men of quality and
distinction, still living, who can attest, that though I was encouraged to sue
for a parliamentary reward, yet I justly disdained all applications for the
like, being content with the public good, which was likely to accrue from my
weak endeavors. Virtue to a prepared heart, never fails of bringing an ample,
concomitant reward.

This I will however confefs; that I have some selfish private (though not
altogether mercenary) views, in soliciting a reformation of pharmacy, and a
strict examination of apothecaries and their shops, because I would from my
self, as well as others, remove all temptations to the abuse or corruption of
my profession, and by all ways and means, promote the knowledge thereof, and
give all reasonable encouragement to following it strictly, justly, and
faithfully. And I conceive the examination of apothecaries and druggists, and
the inspection of their shops, would be one motive; as it must prove as
advantageous to every skilful honest apothecary and druggist, as it must be
disadvantageous to the unskilful and dishonest. Moreover, as the apothecaries
and druggists, have been very active, and I have some reasons to judge, there
are some of them still unwearied in wounding my character and reputation, in
the most false, malicious, and uncharitable manner; I hope it is not culpable
in me to seek, with the redress of a general grievance, a public method of
confuting those groundless calumnies. For in such a trial, I flatter my self,
it will appear, that if I should not have had as fair an opportunity of
learning pharmacy, or as good a capacity, as many of those, who make a better
figure in the profession; I have taken more pains in acquiring some knowledge
in it, in order to make amends for such disadvantages, and to supply such a
natural defect.

I might have taken the usual liberty of dedicators, and here claim a sanctuary
to my self, and this poor performance, by prefixing your illustrious name. But
even this is an artifice I despise; for if it has not merit enough to maintain
it is ground, though clothed in this mean simplicity, let it be rejected, or fall
unregarded.

From one of your great humanity, refined taste, and just notions of morality,
I fear I may dread some censure for an unbecoming zeal, in using through this
discourse some terms of reproach, expressions, which may bespeak an unseemly
freedom with my fraternity, or such as as may savor somewhat of spleen or
invective. In this respect, perhaps, I am to blame, but when you consider how
difficult it is to treat such vile offenders as I complain of more properly, or
for a man of any conscience, or understanding, barely to mention such base
degeneracy, such abominable perfidious villainy, as I have laid before you, or
even but to think of the like, without some heat, indignation, and abhorrence,
I hope it will, in some measure, plead my excuse. I have industriously avoided
personal reflections; except where the offenders were so singularly notorious,
that they must be known to many, by mentioning their crimes only. And although I
have from many of the society, received much unkind, ungenerous, and I may say,
uncharitable, unchristian treatment; and although the dignity of the
parliament house in full session, could not protect me from their violent rage,
and merciless insults, not only in the offices adjoining, but even at the bar
of the House of PEERS; yet, I most solemnly aver it to you, that it is not the
persons, but their vices I detest, and would expose. I know there are still
among them, men of distinguished worth and candor, who are ready and willing to
suffer a reformation; and I am inclined to think, that many of those, who
formerly opposed it, were led thereto by inadvertency, or the clamors of the
multitude. If any thing I have said should offend, or seem levelled at
particular persons, I must say with the ingenious Garth, Preface to Dispens.
"it is at such only as are presumed to be engaged in dishonorable
confederacies (against the public and) against the dignity of their own
profession; but if there be none such, then these characters are but imaginary,
and consequently ought to give no body offense." --

I conclude with the words of the late learned doctor Pinac. nature. Rerum
Britt. Praef.
Merret, on another occasion. -- "Acrem me habebunt verissimumque vindicem,
fraudesque detegam ab artis hujus incunabilis in hunc usque diem usurpatas;
idque reipsa comprobabo haud suspectae fidei testimoniis; simulque omnia
stigmata societati nostrae inusta detergam." --

I am, with due respect to your honorable station, as well as the greatest
regard to your person,

SIR, Your most faithful, and most obedient Servant. C. LUCAS.
Dublin, November 11, 1741.
FINIS.

