A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE STATE of MIDWIFERY IN London, Westminster, etc.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE STATE of MIDWIFERY IN London, Westminster, etc.

WHEREIN An effectual Method is proposed, to enable the Midwomen to perform
their office in all cases, (excepting those few where instruments are
necessary) with as much Ease, Speed, and Safety, as the most dexterous Midmen:
Whereby women and children's falling VICTIMS to the Ignorance of Midwomen, so
LOUDLY complained of by Chamberlen, Giffard, and Chapman, may for the future be
prevented, etc.

By JOHN DOUGLAS, Surgeon, F. R. S.

Non sibi, sed aliis. LONDON: Printed for and sold only by the Author in
Lad-Lane, near Guild Hall. M.DCC.XXXVI.

[Price Two Shillings.]

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY WALPOLE.
MADAM,
HEAVEN HAS BESTOWED ON YOUR LADYSHIP NOT ONLY THE WILL; BUT ALSO THE POWER OF
ENCOURAGING ALL USEFUL ARTS, AND OF PUTTING IN EXECUTION ANY GOOD AND LAUDABLE
DESIGN; WHICH, IN ALL AGES, HAVE BEEN THE ENDEAVOR AND GLORY OF THE WISE AND
GREAT! IF WHAT I NOW OFFER, FOR THE HONOR AND SERVICE OF THAT SEX, WHICH YOU
SO HIGHLY GRACE, SHOULD BE ACCEPTABLE TO YOUR LADYSHIP, I SHALL THINK MY TIME
AND LABOR WELL SPENT. THAT GOD MAY CONTINUE TO BLESS, WITH DESERVED HONORS,
THE PERSON AND CONDUCT OF YOUR ILLUSTRIOUS CONSORT SIR ROBERT, YOUR LADYSHIP,
AND ALL YOUR NOBLE FAMILY, IS AND SHALL BE THE CONSTANT PRAYER OF

MADAM, YOUR LADYSHIP'S MOST HUMBLE, AND MOST DEVOTED SERVANT, JOHN DOUGLAS.
London, 1736.
N. B.
I Must here acquaint the Reader, that through the whole I have not once made
use of the common, though barbarous, word Man-midwife, except in quotations,
because it carries Nonsense in the very front of it: How can a Man be a Wife,
except he be a Hermaphrodite? May they not as properly say a Man-Monkey, a
Man-Goose, or a Man-Ass. The French express it very beautifully by the word
Accoucheur, i. e. a Man who delivers women in labor. And I shall always
express it by the Word Midman; which, though not so neat as the French, yet is
much better than the absurd Word complained of.

THE common Word Midwife is also often very improperly used, E. G. A. Maid may
be taught the art of delivering women, yet she is not a Wife. Widows also lay
women, yet they are not Wives. Therefore to reconcile this impropriety, I shall
always, except in quotations, call them Midwomen, which includes Maids, Wives,
and Widows. But Dr. Maubray, (the worst writer on this subject) and Mr. Chapman
after him, make use of another appellation, much more absurd, viz.
Woman-Midwife, Women-Midvives: Pray would not saying Midwife and Midwives,
distinguish their sex sufficiently? Pray who ever heard of Girl-Midwives?

Explication of the Latin words which occur in Quotations, etc.
1. CRANIUM, the Scull. 2. Scrotum, the bag which contains the Testicles in
Males. 3. Labia Pudendi. 4. Vagina, the Sheath, or Passage to the Mouth of the
Womb. 5. Os Tincae, vel Internum, the Mouth of the Womb. 6. Uterus or Matrix,
the Womb. 7. Fundus Uteri, the bottom of the Womb. 8. Foetus, the Infant or
Child. 9. Funis Umbilicalis, the Navel-string. 10. Placenta, the Burden,
Secundine, or Afterbirth. 11. Pelvis, the Basin, which contains the Womb,
Bladder, etc. 12. Ossa Pubis, the forepart of the Basin. 13. Os Sacrum, the
back-part of the Basin. 14. Ossa Innominata, the sides of the Basin.
THE STATE of MIDWIFERY.
IS it not very surprising, nay and unaccountable, that though almost all the
other parts of Surgery have been cultivated with great assiduity, by the most
knowing Men, ever since Hippocrates, nay and before him, yet ('till about the
middle of the last century) the operations necessary for the safety of women in
labor, and their children; operations of more consequence to mankind than
almost all the rest; operations so often wanted, so difficult many times to
perform, and upon which always two, and sometimes more lives depend, seem to
have been entirely left to a parcel of ignorant women, or to Men little better
qualified than they, who upon any extraordinary difficulty (as too many still
do) took hooks or knives, and carved the children to pieces; and often also
destroyed the Mother?

The Surgeons at Paris, etc. to remedy this evil, have for many years past,
obliged all the Midwomen to be examined and approved of at their hall, before
ever they dare set up for practice: An example most worthy of imitation! But
how, or by what infatuation, our Dom. fac. totum suffered these operations to
drop through their fingers, (as if they were no part of their profession, as if
they were not manual operations, or were of little or no consequence to
mankind,) into the hands of Doctors, inferioris sortis medici, (as a certain
Gentleman calls them,) Apothecaries, and the lowest class of their own
Fraternity! (some of whom have been, and are, as illiterate, of as low
capacities, and as little acquainted with the other great operations of
Surgery, as almost any of the women) and have and do allow every silly woman,
who takes it in her head, with very little or no instruction, to practice
impune among his Majesty's subjects, without any the least examination or
license! are questions I shall not now take upon me to answer. But to proceed:

THE first rational account we ever had of delivering women in labor, was
published at Paris by Mr. Mauriceau, in 1668. In his dedication, he gives the
following honest account of his design: I have the rather undertaken this work,
that Midwives might find therein what they ought to know, the better to
exercise their art, and undergo the examination they are obliged to at
Surgeons-Hall, before they are admitted to practice. In his preface, he says, I
have not run out into superfluous discourse (i. e. he had avoided all puzzling
and unintelligible Theories and Hypotheses, about generation, nutrition,
superfoetation, and such sort of jargon,) that I might be more serviceable both
to Surgeons and Midwives.

THIS plain practical work, would undoubtedly have had a much better effect
upon our Midwomen, had they not been puzzled and confounded, (instead of being
instructed) by the artful insinuations of the translator, in his preface and
marginal notes, published in 1672. as will appear by the following quotations.

DR. Chamberlen, in his preface, says, Having long observed the great want of
necessary directions how to govern women with child, and in childbed, etc. I
designed a small manual to that purpose; but meeting some time after in France
with this treatise of Mauriceau, which in my opinion exceeds all former
Authors, I changed my resolution into that of translating him; whom I need not
much commend, because he is fortified with the approbation of the wardens of
the Surgeons company of Paris. Pray would the Doctor have thought he had been
so well fortified, if he had had the approbation of the then wardens of the
Surgeons company of London? or the approbation of the college of physicians at
Paris? I have carefully rendered his book into English, for the benefit of our
Midwives. This is certainly a very fair and honest Exordium, a worthy and
laudablc Design; but pray mark the end on it: Of whom many may yet very well
admit of an additional knowledge. This cannot be denied, but pray where are
they to go look for this additional knowledge, if he means, in their
profession? Is it to be found in his preface and marginal notes upon
Mauriceau's work? No! they rather darken, than explain, the Author's meaning.
But the additional knowledge the Doctor means, and has taken such pains to
inculcate, through the whole of his preface and notes, is to inform them the He
and his family can assist them better than any other Men; that they have no
business to meddle with any child, except those who just drop into their hands,
and that whenever the least difficulty appears, to send for him, or some or the
Nostrummongers; as will appear evidently from the tenure of the whole.

THEN he goes on, The principal thing worthy the observation of Midwives in
this book, is accurately to discover what is properly their work, and when it
is necessary to send for advice and assistance, that so, many women and
children may be preserved, that now perish for want of seasonable help. i. e.
shall victims to the ignorance of Midwomen. And that Midwife's skill is
certainly the greatest, and she deserves most commendation, who can soonest
discover the success of the labor, and accordingly either wait with patience,
or timely send for advice and help. Pray is not that Midwwoman's skill still
greater? and does she not deserve much more commendation? who can soonest
discover what obstructs the delivery, and then removes the obstruction herself,
and thereby saves the woman the fright, trouble, and expense, of sending for
any farther help or advice? Nor can it be so great a discredit to a Midwife
(let some of them imagine what they please) to have a woman or child saved by a
man's assistance, as to suffer either to die under her own hand, though
delivered: For that Midwife mistakes her office, that thinks she has performed
it, by only laying the woman; because her principal duty is to take care that
she and her child be well, with safety and convenient speed parted; who don't
know that? and, if this be impossible for her, it will justify her better to
wave her imaginary reputation, and send for help. No doubt of it. But would it
not have been much better if they had been taught to do their office themselves?

THUS you see Mr. Mauriceau's design in publishing his book, was to instruct
the Midwomen how to perform their office better; but Dr. Chamberlen perverts
that design, and seems to have the Interest of the Midmen, and not that of the
Midwomen, or -- principally at heart, as is evident from the foregoing
quotations, etc.

Notwithstanding all these coaxes and threats, which he plays off so briskly
upon the town Midwomen, (who are undoubtedly much better qualified, than those
in the country) in case they don't send for him, etc. on every trifling
difficulty, he goes on, and says, Yet in countries and places where help and
good advice is not seasonably to be had, Midwives are compelled to do their
best, as God shall enable them. Pray has God any where promised to give more
assistance to a country than a town Midwoman? Thus the poor country Midwomen
are to act as God shall enable them; but the town Midwomen, as the Doctor etc.
shall direct, Utrum horum! Pray has God Almighty given us the least ground to
expect, that he will inspire us in an instant, even upon the most urgent
occasion, with the perfect knowledge of any useful art, only because it would
just then be of service to us? No. But he has told us, that, if we want to
acquire the knowledge of any useful art, we must diligently and assiduously
apply ourselves to the study of it in the most proper manner we can. Dii
laborantibus omnia vendunt! Which dangerous and uncertain trials in does not
become them to put in practice upon women, where no timely assistance need be
wanting. Thus you see, the Doctor thinks dangerous and uncertain trials may
lawfully be put in practice on women in the country, though not upon those in
town, where he and the rest of the Nostrummongers may be had. But, pray, might
not many of these uncertain and dangerous trials, both in town and country,
have been prevented, if he had endeavored as much to instruct them how to give
better assistance themselves, as he has done to let them know when to send for
him, etc. Are not the women's lives in the country as valuable as those in town?

THEN he goes on to tell them in what particular cases they ought to send for
him, etc. viz. "1. In most wrong births, with or without pain." (alias with or
without danger or difficulty) 2. All floodings with clods, though little or no
pain, whether at full time or not. 3. All convulsions. 4. Many first labors.
5. And some other; (i. e. every other case, when the People are substantial,)
viz. though the child be right, if little or no pain, after the breaking of the
waters, and the child's not following them in some six or ten hours after,
require the good advice of, and, peradventure, speedy delivery by expert
physicians clans in this practice. Pray would not expert Surgeons in this
practice do as well? Is it not evident from the Doctor's list of cases, that
very few women (except those in the country, or who are very poor) could escape
those expert Physicians? viz. He, his father, and two brothers.

BUT least the charge he has given to the Midwomen (of sending for him, etc.
upon every trifling occasion) should not have weight enough, he also threatens
the poor suffering women with what may happen to them, in case they don't
oblige their Midwomen to send for them. Let me therefore advise the good women,
not so readily to blame those Midwives who are not backward in dangerous
cases," (or not dangerous cases,) to desire advice, least it cost them dear;"
(pray don't it always cost them dear when they do?) by discouraging and forcing
them to presume beyond their knowledge and strength, As for their want of
knowledge, I take it to be more their misfortune than their fault, because they
have not yet had such proper opportunities of informing themselves, as they
ought to have; but as to strength, I Am satisfied most of them have enough, did
they know how to make a proper use of it. especially when too many are over
confident." For this compliment the Midwomen are as much obliged to him, as for
many others he passes upon them.

In another place he says, If therefore the use of hooks by Physicians (pray
what business have physicians with hooks? Are not pen, ink, and paper, their
proper instruments? What right have they then to encroach upon us? Don't they
make a sad outcry, are not they alarmed as if their craft was in danger, when
we use pen and ink? except in Pauper cases. and Surgeons, be condemned,
(without thereto necessitated by some monstrous birth, etc.) Now you see he is
obliged to own, notwithstanding all he says to the contrary, that hooks are
sometimes absolutely necessary. We can much less approve of a Midwife's using
them, as some here in England boast they do; which rash presumption, in France,
would call them in question for their lives. The Doctor allows, page 5. country
Midwives are compelled to do their best as God shall direct; them: Now
supposing that God should direct one of them to make use of a crochet, in a fit
case, and after a proper manner, must she be tried for her life for it? Is not
this a very hard charge upon the poor Midwomen, without any proof? I must
diffent so far from the Doctor's opinion, that I believe the hardiest Midwoman
in London, would tremble at the very thought of it, unless they were fully
instructed how to use it, as --; but for what they may do in the country,
according to the Doctor's advice, above recited, I cannot answer.

Mr. Mauriceau (page 179.) says, A Midwife vaunted she was more skilful in her
art than any Surgeon. Upon which Dr. Chamberlen remarks, that, It seems
Midwives in other countries, as well as England, have that pernicious vanity.
But, pray were there no Midmen then in England, who had vaunted they could
perform what they really could not? Vid. Mr. Mauriceau's 26th observation,
quoted below.

MR. Mauriceau, page 203. If the arm be advanced as far as the shoulder, etc.
Dr. Chamberlen remarks, which seldom is, unless an Ignorant Midwife tamper with
it. Are not these pretty compliments? but where is the instruction? Are not all
practitioners, of the very least experience, sensible it often happens without
any tampering. But notwithstanding he has been so lavish in these, and many
other places, in censuring those good women, yet he winds up his preface with a
salvo for all, viz. I hope no good Midwives will blame me for reprehending the
faults of Bad ones, who are only aimed at, and admonished in this work; and I Am
confident none but the Guilty will be concerned, and take it to themselves,
which I desire they may, and amend. Is not this cobweb easily seen through? Is
not this the first time he has mentioned good Midwives?

Dr. Chamberlen's account of his secret.
HE is not content with amusiing, confounding, nay, and abusing the Midwomen,
at the same time he makes a show of teaching them, but also serves the Midmen
the same sauce; by telling them he has a secret, which will do wonders, i. e.
It will save many children's lives, which, they who do not know it, (or
something as good,) must destroy; but cannot in honor (notwithstanding it
might save thousands of lives) discover it even to them, because it might
prejudice the personal interest of his father and two brothers, who only, in
all Europe, know it: But what they may do in Africa, Asia, etc. this deponent
says not. His own story is as follows: My Author, lib. ii. cap. 17. justifies
the fastening hooks in the head of a child that comes right, and yet because of
some difficulty or disproportion, cannot pass; which I confess has been, and is
yet the practice of the most expert artists in Midwifery, not only in England,
but throughout Europe. But I can neither approve of that practice, nor those
delays; (Pray observe how long he was in attempting to deliver that woman at
Paris, vid. M. M. obs. 26. quoted below; because my father, brothers, and self,
(though none else in Europe as I know,) Pray had not Sir David Hamilton more
business, and as good, if not better success, in the practice of Midwifery than
he? May we not then reasonably suppose, that he either knew his secret, or had
one of his own, though he never made any noise about it, which answered as well?
have, by God's blessing, and our iudustry, attained to, and long practiced a
way to deliver women in this case, without any prejudice to them or their
infants; though all others (being obliged, for want of such an expedient, to use
the common way) do, and must endanger, if not destroy one or both with hooks.
Pray would it not have been a grateful return, for God's blessing them with so
useful a secret, to have communicated it to the rest of the Midmen, whereby the
destruction of so many women and children, might have been prevented? By this
manual operation a labor may be dispatched, (on the least difficulty) so that
on the least difficulty, either to Midwomen or Midmen, we must immediately run
for one of the Nostrum-mongers. with fewer pains, and sooner, to the great
advantage, and without danger both of woman and child.

HE is not content with having thus acquainted us with the great value of his
secret, and who besides himself are possessed of it, in his epistle, but also
mentions and recommends it over and over, ad nauseam usque, through the whole
of his remarks on this work, for fear the Midwomen should attend Mr. Mauriceau
so much, that they should forget his Nostrum, E. G. Mr. Mauriceau, page 176. If
there be any case, wherein a Surgeon ought to make the greatest reflection, and
use most precaution in his art, it is this; to know whether the infant be alive
or dead? Dr. Chamberlen remarks, This caution is not so necessary to those
practitoners which can fetch a child coming right, or with the Arm, without
hooks or sharp instruments, as the translator of this book, and his father, and
his brothers can.

Mr. Chapman in his essay on Midwifery, 1733. says, Dr. Chamberlen's secret was
the Forceps. Then makes the following quaint observation on the forementioned
remark: Here is something very odd methinks, in applying this secret to both
these cases, as equally serviceable to either, the cases differing so very
widely, and requiring a quite different method: For the head presenting, and
far advanced, is to be taken hold of by the Forceps, and extracled; when a
child which presents an arm, is to be turned, and so brought away by its feet;
i. e. without either hooks or sharp instruments.

WHENCE its evident, Mr. Chapman did not apprehend the Doctor's view in
applying his secret to the arm as well as the head. It was undoubtedly the
better to puzzle the cause, the better to conceal his Nostrum, that he applies
it to two cases, between which there is not the least analogy. He might as well
have said, it would be of great use in extracting the stone, or in drawing
teeth.

MR. Mauriceau, page 204. The arm is to be twisted off, if the child be dead.
Dr. Chamberlen, Good if the child be dead; but it may be always done without.
Undoubtedly it may be often done without twisting it off, but not with his
Forceps. Mr. Mauriceau, ibid. Before you use the Crotchet, be sure the child is
dead. Dr. Chamberlen, this caveat is unnecessary to those who understand the
art aright. i. e. only the Nostrum-mongers. Dr. Chamberlen, The use of the
crotchet may be connived at when the child is dead; but because the most
careful may often times be mistaken, it cannot be approved of; as appears in
the translator's epistle to the reader. Dr. Chamberlen, page 226. Though the
Crotchet cannot hurt a dead child, yet it may endanger the woman by slipping:
So may a Lancet, Traphine, or any other instrument in the hands of those who
don't know how to use them.) Wherefore the translator of this treatise cannot
approve of it, having an easier and safer way to do this operation, as he
mentions in his preface to this book. Dr. Chamberlen, page 227. All this (viz.
the use of the Crotchet) were to no purpose, if others had the art to do it, as
the translator can, and mentions in his preface to this book.

DR. Chamberlen, page 229. Those instruments are very unsafe for the woman;
(undoubtedly, when in unexperienced hands, otherwise they are not at all
dangerous;) and having a better way, I cannot pass them without manifesting my
dislike. Mr. Mauriceau, page 194. It Is a great question, whether a living child
ought to be destroyed to save the mother? Dr. Chamberlen, This question is out
of doors, for the reason given in the foresaid preface. I Am afraid this will
prove but a very bad reason in some cases, notwithstanding it is laid down with
such a magisterial and dictatorial air, as I shall prove at a more proper time.
Mr. Mauriceau, page 195. says, It is always better of two evils to choose the
least, so we ought always to prefer the mother's life before the child's. Dr.
Chamberlen, This chapter might be very well spared, if every practitioner had
the art the translator professes in his epistle, of fetching a child, when it
comes right, without hooks, or turning it.

IF turning will do, there is never any occasion for hooks, or for his secret
either. Thus you see with what fulsome repetitions, what nauseous
recommendations of his Nostrum, he has stuffed his remarks; but has not made
one remark, that can be of any advantage to our Midwomen; and seems to have had
nothing elfse in view through the whole, but to tell them when they ought to
send for him, and to let them know, that he, etc. could serve them better than
any body else.

OUR translator, like all the rest of the Secretmongers, has given a better
character of his Nostrum, than I fancy it deserves. E. G. He has taken a great
deal of pains, and used all his art to persuade us, that he, etc. can fetch a
child, which presents right, at all times, and in all circumstances, without
hooks, or turning, etc. but how this quadrates with the two following cases,
(one of which is translated by the Doctor himself, and the other is recorded in
Mr. Mauriceau's 26th observation,) I leave the reader to judge.

MR. Mauriceau, page, 198. tells us, that in the year 1660, while he practiced
Midwifery in the Hotel Dieu, one of the Deputies had a woman whose Child she
could not posibly bring forth further than its head; therefore called the head
Midwife to her aid; who likewise used her utmost skill but in vain: And when
they had both thus tired themselves in pulling the head, I came in
accidentally, and they desired me to examine, and find the cause why the child
could not be drawn forth with all their strength, which was sufficient to have
drawn forth the shoulders, if they had been as big again as they were; which
having considered, I immediately conceived the difficulty to proceed from
something else: I then put my hand into the womb, up to the child's shoulders,
which seemed small enough to pass with ease, therefore I concluded that the
hindrance was not there.

After that, I put my hand farther up toward it is belly, which I found very
much swelled by a dropsy. I therefore told them that it was impossible ever to
deliver the woman, until the water was emptied by piercing the belly: But not
having a Crotchet in my pocket, I sent to another Surgeon of the same hospital,
and told him the story, adding withal that the child could not be born, unless
an orifice was made to empty the belly: but he would not take my advice,
imagining he could extract it with his hands; but he soon separated the head
from the shoulders, the Midwives having almost done it before. Afterward he
fell to work with his Crotchet, and in about three quarters of an hour brought
away both arms, several ribs, heart, and lungs, and tired himself heartily, yet
in all this time, he had never opened the Diaphragma, nor Abdomen, which I
advised him to do every moment, without which it was impossible to draw forth
the rest of the body. Then he gave me the Crotchet, telling me I might weary
myself as well as he had done; which I willingly accepted, knowing very well,
that instead of amusing myself, as they had done, by pulling it, I ought only
to pierce the infant's belly to let out the waters, after which all the rest
would easily follow. I then introduced my left hand as far as the side of the
infant's belly, and then with my right guided the Crotchet upon it, to the same
place, then turned its point, and struck it into the infant's belly, so that I
made a hole big enough to receive the ends of my two fingers, with which I
stretched the orifice, and the waters gushed out, so that with one hand I
easily drew out the rest of the body, to the astonishment of this Surgeon, whom
I could never persuade that the infant was so full of the dropsy. I filled the
belly afterward, through the hole I had made, and it held about five quarts. I
have set down this story, that other Surgeons may know how to behave on the
like occasions.

PRAY what could Dr. Chamberlen have done with his Forceps in this case? But
the following story will more clearly show, that he himself has been foiled,
SECRET AND ALL.

Mr. Mauriceau's observation xxvi.
Of a woman who died with her child in her womb, which could not be extracted
by an English Physician who undertook to deliver her.

ON the 19th of August, 1670. I visited a little woman, about thirty-eight
years of age, who had been in labor of her first child for four days, the
membranes being broke the first day of her illness, and yet there was hardly
any dilatation of the mouth of the womb. I ordered her to be blooded, and in
case that did not increase her pains, to give her a decoction of Senna, in
order to excite them; which succeeded so well, that next day the womb was
sufficiently dilated. Nevertheless, it was nor possible to deliver her. The
infant presented it is head, but could not advance into the passage, because of
the straitness and bad formation of the bones of the Pelvis, which made it
impossible for me to introduce my hand though I have a very small one, or any
other instrument wherewith I could deliver her. I therefore declared to the
good women, that it was not possible to deliver her at all, except by the
Caesarian section, which I did not care to meddle with, etc. But soon after I
left her, there was an English Physician, named CHAMBERLEN, recommended by
somebody to visit her.

WHEN he came and heard how it was, and what had passed, he seemed exceedingly
surprised that a Man of so much experience, as I was reputed to have, could not
deliver her; yet, for all that, he assured them, that he would deliver her in
less than half a quarter of an hour, let the difficulty be what it would:
Accordingly he set about the work, but instead of finishing it in half a
quarter of an hour, as he had promised, he worked above three hours, (SECRET
AND ALL) without any intermission, except to breath a little now and then. And
at last, having spent, to no purpose both his strength and art, and seeing the
poor woman ready to expire in his hands, he was obliged to give it up, and
declared also, that it was not possible to deliver her. The poor woman died
with her child in her belly about twenty-four hours after he left her: Upon
opening the body, I found the womb pierced and tore in several places, by the
instruments that Physician had blindly used without the guidance of his hand,
which being much larger than mine could not be introduced. Nevertheless this
Physician had come from England to Paris, about six months before, in hopes of
making his fortune. He gave it out that he had a particular secret for
delivering children when the head presented; and bragged that he could lay the
most troublesome and dangerous in half a quarter of an hour. Nay, he had even
proposed to the king's first physician, that if he would give him 10000. crowns
he would discover his secret. But the bad success of the forementioned case
put him so much out of humor, that he returned a few days afterward to
England.

DOES not this story show how little dependence there is upon secrets, though
never so positively recommended? Does not this show how cautious people ought
to be in believing of them? Does not this show, that, though they may be really
useful in some cases, yet they are not so in all, as they commonly pretend?

PREFACE. I shall now take leave to offer an apology for not publishing the
secret I mention we have to extract children without hooks, where other artists
use them, viz. there being my father and two brothers living, that practice
this art, I cannot esteem it my own to dispose of, (a pretty and reasonable
excuse indeed!) "nor publish it without injury to them; (but there was not a
word of this when he was bargaining with the French king's first Physician,)
and think I have not been unserviceable to my country, although I do but inform
them that the forementioned three persons of our family, and myself, can serve
them in these extremities, with greater safety than others.

IF Ward's Pill, or any other quack medicine, was found by experience, to be
generally of use in this, that, or the other disease, it may be sent with proper
directions, to all parts of the kingdom; so that the most distant inhabitants
would have almost the same benefit of it, with those among whom Mr. Ward lived;
and consequently Mr. Ward might very justly say, that (notwithstanding he would
not discover what his medicine was composed of, because it would be worth so
much yearly to him and his successors,) yet his country was obliged to him, for
telling them where they might purchase so beneficial a remedy.

BUT how few in the whole community could be the better for all the manual
operations in Midwifery, four Men could perform? Can four Men deliver all the
good women in England, who want their assistance, supposing they were to ride
post night and day after them? Is there any proportion between the benefit the
public would receive from the quack medicines, and the secret manual
operations of four Men? What service is it then to the country in general, for
the Doctor to tell them, that he and three others can serve them with greater
safety than other Men?

NEVERTHELESS I Am far from thinking, that the public has any right to expect,
that every private Man (who, at a considerable expense, and assiduous study,
makes any considerable discovery in manual operations, which cannot be made
universally useful, as medicines may, and really are, except they are fully and
distinctly explained,) should always communicate Gratis the fruits of his
labor and expense. No! they ought to be handsomely rewarded, not only for the
real service they have done, but to encourage industry in others.

BUT the Doctor offered to discover this secret to the French for ten thousand
crowns; pray why did he not make the same offer to his country? Had not his
country better have given each of them ten thousand crowns, than exposed so
many thousands of beautiful women, and innocent children, to the danger (...)
hooks, sharp instruments, etc. the Doctor exclaims so much against? Surely yes.

Dr. Chamberlen. page 221. says, The Author, viz. Mauriceau,) you see was only
a Surgeon. Pray what would he have him be? a Doctor, an Apothecary, or what?
Are not these operations merely chirurgical? who then can be so fit to perform
them as Surgeons? Are not the Superioris sortis ^^^^^i, who never delivered one
of them, as capable of directing for them, both before and after delivery, as
any Doctor or Apothecary who had laid several? No doubt of it! they are much
more capable! and it is very surprising they don't assert their own right, and
ours? What then can Dr. Chamberlen mean by this sneer, this sarcasm? Especially
when Mr. Mauriceau is then talking as much to the purpose, as ever he, or any
body else did, on that subject, viz. that when a woman has a violent flooding,
etc. the best way to serve her, is to deliver her as soon as possible, whether
at full time or no? Prove the contrary who can.

IN page 172. he explains himself a little more plainly. Mr. Mauriceau says, A
Surgeon ought always to endeavor to bring the children alive. Upon which the
Doctor makes the following most insolent remark, And therefore undertake what
he can safely perform, and what he cannot, leave to others that may, (pray who
be they, Doctors, Apothecaries, Shavers, or Nostrum-Mongers?) for life is not
to be played with.

IS not the good which Surgeons do their patients as evident as the Sun? E. G.
When they cut for the stone, when they perforate the scull, reduce a luxation,
etc. neither of which can be affected only by the strength of nature. But as
the learned and honest BAGLIVI frankly owns, It Is often doubtful whether the
cure, supposed to be performed even by Physicians of the first rank, was mostly
owing to nature, or the medicines, etc. which they directed. E.G. "In fevers,
small pox, consumptions, etc." What ground had he then to charge the Surgeons
with playing with life? The Doctor owns, page 14. That Surgeons only practice
Midwisery in France; and so they do, or ought to do, every where else.

BUT how far the Doctor went out of his own ken, when he talked to Surgeons in
such a magisterial and dictatorial way, in matters merely chirurgical, the
three following cases will evidently demonstrate. Case 1. Mr. Mauriceau, page
344. says, That children's gums ought to be cut with a Lancet, though Nurses
sometimes do it with their Nails. Yet our commentator says, A thin groat (a
small piece of silver) is as good or better than either. Whence it is evident,
our translator was only a Doctor. Notwithstanding he takes upon him to direct
the Surgeons in such an imperious and dictatorial way; yet in this observation,
he betrays himself, and plainly shows, he did not understand this very little
part of Surgery, even so well as the very Nurses. The method he proposes is so
far from being better than Mauriceau's, he takes upon him so freely and
publicly to correct, that it is worse than that used by the old women, as will
appear at sight, to every proper judge. Case 2. Mr. Mauriceau, page 227. says,
When by the first fastening of the Crotchet, the head is drawn a little lower,
you may loosen it out of the first place, to fasten it further up, that
stronger hold may be taken and so successively removing and fastening of it
till the head is quite born, etc. Dr. Chamberlen, "This is needless and
dangerous, in case Crotchets be used, unless they lose their hold.

CAN any thing expose a Man's judgment more than finding fault in the wrong
place? Would not this remark convince any Man that he had never used a
Crotchet, nay, that he did not know how to use it? The Doctor himself allows,
that Crotchets are absolutely necessary in some cases, and considering his
large share of practice, it is impossible but some of these very cases must fall
in his way. Pray what did he do then? Did he use the Crotchet himself? or did
he send for a Surgeon to use it for him? Case 3. Of a violent Flooding. Mr.
Mauriceau, page 89. The woman being put into a proper posture, the Surgeon
having well greased his hand, introduces the end of his fingers into the mouth
of the womb, then opens them gently to dilate it, (i. e. by little and little,
without either great violence or hurry,) wide enough to admit his whole hand;
then, if the membranes are not broke, let him break them; then, though the Head
presents, let him search for the feet, and draw it forth by them, because there
is better hold, and more easy to deliver by them, than by the head, or any
other part of the body. Dr. Chamberlen, Without it could be done without hooks,
as mentioned in the preface of the translator.

IF this is not puzzling the cause, if this is not amusing and confounding
people instead of instructing them, pray what can be called so? Is not bringing
the child out by the feet, as Mr. Mauriceau directs, bringing it out without
hooks? Besides, don't every body know, that it may be quicker brought away by
the feet than by the head; and that the sooner the woman is delivered, the
sooner the flooding will stop? Is not this making good, bad? Is not this
finding fault where there is none? Don't this prove that Mr. Mauriceau was a
good and faithful Surgeon, and that Chamberlen was only a -- Doctor.

THUS, upon the whole, I think it is evident, that Dr. Chamberlen's main design,
in his preface, and notes upon Mr. Mauriceau's book, was to puzzle, rather than
instruct the Midwomen or Midmen, to persuade them, that he, and the rest of the
Nostrum-mongers, could serve them better than any other artists; and to
represent Physicians, though unacquainted with almost every other part of
Surgery, as fitter persons to deliver women in labor than Surgeons, etc.

In 1734. Dr. HODY published 225 Cases in Midwifery, written some years before
by the late ingenious and experienced Mr. WILLIAM GIFFARD, Surgeon and
Man-midwife. In which he has given the following account of the IGNORANCE of
the Midwomen, and its fatal consequences.

CASE I. I Was fetched to the wife of a chairman, and found one arm of the
child sunk down without the outer orifice, and the shoulder and side so
engaged, and sunk so low, that I could neither return the arm, nor with all my
strength move the other parts to fetch it by the feet. Another Man-midwife --
had been there before me, who at first would not attempt any thing without a
sum of money was laid down; (a great piece of inhumanity too many are guilty
of,) but upon assurances that he should be paid, he worked upon the poor woman,
and left her in a worse condition than he found her. (Thus you see Midmen are
not all witches any more than the Midwomen.) However this was the state I found
her in, which gave me occasion to reprimand the Midwife, telling her she had
not sent for help in time, and not till she had worked upon her, which had
occasioned those parts to be funk so low, and so strongly engaged, that I could
neither return the arm, nor pass my hand (the whole passage being stopped up on
every side) to fetch it by the feet; which might have been very easily done had
I been sent for in time. The case being so desperate at first, I was at a loss
where to begin: Her pulse was very languid and low, and she was in cold sweats,
so that I feared she would die under the fatigue and pain she must of necessity
undergo. Then he twisted off the arm, and with great difficulty extracted the
rest, of the infant with his Crotchet; yet after all this woman recovered. Q.
1. Whether one in fifty recovers after such a job? Q. 2. Whether this bad
posture of the child, the great suffering and danger of the mother, might not
have been prevented, nay, and the child's life saved, had a skilful Midwoman
attended?

Case II. The child was born dead, which is generally the fate of those
children whose Placenta offers first, (Madam du Tertre, head Midwoman in the
Hotel Dieu at PARIS, and Author of one of the best books on this subject,
published in 1677. says, the Placenta offering before the child, is the most
certain sign of its being dead, Enter les signs qui nous font connoistre que
l'enfant est mort, le plus certain est lorsque l'arriere-fais est sorty avaunt
luy. Instruction familiere, etc.
) if a proper person be not at hand to deliver them immediately. Who can be so
proper, who is so likely to be in the way as a skilful Midwoman? But as long as
they want skill to perform it, the child must die before a Midman can be
brought.

CASE III. The Midwife informed me, that the navel-string was thrust into the
Vagina, beyond the Os internum, but could not inform me what other part
presented. Many Midwives are ignorant of the method of TOUCHING, which
oftentimes occasions very great misfortunes both to mother and infant, and
sometimes is the death of both, but most commonly of the child (Is not
destroying one bad enough?) which being for some time engaged in a wrong
posture, and the waters gone off, the Uterus is so collapsed, it gives great
trouble to the operator, much more pain to the mother, and very often, as I
said before, occasions the death of the infant; all which may be prevented if a
skilful operator is sent for in time. But much better, if a skilful operatrix
attended.

CASE IV. I visited a woman who had been some days in labor, and the Midwife
affirmed that the waters run off the preceding day, and that she thought a foot
presented, but upon my touching I found it to be the hand bent backwards wards
in the passage, and protruded out of the inner orifice up to the shoulder.

CASE V. The Midwife told me that one hand and the arm was sliped down into the
Vagina, and that it had laid so for some hours, and the waters, she said, were
gone of several hours before the hand was protruded. I rebuked her (as he very
well might) for not sending sooner; she alleged, for excuse, that her labor
might have succeeded in time: Then I told her that it was impossible, in the
posture the child presented, it could ever be born.

CASE VI. The Midwife told me, that one child had been born, and another
remained behind, that the membranes, with the waters, pressed forwards, and
were very tight at every pain; but the woman having flooded very much after the
birth of the first child, the Midwife could not tell me what part of the second
presented. I Blamed the Midwife for not sending for me sooner, etc. Whereupon I
passed up my hand, and found the membranes much extended with the waters, and
the legs of the infant (which the Midwife knew nothing of, not knowing how to
touch) pressed forward into the Vagina.

CASE VII. Upon examining the Midwife, at my first coming, how the child
presented, she answered, etc. This convinced me of the Midwife's ignorance in
the method and knowledge of touching, and I could wish it was not too common. I
have generally found them ignorant in this point, which often occasions the
death both of Mother and infant, (Why did not he do his endeavor to amend this
great evil? What signifies finding fault with them in every page without
attempting a remedy?) and gives a great deal of pain to the Man-midwife.

CASE VIII. I was sent for to a woman, whose child was brought out to the
shoulders, where it had stuck for about three hours; the Midwife not knowing
how to draw out the arms and the head. They had also sent for another Midwife
before I got there, but she knew not how to extricate the child out of this
snare. Then I extracted it, but the child was dead, which could not otherwise
be expected, since it had been so long held in that posture.

CASE IX. I first enquired of the Midwife, how matters stood in general, but
she giving me no satisfactory account, I descended to particulars. I then asked
her if the membranes were broke, and if so, how long before; to which she could
not give a ready answer, so that I found her thoroughly Ignorant. I next
enquired how long the navel-string had been fallen down; Her answer was,
several hours. I told her, i. e. rebuked her, etc.

CASE X. I was sent for to a person, whose child was born, and the Placenta
left behind. Upon my coming there, the Midwife told me that she had attempted,
by all methods she was mistress of, to fetch it, but could not succeed:
Wherefore, considering the length of time, from the bringing of the Foetus to
my coming, I thought no more time ought to be lost; and immediately put up my
hand, and found the inner orifice so much contracted, that at first I could
scarce pass up the ends of my two fore-fingers, but after some time I dilated
it so much, that I was able to pass my hand, etc.

This Case will show us, what difficulties people often fall into from the
Ignorance of the Midwife, in not knowing how to pass their hands as soon as the
Foetus is protruded.

CASE XI I found the Scalp was extended and separated from the Cranium. This I
judged to have proceeded from the Midwife's top rudely handling the head.

CASE XII. The Midwife being very ignonorant, was not able to give me a
satisfatory account of the case. I found the Labia Pudendi very much swelled,
etc. wherefore Irebuked the Midwife, telling her, that when she had done all
the mischief she could, then she persuaded them to send for me: This is a
common fault amongst them, not being willing to have further help, 'till
matters are come to the last extremity.

CASE XIII. I thereupon passed up my hand into the Vagina, and found the parts
somewhat swelled, by the Midwife's too rudely handling them.

CASE XIV. Upon passing my hand, I found the Midwife had been too busy, for the
arm was sunk low, and much swelled; not knowing better, she had endeavored to
bring it away in the posture it presented; whereupon I Rebuked her, telling
her, that by her so doing she had made bad work, and showed her, that it was
almost (he might have said altogether) impossible to bring it away in the
posture it came in.

CASE XV. This case should be a caution to Midwives to send for help in time,
when a child comes Footling, and not to venture (unless they are very skilful)
to bring it forwards. But whose fault is it they are not all very skilful? Why
are they suffered to practice, who are not very skilful? Would not Madam du
Tertre have laughed at any Man, who should have told her, she must not venture
to bring a child forwards when the feet presents? Are not our women as capable
of being taught as the French women?

CASE XVI. I came, and the Midwife being a Novice in her profession, was not
capable of giving proper directions. She should have advised the laboring
woman to have, kept back, as much as possible, her throws, and not forced
downwards, and she ought to have passed her hand up, and pressed against the
child's buttocks, to retain it from slipping down, whenever the pains pressed
forwards; ( or, which would have been much more to the purpose, put up her
hand, laid hold of the feet, and brought it away by them;) but the Midwife
neglecting to give this advice, or to act in this manner, I found the hip of
the infant, with the Scrotum, sunk low into the Vagina, and strongly engaged
between the bones of the Pelvis, so that I could not move it by any means.

CASE XVII. I found things very bad, which in a great measure proceeded from the
Ignorance of the Midwife; I therefore rebuked her for her carelessness, etc.

CASE XVIII. I enquired of the Midwife, if the waters were broke, how long they
had been gone off, and what part presented; She told me that the waters had
been run off some hours, but what part presented she knew not. I soon perceived
her Ignorance; for upon passing my singers, I found the membranes protruded by
the waters beyond the Os internum, into the Vagina, about the bigness os a
pig's bladder, so that the waters were not gone off, as she said, for some
hours, and being Ignorant of the method of touching, it was impossible she
could tell what part presented.

CASE XIX. I was called about six in the morning, and the Midwife told me, that
the Membranes were broke, and the waters flowed off about twelve o'clock at
night, and that the first part which presented was the elbow. I Rebuked her for
staying so long before she sent for help, and I soon discovered her Ignorance;
for she told me that she had delivered several children where the arm came
first, in the same posture, and some were born alive, etc. The child was born
dead, which I imagined to proceed from its lying so long in the posture I found
it, and the Midwife's too rudely pulling the arm when it first fell into the
passage, in hopes, as she thought, to have brought away the child in the
posture it presented. By her violent pulling she had almost separated the arm
from the shoulder.

THIS is one amongst the Many inconveniences that occur from the ignorance of
Midwives: Had I been sent for as soon as the membranes were broke, and before
the shoulder, by reiterated pains, was so strongly locked between the bones of
the Pelvis, most of my trouble, and the child's life might have been saved.
Undoubtedly! or if she had had skill enough to have done it herself.

CASE XX. When I came I found the child protruded to the hips, which hung out
beyond the Labia Pudendi, the Midwife told me that the waters run off about an
hour before; that the child presented with the feet first, and that when she
had brought it to the buttocks, it stuck there, nor could she bring it any
further. I rebuked her for not sending at first, when she found it to present
in a wrong posture; but she in excuse, as is usual amongst them, told me, that
she had brought out many children offering in that posture. ( She must indeed
have been a very ordinary Midwife if she had not.) The child from its having
lain some time so pressed, was dead, which, I told her, was very probably owing
to her neglect, in not sending sooner, when she was satisfied the child
presented wrong.

CASE XXI. Upon examination of the child's head, I found a Tumor, about the
bigness of a pigeon's egg, on its upper part, arising, as I judged, from the
Midwife's too rudely handling it, or ( which is much more probable) it is lying
so long locked between the bones. But it is their way to haul the Midwomen in,
head and shoulders, guilty or not guilty.

CASE XXII. I Rebuked the Midwife for not sending sooner, telling her the
danger she had exposed the poor woman to by her delay: She in excuse, answered
me, that she had never had such an accident before, although she had been a
Midwife above eleven years; however I found she was very ignorant.

CASE XXIII. This case (viz. the Placenta being lest behind, occasioned a
flooding) should be a caution to all Midwives not to delay sending early, and
not depend too far on their own skill and experience; for it is plain this poor
woman died a Martyr to either the Midwife's Ignorance, or vain Opinion of her
own Self-sufficiency, which too much prevails amongst them.

CASE XXIV. Passing my hand into the Vagina, I found the arm bent and broke, by
the Midwife's too rudely handling it. The child was born dead, which proceeded,
as I judged, from its long lying in so uneasy a posture, and from the Midwife's
Ignorance, in not knowing how to keep up the arm, etc.

CASE XXV. Men-midwives frequently find great difficulty in passing their hand
into the womb, when, from the Ignorance of the Midwife, they are obliged to
fetch the Placenta after the child has been born some time, the Os internum
being upon these occasions generally very much contracted. Pray is not a
Midwoman's hand easier passed at first, than a Midman's at last.

CASE XXVI. One foot presented; but the Midwife (thinking herself capable of
delivering the woman, being in her own opinion very Self-sufficient, although she
was very ignorant,) would not at first send for assistance, etc.

CASE XXVII. As soon as the Midwife found that the hands presented, she sent
for me. This is what Midwives seldom do; ( a black swan indeed!) trusting too
much to, and depending upon their own Sufficiency, which very often occasions
the loss of the child, and sometimes of the mother.

CASE XXVIII. The Midwife's Ignorance, in not knowing how to pass her hand,
occasioned this uneasiness.

CASE XXIX. This is one among the many misfortunes that attend a Man-midwife,
when he he is sent for too late, proceeding from the negligence, supineness,
ignorance, or self-sufficiency of the Midwife; which last prevails in most of
them, and is very often the occasion of the loss either of the mother or child,
or sometimes both.

CASE XXX. The Ignorance of the Midwife, in not knowing how to keep up the womb
from being forced before the head so low into the Vagina, was what added so
much to my difficulty in delivering this woman.

CASE XXXI. When I came, I found all but the head was protruded beyond the
Labia Pudendi, but that stuck above, although the Midwife had pulled so strongly,
that she had near separated the body from the head. The Midwife, being
Ignorant, did not take care to turn the child's face toward the Spine of the
mother as the body advanced. However, I brought it out in a minute's time, this
surprised all that were present, because the Midwife had been working above an
hour, without making any advance. Had I been there early, I might very probably
have saved the life of the child, but Self-sufficiency, joined with an idle
Notion that they suffer in their character if they send for a Man's assistance,
generally prevents most Midwives from sending early, by which they too often
endanger the lives of both mothers and children, and give no small trouble to
the Manmidwife.

CASE XXXII. The Midwife could not fetch the Placenta, for as she was ignorant
in the method of passing her hand into the Uterus, up to the body of the
Placenta, to examine whether it adhered to it, she had only pulled by the end
of the string which hung out, and so had very near broke it close to the
Placenta; she had made no Ligature upon the end of the string, therefore a
Hemorrhage had ensued, and the woman had lost a great quantity os blood.
Midwives very often depend too much upon their own judgment, and think
themselves Self-sufficient, so that they postpone sending for help in time,
whereby the poor women become Victims to their Ignorance or Self-conceit.

CASE XXXIIL The Child's arm presented several hours before I was sent for;
upon which I rebuked the Midwife for not sending sooner; but she, to justify
herself, had the Assurance to to tell me, that she had brought out several
children presenting in that manner; whereupon I showed her the impossibility of
it, and advised her for the future always to send for help, as soon as she
should find the hand to present first, and not, by pulling the hand, draw it
further down, and engage the shoulder in the passage, as she had now done. Pray
would it not have been much more seasonable advice to have shown her how to
pass her hand, and get hold of the feet, etc.

CASE XXXIV. The Nurse came and told me the child was born, but the Midwife was
soiled in her attempts to fetch away the Placenta. I went, and found the
Midwife was both ignorant of the cause of its being retained, and the method of
passing the hand to extract it; yet I brought it away whole in less than half a
minute's time, which much surprised both the woman and the bystanders, the
Midwife having spent so much time without being able to effect it. Sometimes a
Man gets more credit by doing nothing than by a difficult operation!

CASE XXXV. The Man-midwife's being sent for so late, too often proceeds from
the Ignorance or Self-sufficiency of the Midwife, ( but oftener from the
modesty of the women, covetousness, or real poverty of the men, etc.) who
either not knowing how to behave in difficult cases, or fearing she should
suffer in her character should she desire assistance, puts off the calling in
of a Man-midwife to the last extremity, so that the mother and child too often
become victims either to her negligence or ignorance.

CASE XXXVI. The Midwife depending upon her own Sufficiency, (although she was
very ignorant) had let the child advance too far, without taking care to turn
and bring the face backwards toward the Os Sacrum, and had for some time
endeavored to bring out the head, but to no purpose; wherefore I was at last
sent for, and found the parts very dry, and somewhat swelled, by the rude
Handling of the Midwife.

CASE XXXVII. The woman had been in labor forty-eight hours; the Midwife being
very Ignorant, could neither tell me how the Child presented, nor at what time
the membranes broke, but answered me, according to her dialect, that it was a
dry labor.

CASE XXXVIII. The child was brought into the world all but the head, where it
had stuck two or three hours before I came; the Midwife being very Ignorant,
was not able to do the business herself, nor would she send for assistance in
time, so that the child was lost, and the mother narrowly escaped.

CASE XXXIX. The Midwife, in attempting to bring away the Placenta, had
inverted the Uterus, for I found the whole body of the Uterus, with the
Placenta, adhering to it is Fundus, hanging out beyond the Labia Pudendi; I
Rebuked the Midwife for not sending sooner, and told her, that she, through her
Ignorance, was the immediate cause of this woman's death. Before I examined
her, the Midwife told me, that the Placenta was partly brought out, being
ignorant that she had also pulled out the womb, etc.

CASE XL. But the Midwife by pulling the Navel-string too rudely, had broke it
off near the Placenta, which was left in the womb. As soon as I came, I passed
up my hand, where I found the Placenta entirely separated from the Uterus, and
partly protruded into the Vagina, so that I readily brought it away, and in so
short a time, that the people that were present were greatly surprised. Had the
Midwife understood how to have passed her hand, she might easily have brought
away the burden before; and for want of this knowledge, some women fall into
violent floodings, whence faintings, convulsions, and death. A wonderful
operation indeed! But does she deserve the Name of a Midwoman who could not
have extracted it as quick as he?

CASE XLI. Had I been sent for before the membranes were broke, the waters
passed off, the arm slipped down, and the back part of the shoulder so
rivetted, I might not only have preserved the Child, but prevented the Mother's
suffering so much pain, and have likewise saved myself much fatigue and
trouble. Without doubt!

IT IS too true, that many Midwives are Ignorant "of the method of touching," (
and it is as true they might with very little trouble be taught;) and therefore
are incapable of judging in what manner the Child presents, until an arm, or
some other part is protruded into the Vagina, which is often so locked between
the bones of the Pelvis, that it is scarce possible to remove it; and too often
they depend so much upon their own sufficiency, and delay sending for
assistance in time, that both the mother and child, but more frequently the
latter, die martyrs to their presumption.

CASE XLII. I was sent for about two in the morning, the Midwife had delivered
the Child about six the evening before, but not being able, notwithstanding all
her endeavors, to bring away the Placenta, she at last left the woman, telling
her, that it would in time come away, and that she had known it retained
fourteen days without any inconveniency; but as this was a doctrine I was a
stranger to, and being on the contrary well satisfied that inconveniences
might attend, should it not be speedily drawn away; therefore --.

CASE XLIII. The child's arm was slipped out into the Vagina, which, as soon as
the Midwife observed, who was first sent for, she proposed that a Man-midwife
should be sent for, telling those that were present, that it was not a
Midwife's business; whereupon another Midwife was sent for, who pretended to do
the work of a Man-midwife, and at first gave them assurances that she would
deliver her, but after she had worked upon her for half an hour, or longer,
putting her into several postures, as kneeling, standing, etc. she left her in a
much worse condition than she found her; for being ignorant of the method of
delivery, when a child offered in the manner this did, she truly had
endeavored to draw the child forward in the same posture it presented, whereby
she had drawn the hand out, and part of the arm, beyond the Labia Pudendi, and
almost separated it at the shoulder. The temerity, joined to the ignorance of
this Midwife, very much increased the difficulty of laying her. If I had been
sent for in time, I might with much more ease have delivered the woman, and
withal have saved the Child. I have meet with some Midwives, who have had the
ignorance and assurance to tell me, that they have delivered children thus
presenting, without turning and bringing them by the feet.

In 1733. Mr. Chapman published, "An Essay on "the improvement of Midwifery."
wherein he compliments the Midwomen as follows.
Preface. I Was induced to write the following Essay on the improvement of
Midwifery, because I found that all Books hitherto written on this subject,
were calculated more for the instruction of my own sex, than the other. This
had certainly been a very reasonable inducement, had it not been a mistake. But
the forementioned Madam du Tertre, says she composed her book for the use of
the Midwives apprentices in the Hotel Dieu Composee par Margarite du Tertre,
etc. en faveur des apprentisses sage-femmes dudit Hotel Dieu.
. Madam Lovys Burgeois, whose book was translated into English, and published
in London School. says, she put it forth for the sole use of the Midwives. Is it
possible these Midwomen, and many more who might be mentioned, could have the
instruction of the Midmen chiefly in view? Why would not he believe their own
declaration?

PREFACE. I have daily, during the space of above twenty years practice, seen
many fatal mistakes committed by Midwives, Pray what sort of Midwives must
these have been, who committed fatal mistakes every day, for above twenty years
together? Ought they not to have been restrained from practicing? Nay, even
punished by the civil magistrate? -- which I think could not have happened had
they ever read a treatise so properly adapted to their capacities, and at the
same time so full and plain, as the following. Q. Whether, if they had read
Madam du Tertre's little book, they would not have found it more properly
adapted to their capacities, as full and plain, and her sentiments more
accurately expressed?

MY greatest aim in it is faithfully to instruct, and point out to them, those
dangerous Rocks on which many have been cast away; that they may either be able
to give better Assistance themselves, or at least to see the danger time enough
to call in superior advice.

NOTWITHSTANDING this formal declaration, etc. I Am afraid his greatest Aim will
appear to be much the same with Dr. Chamberlen's, viz. to tell the Midwomen
when, and in what particular cases, to send for his superior advice; and not to
instruct them how to give better advice themselves.

I have met with several Midwives, especially in this Metropolis, that are
extremely well qualified. However, ( well or ill qualified) I must beg leave to
give them this one piece of advice, viz. That where any material difficulty
occurs, they would readily, and in time, call in our assistance; as when a
child presents with it is head, but does not, with a proper degree of pain, fall
any lower; when the posture happens to be wrong, and consequently the child
requires turning; ( May not the posture be wrong, and yet not want turning? E.
G. when the fect or hips present. May not the posture be wrong, and the
Midwoman as able to turn it as any Midman?) but more especially that they would
not delay to send for a Man in case of Floodings, or other threatening Symptoms.

PRAY can this be called instructing them faithfully, as he proposes in his
Exordium? or telling them when to send for superior advice? Is it not plainly,
declaring, as the Doctor had done before, that in his opinion, they know no
more of the matter, than to receive a Child which comes away, as it were of
itself, without any the least difficulty? Would he not, had he designed to have
instructed them Faithfully how to give better assistance themselves, explained
to them, how, and after what manner, to remove all these difficulties, and
threatening Symptoms he supposes, instead of only telling them to send speedily
for superior advice? But pray what are the poor Midwomen to do in places where
no superior advice, i. e. no Midmen, are to be had? He has made no provision
for them, as Dr. Chamberlen did, page 5.

AFTER giving his directions when he thinks they should send for superior
advice, he first coaxes, and then threatens them, as the Doctor did above.

I believe this advice will not be thought impertinent by the most experienced
Midwives, who, by the by, I have ever found most ready to call in farther
assistance; and indeed they find their account in it; whilst it is quite
otherwise with those, who, from too great an opinion of their own judgment and
abilities, run great hazards, or at the best call us in too late, and so lose
their good name, and justly suffer in their reputation. The best Midwives send
early for advice upon the appearance of danger and difficulty; the suffering
Fair readily consents to it, and by this means both lives are saved. Pray are
not these two speeches both picked out of Dr. Chamberlen's preface? Pray would
not the suffering Fair have been much more obliged to her Midwoman, if she had
performed the work herself, and thereby saved her both the uneasiness and
expense of superior advice?

NAY in the following paragraph, he takes off the mask, and plainly tells them,
he has got a Secret which he must keep to himself. Pray is keeping of Secrets
consistent with his former declartion, page 42. viz. My greatest aim is
faithfully to instruct them?

WHEN the head presents, and sticks in the passage, it can only be extracted,
with safety to the child, by a Fillet, or the Forceps. The former of these I
must beg leave to be silent in, as being entirely an invention of my own, ( sub
judice lis est.) nor shall I, I hope, be censured for my so doing, any more
than the Great Dr. Chamberlen was, for his choosing to conceal the method, or
secret, whereby he could extract children in this case without hooks, where
other artists are forced to use them.

WAS there ever such an excuse heard of? Because the Great Dr. Chamberlen acted
a very ungenerous part in this affair, therefore Mr. Chapman must be excused
for doing just the same thing. Might he not as well have said, the Doctor had
been guilty of Symony, or Sacrilege, and was not punished for it; therefore he
might, for that reason, expect the same grace, in case he should take it in his
head to commit the same crimes?

IN page 71. he says, Here I only passed a Fillet over the Head, and thereby
delivered her of a living child. This method of extracting with a Fillet is an
art known but to very few; (I doubt not, he will find himself as much mistaken in
this assertion, as he was when he affirmed, that he was the second Englishman
who wrote originally and professedly on this subject; and that all Books
hitherto written on this subject were calculated more for the instruction of
the men, than of the women, etc.) "nor should it ever be attempted, but by a
very skilful operator. Such as --

PAGE 8. he says, If the child offers any other part than the head, be what it
will, the hand is to be passed gently into the womb, the Feet are to be
searched for, the child to be turned, and that way to be brought forth. Page
20. A child presenting with it is head is often to be turned, and delivered with
the feet first, in all other postures whatever always with the feet first.

BUT suppose a Foot, or the Feet, present, what need have we then to pass the
hand into the womb to fetch them? And suppose the buttocks present, and are
sunk so low in the passage, that they cannot be pushed back without danger; is
it not much easier, safer, and quicker to slip the fingers over the bend of the
thigh, or over the Ossa Ilia, and draw it forward in that posture, than to run
the risk of forcing them back to look for the feet?

THOUGH it is plain from these quotations, that Mr. Chapman, notwithstanding his
twenty-five years practice, was perfectly unacquainted with this case; yet that
good old woman, Madam du Tertre, etc. describes it very accurately, viz. that,
when the buttocks present low in the passage, the child should be extracted as
it offers Les pieds font les parties par ou l'on peut tire l'enfant lors qu'il
ne present pas la Test la primiere, except quand il se present en double,
qu'on peut le titer par les fesses. Si ce font les fesses que l'enfant
present, que faut-il fair?

Si d'avanture l'enfant est embarasse au passage, and que les cuisses soient
couchees sur son ventre, and les jambes sur la poitrine, il faut laisser venir
l'enfant en cette posture; mais s'il est eleve au dessus des Os Pubis, il faut
aller chercher un pied, etc.


.

PAGE II. Sometimes the pain shall be strong and true, the head of the child
very low, and bearing forcibly down every pain; yet the mouth of the womb (loath
as it were to open) shall be but very little dilated, even after many hours
pain. E. G. I visited a woman, who had been many hours in labor, the head of
the child lay in the Vagina, so low in the pains, that the unskilful Midwife,
(who had never touched the mouth of the womb, which lay more than ordinary
backwards) had given hopes of delivery the very next pain. Here I did no more
than with my finger dilate and cast the part (viz. the mouth of the womb) back,
and so in a few minutes opened the door, and released the little prisoner. Pray
would not Madam du Tertre's finger have released the prisoner as soon and as
safely as his did? That there has been great difficulties occasioned by the
lothness of the mouth of the womb to open, viz. in elderly women, when callous,
schirrous, etc. no Man will will deny. But there is not the least sign of any
difficulty or lothness of the mouth of the womb to open, in this case Mr.
Chapman brings, to prove that the pains may be strong and true, etc. and yet
the mouth of the womb, loath as it were to open, shall be very little dilated.
The difficulty in his case consisted only in the unnatural situation of the Os
Tincae, which prevented the head's pressing directly on it, otherwise it would
have opened with all imaginable ease and speed; as you see it did when he
touched it with his finger.

PAGE 29. -- Dipping the infant's hand, when hanging out of the womb, in cold
water, rubbing it with ice, or touching it with a wet cloth, which some
ignorant Midwives practice, etc. Pray how many Midwomen did he ever know guilty
of these fooleries?

PAGE 30. I once delivered a woman, where the child's arm had been eighteen
hours in the world, and much swelled by the long time, and Ignorance of the
Midwife, who pulled violently at the arm every pain; not knowing that it was
impossible to deliver a full grown infant by that method.

PAGE 40. Or perhaps pull down the Fundus Uteri, and so invert the Matrix;
which is a case I have several times met with, after rough and ignorant
Midwives; which may serve as a warning to others how they pull at the string,
etc.

PAGE 41. He says, That most Midwives tie the string at too great a distance
from the child's belly, which occasions Ruptures, etc. afterward. It is very
certain however, that more than two inches of the string itself from the Navel
is unnecessary; whereas I have commonly known Midwives leave five or six.

HERE Mr. Chapman again fancies he has told us a secret, but if you look into
that good old woman, Madam du Tertre, you will find these words, " Elle nouera le
cordon, ou ombilic a "deux doigts du nombril de l'enfant, etc. i. e. she must
tie the string two inches from the child's Navel. Where now is the mighty
secret he makes such a fuss about? Is it any thing more than an old woman told
us before he was born?

PAGE 49. Few Midwives are sufficiently apprised of this unhappy Symptom. viz.
A violent flooding.

I differ so far from Mr. Chapman in this assertion, that in my opinion, there
is not one Midwoman in a thousand who knows not, that a violent flooding will
either occasion abortion or death.

PAGE 56. I was called to a woman, who had lain ten or twelve hours with the
head of the child born; but the Midwife being Ignorant of the pains going off;
suffered the infant to stop there.

CASE of a violent Flooding, page 64. One of her friends was of opinion that
she ought to be delivered; but the Midwife resisted, and said, that she never
yet had forced a labor, and that she would hot begin then; terrifying the
unhappy sufferer, by telling her, that if she was delivered she would certainly
die. And so she did, because she was not delivered.

PAGE 69. I was called to a woman whose Vagina came down before the head of the
child, hanging far out of the body. This by an ignorant Midwife, was taken for
a water, and accordingly she had scratched and endeavored to break the
Membrane, as she foolishly thought it.

PAGE 81. I attended a woman who was delivered by natural pains in about two
hours; upon passing my hand, as my constant practice is, immediately to fetch
the Placanta, I found another child, which I soon brought away, with two
distinct Placenta's. Pray is it not every body's practice to pass their hand
immediately, and examine if there is any more children, and if no more to fetch
the Placenta? What then is there extraordinary in it, that it deserves to be
noted so emphatically, viz. as my constant practice is? Did not Madam du
Tertre, etc. do so Elle doit prendre guard qu'il n'y ait point un autre enfant
avaunt de travailler a delivrer la femme, etc. Et sur tout se souvenir de ne
jamais delivrer la femme, que premierement lon ait remarque qu'il n'y ait point
un autre enfant.
.

Now had an ignorant Midwife been concerned in this case, who had only taken
the first child and Afterbirth, the last would probably have been left behind;
(but suppose an experienced Midwife had been concerned, how would it have been
then? Was there any such great Feat done by him in this case, which she could
not have done as well?) and so either violent floodings, or a bad fever would
have ensued; and, as the woman was before very ill and extremely weak, it would
very likely have cost her Life. Thus you see, let a Midwoman be present, or not
present, guilty, or not guilty, it is all one, they must be hauled in, and
condemned, for an imaginary, as well as for a real fault.

PAGE 83. I was sent for in great haste to a woman in labor, but on my arrival
found her dead. I conjectured she had died by flooding, but was told she had
not; however, the Midwife told me, that the Afterbirth stuck so fast in one
part, that she was not able with all her strength to take it from her. Upon
which I desired to see the corpse, and found, to my great surprise, that the
Matrix was inverted, and hung down between her thighs, with the Placenta
adhering to its Fundus, which I separated before the Midwife, and several
Matrons there present, and convinced them all of the dismal accident. This
woman had it seems a very good and easy labor of the child; but then she
Midwise pulled hard at the Navel-string, and so brought down the Matrix, which
as soon as she could take hold of, she did; and then pulled with fresh
violence, and not being deterred by the loudest cries, the poor miserable woman
fell into Convulsions and Deliquiums, and soon expired. This was a young
healthy Mother cut off in the bloom of life, and cast into the cold arms of
Death, just as she was about to clasp her Firstborn in her own. A shocking
case indeed!

PAGE 84. I have been called to three women, where I found the Vagina quite
broke through in the back part, by the Midwife's rudely thrusting up her hand,
in order to come at the opening of the womb, which in all these three happened
to lie very forwards, under the Os Pubis. Two of these died in a few days
after, and the other recovered, beyond my expectation.

PAGE 86. I was sent for to a gentlewoman, who kept a tavern in Ipswich. The
child was Dead, and the mother Flooding. She was attended by no less than two
Midwives and a Surgeon, just then set out in the profession. When they had all
used their endeavors, to little or no purpose, I was called in, and delivered
her in a minute. I left her under the care of Dr. Beeston, but she died in six
or seven days.

MR. Chapman indeed has not told this young Gentleman's name, but has described
him so well that I doubt there is not a Man in all Ipswich, nor perhaps twenty
miles round, but can tell who he means. What injury might not such a tale do a
worthy young fellow? but how consistent this story is with the advice he gives
to others, page 114. I leave the reader to determine.

PREFACE. But the dignity of this art will appear to every person in a much
more advantageous light, if we reflect on the LEARNING of the professors of it.
E. G. Dr. C --, Dr. M --, Dr. W --, Dr. G --, Dr. A --, Dr. B --, Dr. Gregoire
Tota notus in urbe! etc.

THE improvements these GREAT Men have made in this art, have effectually wiped
away that load of Slander and Ignominy with which this profession was formerly
branded.

PRAY have nor ninety-nine in a hundred of these GREAT Men he talks of, kept
their improvements (if they ever made any) to themselves? Don't most of them
now, as well as He, pretend to have Secrets? Don't they endeavor to puzzle, at
the same time they make a show of instructing others? Don't they very seldom,
if ever, consult together, as they always ought to do in difficult or dangerous
cases? What can hinder them, except the fear of discovering the insignificancy
of their pretended secrets, or their real ignorance? Nay, Dr. Chamberlen
himself page 91. blames them for this, and very justly observes, even with some
regret, this great fault in practitioners. It were to be wished rather than
hoped for, that practitioners, in difficult and dangerous cases, (whereof they
have no certain knowledge) would consult, and not destroy one or more, by
undertaking what they cannot well perform, or discourage patients from sending
for other help or advice; putting life in balance with their reputation.

I very readily agree with the Doctor, that practitioners in Midwifery should
consult together, when any thing very difficult or dangerous occurs, with the
same freedom and unreservedness as in other cases of Surgery, viz. Luxations,
Fractures, Mortifications, etc. Wherein consists the disreputation of
consulting in this, more than in any other case? Are there not more lives
concerned in these, than in any other cases? Is not consulting the only way of
preserving, instead of losing their reputation, and the patients lives?

IN 1735. Mr. Chapman published a Treatise on Midwifery; in the preface to
which he says, I own I had some assistance in regard to the diction; and did
not send my papers to the press until that was revised and corrected.

CAN he be a tolerable judge of diction himself, who suffers his friend to
write Woman-Midwife, Women-Midwives, etc. Words used by no body, except the
learned Dr. Maubray, who Mr. Chapman or his Corrector calls, that ingenious and
laborious author. But to give a specimen, first;, of his Ingenuity: he begins a
large book, which he calls the whole art of Midwifery, etc. Thus, Sect. I. cap.
1. Of God, cap. 2. Of Nature, cap. 3. Of Man, cap. 4. Of the Soul. Sect. II.
cap. 1. Of Maidenhood, cap. 2. Of Virginity, cap. 3. Of the Virgin-disease,
cap. 4. Of Love, cap. 5. Of Copulation, etc. Now! pray what relation, what
connection, is there between these out-of-the-way subjects and Midwifery? Might
he not as properly have introduced what he had to say about Midwifery, with an
account of Rat-catching, Rabbit-breeding, or Sow-gelding?

PRAY does it show most Ingenuity or Stupidity, to jumble several subjects
together, which have no manner of relation, connection, or analogy with one
another, or with his main design, by way of introduction? Secondly, of his
Laboriousness: I cannot but own that every page is labored, but in such a
manner, that he often forgets, in less than a leaf, what he intended to account
for or prove, and leaves you as much in the dark as he found you: and that he
has spent a great deal of labor upon collecting from Romances, Popish legends,
etc. a parcel of idle, groundless, nay ridiculous tales, and tells them with
all imaginable gravity, and seeming earnestness; and very seriously undertakes
to account for unaccountables. E. G. Page 58. he tells us, "St. Austin" (and
who would not believe a popish saint, tho he asserted that he saw a Rabbit
kitten Monkeys, Pole-cats, or Foxes? writes of a Man who could sweat whenever
he had a mind. And I have likewise known some persons my self, who could weep
and shed abundance of tears at will and pleasure. Utrum horum? "Yea, and
farther yet, many learned Authors Pontan, Amat. Lusitan, etc.
testify, by diverse examples, that Women have been turned into Men; which some
attribute to the force of imagination. But, though I am no ways to question the
veracity of what so many excellent men have confirmed; (Is there any other Man
living, who would not question them?) yet I think we may find more probable
reasons for it, than all the Powers of IMAGINATION. Whereof I shall mention that
which seems to be the most rational cause, viz. an extinguished or latent
FORMING FACULTY, Here. Sax. praelect. pract. part iii. cap.30.
which (however) sometimes has Exerted itself again, like the BLAZING of a
raked or resuscitated Fire.

I hope Mr. Chapman will explain this ingenious account of this incredible
phenomenon in his next edition, for, I must own, as it stands, it is far beyond
my comprehension, and that the account he gives of it is so very sublime, that
it rather puzzles than instructs me. Pray what does he mean by "an extinguished
or latent forming Faculty?" And wherein lies the analogy between that, and "the
Blazing of a raked or resuscitated Fire?"

HE has been so justly and tartly reprimanded for the absurd and false account
of the Sooterkin, de Suyger, or Sucker, by the late reverend and learned Dr.
Archibald Mitchel, The Sooterkin dissected, 1726.
Utriusque Medicinae Doctor, that I shall only add one observation to what he
has advanced, viz. that Dr. Maubray had the assurance to assert, in the
forementioned book, page 376. that he had talked to some of the most learned
Men, in the Seven Provinces, about this Sooterkin, de Suyger, or Sucker, and
that they ingenuously told him, that it was so common a thing, that scarce one
woman in three escaped this kind of strange birth; nay! and that his own
practice among them afterward confirmed it, so much, that he always as much
expected the thing de Suyger, as the child itself! Is it not surprising that he
did not catch a few of these little Demons or Moodiwarps as he calls them, and
keep them in a cage, rat-trap, or in some other more curious mechanical
contrivance, for the conviction of Dr. Mitchel, and other infidels? Pray does
such a writer as this deserve the epithets of ingenious and laborious? Wherein
does his ingenuity appear? wherein is his labor of any use? Pray can any thing
expose a Man's judgment more than laughing or hissing, praising or finding
fault, in the wrong place?

WHAT a splutter Mr. Chapman makes, page 59. about his breaking the Membranes
of the second child, in order to bring it away by the feet, as if he had
discovered something new. And then he tells us, he is not a little pleased to
find Dr. Maubray agree with him exactly in this point, and advise this manner
of proceeding, in almost the same words used by him on this occasion, though the
words used by Dr. M. are very different from his, nay, they are perfect
nonsense. E. G. He says, I would fetch the second child by the feet, in case
the second Flooding is not yet over, etc. Pray what does he mean by the second
flooding? Mr. Chapman answers and says, that by the second flooding he must
mean the flowing of the waters; but who, besides he, ever called the flowing of
the waters a flooding? Every body else means a dangerous flux of blood by a
flooding. But if he had looked back as far as Madam du Tertre, etc. he would
have found that very method strongly recommended, and much better, shorter, and
clearer expressed, than either he or Dr. Maubray have done it Page 96. Si elle
remarque qu'il y a un autre enfant, elle nouera le cordon, ou ombilic a deux
doigts du nombril de l'enfant, and fera une second ligature a quatre doigts au
dessus de la premiere ligature; puis elle coupera le cordon enter les deux;
apres qu'elle aura oste and done l'enfant a quelqu'un, elle portera la main
dans la matrice pour percer les membranes, dans les quelles le second enfant
est contenu: S'il vient mal, elle ira chercher les pieds, and si vient la test
la premiere, elle pressera la mere de fair quelque effort; car il est facile a
l'enfant de sortir les passages estant ouverts: Mais si la femme est foible,
and qu'elle manque de courage, and que l'enfant soit encore haut dans la
matrice, elle ira chercher les pieds comme si venoit mal, cela se pouvant fair
sans aucun accident, pourveu que ce soient des persons qui scachent leur
mestier.
.

HE makes again, page 65. as great a rout about extracting the Placenta, for
three pages together, as if no body had known any thing of the matter before he
taught them. E. G. The Placenta is never to be left to be shut up in the womb,
whether the labor has been natural or not; and I have the satisfaction of
finding Dr. Maubray recommending this practice. A great satisfaction indeed!
But pray can he find any body who does not recommend it, as well as he and Dr.
Maubray?

HE censures Dionis page 68. for saying, That the Placenta in an Abortion of
two or three months, may be left to come away of itself. Which undoubtedly may
very often be done without any danger, though it is certainly safer to bring it
away at first, if sent for in time; but if the child has been come away some
time, I should give myself no trouble about it till a flooding appeared.
Because the irritation caused by the fingers, when the Os Tincae is almost
closed, may be more apt to cause an inflammation, flooding, etc. than letting it
alone; nay, I knew it once left whole (by the obstinancy of the mother, who
could by no means be persuaded to have it taken away,) between the fourth and
fifth month, and yet she did very well. Nay that experienced Midman Mr.
Giffard, is also of the same opinion, Of two evils the greater ought to be
shunned, there being less danger in leaving part of the Afterbirth, which will
very often, without doing any great harm, come away with the Lochia, than in
using any force in extracting it, by which we very often hurt the womb. Pray
can he imagine Mr. Dionis did not do the needful, in case a flooding did
succeed?

BUT he finds no fault with him, where I think he richly deserves it, when he
says, Paris edit. lib. ii. cap. 15.
the Os Tincae in a violent flooding, is more conveniently dilated with an
instrument, and the false concepttion, etc. extracted with a pair of Forceps,
than by the fingers. If this is not finding fault in the wrong place, pray what
is? Is it not a most dangerous, nay, and unnecessary practice?

PAGE 171. He gives one instance of a child he delivered with the buttocks
foremost. But pray how does this quadrate with what he says, page 11. of the
same book; If the child offers any other part than the head, the hand is to be
passed into the womb, the feet searched for, the child to be turned, and
brought forth by them.

PAGE 174. I was unwilling to have recourse to art. (Is it not the art of
Midwifery, which the Midwomen have been taught, the only thing which
distinguishes them from other women? Are not they obliged to make use of their
art at every labor they are called to? Why then does he so often make use of
the words Art and Artists, and only apply them to himself or some other Man?
Will Not any one who reads Madam du Tertre's little book be convinced, that she
has shown more art and better diction, than either Dr. Maubray, or --. Does her
being a woman make it improper to say, she had recourse to art, or that she was
an artist.) But after two hours trial, finding no advantage from her pains, I
was forced to it. I first made an attempt with the Fillet; but the young
creature's pulse began to sink, and her pains falling off a little, I chose to
take the most Speedy, as well as the most secure Method, viz. the Forceps, and
delivered her in about two Minutes.

PRAY is not this fairly owning, that the Fillet (he makes a secret of page
17.) is neither so Speedy, nor so Secure a Method as the Forceps? Why then does
he keep it a secret? To what purpose can he do it? When he, at the same time
confesses the Forceps, (which he has given us a print of, though a very
indifferent one, and nothing new therein,) to be preferable.

THEN he goes on in the same page 17. and says, But I have been told, since the
first publiccation of my Essay, that the Fillet is so far from being an
invention of mine, that it its generally, or at least very frequently used. I
own indeed, that it may be commonly used in turning a child, by securing one
foot with it, as I have directed; but do not believe the manner of passing it
over the head to be so universally known and practiced.

DAVENTER, in the appendix to his Ars Obstertricandi, published in 1701.
describes and very much approves of a Fillet's being passed over the child's
head in order to extract it. And I myself have seen eight or ten different
sorts of them, contrived and used by different practitioners. Pray was not Dr.
Birch's Fillet put up to be sold for 500 l. by the late excellent Surgeon Mr.
Jos. Symond's? Has not Dr. Sandys had one for many years? Nay I hardly know one
who has not, in one shape or other, How then can Mr. Chapman expect to fob us
off with saying, that all other people's are for the foot, and his only for the
head? Must not he think us very weak, and very illiterate if we believed him?
Might he not with as much reason assert, that he or Dr. Maubray were the first
inventors of breaking the Membranes of the second child, in order to bring it
away presently by the feet; or of directing the Placenta to be extracted before
the Uterus closed upon it, or of tying the Navel-string within two inches of
the child's belly, etc. all which have been told us by Madam du Tertre.

THEN he winds up the foresaid Girl's case, page 174. with these solemn
reflections on his own good conduct, and the mishaps which would have befali'n
this poor woman had not he been with her. Had a Midwife been called to this
person some days, not to say weeks, before, when her pains and complaints began
to vary, and (as is common with young and unexperienced Midwives, put her upon
her labor too early, which I carefully avoided) considering the position of
the child, what must have been the consequence? (Something very frightful
undoubtedly!) And even had a Man been called, who was unacquainted with the use
of that noble and safe instrument the Forceps, he must have destroyed the child.

BUT suppose a knowing Midwoman, such a one as Madam du Tertre, etc. had been
with her, in the room of his young and unexperienced one, would not she as
carefully have avoided putting her upon her labor before her time, as Mr.
Chapman did? And supposing a Man had been there who had no Forceps about him,
but was well acquainted with the use of Daventer's, Birch's, or any other
Fillet, except Mr. Chapman's Secret, (which he owns himself, page 59. would not
do,) could not he have extracted the child with as much safety as he did with
the Forceps?

MR. Chapman, page 95. tells us the following story: A fine young lady, in
labor with her first child, was seized with a flooding, and the arm of the
infant presented. She immediately sent for a Physician, who had lately taken
upon him to practice Midwifery, BUT WAS SO LITTLE ACQUAINTED WITH THE ART, THAT
HE NEGLECTED THE ONLY THING NECESSARY IN THAT CASE, viz. a speedy delivery by
turning the child; and employed restringent or styptick medicines. After some
hours another gentleman was called in, but the lady was now very much weakened,
and the artist, apprehensive of her expiring under his hands, or immediately
after delivery, which indeed too often happens, would make no attempt, but
abandoned her to her approaching fate. She lived some hours after, and then
died. Im persuaded it will be allowed by the best judges, that, had she been
immediately delivered, her life might have been saved. I received this account
from a worthy matron, who was present during the whole time.

MR. Giffard mentions a case of the same kind, therefore I choose to place them
together. I was sent for about five in the afternoon, to a woman at Battersea,
who had been delivered of three children about three the preceding morning, but
the Midwife had left the afterburthens, (monsterous and fatal ignorance) having
broke off two of the strings; she not knowing how to pass her hand to fetch
them, and being called away to another woman, had left her in this condition:
(Could a Turk believe there were any wholesome laws in a country where such
barbarities were not severely punished?) Another Midwife was sent for, but she
would not attempt to bring them away, fearing the woman should die, and her
death be laid to her charge; (poor unhapy woman!) so when I came I found the
woman in the agonies of death, her whole mass of blood being drained away by
the continual flooding, (viz. for fifteen hours) I immediately brought them
away, but the woman's blood and spirits were so much exhausted before, that she
expired in less than an hour afterward; so that this woman fell a sacrifice to
the ignorance of one Midwife, and the timidity of the other, for had the
burdens been brought away at first, before she had lost so much blood, she had
been in no danger of dying. They had sent for one Dr. --, at --, who instead of
advising them to fetch the burdens away, or coming himself to do it, had sent
forcing Medicines, which would of consequence increase the flooding, and so
hastened her death. The three children were all born alive and well. Who can
read this case without being shocked at it?

HAS any of the forementioned women committed greater Blunders than these
Doctors? Is it not evident from these stories, that the Doctor or Apothecary
Midmen, are sometimes as ignorant as the lowest class of Midwomen? Pray where
could these Doctors have been admitted to their degrees? Must it not have been
in some popish country, where orthodoxy is reckoned a better recommendation,
than the knowledge of diseases? Where visiting chapels three or four times a
day is thought more conducive to the making a good Physician, than frequenting
the hospitals as often? Don't this show that we want a proper school for Midmen
as well as for Midwomen?

MR. Chapman, page 31. tells us of A woman who had been twice or thrice
delivered by a Man, of children that always presented with the head, which the
operator took a fatal freedom with, viz. using a hook, (Pray how could he tell,
who was not present, but that all these children were dead? That he was obliged
to use a hook, because of the largeness of the child's head, shoulders, or
belly? That he was forced to destroy the child to save the mother? Wherein then
consists this fatal freedom he talks of? Ought not a Man to be very sure before
he accuses another after this manner?) at last sent for me. I think he is much
to blame for not telling us, whether this fatal freedom taker was a Doctor or
an Apothecary Midman?

THAT excellent Anatomist Dr. Nicholls, in his Compendium Anatomicum, published
in 1733. and republished 1736. has the following remarkable passage, In omni
malo situ, ut and in rebus desperatis, pedibus extrahetur Foetus. i. e. In
every wrong posture, as also in desperate cases the child is to be extracted by
the feet.

Now, pray is it not a wrong posture when the buttocks present? And yet the
child may be brought away with great safety both to it and the mother when they
present, without looking for the feet, vid. page 46, 58, etc. The case may also
be very desperate, and yet not possible to bring the child away by the feet. E.
G. When the head is too large and sticks in the passage, when the head is born,
but sticks because of the largeness of the shoulders, or when the belly is full
of water, as in the case mentioned page 14. etc.

DR. C -- writes thus, 1720. Cum Vagina sit nimis angusta, vel pelvis
naturaliter parva, vel Foetus solito major, una nonnuquam continua rima seu
scissura ab vulva ad anum, fit, quod valde periculosum est and mulierem, si
evadat, in posterum sterilem reddit.

THIS case I have found, by repeated experience, not to be at all dangerous, in
persons otherwise healthy; and am satisfied that it will contribute as little
to making them barren as a broken leg.

Deductions from the premises.
THUS you see what a number of children have been lost, what a number of women
have suffered great and needless pains, and have been brought into the utmost
danger of their lives, nay have actually fallen Martyrs, Sacrifices, or
Victims, as they term it, in the very flower of their age, to the imprudence
and ignorance of Midwomen, nay, and Doctor Midmen, vid. page 62, 63. and these
only from the accounts of what fell under the cognizance of two Midmen, viz.
Giffard and Chapman. But pray how high may we suppose the account might have
risen, if every Midman, etc. who practiced in England, since the end of the
last century, i. e. thirty-five years back, had also made up their accounts?
What a black list would it be? Is it not shocking to think on it? Are not these
accounts of their blunders enough to frighten the women from ever trusting to a
Midwoman any more? But if the Midwomen in, and about London and Westminster,
are so generally and so grossly ignorant, as those gentlemen have represented
them, what must they be in the country? What havoc must they make among his
Majesty's subjects? What numbers of fine women and children must daily fall a
sacrifice by the very hands, proh dolor! from whom they expected relief? Is not
this a melancholy and deplorable case? Is it not an evil which demands both a
speedy and an effectual remedy? Can any thing better deserve the attention even
of the Legislature itself? But granting their ignorance to be as great as they
suppose, pray will calling of names, such as Rude, Rough, Negligent, Ignorant,
Foolish, Novice, Obstinate, Over-confident, Supine, Unskilful, Conceited,
Self-sufficient, Errand Midwives, etc. or Rebuking, Blaming, Checking, and
Reprimanding, etc. these gentlemen have so liberally bestowed upon them, make
them more prudent or judicious, or enable them in any degree to give better
assistance themselves, and thereby put a stop to the great evil they complain
of so loudly? Surely no!

PRAY have these Gentlemen Complainants proposed any other method, to prevent
for the future, this calamitous, this dismal, this inhuman practice, except to
send for one of them, upon every little trifling difficulty? Is not this making
mere Nurses of the Midwomen, and -- of their patients? Is it not telling them
plainly, that they neither do, nor ever shall know any more of the matter, by
any information they will give them, than ( what they knew before) just to
receive a child which drops into their hands? Nay it is much worse, it is making
mere Jack-calls of them; i. e. They must hunt about in search of Their prey,
and then send for Them to devour it. But these gentlemen's scheme, of being
consulted upon every little difficulty, is, and always will be, impracticable
in many cases, even in London it self, and much more in the country, even though
the Midwomen were as much at their Beck as they themselves could desire? 1.
Because some women are so unseasonably modest, or obstinate, that they cannot
be prevailed on, on any account, to admit of a Midman, until it is too late. 2.
Because some husbands are as much against having their wives laid by Men, as
they themselves are. 3. Because some people are so very covetous, that they
will not suffer a Midman to be sent for soon enough to do any good. 4. Because
some people are so very poor, that they cannot bear the expense of a Midman. 5.
Because some Midmen are so very inhuman, that they will not touch a poor woman,
except they are paid first, vide page 24. 6. Because sometimes Midmen cannot be
got in time, etc. What would They have the poor Midwomen do in these cases? Are
They to be blamed for other people's Tempers, Opinions, or Inhumanity? Though
They have been often to blame, yet they are not always blameable. What then
must we do? Must we always employ Men? Or continue to stand idly by, and suffer
our wives and children to be thus cruelly massacred by ignorant and unhallowed
hands? Must we never attempt the cure of this Malignant and most Pestilent
distemper, by which such numbers have been, and daily are destroyed, because no
body has hitherto endeavored to do it? No! We must apply an effectual remedy,
if it can be found, Charity Humanity, and the strongest ties of nature (viz.
the preservation of our wives and children) oblige us to do it.

BUT how? What Method will, or can, effectually prevent the disasters
complained of above, for the future? The ignorance of the Midwomen is,
undoubtedly the principal, if not the sole cause of these dire events; and
their unskilfulness is certainly owing to their want of a proper education, and
not to their want of capacity, and consequently is more their misfortune than
their fault. Therefore, the only method by which this fatal distemper can be
cured, and all its bad consequences for the future avoided, is to put it in the
power of the Midwomen to qualify themselves thoroughly, and at a moderate
expense, in all the parts of their most necessary office, before ever they are
permitted to practice: (And then they, who did not readily embrace the
opportunity, would not only be deservedly blamed, but ought to be punished by
the civil Magistrate:) E. G. They ought to be well instructed, 1. In the
knowledge of the nature and situation, not only of the parts of generation in
women, but also of the circumjacent parts which may be affected by, or may
obstruct delivery; and with the nature and use of the Membranes, Waters,
Navel-string, Placenta, etc. of the Foetus. 2. In the cause and cure of these
disorders and accidents, peculiar to women during their pregnancy, and after
their delivery. 3. In the art of Touching, (to the want of which, most of the
blunders complained of above, were owing, viz. leaving the Placenta behind,
Dragging the womb inside out, Mistaking the arm for the foot, the Hips for the
Head, Thrusting their fingers through the Vagina, etc.) whereby they can not
only tell the present state of the woman at any time of her gestation, but also
even prevent many of the difficult and dangerous labors (being always sent for
so early) which now happen; E. G. The membranes being broke, and often before,
they may certainly tell by the touch, what parts present, then supposing it is
the navel-string, hips, hand, or any other part but the head, advancing in a
right posture, they may at first appearance (the parts being then so moistened
by the waters) be easily put back, the feet sought for, and the child extracted
by them: Whereas, when they have not art and jugement enough to take this
favorable opportunity, nature her self offers; the woman is spent with
fruitless pains, the child advances in a wrong posture, or too slowly, if in a
right one, her body grows dry, the womb collapses, and contracts so closely
about it, and the child is so jammed, and locked between the bones of the
Pelvis, that it cannot be extracted without the greatest difficulty and danger,
by the most dexterous hands. And how many fall under, or soon after such
operations, the forementioned cases abundantly show. Pray is it not much
easier and safer to prevent such blunders, than to undertake thecure of them
afterward? 4. In the most rational Methods of delivering women, at any time of
their gestation, of a child, false conception, or mole, with jugement,
dexterity, and expedition. 5. In the knowledge of those cases where instruments
are absolutely necessary, that they may send directly for a Surgeon, instead of
fatigueing the mother, and endangering both, by needless delays and fruitless
attempts. 6. In the method of using them themselves, where no Surgeon can be
had. Prestat anceps quam nullum adbibere remedium.

To which method of qualifying themselves, I doubt not the Midwomen will object
and say, that they would readily be at any reasonable expense and fatigue, to
be so thoroughly instructed in all the parts of their office, as I propose: but
it is not in their power, they have no opportunity of following this scheme. How
can they do it? The Midwomen cannot, and the Midmen will not instruct them. What
then would you have them do? Can you blame these good women then, for doing as
well as they can, nay as well as their Mistresses who taught them the little
they do know, though not so well as they would, had they had the opportunities of
being instructed, as abovementioned? To which I answer, I own their Plea to be
just and reasonable, until these opportunities are put in their power.

THE Midmen, I doubt not, will object and say, that the Midwomen want both
Capacity and Strength (instruct them as ye please) to perform what I propose.
To which I reply, That this is only an artful and groundless insinuation, and
do affirm, ( ore rotundo, plenis buccis) that it is not want of Capacity,
Docility, Strength, or Activity, but merely want of fit and full instructions
in all the parts of their office, which disables them to perform it, in all
cases (excepting where instruments are necessary) with as much Ease, Safety,
and Expedition, as the most dexterous Midman; which is evident to a
demonstration, from the successful practice of the Midwomen in the Hotel Dieu
at Paris, (the best school for Midwomen now in Europe) where they hardly ever
want the assistance of a Surgeon, excepting where instruments must be used:
Which is frankly owned by Monsieur de la Motte, who says, that during the space
of six months, wherein he attended amongst the women in the Hotel Dieu at
Paris, there was but one hard labor happened where there was the least
occasion for a Surgeon, and even that was at last finished by nature; and in
that time there were above four hundred delivered, almost all by the
Apprentices, and very rarely by Madam du Tertre, who was then first Midwife. I
have also been informed lately, by a correspondent at Paris, that there are now
about two thousand women delivered in that hospital, communibus annis, without
the assistance of a Surgeon, excepting as above. Would not any person then be
deservedly laughed at who should assert, that our women are not as capable of
performing their office, had they the same instructions, as the French women?

BUT this charge of the Midmen will appear still more groundless, if we
consider the nature of the blunders they are charged with by Dr. Chamberlen,
Giffard, and Chapman, in the cases before mentioned, viz. of Pulling at the
child's arm, Inverting the Matrix, Mistaking the hand for the foot, Leaving the
Placenta behind, Being ignorant of the art of Touching, etc. etc. Pray do these
charges prove their want of Capacity, Docility, or Strength? Surely no! All
that can be reasonably deduced from them, is, that they want a proper
education, which is their misfortune more than their fault, and what I Am
endeavoring to put in their power to have. Pray is there a Midwoman in England
so stupid, as not to be easily convinced, that pulling at the arm is wrong and
to no purpose; that tugging too hard at the Navel-string, or laying hold of the
fund of the womb, instead of the Placenta, will invert the Uterus; or, that
missing their time to take away the Placenta, when the passage is open, makes
it both difficult, painful, nay, and dangerous to extract it afterward; or
that could not with proper pains be instructed, to act rationally in these or
most other cases? Pray is there any branch of Surgery in which so many of the
family of -- have been and are engaged, as in the business of Midwifery? (Yet
some of them are very learned and knowing Men.) An affair of such vast
importance to mankind.

How can it be made appear, that Doctors, Apothecaries, and the lowest class of
Surgeons, who are as little acquainted with the other principal operations of
Surgery, as the very women themselves, are more capable of performing these
operations than They, who have much more practice, and many of them as good
capacities? Pray wherein consists the secret? It requires no Mathematics, no
skill in Philosophy, no University learning at all, otherwise most of the
Midmen would be distanced as well as all the Midwomen. Has not all ages
produced women who have made a figure in the most sublime parts of learning,
and in all manner of curious and useful arts; and also illiterate thick-headed
Priests, Lawyers, and Physicians? All which is occasioned by nothing so much as
having, or wanting, a proper education. Why then, is it not rational to
suppose, that they might also be made capable of assisting their own sex, at
that time when it is least proper for Men to come near them?

BUT now to come to the main point, viz. How the method I propose for the
regular instruction of the Midwomen, can be put in execution? To which I
answer: 1. That an hospital be erected, E. G. in London or Westminster (at the
public expense, by donation, or subscriptions, as several Almshouses,
Infirmaries, Hospitals, etc. of far less consequence to the Commonweal, have
been and are daily carried on) for the reception of about two or three hundred
poor women who are big with child. 2. That a proper number of Midwomen be
appointed to attend them. 3. That two Surgeon Midmen be appointed to assist
these Midwomen in all extraordinary cases, and to demonstrate the structure of
the parts concerned, explain the art of touching, etc. as above, in set
lectures, at least three times a week, to all the Midwomen and their
apprentices who please to attend. 4. That every young woman, who designs to
practice Midwifery, shall be obliged to attend these courses during her
apprenticeship; then go and practice, for a set time, under those expert
Midwomen in that Hospital: Afterward let them be examined as to the skill and
knowledge they have acquired in their profession, by the two Surgeons, (since
our Dom, fac. totum take Midwifery either to be no part of Surgery, or such a
trifling part of it, that it is below their notice; notwithstanding some of them
can distinguish, to a mathematical exactness, how many grains of more knowledge
in Surgery is requisite for a Surgeon of a first, than of a second rate Man of
War,) and six or seven other persons, appointed by his majesty, (because I
don't think it reasonable, that so many people's bread should depend on the
humor and caprice of any two Men only,) and if approved, to receive from them
a certificate of their fitness to practice in London or any where else. 5.
That, until fit Hospitals can be built and endowed, a Midman be appointed in
every city, or county-town in England, to read the foresaid lectures to all the
Midwomen in the county, and demonstrate to them the truth of their doctrines on
the poor of the neighborhood, of which there are plenty every where.

If this, or same such SCHEME, was put in execution, in the principal town; of
the kingdom, I Am satisfied, in a very few years there would hardly be an
ignorant Midwoman in England, and consequently the great agonies, most women
suffer at the very mention of a Man, would be almost entirely prevented; the
great expense they cost saved; and the melancholy scenes abovementioned, would
be no more seen nor heard of. What can be more Desirable? What can show more
Humanity? What can be more Charitable, than to pursue a Design, whereby the
lives of so many innocent children, and valuable women, may be yearly, nay
daily, saved from destruction?

FINIS.
Speedily will be published, (Dedicated to that accurate Anatomist, and
consummate ACCOUCHEUR, Dr. James Douglas, Physician Extraordinary to the Queen,
Fellow of the Royal Society, and Honorary Fellow of the College of Physicians,)
A translation of Madam du Tertre's excellent book, entitled Instruction
familiere and tres facile, etc. with the French King's ample privilege,
approbation of the College of Physicians, etc. To which will be added,
proposals for a Course of MIDWIFERY, to Midwomen only; wherein the principal
operations of that art will be briefly explained.

By JOHN DOUGLAS Surgeon, F. R. S.

-- Dea sum auxiliaris, opemque
Exorata fero. --
OVID. LONDON, M.DCC.XXXVI.

INDEX.
DR. CHAMBERLEN charges the Midwives with suffering many women and children to
perish for want of seasonable help. page 4 -- With having an imaginary
reputation. page.5 -- With being over-confident. page 7 His account of his
Secret, etc. page 9 Mr. GIFFARD charges the Midwives with being ignorant of the
art of touching. page 26 -- With being thoroughly ignorant. page 28 -- With
leaving the Placenta. page 29 -- With doing all the Mischief they can first,
and then sending for help. ibid. -- With pulling at the arm. page 31 -- With
inverting the Uterus, etc. page 37 Mr. CHAPMAN charges the Midwives with
committing fatal mistakes every day. page 41 -- With pulling at the arm. page
47 -- With inverting the Matrix. page 48 -- With mistaking the Vagina for a
Membrane full of water. page 49 -- With imaginary instead of real faults. page
50 -- With killing the women. ibid. -- With thrusting their fingers through the
Vagina. page 51 His account of his Secret, etc. page 44

