ANECDOTES OF PAINTING in ENGLAND; With some Account of the principal Artists;
And incidental NOTES on other ARTS;

Collected by the late Mr. GEORGE VIRTUE; And now digested and published from
his original MSS. By Mr. HORACE WALPOLE.

The SECOND EDITION.

Le sachant Anglois, je crus qu'il m'alloit parler d'edifices et de peintures.
Nouvelle Eloise, vol. i. p. 245. VOL. II.

Printed by THOMAS KIRGATE at STRAWBERRY-HILL, MDCCLXV.

ANECDOTES of PAINTING, etc.
CHAP. I.
Painters and other Artists in the Reign of JAMES I.
IT was well for the arts that King James had no disposition to them: He let
them take their own course. Had he felt any inclination for them, he would
probably have introduced as bad a taste as he did into litterature. A Prince
who thought puns and quibbles the perfection of eloquence, would have been
charmed with the monkies of Hemskirk and the drunken boors of Ostade. James
loved his ease and his pleasures and hated novelties. He gave himself up to
hunting and hunted in the most cumbrous and inconvenient of all dresses, a ruff
and trowser breeches. The nobility kept up the magnificence they found
established by Queen Elizabeth, in which predominated a want of taste, rather
than a bad one. In more ancient times the mansions of the great lords, were, as
I have mentioned before, built for defense and strength rather than
convenience. The walls thick, the windows pierced wherever it was most
necessary for them to look abroad, instead of being contrived for symmetry or
to illuminate the chambers. To that style succeeded the richness and delicacy
of the Gothic. As this declined, before the Grecian taste was established,
space and vastness seem to have made their whole ideas of grandeur. The palaces
erected in the reign of Elizabeth by the memorable Countess of Shrewsbury,
Elizabeth of Hardwicke, are exactly in this style. The apartments are lofty and
enormous, and they knew not how to furnish them. Pictures, had they had good
ones, would be lost in chambers of such height: Tapestry, their chief moveable,
was not commonly perfect enough to be real magnificence. Fretted cielings,
graceful mouldings of windows, and painted glass, the ornaments of the
preceding age, were fallen into disuse. Immense lights composed of bad glass in
diamond panes, cast an air of poverty on their most costly apartments. That at
Hardwicke, still preserved as it was furnished for the reception and
emprisonment of the Queen of Scots, is a curious picture of that age and style.
Nothing can exceed the expense in the bed of state, in the hangings of the same
chamber, and of the coverings for the tables. The first is cloth of gold, cloth
of silver, velvets of different colors, lace, fringes and embroidery. The
hangings consist of figures, large as life, representing the virtues and vices,
embroidered on grounds of white and black velvet. The cloths to cast over the
tables are embroidered and embossed with gold, on velvets and damasks, The only
movables of any taste are the cabinets and tables themselves, carved in oak.
The chimnies are wide enough for a hall or kitchen, and over the arras are
freezes of many feet deep with miserable relievos in stucco representing
huntings. There and in all the great mansions of that age is a gallery,
remarkable only for its extent. That at Hardwicke is of sixty yards.

James built no palace himself. Those erected by the Nobles in his reign are
much like what I have been describing. Audley-inn, Dugdale, writing after the
days of Inigo Jones, says, that this house was not to be equalled by any fabric
in this realm, excepting Hampton Court. There are prints of Audley-inn in it is
grandeur by Winstanley, who lived at Littlebury near it, where, within my
memory, was his house, remarkable for several mechanic tricks, known by the
name of WINSTANLEY's WONDERS. His plates of Audley-inn are extant, but the
prints are very scarce. Part of the edifice was taken down about forty years
ago, and a greater part, with the magnificent gallery, was demolished after the
decease of the last Earl of Suffolk of that line.
PAUL VANSOMER.
T.Chambars sculp.

one of the wonders of that age, deserved little notice but for the prodigious
space it covered. Toward the end of that monarch's reign genius was called out
and appeared. The magnificent temper or taste of the Duke of Buckingham led him
to collect pictures, and pointed out the study of them to Prince Charles.
Rubens came over, Inigo Jones arose, and architecture broke forth in all the
luster and purity of Rome and Athens -- But before I come to that period, I
must clear my way by some account of the preceding artists. The first painter
who seems to have arrived after the accession of James was

PAUL VANSOMER,

a native of Antwerp. The accounts of him are extremely deficient, no author of
the lives of painters mentioning him but Carl Vermander, who only says that
Vansomer was living when he wrote, and then resided with his brother Bernard at
Amsterdam. Yet Vansomer as a painter of portraits was a very able master. The
picture of the Lord Chamberlain William Earl of Pembroke, half length at St.
James's, is an admirable portrait, and a whole length at Chatsworth of the
first Earl of Devonshire in his robes, though ascribed to Mytens, I should
think was painted by the same hand. Mytens was much colder in his coloring and
stiff in his drawing Mytens improved so much in his later portraits, that this
character must be read with allowances; and on studying more of his works, I
cannot determine whether the portrait at Chatsworth is not painted by him, as
constant tradition says it was. In general, the portraits by Vansomer and
Mytens, when at whole length, may be thus distinguished; Vansomer commonly
placed his on a mat, Mytens, on a carpet.
. Both these portraits are bold and round, and the chiaro scuro good. The Earl
of Devonshire is equal to the pencil of Vandyck, and one of the finest single
figures I have seen. In what year Vansomer came to England we do not know;
certainly as early as 1606, between which and 1620 he did several pictures. I
shall mention but a few, that are indubitably his, from whence by comparison
his manner may be known.

James I. at Windsor, behind him a view of Whitehall.

Anne of Denmark, with a prospect of the west end of St. Paul's.

The same King at Hampton Court, armor lying by him on the ground; better than
the former. Dated 1615.

His Queen in blue, with a horse and dogs; also at Hampton Court. This picture
is imitated in the tapestry at Houghton.

Three ladies, 1615, at Ditchley; Lady Morton in purple; another, with yellow
lace about her neck and a gauze scarf: the third in black with a crape over her
forehead.

Lord Chancellor Bacon and his brother Nicholas at Gorhambury.

Sir Simon Weston, brother of Lord Treasurer Portland, whole length with a pike
in his hand, 1608, aet. 43. This piece was in the possession of the Lord Chief
Justice Raymond.

Marquis of Hamilton with the white staff, at Hampton Court.

Vansomer died about the age of forty-five, and was buried at St. CORNELIUS
JANSEN.
T.Chambars sculp.

Martin's in the Fields as appears by the register; Jan. 5, 1621. Paulus
Vansomer, pictor eximius, sepultus fuit in ecclesia.

CORNELIUS JANSEN,

generally, but inaccurately, called Johnson, was, according to Sandrart, born
in London of Flemish parents; but Virtue, and the author of an Essay toward an
English school, say it was at Amsterdam, where the latter asserts that he
resided long, the former that he came over young, which, considering how late
he lived, I should be inclined to believe, if Virtue did not at the same time
pronounce that his earliest performances are his best: So good a style of
coloring was hardly formed here. His pictures are easily He sometimes put this
mark on his pictures ^ fecit.
distinguished by their clearness, neatness and smoothness. They are generally
painted on board, and except being a little stiff, are often stronglly marked
with a fair character of nature, and remarkable for a lively tranquillity in
the countenances. His draperies are seldom but black. I have two portraits by
him of singular merit; one of Mr. Leneve, master of the company of
merchant-taylors; the other of Sir George Villiers, father of the great Duke of
Buckingham, less handsome, but extremely like his son. One of his hands rests
on the head of a greyhound, as fine as the animals of Snyder.

Jansen's first works in England are dated about 1618. He dwelt in the
Black-friars, and had much business. His price for a head was five broad
pieces. He painted too in small in oil, and often copied his own works in that
manner. In the family of Verney were the portraits of Sir Robert Heath and his
lady in both sizes. At Cashiobury is a large piece, curious, but so inferior to
Jansen's general manner, that if his name were not to it, I should doubt it is
being of his hand. It represents Arthur Lord Capel, who was beheaded, his Lady
and Children. Behind them is a view of the Garden at Hadham, at that time the
chief seat of the family. Between the years 1630 and 1640 Jansen lived much in
Kent at a small village called Bridge near Barhamdown, and drew many portraits
for gentlemen in the neighborhood, particularly of the families of Auger,
Palmer, Hammond and Bowyer. One of his best works was the picture of a Lady
Bowyer, of the family of Auger, called for her exquisite beauty The Star in the
East. At Sherburn Castle in Dorsetshire is a head of Elizabeth Wriothesley
eldest daughter of Henry Earl of Southampton, and wife of William Lord Spenser,
her head richly dressed, and a picture in a blue enamelled case at her breast.
This picture is well colored, though not equal to another at the same seat, a
half length of her mother, Elizabeth, daughter of John Vernon, wife of Earl
Henry. Her clothes are magnificent, and the attire of her head, singular, a
veil turned quite back. The face and hands are colored with incomparable
luster, and equal to any thing this master executed. There is also a half
length in black satin of John Digby, first Earl of Bristol, young and
remarkably handsome. It is ascribed to Jansen, but is faintly colored, and
evidently in the manner of Vandyck, whom perhaps he imitated as well as
rivalled.

Jansen's fame declined At Lord Pomfret's at Easton was a portrait of Charles
I. by Jansen.
on the arrival of Vandyck, and the civil war breaking out, Cornelius, at the
importunity of his wife, quitted England. His pass is recorded in the Journals
of the Commons:

October 10, 1648. Ordered, that Cornelius Johnson, picture-drawer, shall have
Mr. Speaker's warrant to pass beyond seas with Emanuel Pass, George Hawkins;
and to carry with him such pictures and colors, bedding, household stuff,
pewter, and brass, as belongs unto himself.

He retired first to Midelburg and then to Amsterdam, where he continued to
paint and died in 1665. Sandrart, p. 314.
His wife's name was Elizabeth Beck, to whom he was married in 1622. They had a
son Cornelius, bred to his father's profession, which he followed in Holland,
where he died poor, being ruined by the extravagance of a second wife. The son
drew the Duke of Monmouth's picture, as he was on the point of sailing for his
unfortunate expedition to England.

A sister of Cornelius Jansen the elder was second wife of In the catalogue of
King Charles's pictures is mentioned a portrait drawn by George Spence of
Nuremberg, and bought of Nicasius Russel, p. ^35.
Nicasius Russel or Roussel of Bruges, jeweller to the Kings James and Charles
the first. They had many children. To one of the sons born in 1619 Cornelius
Jansen was godfather, and the widow of Isaac Oliver, godmother. Theodore
Russel, an elder son was born in 1614, and lived nine years with his uncle
Cornelius Jansen, and afterward with Vandyck, whose pictures he copied very
tolerably on small pannels; many of them are in a private apartment at Windsor,
at Warwickcastle, and in the collection of the Duchess Dowager of Argyle.
Russel chiefly was employed in the country in the families of the Earls of
Essex and Holland, and was a lover of his ease and his bottle. He was father of
Antony Russel, a painter, from whom Virtue received these particulars, and at
whose house he saw a picture of Cornelius Jansen, his wife and son, drawn by
Adrian Hanneman, who courted Jansen's neice, but was disappointed.

DANIEL MYTENS

of the Hague, was an admired painter in the reigns of King James and King
Charles. He had certainly studied the works of Rubens before his coming over;
his landscape in the back grounds of his portraits is evidently in the style of
that school; and some of his works have been taken for Vandyck's. The date of
his arrival is not certain; probably it was in hopes of succeeding Van Somer;
but though he drew several of the court, he was not formally employed as the
King's painter 'till the reign of Charles. His patent is preserved in Rymer's
Foedera, vol. xviii, p. 3.

I found the minute of the docquet warrant for this among the Conway papers in
these words;

The office of one of his majesty's picture-drawers in ordinary, with the fee
of 20 l. per ann. granted to Daniell Mitens during his life. Subscribed by
order from the Lord Chamberlain. Procured by Mr. Endimyon Porter, May 30, 1625.

And among the same MSS. is the following docquet-warrant;

July 31, 1626. A warrant to the exchequer to pay unto Daniell Mittens his
majesty's picturer the sum of 125 l. for diverse pictures by him delivered to
sundry persons by his majesty's special direction. By order of the Lord
Chamberlain of his majesty's household, procured by the Lord Conway.

DANIEL MYTENS.


Ant. van Dyck pinx. T.Chambars sculp.

At Hampton Court are several whole lengths of Princes and Princesses of the
house of Brunswick-Lunenburgh, and the portrait of Charles Howard Earl of
Nottingham; at Kensington is Mytens's own head. At Knowle, Lionel Cranfield
Earl of Middlesex, Lord Treasurer, with his white staff, whole length. A small
bell on the table has these letters D. M. F. 1623. It was more common for him
to paint a slip of paper on his pictures, inscribed only with the names or
titles of the persons represented. At Lady Elizabeth Germain's at Drayton, is a
very fine whole length of Henry Rich Earl of Holland, in a striped habit with a
walking stick. At St. James's The picture of the Queen of Scots at St. James's
is a copy by Mytens.
is Jeffery Hudson the dwarf, holding a dog by a string, in a landscape,
colored warmly and freely like Snyder or Rubens. Mytens drew the same figure
in a very large picture of Charles I. and his Queen, which was in the
possession of the late Earl of Dunmore, but the single figure is much better
painted. The history of this diminutive personage was so remarkable, that the
reader will perhaps not dislike the digression.

See Fuller and Wright's Rutlandshire.
He was born at Oakham in Rutlandshire in 1619, and about the age of seven or
eight, being then but eighteen inches high, was retained in the service of the
Duke of Buckingham, who resided at Burleigh on the Hill. Soon after the
marriage of Charles I, the King and Queen being entertained at Burleigh, little
Jeffery was served up to table in a cold pie, and presented by the Duchess to
the Queen, who kept him as her dwarf. From seven years of age 'till thirty he
never grew taller; but after thirty he shot up to three feet nine inches, and
there fixed. Jeffery became a considerable part of the entertainment of the
court. Sir William Davenant wrote a poem called Jeffreidos, on a battle between
him and a The scene is laid at Dunkirk, and the midwise rescues him from the
fury of his antagonist.
turkey-cock, and in 1638 was published a very small book called The New Year's
Gift, presented at court from the Lady Parvula to the Lord Minimus (commonly
called little Jeffery) her majesty's servant, etc. written by Microphilus, with
a little print of Jeffery prefixed. Before this period Jeffery was employed on
a negotiation of great importance: He was sent to France to fetch a midwife for
the Queen, and on his return with this gentlewoman, and her majesty's
dancing master, and many rich presents to the Queen from her mother Mary de
Medici, he was taken by the Dunkirkers. It was in 1630. Besides the present he
was bringing for the Queen, he lost to the value of 2500 l. that he had
received in France on his own account from the Queen Mother and ladies of that
court.
Jeffery, thus made of consequence, grew to think himself really so. He had
born with little temper the teazing of the courtiers and domestics, and had
many squabbles with the King's gigantic porter; A basrelief of this dwarfand
giant is to be seen fixed in the front of a house near the end of Bagnio-court
on the east side of Newgate-street. Probably it was a sign. Oliver Cromwell too
had a porter of an enormous height, whose standard is recorded by a large O on
the back of the terrace at Windsor, almost under the window of the gallery.
This man went mad and prophesied. In Whitechapel was a sign of him taken from a
print of St. Peter.
at last being provoked by Mr. Crofts, a young gentleman of family, a challenge
ensued, and Mr. Crofts coming to the rendezvous armed only with a squirt, the
little creature was so enraged that a real duel ensued, and the appointment
being on horseback with pistols, to put them more on a level, Jeffery with the
first fire shot his antagonist dead. This happened in France whither he had
attended his mistress in the troubles. He was again taken prisoner by a Turkish
rover, and sold into Barbary. He probably did not long remain in slavery; for
at the beginning of the civil war he was made a captain in the royal army, and
in 1644 attended the Queen to France where he remained 'till the restoration.
At last upon suspicion of his being privy to the Popish plot, he was taken up
in 1682, and confined in the gate house Westminster, where he ended his life in
the sixty-third year of his age.

Mytens remained in great reputation 'till the arrival of Vandyck, who being
appointed the King's principal painter, the former in disgust asked his
majesty's leave to retire to his own country; but the King learning the cause
of his dissatisfaction, treated him with much kindness, and told him that he
could find sufficient employment both for him and Vandyck; Mytens consented to
stay, and even grew intimate, it is probable, with his rival, for the head of
In some of the first impressions the name of Isaac appears in this plate,
instead of Daniel. It was corrected afterward.
Mytens is one of those painted among the professors by that great master.

Whether the same jealousy operated again, or real decline of business
influenced him, or any other cause, Mytens did not stay much longer in England.
We find none of his works here after the year 1630. Yet he lived many years
afterward. Houbraken quotes a register at the Hague dated in 1656, at which
time it says Mytens painted part of the cieling of the town hall there; the
subject is, Truth writing history on the back of Fame.

These were the most considerable painters in oil in the reign of James: There
were undoubtedly several others of inferior rank, whose names are not come down
to us, except two or three; and of one of those I find nothing but this short
note from Baglione. Page 186.


Christophano Roncalli, pittore, ando per la Germania, per la Fiandra, per l'
Olanda, per l' Inghilterra, per la Francia; e finalmente carico d' honori e di
74 anni fini il corso 1626. He died at Rome.
I should not mention such slight notices, but that they may lead to farther
discoveries. An other was a more remarkable person, especially in the
subsequent reign; but in a work of this nature it is impossible not to run the
subjects of one chapter into those of another, taking care however to
distribute them, as they serve best to carry on the chronologic series. His
name was

ROBERT PEAKE.

The earliest mention of him that appears is in the They were in the collection
of the late Dr. Rawlinson.
books of the Lord Harrington Treasurer of the Chambers, No. 78, 79. being
accounts of moneys received and paid by him;

Item, paid to Robert Peake, picture-maker, by warrant from the council October
4, 1612, for three several pictures made by him at the commandment of the Duke
of York his officers, and given away and disposed of by the Duke's Grace,
twenty pounds.

It does not appear whether these pictures were in oil or watercolors; I
should rather suppose portraits in miniature of (King Charles the First then)
Duke of York; but that Peake painted in oil is ascertained PETER OLIVER.
(...) pinx. T.Chambars sculp

by Peacham in his book of limning, where he expressly celebrates his good
friend Mr. Peake and Mr. Marquis Of this man I find no other mention.
for oil-colours. Peacham himself was a limner, as he tells us in the same
book, having presented a copy of his majesty's Basilicon Doron illuminated to
Prince Henry.

Peake was originally a picture-seller by Holbourn-bridge, and had the honor
of being Faithorn's master, and what perhaps he thought a greater honor, was
knighted at Oxford, March 28, 1645. The disorders of the times confounding all
professions, and no profession being more bound in gratitude to take up arms in
the defense of King Charles, Sir Robert Peake entered into the service and was
made a Lieutenant Colonel and had a command in Basing-house when it was
besieged, where he persuaded his disciple Faithorn to inlist under him, as the
latter in his dedication of the art of graving to Sir Robert expressly tells
him, and where Peake himself was taken prisoner. See a Letter from Oliver
Cromwell to the Speaker of the House of Commons, on the reduction of
Basing-house. Printed in the Annual Register for 1761.
He was buried in the chuch of St. Stephen London. Pain Fisher's catal. of
monuments.


Miniature makes a great figure in this reign by the luster thrown on it by

PETER OLIVER,

the eldest son of Isaac Oliver, and worthy of being compared with his father.
In some respects the son even appears the greater master, as he did not confine
his talent to single heads. Peter copied in watercolours several capital
pictures with signal success. By the catalogues of King Charles I. and King
James II. it appears that there were thirteen pieces of this master in the
royal collection, chiefly historic miniatures; seven of them are still
preserved in Queen Caroline's closet at Kensington. At the Earl of Exeter's at
Burleigh is the story of Venus and Adonis, painted by Peter, and dated 1631.
Virtue mentions another, which was in Mr. Halsted's sale in May, 1726; it
represented Joseph, the Virgin, and the Child a-sleep, eight inches wide and
five high. On it was written his name, with the termination French, P. Olivier
fecit, 1628. Another piece, a fine drawing in indian ink, was copied by him
from a picture of Raphael in the collection of King Charles, St. John
presenting a cross to the child, kneeling before the Virgin. The original was
sold after the King's death to the Spanish Ambassador for 600 l. Jerome Laniere
bought Peter's drawing, and sold it for twenty guineas to Mr. John Evelyn, from
whom it came to the present Sir John Evelyn. The Duke of Devonshire has the
portrait of Edward 6th. when an infant, the drapery highly ornamented and
finished; a copy from Holbein. In the first edition I, by mistake, ascribed
this to Isaac Oliver, but Peter's mark is upon it.
Lady Elizabeth Germain has at Drayton the Madonna and Child. The finest work
of Peter Oliver in my opinion is the head of his own wife, in the cabinet of
the Duchess of Portland: It is life itself. I doubt whether his father ever
excelled this piece. I have a head of the same woman drawn with black lead on
the leaf of a vellom pocketbook; on the reverse is his own portrait in
profile; both masterly: And in black and red chalk I have a boy's head, larger
than he generally painted, of great nature and vivacity. At Kensington below
stairs is the portrait of Peter Oliver by Hanneman, who painted the wise too;
but I know not where the latter is.

It is extraordinary Sir Andrew Fountain lost many miniatures by a fire at
White's original chocolate house in St. James's street, about thirty years ago,
where he had hired two rooms for a repository of part of his collection.
Probably some of the works of the Olivers, of Cooper, etc. were destroyed there.
that more of the works Peter Oliver etched a few small histories, but Virtue
does not specify the subjects.
of this excellent master are not known, as he commonly made duplicates of his
pictures, reserving one of each for himself. On this subject Russel the
painter, related to or connected with the Olivers, told Virtue a remarkable
story. The greater part of the collection of King Charles being dispersed in
the troubles, among which were several of the Olivers, Charles II. who
remembered, and was desirous of recovering them, made many inquiries about them
after the restoration. At last he was told by one Rogers Virtue says he was
very great at court; it was probably Progers, well known for being employed in
the King's private pleasures. See Memoires de Grammont.
of Isleworth that both the father and son were dead, but that the son's widow
was living at Isleworth and had many of their works. The King went very
privately and unknown with Rogers to see them; the widow showed several
finished and unfinished, with many of which the King being pleased, asked if
she would sell them: She replied, she had a mind the King should see them
first, and if he did not purchase them, she should think of disposing of them.
The King discovered himself, on which she produced some more pictures which she
seldom showed. The King desired her to set her price; she said she did not care
to make a price with his majesty, she would leave it to him; but promised to
look over her husband's books and let his majesty know what prices his father
the late King had paid. The King took away what he liked, and sent Rogers to
Mrs. Oliver with the option of 1000 l. or an annuity of 300 l, for her life.
She chose the latter. Some years afterward it happened that the King's
mistresses having begged all or most of these pictures, Mrs. Oliver, who was
probably a prude and apt to express herself like a prude, said, on hearing it,
that if she had thought the King would have given them to such whores, and
strumpets and bastards, he never should have had them. This reached the court,
the poor woman's salary was stopped, and she never received it afterward. The
rest of the limnings which the King had not taken, fell into the hands of Mrs.
Russel's father.

Peter Oliver, says Virtue, died about the year 1664, aged near 60; but this
must be a mistake, as his father's drawing at Kensington finished by the son is
dated 1616, when by that account Peter was not above twelve years old. From his
age and the story of his widow it is more likely that he died before the
restoration. Probably the date 1664 should be 1654. He was buried with his
father in the Blacksryars.

As in none of these accounts mention is made of any children of Peter Oliver,
I conclude that Isaac Oliver, glass-painter, born in 1616, was son of the
younger brother James. Among the verses printed by the university of Cambridge
in 1638 on the death of Mr. Edward King, Milton's Lycidas, one of the English
copies is inscribed, Isaac Oliver, Peck's life of Milton, p. 36.
who, I suppose, was the glass-painter, and then about the age of twenty-two,
as appears from the following inscription on a painted window in Christ-church
Oxford, ^liver aetat. suae 84, anno 1700, pinxit deditque. The story is St.
Peter delivered out of prison, the drawing and execution good, but the
coloring in some parts faint. The long life of this person, After the fire of
London he was employed jointly with Mr. Hook in surveying and laying out the
ground for rebuilding the city. See Biogr. Britann. vol. iv. p. 2654, marginal
note.
estimable for his own merit and that of his family, served almost alone to
preserve the secret of painting on glass -- a secret which however has never
been lost, as I shall show in a moment by a regular series of the professors.
The first interruption given to it was by the reformation, which banished the
art out of churches; yet it was in some measure kept up in the escutcheons of
the nobility and gentry in the windows of their seats. Toward the end of Queen
Elizabeth it was omitted even there, yet the practice did not entirely cease.
The chapel of our Lady at Warwick was ornamented anew by Robert Dudley Earl of
Leicester and his Countess, and the cipher of the glass-painter's name yet
remains with the date 1574; and in some of the chapels at Oxford the art again
appears dating itself in 1622 by the hand of no contemptible master. I could
supply even the gap of forty-eight years by many dates on Flemish glass, but
nobody ever supposed that the secret was lost so early as the reign of James I.
and that it has not perished since will be evident from the following series
reaching to the present hour.

The portraits in the windows of the library at All Souls, Oxford.

In the chapel at Queen's-college twelve windows, dated 1518.

^ a cipher on the painted glass in the chapel at Warwick, 1574.

The windows at Wadham-college; the drawing pretty good, and the colors fine,
by Bernard Van Linge, 1622.

In the chapel at Lincoln's End, a window with the name of Bernard, 1623. This
was probably the preceding Van Linge.

In the chapel at Wroxton stories from the Bible by Bernard Van Linge, 1632.

In Christ-church, Oxford, by Abraham Van Linge, 1640.

In the church of St. Leonard Shoreditch, two windows by Baptista Sutton, 1634.

The East window in the chapel at University-college. Hen. Giles In Mr.
Thoresby's museum was "the picture of Mr. Henry Gyles (called there (the famous
glass painter at York, wrote in mezzotinto by the celebrated Mr. Francis Place,
when that art was known to few others. Bought with other curiosities by Mr.
Gyles's executors." See Thoresby's Ducatus Leodiensis, page 492.
pinxit, 1687. There are eight or ten more dated 1640.

-- at Christ-church, Isaac Oliver, aged 84, 1700.

Window in Merton-chapel, William Price, He died in 1722.
1700.

Windows at Queen's, New-college and Maudlin, by William Price, the son, now
living, whose colors are fine, whose drawing good, and whose taste in
ornaments and mosaic is far superior to any of his predecessors, is equal to
the antique, to the good Italian masters, and only surpassed by his own
singular modesty. It may not be unwelcome to the curious reader to see some
anecdotes of the revival of taste for painted glass in England. Price, as I
have said, was the only painter in that style for many years in England.
Afterward, one Rowell, a p^^mber at Reading, did some things, particularly for
the late Henry Earl of Pembroke, but Rowell's colors soon vanished. At last he
found out a very durable and b^^^tifull red, but he died in a year or two and
the secret with him. A man at Birmingham began the same art in 1756, or 57, and
fitted up a window for Lord (...) in the church of Hagley, but soon broke. A
little after him one Peckitt at York, began the same business, and has made
good proficience. A few lovers of the art collected some dispersed panes from
ancient buildings, particularly the late Lord Cobham, who erected a gothic
temple at Stowe, and filled it with arms of the old Nobility, etc. About the
year 1753, one Asciotti an Italian, who had married a Flemish woman, brought a
parcel of painted glass from Flanders, and sold it for a very few guineas to
the Hon. Mr. Bateman of Old Windsor. Upon that I sent Asciotti again to
Flanders, who brought me 450 pieces, for which, including the expense of his
journey, I paid him thirty-six guineas. His wife made more journeys for the
same purpose, and sold her cargoes to one Palmer, a glazier in St.
Martin's-lane, who immediately raised the price to one, two, five guineas for a
single piece, and fitted up entire windows with them, and with mosaics of plain
glass of different colors. In 176^, Paterson, an auctioneer at Essex-house in
the Strand, exhibited the first auctions of painted glass, imported in like
manner from Flanders. All this manufacture consisted in rounds of
scripture-stories, stained in black and yellow, or in (...) of black and white,
birds and flowers in colors, and Flemish coats of (...).


HENRY GYLES
John (...)


EDWARD NORGATE,

though of a very inferior walk in the profession, deserves to be remembered
for his uncommon excellence in his way. He was son of Dr. Robert Norgate,
master of Bennet-college Cambridge, where Edward was born. He was brought up by
Nicholas Felton Bishop of Ely who married his mother, and who observing his
inclination to limning and heraldry, permitted him to indulge his genius. As he
had good judgment in pictures, he was sent into Italy by the great collector,
Thomas Earl of Arundel, to purchase for him, but returning by Marseilles and by
some accident being disappointed of the remittances he expected, and totally
unknown there, he was observed by a French gentleman to walk many hours every
day on the course in a disconsolate manner. The gentleman inquiring into his
circumstances, told him, that perceiving he was able to walk at least twenty
miles a day, if he would set out on his journey homewards, he would furnish him
handsomely for a footman, by which assistance Norgate arrived in his own
country. Fuller's Worthies in Cambridgeshire.
Among the accounts of the Lord Harrington quoted above, is the following entry;

Paid to Edward Norgate by warrant from the council April 24, 1613, for his
pains taken to write and lymne in gold and colors certain letters written
from his majesty to the King of Persia, the sum of ten pounds.

These letters were undoubtedly in answer to those brought by that singular
adventurer Sir Antony Shirley, ambassador from the Sophy to his own sovereign.

The warrant for restoring the use of the old English march, which I have set
forth in the Catalogue of Noble Authors, was illuminated by this person; but
the best evidence of his abilities is a curious patent lately discovered. The
present Earl of Stirling received from a relation an old box of neglected
writings, among which he found the original commission of Charles I. appointing
his Lordship's predecessor Alexander Earl of Stirling commander in chief of
Nova Scotia with the confirmation of the grant of that province made by James
I. In the initial letter are the portraits of the King sitting on the throne
delivering the patent to the Earl, and round the border representations in
miniature of the customs, huntings, fishings and productions of the country,
all in the highest preservation, and so admirably executed, that it was
believed of the pencil of Vandyck. But as I know no instance of that master
having painted in this manner, I cannot doubt but it was the work of Norgate,
allowed the best illuminator of that age, and generally employed, says Fuller,
to make the initial letters in the patents of Peers and commissions of
Ambassadors. Fuller concludes his account of him in these words; "He was an
excellent herald by the title of (...), It is extraordinary that Fuller, who
was acquainted with him, did not know the title of his office. It appears by
the warrant for the march that Norgate was Windsor-herald. He was also clerk of
the signet. V. Masters's History of Corpus Christi Coll. Camb. p. 118.
and which was the crown of all, a right honest man. Exemplary his patience in
his sickness (whereof I was an eye witness) though a complication of diseases,
stone, ulcer in the bladder, etc. seized on him." He died at the Herald's
office Dec. 23, 1650.

SOLOMON DE CAUSE,

a Gascon, was Prince Henry's drawing-master. All I have learnt that the front
of Wilton by Inigo Jones, was conducted by this De Cause.
we know of him is that in 1612, the year of the Prince's death, he published a
book, entitled, La Perspective ou Raison des ombres et miroirs, with several
engraved plates, folio. It is addressed from Richmond palace to Prince Henry,
after he had been, as he tells his Highness two or three years in his service;
and another tract in folio on mechanic powers, 1628.

This young Prince was a great lover of the arts, and laid the foundation of
the collection, which his brother completed. The medals were purchased by him,
and Vanderdort, in his catalogue, mentions several statues and pictures which
King Charles inherited from Prince Henry. In the appendix to Birch's life of
this Prince are several letters from Sir Edward Conway, in one Page 486.
of which he mentions having bought a picture of the Four Evangelists, whom he
calls affectedly, the most faithful, glorious and excellent secretaries that
ever were to tbe infinite incomprehensible Prince; desiring Mr. Adam Newton,
secretary to the most hopeful, powerful and glorious earthly Prince, to
present it to his Royal Highness; and in others is much talk of a negotiation
in which he was employed by the same Prince to engage an eminent painter of
Delft to come to England. This was Mireveldt, who had many solicitations
afterward from King Charles on the same head; but none succeeded. The printed
letters are from the Harleian MSS. and describe Mireveldt as very fantastic and
capricious. Mr. West has two others, one from Mireveldt to Sir Edward Conway,
the other from Sir Edward, in which appears the cause of Mireveldt's
uncertainty; he was afraid of being stayed in England by authority, and
stipulated that he should have liberty to return in three months. -- In 1625 he
had again engaged to come but was prevented by the breaking out of the plague.
Mireveldt is said to have painted five thousand portraits; there are some in
England of his hand, as Henry Earl of Southampton at Woburn; Sir Ralph Winwood;
a fine whole length at Kimbolton of Robert Rich Earl of Warwick, and a print of
Robert Earl of Lindsey by Vorst 1631, was engraved from a picture of Mireveldt,
but these portraits must have been painted when those persons followed the wars
and their business abroad.

It was in the reign of King James that the The art of weaving tapestry was
brought into England by William Sheldon Esquire about the end of the reign of Henry
VIII. See Dugdale's Warwickshire in stemmate Sheldon; p. 584. At Mr Sheldon's
are four maps of Oxford, Worcester, Warwick, and Gloucester, shires, executed
in tapestry on a large scale.
manufacture of tapestry was set up at Mortlack in Surrey, Aubrey in his
history of that county dates it is institution in the subsequent reign; but Loyd
State Worthies, p. 953.
is not only positive for the former era, but affirms that at the motion of
King James himself, who gave two thousand pounds toward the undertaking, Sir
Francis Crane erected the house at Mortlack for the execution of the design;
and this is confirmed by authentic evidence: In Rymer's Foedera Vol. xviii. p.
66.
is an acknowledgment from King Charles in the very first year of his reign
that he owes 6000 l. to Sir Francis Crane for tapestry; Francisco Crane militi
A. D. 1625.

For three suits of gold tapestry for our use we stand indebted to Sir Francis
Crane for 6000 l. Granted to him an annuity of 1000 l. To Sir Francis Crane
also allowed more 2000 l. yearly for the better maintenance of the said work
of tapestries for ten years to come.

It is plain by this deed that the manufacture was then arrived at great
perfection. Another suit of hangings, executed at the same place, and
representing the five senses, was in the palace at Oatlands: They were sold in
1649 for 270 l. At Hampton Court are some of the cartoons.

The beautiful hangings at Lord Orford's at Houghton, containing whole lengths
of King James, King Charles, their Queens, and the King of Denmark, with heads
of the royal children in the borders, were in all probability the production of
the same manufacture.

Williams, Archbishop of York and Lord Keeper, paid Sir Francis Crane 2500 l.
for the four se^^ns.

At Knowle is a piece of the same tapestry, wrought in silk, containing the
portraits of Vandyck and Sir Francis himself. Mrs. Markham, whose maiden name
was Crane, and a descendent of Sir Francis, has a half length portrait in
tapestry of her ancestor, with the collar of St. George over his shoulders. She
has also a picture in the same manufacture of St. George and the dragon. She is
a Roman Catholic Lady and lives in Lincolnshire. At Lord Ilchester's at
Redlinch in Somersetshire is a suit of hangings of this manufacture,
representing the twelve months in compartments. I have seen several more sets
of the same design; the habits are of the court of Francis 1st. and one of the
months represents a Gentleman and Lady riding together to hawk.

Of this person I find no farther record with relation to the arts, but that he
made a present to the King of a sea-piece painted by Persellis; and was dead
when Vanderdort drew up the catalogue King Charles's catalogue page 13. He went
to Paris to be cut for the stone in the bladder in 1635, and probably died
there. He was at that time engaged in a suit in the star chamber with Sir
Robert Osborne, an old servant of King James, who had mortgaged to Crane for
7500 l. the Royal manor of Grafton of which he was only tenant. See Strafford
papers, vol. i. p. 361. 336. 524. He was sometime chancellor of the garter, and
founded five additional Alms-knights, by his will dated in 1635. See Aubrey's
history of Surrey, vol. 3 page 206. In Rymer is a patent granting to him and
Frances Duchess of Richmond and Lenox the monopoly of farthings for seventeen
years. Vol. xviii, p. 143.
The manufacture will be mentioned again in the article of Francesco Cleyne.

Sculpture was carried to no great height in the reign of James: What
statuaries there were, found employment chiefly on monuments, which, as far as
I have seen, were generally in a bad taste. What little Virtue could discover
of the artists I shall set down. NICHOLAS STONE Senr.
NICHOLAS STONE Junr.
T.Chambars sculp.



MAXIMILIAN COLTE

lived in St. Bartholomew's close: In the church is a monument for his daughter
Abigail, who died at the age of 16, March 29, 1629: And in the register of the
parish is mentioned the interment of his wife Susan, who died in 1645. He had
two sons Alexander and John; the latter was a stone-cutter, and was buried in
the same parish with his wife and children. Maximilian, the father, was of some
eminence, and was in the service of the crown, as appears by an officebook of
the board of works;

Maximilian Colte, master sculptor at 8 l. a year, 1633.

EPIPHANIUS EVESHAM

was another sculptor of that time: In the translation of Owen's epigrams by
John Penkethman printed in 1624, the translator says, "give me leave to insert
his (Owen's) epitaph, which is engraved in a plate of brass, and fixed under
his monumental image, formed and erected by that most exquisite artist, Mr.
Epiphanius Evesham, in the cathedral of St. Paul."

NICHOLAS STONE

was the statuary most in vogue. He was born at Woodbury near Exeter, in 1586,
and coming to London, lived for some time with one Isaac James. He then went to
Holland, where he worked for Peter de Keyser, whose daughter he married; and
returning to England was employed in making monuments for persons of the first
distinction. In 1616 he was sent to Edinburgh to work in the King's chapel
there. In 1619 he was engaged on the building of the banqueting house; and in
the beginning of the reign of King Charles he received his patent as master
mason, recorded in Rymer's Foedera Vol. xviii. p. 675.
of which this is the substance; "Know ye that we do give and grant unto our
trusty and well-beloved servant Nicholas Stone the office and place of our
master mason and architect for all our buildings and reparations belonging to
our castle of Windsor during the term of his natural life; and further, for the
executing the said office, we do give him the wages and fee of twelve pence by
the day in as ample and as large a manner as William Suthis, master mason of
Windsor-castle, citizen and goldsmiths of London, is buried at Lambeth, where a
tomb was erected for him by his wife. He died October 5, 1625. See the epitaph
in Aubrey's history of Surrey, volume 5, page 248.
William Suthis or any other person heretofore did enjoy. A. D. 1626, April 20."

The history of his works is fully recorded by himself. Virtue met with his
pocketbook, in which he kept an account of the statues and tombs he executed,
of the persons for whom done, and of the payments he received: A copy of this
Mr. Hawksmore had the original. Another copy was in the possession of captain
Wind, an architect who will be mentioned hereafter.
pocketbook Virtue obtained, from which I shall extract the most remarkable
and curious articles.

"In June 1614, I bargained with Sir Walter Butler for to make a tomb for the
Earl of Ormond, and to set it up in Ireland; for the which I had well paid me
100 l. in hand, and 300 l, when the work was set up at Kilkenny in Ireland."

"1615. Agreed with Mr. Griffin for to make a tomb for my Henry Howard Earl of
Northampton. See catalogue of Royal and Noble Authors.
Lord of Northampton and to set it in Dover-castle, for the which I had 500 l.
well paid. I made master Isaac James a partner with me in courtesy, because he
was my master three years, that was, two years of my prentice, and one year
journeyman."

"In May 1615, I did set up a tomb for Sir Thomas Bodily in Oxford, for which
Mr. Hackwell of Lincoln's End paid me 200 l. good money."

"In November 1615 Mr. Jansen in Southwark and I did set up a tomb for Mr.
Sutton at Charter House, for the which we had 400 l. well paid, but the little
monument of Mr. Laws was included, the which I made and all the carven work of
Mr. Sutton's tomb."

"July 1616 was I sent into Scotland, where I undertook to do work in the
King's chapple and for the King's clossett, and the organ, so much as came to
450 l. of wainscot-worke, the which I performed and had my money well paid,
and 50 l, was given to drink, whereof I had 20 l. given me by the King's
command."

"1616. A bargain made with Mr. Chambers for the use of the Right Honorable
Lucy Harrington, a great heiress, wife of Edward Earl of Bedford, whose fortune
and her own she wasted. She was a great patroness of the wits of that age, and
was much celebrated by them, particularly by Dr. Done: May dedicated his Lucan
to her. At Woburn there is a picture of her in a fantastic habit, dancing; and
another very fine one by Honthorst, which will be mentioned hereafter. She was
a collector of antique medals: among Sir Thomas Roe's is a letter to her, or
rather a dissertation, which infers that she was no mean Latin scholar. V. p.
583.
Luce Countes of Bedford, for one fair and stately tomb of touchstone and white
marble for her father and mother and brother and sister, for the which I was to
have 1020 l. and my lady was to stand at all charges for carridge and iron and
setting up."

"1619. A bargain made with Sir Charles Morison of Cashioberry in Hartfordshire
for a tomb of alabaster and touchstone only. One pictor of white marble for
his father, and his own, and his sister the Countess of Bridget Morrison wife
of Robert Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex.
Sesex, as great as the life of alabaster, for the which I had well paid 260
l. and four pieces given me to drink."

"1619, I was sent for to the officers of his majesty's works to undertake the
charge of the place of master mason for the new banqueting house at Whitehall,
wherein I was employed two years, and I had paid me four shillings and ten
pence the day: And in that year I made the dial at St. James's, the King
finding stone and workmanship only, and I had for it 6 l. -- 13 s. -- 4 d. And
I took down the fountain at Theobalds, and set it up again, and the fountain
at Nonsuch, and I was paid for both 48 l."

"And in 1622 I made the great Mr. M^^ drew the lines.
dial in the Privy-garden at Whitehall, for the which I had 46 l."

"And that year 1622 I made a dial for my Lord Brook in Holbourn, for the
which I had 8 l. -- 10 s."

"Unto Sir John Daves at Chelsey I made two statues of an old man and a woman
and a dial, for the which I had 7 l. a piece."

"And a tomb for Dr. Donne's wife in St. Clement-danes, for the which I had
fifteen pieces."

"1620. In Suffolk I made a tomb for Sir Edmund Bacon's lady, and in the same
church of Redgrave I made another for his sister Lady (Gaudy) and was very well
paid for them. And in the same place I made two pictors of white marbell of
Sir N. Bacon and his Lady, and they were laid upon the tomb that Bernard
Janson had made there, for the which two pictors I was paid by Sir Edmund
Bacon 200 l."

"I also made a monument for Mr. Spencer the poet, and set it up at
Westminster, for the which the Countess of Dorsett paid me 40 l.

"And another there for Mr. Francis Holles, the youngest son of the Earl of
Clare, for the which the said Earl paid for it 50 l. [As this figure is of
most antique simplicity and beauty, the design was certainly given by the Earl
to Stone, who when left to himself had no idea of grace, as appears by the tomb
of the Lytteltons at Oxford.]"

"My Lord of Clare also agreed with me for a monument for his brother Sir
George Holles, the which I made and set up in the chapel at Westminster
where Sir Francis Vere lies buried, for the which I was paid from the hands
of the said Earl of Clare 100 l."

"And in the same church I made an inscription for Sir Richard Cox for the
which I had 30 l."

"And another fast by for Monsieur Casabon, the Lord Bishop of Durham paid for
it 60 l."

"And about this time (1625) I made for the Old Exchange in London four
statues, the one Edward 5, Richard 3, and Henry 7. for these three I had 25 l.
a piece, and one for Queen Elizabeth, which was taken down and set up again
were now it stands at Guildhall gate, for the which I had 30 l."

And in 1629 I made a tomb for mylady Paston of Norfolk, and set it up at
Paston, and was very extraordinarily entertained there, and paid for it 340 l."

"In 1631, I made a tomb for the Right Hon. Lady the Countess of Buckingham,
and set it up in Westminster-abbey, and was paid for it 560 l."

"In 1631, I made a This monument of Dr. Done is remarkable for it is
singularity: a print of it is prefixed to the first edition of his Sermons.
Another place is in Dugdale's St. Paul's.
tomb for Dr. Done, and set it up in St. Paul's London, for the which I was
paid by Dr. Mountford the sum of 120 l. I took 60 l. in plate, in part of
payment."

"In 1634 I made a chemny-peece for Sir John Holland, and set it up at Godnon
[Quidnam] in Norfolk, for the which I had 100 l."

"And 1632, I made a chemny-peece for Mr. Paston set up at Oxnett in Norfolk,
for the which I had 80 l. and one statue of Venus and Cupid, and had 30 l. for
it; and one statue of Jupiter 25 l. and the three-headed dog Cerberus with a
pedestal 14 l. and Seres, and Hercules, and Mercury 50 l. and a tomb for mylady
Catherine his dear wife 200 l. and a little chemny-peece in a banqueting house
30 l. and one Rance marbel tabel with a foot 15 l. and diverse other things sent
down to him from time to time, as paintings, arms, etc. and in May 1641 sent to
him three statues, the one Appollo, Diana, and Juno, agreed for 25 l. a piece,
with pedestals."

"In 1635 I made a tomb for the two sonns of Sir Thomas Littleton, and set it
up in Malden-college in Oxford, where the boys were drowned, for the which work
I had 30 l."

"In 1650 I made a tomb for my Lord Castleton Vycount Dorchester, and set it
up at Westminster-abbey, for the which I had 200 l. and old monument that stood
in the same place before set up for his Lady some eight years before." As
persons of curiosity may be glad to know the workman and the expense of the
tombs of their ancestors, I shall here briefly recapitulate the rest. For Lady
Bennet's at York, 35 l. Sir Roger Wilbraham's at Hadley by Barnet, 80 l. Sir
Thomas Hayes in Aldermanbury, 100 l. Sir Robert Drury at Hasteed by Bury, 140
l. Alderman Anguish at Norwich 20 l. Sir Thomas Ewer at Lynn 95 l. Lady Carry
Elizabeth N^vil, daughter of John Lord Latimer, by Lady Lucy Somerset, daughter
of Henry Earl of Worcester. Lady Elizabeth was first married to Sir John
Danvers of Dauntesey, and then to Sir Edmund Carey son of Henry Lord Hunsdon.
She died in 1630, aged 84. The tomb, I am assured, is admirably performed.
mother of Lord Danvers, at Stow Northamptonshire, 220 l. Mr. Molesworth at
Croyland, 23 l. Mrs. Palmer at Enfield, 16 l. Sir Thomas Cornwallis,
groom-porter, at Portchester, 18 l. Mr. Cornwallis of Suffolk 16 l. Sir Thomas
Monson's father and mother, set up two miles beyond Lincoln. For Sir Edmund
Paston, 100 l. Sir Charles Morrison and his Lady in the chancel at Watford, 400
l. Sir George Copen at St. Martin's, 40 l. Dr. Barker in New-college Oxford, 50
l. Lord Knevett at Stanwell Middlesex, 215 l. Sir Adam Niton (Newton) at
Charlton by Greenwich, 180 l. Sir Humphrey Lee at Acton-Bromwell, 66 l. Sir
Thomas Palmer at Winam, Kent, 100 l. Sir Thomas Meary at Walthamstow, 50 l. Sir
William Stonehouse at Radley, Oxfordshire, 120 l. Sir Richard and Lady Verney
at Compton-Verney, 90 l. Mr. Cook and his wife at Brampton, Suffolk, 130 l. Sir
Julius Caesar in St. Helen's London, 110 l. Lord and Lady Spencer at Althorp,
600 l. This was in 1638. Lord Chief Justice Coke at Tittleshall, 400 l. Sir
Thomas Puckering at Warwick, 200 l. Judge Hatton at St. Dunstan's by Temple Bar
40 l. Sir J. Worsnom at Stanmore, 200 l. and a porch to the new church there,
30 l. Besides others for very obscure persons, and without specification of
place.


The whole receipts as they were cast up by Stone's kinsman Charles Stoakes
amounted to 10889 l.

Besides these works Stone in 1629 undertook to build for the Earl of Holland
at Kensington two piers of good Portland stone to hang a pair of great wooden
gates; the estimate of the piers (which were designed by Inigo Jones, and are
still standing at Holland-house though removed to greater distance from each
other) was 100 l.

He built the great gate of St. Mary's church, and the stone gates for the
physic-garden at Oxford, designed too by Inigo, for the Earl of Danby, by whom
(as by some other persons) he was employed even as an architect. The Earl
ordered Stone to design a house for him at Cornbury, and to direct the workmen,
for which he was paid 1000 l. In 1638 he built Tarthall near Buckingham-house
for the Countess of Arundel, and had paid to him at different times to pay
workmen 634 l. He built the front of St. Mary's at Oxford, and executed many
works at Windsor for King Charles, particularly three cartouches to support the
balcony, the star and garter. The figure of the Nile on the stairs at
Somerset House was of his work; the other statue was done by Kerne a German,
who married Stone's sister. He employed several workmen, some of whose names he
has preserved among his own accounts, as follow;

1629. John Hargrave made a statue of Sir Edward Cook for 15 l. -- 0 s. -- 0 d.

1631. Humphrey Mayor finished the statue for Dr. Donne's monument, 8 l. -- 0 s.
-- 0 d.

1638. John Hargrave made the statue to the monument of Lord Spencer, 14 l. --
0 s. -- 0 d. and Richard White made the statue of Lady Spencer, 15 l. -- 0 s.
-- 0 d.

1643. John Schurman, carver.

Nicholas Stone died in 1647, and was buried in St. Martin's, where on the
north wall within the church is the following inscription, with a profile of
his head."

"To the lasting memory of Nicholas Stone, Esquire master mason to his majesty, in
his life time esteemed for his knowledge in sculpture and architecture, which
his works in many parts do testify, and, though made for others, will prove
monuments of his fame. He departed this life on the 24th of August 1647, aged
sixty-one, and lies buried near the pulpit in this church. Mary his wife and
Nicholas his son, lie also buried in the same grave. She died November 19th,
and He on the 17th of September, 1647. H. S. posuit."

Stone had three sons, Henry, Nicholas, and John. The two eldest were sent to
Italy to study; the youngest was educated at Oxford, being designed for a
clergyman, but in the civil war he entered into the army on the King's side.
During that period this John Stone published a book on fortification, called
Enchiridion, with many small cuts etched by himself but without his name. The
King's forces being routed, young Stone and a companion made their escape; the
latter was taken and hanged before his father's door in Smithfield, but Stone
hid himself in his father's house in Long-acre for above a twelvemonth,
without the knowledge, says Virtue, of his father, whence I suppose, he had
either offended the old man by quitting his studies for arms, or the father was
too prudent to risk the emoluments of his profession by engaging in
party-dissentions. John at last found means of retiring to France, where he
lived some years, and, I conclude, applied himself to the arts, as we shall
find him after his return engaged in his father's business. Nicholas, the
second son, was of a promising genius; and while abroad modelled after the
antiques so well, that his works have been mistaken for the best Italian
masters. Mr. Bird the statuary had the Laocoon and Bernini's Apollo and Daphne
in Terra cotta by this Nicholas Stone, and Virtue saw a book with many of his
drawings of palaces, churches, and other buildings in Italy. He returned to
England in 1642, and died the same year as his father.

Henry, the eldest son, who erected the monument for his father, mother, and
brother, carried on, in conjunction with John, the business of statuary, after
his father's death; though Henry addicted himself chiefly to painting, and was
an excellent copyist of Vandyck and the Italian masters: He is generally known
by the name of Old Stone, I suppose to distinguish him from his brother John.
Henry wrote a book, a thin folio, entitled the third part of the art of
painting, taken mostly from the ancients. Virtue, who saw this book, was
uncertain whether the two former parts were composed by Stone, or by some other
author. The accounts of Nicholas Stone, sen. which I have quoted above, were
continued by John, while he and Henry worked in partnership; among other
articles are the following;

"In the year of our Lord 1659 my brother and I made a tomb for the Lord
Ashley, for which we had 60 l.

"Formerly I made a little tomb of white marble, being an eagle with an
escutcheon upon his breast, set up at Sunning in Barkshire, for 7 l.

"In Ano. 1656 I set up a little tomb in the Temple church for Sir John
Williams, and had for it 10 l. It was an eagle of white marble." There are but
fifteen monuments entered in this account, the prices of none of which rise
above 100 l. Consequently the sons, I suppose, never attained the reputation of
the father.

A head of Sir Jonas Moore with a scroll of paper in his hand was HENRY STONE.
Lilly pinx. Bannerman Sculp.

engraved by T. Cross in 1649 from a painting by Henry Stone, Ferdinado Boll,
the painter, sent his own portrait to Henry Stone, in exchange for his. Boll's
was sold to Counselor Eades at Warwick in 1680.
whose house, garden, and work-yard in Long-acre, the same that had been his
father's, were rented from the crown at 10 l. a year, as appeared when surveyed
in 1650 by the commissioners appointed to inspect the lands that had belonged
to the King. Henry Stone died in 1653, and was buried near his father, where a
monument was erected and this epitaph written for him by his brother John.

"To the memory of Henry Stone of Long-acre, painter and statuary, who having
passed the greatest part of thirty-seven years in Holland, France, and Italy,
achieved a fair renown for his excellency in arts and languages, and departed
this life on the 24th day of August, A. D. 1653, and lies buried near the
pulpit in this church: His friends bewail him thus,
Could arts appease inexorable fate,
Thou had survived this untimely date;
Or could our votes have taken place, the sun
Had not been set thus at it is glorious noon:
Thou should have lived such statues to have shown
As Michael Angelo might have wished his own:
And still thy most unerring pencil might
Have raised his admiration and delight,
That the beholders should inquiring stand
Whether 'twas Nature's or the Artist's hand.
But thy too early death we now deplore,
There was not art that thou could live to more,
Nor could thy memory by age be lost,
If not preserved by this pious cost:
Thy name's a monument that will surpass
The Parian marble or Corinthian brass.
John Stone to perfect his fraternal affections erected this monument."

And a little lower, June 1699, Four rare Stones are gone,
The Father and three Sons,
In memory of whom their near kinsman, Charles Stoakes, repaired this monument.

John Stone, the last of the family, died soon after the Restoration; and
Stoakes, the person abovementioned, from whom Virtue learned all these
circumstances, came into possession of many drawings, prints, paintings,
models, etc. particularly many portraits of the family in small by Henry Stone;
and from Stoakes, the pictures fell into the hands of Mr. Cock the auctioneer.

BERNARD JANSEN

was an architect at the same time that Nicholas Stone was the fashionable
statuary. They were employed together, as appears by the foregoing memorandums,
on the tomb of Mr. Sutton the founder of the Charterhouse. Of what country
Jansen Among the Harleian MSS. No. 8. art 15. are articles of agreement between
Paul D'ewes, Esquire and Jan. Jansen stone-cuter, for setting up a tomb in the
church of Stowlangtost. Dated June 25, 1624.
was, does not appear; by both his names I conclude a foreigner, and probably a
Fleming, as he was a professed imitator of Dieterling, a famous builder in the
Netherlands, who wrote several books on architecture. Jansen was engaged on
many great works This account Virtue received from Stoakes, the relation of
Stone, mentioned in the preceding article.
here; he built Audley-inn, Audley-Inn, near Walden in Essex, was an immense
pile of building; the rooms large, but some of them not lofty in proportion,
and a gallery of ninety-five yards, which with the chapel, and great Council
Chamber, each projecting backwards from the ends of the gallery, have been
demolished. The present chapel was lately fitted up. The screen accompanying
the ascent of steps from the hall was designed by Sir John Vanbrugh, and has no
relation to the rest of the building. That injudicious architect too advised
the destruction of the first court which consisted of noble corridores
supported by columns of alabaster, in the room of which he built two ugly brick
walls which cost 1600 l. The marble pillars of the chapel were purchased by
Lord Onslow. King William bought thence some suits of tapestry, now at Windsor,
for which he paid 4500 l. The drawingroom, called the fish-room, is a noble
chamber; the cieling and a deep frieze adorned in stucco with sea monsters and
great fishes swimming. All the costly chimney-pieces have been sold: Over that
in the gallery were the labors of Hercules, and in the cieling, the loves of
the Gods. Many of the friezes still extant are in very good taste. It was
erected by THOMAS Howard Earl of Suffolk, Lord Treasurer in the reign of James
I. and was generally supposed to be founded on Spanish gold, his Countess, who
had great sway with him, being notoriously corrupt. There is a whole length of
her in the hall at Gorhambury. She was mother of the memorable Frances Countess
of Essex and Somerset; whose escutcheon still (1762) remains entire in the
chancel of the church at Walden, one of the lightest and most beautiful parish
churches I have seen.
and the greater part of Northumberland-house, except the frontispiece, which
Virtue discovered to be the work of the next artist

GERARD CHRISMAS.

Before the portal of that palace was altered by the present Earl of
Northumberland, there were in a freeze near the top in large capitals C. AE. an
enigma long inexplicable to antiquarians. Virtue found that at the period when
the house was built, lived Chrismas, an architect and carver of reputation, who
gave the design of Aldersgate, and cut the basrelief on it of James I. on
horseback, and thence concluded that those letters signified, Chrismas
aedificavit. In the new description of London vol. 5, it is said, that from
some letters on the front, when it was last rebuilt, it was inferred, that one
Moses Glover was the architect, which is not improbable, as that great
curiosity at Sion-house, the survey of Sion and the neighboring villages, was
performed by Moses Glover, painter and architect^r. In that valuable plan are
views of the royal houses and seats in the neighborhood.
Jansen probably built the house, which was of brick, and the frontispiece,
which was of stone, was finished by Chrismas. The carvers of the great ship,
built at Woolwich by Mr. Peter Pett in 1637, were John and Mathias Chrismas,
sons of Gerard. Virtue had seen a printed copy of verses in praise of the
father.


JOHN SMITHSON

was an architect in the service of the Earls of Newcastle. He built part of
Welbeck in 1604, the riding-house As appears by his name over the gate.
there in 1623, and the stables in 1625; and when William Cavendish, Earl and
afterward Duke of Newcastle, proposed to repair and make great additions to
Bolsover-castle, Smithson, it is said, was sent to Italy to collect designs.
From them I suppose it was that the noble apartment erected by that Duke, and
lately pulled down, was completed, Smithson dying in 1648. Many of Smithson's
drawings were purchased by the late Lord Byron from his descendents who lived
at Bolsover, in the chancel of which church Smithson is buried with this
inscription; Reader, beneath this plain stone buried lies
Smithson's remainder of mortality;
Whose skill in architecture did deserve
A fairer tomb his memory to preserve:
But since his nobler works of piety
To God, his justice and his charity,
Are gone to heaven, a building to prepare
Not made with hands, his friends contented are,
He here shall rest in hope, 'till the worlds shall burn,
And intermingle ashes with his urn.
Ob. December. 27, 1648.

His son, a man of some skill in architecture, was buried in the same grave.

(...) BUTLER

a name preserved only by Peacham, in whose time Butler seems to have been
still living, for speaking of Architecture and of the Lord Treasurer Salisbury,
"who, he adds, as he favors all learning and excellency, so he is a
principal patron of this art, having lately employed Mr. Butler and many
excellent artists for the beautifying his (...) especially his chapel at
Hatfield.

STEPHEN HARRISON

who calls himself joyner and architect, invented the triumphal arches erected
in London for the reception of James I. They were engraved by Kip on a few
leaves in folio, a work I never saw but in the library at Chatsworth.

I shall conclude what I have to say on the reign of King James, with a brief
account of a few of his medallists. This article is one of the most deficient
in Virtue's notes; he had found but very slight materials, though equally
inquisitive on this head with the rest. One must except the subject of the two
Simons, of whose works as he himself published a most curious volume, I shall
omit the mention of them in this catalogue, only desiring that Virtue's account
of the two Simons and Hollar, and the catalogues of the collections of King
Charles, King James and the Duke of Buckingham, may be regarded as parts of
this his great design. By those specimens one sees how perfect he wished and
labored to make the whole.

I was in hopes of completing this article, by having recourse to Mr. Evelyn's
Discourse on Medals, but was extremely disappointed to sind that in a folio
volume, in which he has given the plates and inscriptions of a regular series
of our medals, he takes not the least notice of the gravers. I should not have
expected that a virtuoso so knowing would have contented himself with
descriptions of the persons represented, he who had it in his inclination, and
generally in his power, to inform posterity of almost every thing they would
wish to learn. Had Mr. Evelyn never regretted his ignorance of the names of the
workmen of those inimitable medals of the Seleucidae, of the fair coins of
Augustus, and of the Denarii of the other Roman Emperors? Was he satisfied with
possessing the effigies of Tiberius, Claudius, Irene, without wishing to know
the names of the ingenious and more harmless gravers -- Why did he think
posterity would not be as curious to learn who were the medallists of Charles
II. James I. Mary I.? He has omitted all names of gravers except in two or
three of the plates, and even there says not a word of the artist. For instance
in a medal of Charles I. p. 113, under the King's bust are the letters N. R. F.
I cannot discover who this N. R. was. Unless it was Norbert Rotier, who arrived
in the reign of Charles II. In that case, the medal in question must have been
executed after the Restoration.
Thomas Rawlins was a graver of the mint about that time; perhaps he had a
brother who worked in partnership with him. I was so surprised at this
omission, that I concluded Mr. Evelyn must have treated of the gravers in some
other part of the work. I turned to the index, and to my greater surprise found
almost every thing but what I wanted. In the single letter N. which contains
but twenty-six articles, are the following subjects, which I believe would
puzzle any man to guess how they found their way into a discourse on medals;
Nails of the cross. Negros. Narcotics. Neocoros. Nations, whence of such
various dispositions. Nightingale. Noah. Natural and artificial curiosities.
Noses. Navigation. Nurses, of what importance their temper and dispositions.
Neapolitans, their character.

In short, Mr. Evelyn, who loved to know, was too fond of telling the world all
he knew. Among other branches of science, if one can call it so, Mr. Evelyn
studied Physiognomy, and found dissimulation, boldness, cruelty and ambition in
every touch and stroke of Fuller's picture of Oliver Cromwell's face, which he
says, was the most resembling portrait of the Protector. In Vandyck's Earl of
Strafford, a steady, serious, and judicious countenance; and so in many others
whose characters from knowing their history he fancied he saw in their
features. How his divination would have been puzzled if he had been shown a
picture of Cromwell in the contemptible appearance, which, Sir Philip Warwick
says, he made at his first entry into the House of Commons. Or if my Lord
Strafford had continued to oppose the court, and had never changed sides, would
Mr. Evelyn have sound his countenance so STEADY and JUDICIOUS?
His virtue, industry, ingenuity, and learning, were remarkable; one wishes he
had written with a little more judgment -- or perhaps it is not my interest to
wish so; it would be more prudent to shelter under his authority any part of
this work that is not much to the purpose.

All this author says Page 239.
of our medallists is, that we had Symons, Rawlins, Mr. Harris, Christian, etc.
and then refers us to his Chalcography, Page 49.
where indeed he barely names two more, Restrick and Johnson, of whom I can
find no other account. The reader must therefore accept what little is
scattered up and down in Virtue's MSS. I have already mentioned one or two in
the preceding volume. The first graver I meet in the reign of James is

CHARLES ANTONY,

to whom Sir Thomas Knyvet, master of the mint in the second of that King, paid
by warrant 40 l. for gold and workmanship, for graving an offering piece of
gold, Anthony having then the title of the King's graver. I have a thin plate
of silver larger than a crown piece, representing King James on his throne. It
is very neat workmanship, and probably by this Antony.
Virtue supposes this person made the medal in 1604 on the peace with Spain, a
medal not mentioned by Evelyn, and that he continued in office 'till 1620. Mr.
Anstis informed him of a warrant to a brother of Charles Antony, called

THOMAS ANTONY

curatori monetae et sigillorum regis ad cudendum magnum sigillum pro
episcopatu et comitatu palatino Dunelm. 1617. But of neither of these brothers
do I find any other traces.

THOMAS BUSHEL

was probably a medallist of the same age. In the year 1737 Mr. Compton
produced at the Antiquarian Society, as I find by their minutes, a gold medal,
larger than a crown piece; on one side Lord Chancellor Bacon in his hat and
robes, with this legend, Bacon Viceco. Sct. Alb. Angliae Cancel. On the
reverse, Thomas Bushel. Deus est qui clausa recludit.

NICHOLAS BRIOT

was a native of Lorrain, and graver of the mint to the King of France, in
which kingdom he was the inventor, or at least one of the first proposers of
coining money by a press, instead of the former manner of hammering. As I am
ignorant myself in the mechanic part of this art, and have not even the pieces
quoted by Virtue, I shall tread very cautiously, and only transcribe the titles
of some memorials which he had seen, and from whence I conclude a litterary
controversy was carried on in France on the subject of this new invention, to
which, according to custom, the old practicioners seem to have objected, as,
probably interfering with the abuses of which they were in prescriptive
possession.

Raisons de Nicolas Briot, tailleur et graveur des monoyes de France, pour
render et fair toutes les monoyes du royaume a l'advenir uniformes et
semblables, etc.

Les remonstrances faites par la cour des monoyes contre la nouvelle invention
d'une press ou machine pour fabriquer les monoyes, proposee par Nicolas Briot.
1618. quo.

Examen d'un avis present au conseil de sa majeste 1621 pour la reformation
des monoyes par Nicolas Briot. compose par Nicolas Coquerel. This Coquerel, I
find by another note, was Generalis monetarius, or Pope of the mint, into which
the reformation was to be introduced. The Luther, Briot, I suppose, miscarried,
as we soon afterward find him in the service of the crown of England, where
projectors were more favorably received. From these circumstances I conclude he
arrived in the reign of King James, though he did not make his way to court
before the accession of King Charles, the patron of genius. Briot's first
public work was a medal of that Prince exhibited in Evelyn, with the artist's
name and the date 1628. To all or to almost all his coins and medals he put at
least the initial letter of his name. He was employed both in England and
Scotland. In 1631, as appears by Rymer's Foedera, tom xix. p. 287, a special
commission was appointed for making trial of the experience skill and industry
of Nicholas Briot, in the coinage of money at the mint, dated June 13, 1631, at
Westminster. This was the project he had attempted in France, by instruments,
mills and presses, to make better money and with less expense to the crown than
by the way of hammering. The scheme was probably approved, for in the very next
year we find him coining money upon the regular establishment. There is extant
a parchment roll, containing the accounts of Sir Robert Harley, Knight of the
Bath, master worker of his majesty's moneys of gold and silver within the tower
of London, in the reign of King Charles I. from November 8, 1628, to August 1,
1636. In this account, in 1632 are payments to Briot for coining various
parcels of gold and silver, which are followed by this entry.

"And delivered to his majesty in fair silver moneys at Oatlands by Sir Thomas
Aylesbury, viz. iij crowns, and iij half crowns of Briot's moneys, and iij
crowns, and iij half crowns, and ten shillings of the monoyers making."

These comparative pieces were probably presented to the King by Sir Robert
Harley, Briot's patron, to show the superior excellence of the latter's method.

Briot returned to France about 1642, having formed that excellent scholar
Thomas Simon.

In a private family (the name of which he does not mention) Virtue saw a
peachstone, on which was carved the head of King Charles full faced, with a
laurel, and on the reverse, St. George on horseback, with the garter round it;
and on one side above the King's head, these letters ^. The tradition in that
family was, that the carver having been removed from the service of the crown,
and at last obtaining the place of poor Knight at Windsor, cut that curiosity
to show he was not superannuated nor incapable of his office as he had been
represented. If the mark ^ signified Nicholas Briot, as is probable, either the
story is fictitious, or Briot did not return to France on the breaking out of
the civil war. The latter is most likely, as in the Treasury, where the plate
of St. George's chapel is deposited, there is such another piece, though
inferior in workmanship to that abovementioned. In the Museum at Oxford are
two small carvings in wood, Christ on the cross and the Nativity, with the same
cipher ^ on each.

ANECDOTES OF PAINTING, etc.
CHAP. II.
CHARLES I. His Love and Protection of the Arts, Accounts of Vanderdort and Sir
Balthazar Gerbiere. Dispersion of the King's Collection, and of the Earl of
Arundel's.
THE accession of this Prince was the first era of real taste in England. As
his temper was not profuse, the expense he made in collections, and the rewards
he bestowed on men of true genius and merit, are proofs of his judgment. He
knew how and when to bestow. Queen Elizabeth was avaricious with pomp; James I.
lavish with meanness. A prince who patronizes the arts, and can distinguish
abilities, enriches his country, and is at once generous and an oeconomist.
Charles had virtues to make a nation happy; fortunate, if he had not thought,
that he alone knew how to make them happy, and that he alone ought to have the
power of making them so!

His character, as far as it relates to my subject, is thus given by Lilly; "He
had many excellent parts in nature, was an excellent horseman, would shoot well
at a mark, had singular skill in limning, was a good judge of pictures, a good
mathematician, not unskillfull in music, well read in divinity, excellently in
history and law, he spoke several languages, and writ well, good language and
style." Perinchief is still more particular; "His soul, says that writer, was
stored with a full knowledge of the nature of things, and easily comprehended
almost all kinds of arts that either were for delight or of a public use; for
he was ignorant of nothing, but of what he thought it became him to be
negligent, for many parts of learning, that are for the ornament of a private
person, are beneath the cares of a crowned head. He was well skilled in things
of antiquity, could judge of medals whether they had the number of years they
pretended unto; his libraries and cabinets were full of those things on which
length of time put the value of rarities. In painting he had so excellent a
fancy, that he would supply the defect of art in the workman, and suddenly draw
those lines, give those airs and lights, which experience and practice had not
taught the painter. He could judge of fortifications, and censure whether the
cannon were mounted to execution or no. He had an excellent skill in guns, knew
all that belonged to their making. The exactest arts of building ships for the
most necessary uses of strength or good sailing, together with all their
furniture, were not unknown to him. He understood and was pleased with the
making of Mr. Oughtred made a horizontal instrument for delineating dials, for
him; "Elias Allen, says that celebrated mathematician, having been sworn his
majesty's servant had a purpose to present his majesty with some new year's
gift, and requested me to devise some pretty instrument for him. I answered
that I have heard that his majesty delighted much in the great concave dial at
Whitehall; and what fitter instrument could he have than my horizontal, which
was the very same represented in flat." Biogr. Brit. vol. 5. p. 3279. Delamain,
another mathematician, made a ring dial for the King, which his majesty valued
so much, that, on the morning before he was beheaded, he ordered it to be given
to the Duke of York, with a book showing it is use, ib. p. 3283.
clocks and watches. He comprehended the art of printing. There was not any one
gentleman of all the three kingdoms that could compare with him in an
universality of knowledge. He encouraged all the parts of learning, and he
delighted to talk with all kind of artists, and with so great a facility did
apprehend the mysteries of their professions, that he did sometimes say, "He
thought he could get his living, if necessitated, by any trade he knew of, but
making of hangings;" although of these he understood much, and was greatly
delighted in them; for he brought some of the most curious workmen from foreign
parts to make them here in England." Life of Charles I. at the end of the Icon
Basilike. edit. 1727.


With regard to his knowledge of pictures, I find the following anecdote from a
book called the original and growth of printing by Richard Atkyns Esquire "This
excellent Prince, says that author, who was not only aliquis in omnibus, but
singularis in omnibus, hearing of rare heads (painted) amongst several other
pictures brought me from Rome, sent Sir James Palmer to bring them to Whitehall
to him, where were present diverse picture-drawers and painters. He asked them
all of whose hand that was? some guest at it; others were of another opinion,
but none was positive. At last said the King, This is of such a man's hand, I
know it as well as if I had seen him draw it; but, said he, is there but one
man's hand in this picture? None did discern whether there was or not; but most
concluded there was but one hand. Said the King, "I am sure there are two hands
have workt in it, for I know the hand that drew the heads, but the hand that
did the rest I never saw before." Upon this a gentleman that had been at Rome
about ten years before, affirmed that he saw this very picture, with the two
heads unfinished at that time, and that he heard his brother (who staid there
some years after him) say, that the widow of the painter that drew it wanting
money, got the best master she could find to finish it and make it saleable."
This story which in truth is but a blind one, especially as Mr. Atkyns does not
mention even the name of the painter of his own picture, seems calculated to
prove a fact, of which I have no doubt, his majesty's knowledge of hands. The
gentleman who stood by and was so long before he recollected so circumstantial
a history of the picture, was, I dare say, a very good courtier.

The King is said not only to have loved painting but to have practiced it; it
is affirmed that Rubens corrected some of his De Piles, in his life of Rubens,
says, that the King's mother-in-law, Mary de' Medici designed well.
majesty's drawings.

It was immediately after his accession that Charles began to form his
collection. The crown was already in possesssion of some good pictures: Henry
VIII. had several. What painters had been here had added others. Prince Henry,
as I have said, had begun a separate collection both of paintings and statues.
All these Charles assembled, and sent commissions into France and Italy to
purchase more. Cross Vincentio Carducci in his dialogo della pittura printed at
Madrid in 1633, calls him Michael de la Crux; others say it was Henry Stone
jun. who was sent to Spain. When Charles was at that court, the King of Spain
gave him a celebrated picture by Titian called the Venus del Pardo, see catal.
p. 103; and the Cain and Abel by John of Bologna, which King Charles afterward
bestowed on the Duke of Buckingham, who placed it in the garden of York-house.
See Peacham, p. 108. From Whitlocke p. 24. we have the following information.
"In December the Queen was brought to bed of a second daughter named Elizabeth.
To congratulate her majesty's safe delivery, the Hollanders sent hither a
solemn ambassy and a noble present, a large piece of ambergrease, two fair
china basins almost transparent, a curious clock, and four rare pieces of
Tintoret's and Titian's painting. Some supposed that they did it to ingratiate
the more with our King, in regard his fleet was so powerful at sea, and they
saw him resolved to maintain his right and dominion there."
was dispatched into Spain to copy the works of Titian there: and no doubt as
soon as the royal taste was known, many were brought over and offered to sale
at court. The ministers and nobility were not backward with presents of the
same nature. Various are the accounts of the jewels and bawbles presented to
magnificent Elizabeth. In the catalogue of King Charles's collection are
recorded the names of several of the court who ingratiated themselves by
offerings of pictures and curiosities. But the noblest addition was made by the
King himself: He purchased at a great The lowest I have heard was 20,000 l. So
R. Symondes said. At Kensington are several pieces of the Venetian and Lombard
schools, in uniform frames of black and gold, the pictures themselves much
damaged. These I take to have been part of the collection from Mantua.
price the entire cabinet of the Duke of Mantua, then reckoned the most
valuable in Europe. But several of those pictures were spoiled by the
quicksilver on the frames, owing I suppose to carelessness in packing them up.
Vanderdort, from whom alone we have this account, does not specify all that
suffered, though in general he is minute even in describing their frames. The
list, valuable as it is, notwithstanding all it is blunders, inaccuracy, and bad
English, was I believe never completed, which might be owing to the sudden
death of the composer. There are accounts in MS. of many more pictures,
indubitably of that collection, not specified in the printed catalogue.

Now I have mentioned this person, Vanderdort, it will not be foreign to the
purpose to give some little account of him, especially as to him we owe, The
original copy, of which there were two or three transcripts, is preserved in
the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford. Tom Hearne once thought of publishing it, but
at last concluding it was German, gave it over. Mr. Virtue, better grounded,
and still more patient, transcribed it for the press, but dying before the
impression was finished, it was published by Mr. Bathoe, as were Virtue's
catalogues of the collections of James II. the Duke of Buckingham, Queen
Caroline, etc. the whole making three volumes in quarto.
however mangled, the only record of that Royal Museum.

Abraham Vanderdort, a Dutchman, had worked for the Emperor Rodolphus, whose
service he left we do not know on what occasion. He brought away with him a
bust of a woman modelled in wax as large as the life, which he had begun for
that monarch, but Prince Henry was so struck with it, that though the Emperor
wrote several times for it, the young Prince would neither part with the work
nor the workman, telling him he would give him as good entertainment as any
Emperor would -- and indeed Vanderdort seems to have made no bad bargain. He
parted with the bust to the Prince upon condition, that as soon as the cabinet,
then building from a design of Inigo Jones, should be finished, he should be
made keeper of his Royal Highness's medals with a salary of 50 l. a year; See
Birch's life of Prince Henry, append. p. 467, and Rymer vol. 18, p. 100.
a contract voided by the death ABRAHAM VANDERDORT.
Dobson pinx. T.Chambars sculp.

From the Original at Houghton

of the Prince. However, upon the accession of King Charles, Vanderdort was
immediately retained in his service with a salary of 40 l. a year, and
appointed keeper of the cabinet. This room was erected about the middle of
Whitehall, running across from the Thames toward the banqueting house, and
fronting westward to the privygarden. Catalogue of King Charles's collection p.
164.
Several warrants for payments to Vanderdort as follow are extant in Rymer, and
among the Conway papers; one of the latter is singular indeed, and shows in
what favor he stood with his royal master.

"The second day of April 1625, at St. James. His majesty was pleased by my
Lord Duke of Buckingham's means to send for Sir Edward Villiers, warden of his
majesty's mint, as also for his own servant Abraham Vanderdoort, where his
majesty did command in the presence of the said Lord Duke and Sir Edward
Villiers that the said Abraham Vanderdoort should make patterns for his
majesty's coins, and also give his assistance to the ingravers and his
furtherance that the same may be well engraven according to their abilities.
For which he desires a warrant with an annual fee of 40 l. a year, whereby it
may appear that it was his majesty's pleasure to appoint him for that service."
Conway papers. At the bottom of this paper is this entry, "It is his majesty's
pleasure that the clerk of his majesty's signett for the time being do cause a
book to be prepared fit for his majesty's signature of the office, with the
annuitie or fee beforementioned to be paid out of the exchequer duringe his
life."

The patent itself is in Rymer. Foedera vol. xviii, p. 73.


"A warrant under the signet to the officers of his majesty's household for the
allowance of five shillings and sixpence by the day unto Abraham Vanderdoorte
for his boorde wages, to begyne from Christmas last and to continue during his
life. By order of the Lord Conway and by him procured. March 24, 1625." Conway
papers.


"Docquett. 11o. Junii, 1628. A warrant unto Abraham Vanderdort for his life of
the office of keeper of his majesty's cabynett room with a pension of 40 l.
per annum, and of provider of patterns for the punches and stampes for his
majesty's coin in the mynt with the allowaunce of 40 l. per annum for the same
paiable quarterly out of the exchequer, the first payment to begin at
Midsommer next 1628. With further warrant to pay unto him the several arrearage
of 120 l. 100 l. and of 10 l. due unto him upon privy seals for and in respect
of his employment in the said office and place which are to be surrendered
before this pass the great seal. His majesty's pleasure signyfied by the
Lord Viscount Conway and by him procured. Subscribed by Mr. Solicitor
General."

"To Mr. Attorney; Junii 17, 1628. Sir, his majesty is pleased to make use of
the service of his servaunt Abraham Vanderdoort, to make patterns for his
majesty's coins, and give his assistance and furtherance to the ingravers for
the well making of the stamps; and for his pains therein to give him an
allowance of 40 l. per ann. duringe pleasure. To which purpose you will be
pleased to draw a bill for his majesty's signature. Minute of a letter from
Lord Conway.


"Docquett. 11o. Octobr. 1628. A letter to Sir Adam Newton Knight and Baronett,
receaver general of his majesty's revenue whilst he was Prince, to pay unto
Abraham Vanderdort for the keeping of his majesty's cabinett room at St.
James's, and other service the some of 130 l. in arreare due unto him for the
said service from our Lady Day 1625, 'till Midsommer 1628; procured by Lord
Viscount Conway."

The next is the extraordinary paper I mentioned; it shows at once how far the
royal authority in that age thought it had a right to extend, and how low it
condescended to extend itself.

"Docquett. 28 November. 1628. A letter to Louysa Cole, the relict of James
Cole, in favor of Abraham Vanderdort his majesty's servant, recommending him
to her in the way of marriage. Procured by the Lord Viscount Conway."

What was the success of this royal interposition How much this was the
practice of that Court, we are told by an unexceptionable witness; Lord
Clarendon, in his character of Waller, says, "he had gotten a very rich wife in
the city, against all the recommendation, and countenance, and authority of the
Court, which was thoroughly engaged on the behalf of Mr. Crosts, and which used
to be successful in that age against any opposition. V. Life in folio, p. 24.
I no where find. Vanderdort, in his catalogue, Page 57. 72.
mentions presents made by him to the King, of a book of prints by Albert
Durer, of a head in plaster of Charles V. and of the arm of the King of
Denmark, In the king's collection was a portrait of the king of Denmark by
Vanderdort, which proves that he dabbled too in painting.
modelled from the life. It is certain that the poor man had great gratitude to
or great awe of Charles I. The King had recommended to him to take particular
care of a miniature by Gibson, the parable of the lost sheep. Vanderdort laid
it up so carefully, that when the King asked him for it, he could not find it,
and hanged himself in despair. Sanderson's Graphice page 14.
After his death his executors found and restored it. As this piece is not
mentioned in the catalogue, probably it was newly purchased. There is an
admirable head of Vanderdort by Dobson at In the Aedes Walpolianae I have
called this, Dobson's father, as it was then believed; but I find by various
notes in Virtue's MSS. that it was bought of Richardson the painter, and is
certainly the portrait of Vanderdort.
Houghton.

The King who spared neither favors, nor money, to enrich his collection,
invited In the Life of Romanelli in Catalogue Raisonne des Tableaux du Roi (de
France) it is said that Charles invited that painter hither too. Vol. i. p. 163.
Albano into England by a letter written with his own hand. It succeeded no
more than a like attempt of the Duke of Buckingham to draw Carlo Maratti
hither. Carlo Several English sat to that master at Rome, particularly the
Earls of Sunderland, Exeter, and Roscommon, Sir Thomas Isham, It is at Lord
Ilchester's at Redlinch, and is a good head: on the shoulder are searlet
ribbands.
Mr. Charles Fox, and Mr. Edward Herbert of Packington, a great virtuoso. The
portrait of Lord Sunderland is at Althorp, a whole length, in a loose drapery
like an Apostle; the head and hands are well painted. The head of Mr. Herbert,
who was called the rough diamond, was with some of his books left by his nephew
to the library of the Middle Temple, where it remains. At Waldeshare in Kent a
portrait of Sir Robert Furnese; and at Sherburn-castle in Dorsetshire another,
not quite half length of Robert Lord Digby, son of Kildare Lord Digby, holding
a paper with a mathematical figure. At Burleigh, a portrait of the Earl of
Exeter, who collected so many of Carlo's works, and a head of Charles
Cavendish, a boy, with the eyes shut, said to be taken after his death, but it
seems too highly colored, and is probably sleeping.
had drawn for that Duke the portraits of a Prince and Princess of Brunswic,
but excused himself from obeying the summons, by pleading that he had not
studied long enough in Rome, and was not yet worthy of painting for the King.
Simon Vouet, an admired French painter, who while very young had been sent over
in 1604 to draw the portrait of some lady of great rank retired hither from
Paris, was invited by King Charles with promise of great rewards to return to
England, but declined the offer. Felibien.
His majesty was desirous too of having something of the hand of Bernini.
Vandyck drew in one piece the full face and the three quarter face and the
profile of the King, from which Bernini made a bust, that was consumed or
stolen in the fire of Whitehall. It is very uncertain what became of this bust:
Virtue from several circumstances, which I shall lay before the reader,
believed it was not destroyed. Cooper the print-seller told him that he had
often heard Norrice frame-maker to the court, and who saved several of the
pictures, averr, that he was in the room where the bust used to stand over a
corner chimney, and that it was taken away before that chamber was destroyed.
Lord Cutts who commanded the troops, was impatient to blow up that part, and
yet after he had ordered the drums to beat, it was half an hour before the
explosion was begun, time enough to have saved the bust, if it was not stolen
before. Sir John Stanley, then deputy-chamberlain, was of the latter opinion.
He was at dinner in Craig-court when the fire began which was about three
o'clock: He immediately went to the palace, and perceived only an
inconsiderable smoke in a garret, not in the principal building. He found Sir
Christopher Wren and his workmen there, and the gates all shut. Looking at
Bernini's bust, he begged Sir Christopher to take care of That, and the
statues. The latter replied, "Take you care of what you are concerned in and
leave the rest to me." Sir John said it was above five hours after this before
the fire reached that part. Norrice afterward dug in the ruins of that chamber
but could not discover the least fragment of marble. The crouching Venus in the
same apartment was known to be stolen, being discovered after a concealment of
four years and retaken by the crown. Virtue thought that the brazen bust of
King Charles in the passage near Westminster Hall, was not taken from
Bernini's, of which casts are extant, but of an earlier date. In the imperial
library at Vienna, says Dr. Edward Brown in his travels, is a head of King
Charles in white marble, but this cannot be Bernini's, as Brown wrote in 1673,
and the fire of Whitehall happened in 1697.
It was on seeing this picture that Bernini pronounced, as is well known, that
there was something unfortunate in the countenance of Charles. The same artist
made a bust too of Mr. Baker, who carried the picture to Rome. The Duke of
Kent's father bought the latter bust at Sir Peter Lely's sale; it is now in the
possession of Lord Royston, and was reckoned preferable to that of the King.
The hair is in prodigious quantity and incomparably loose and free; the
point-band very fine. Mr. Baker paid Bernini an hundred broad pieces for his,
but for the King's Bernini received a thousand Roman crowns. The King was so
pleased with his own, that he desired to have one of the Queen too; but that
was prevented by the war. In the church at Chelsea is a fine monument in a
niche for the Lady Jane Cheyney; she is represented lying on her right side,
and leaning on a bible. This tomb was the work of Bernini, and cost 500 l.


Among the Strafford papers is an evidence of this Prince's affection for his
pictures: In a Page 130, vol. ii.
letter from Mr. Garrard, dated November 9, 1637, speaking of two masks that
were to be exhibited that winter, he says, "A great room is now Journal of the
House of Commons July 16, 1645. Ordered that the boarded masque-house at
Whitehall, the masque-house at St. James's and the courts of guard be forthwith
pulled down and sold away.
building only for this use betwixt the guard-chamber and banqueting house of
fir, only weather-boarded and slightly covered. At the marriage of the Queen of
Bohemia I saw one set up there but not of that vastness that this is, which
will cost too much money to be pulled down, and yet down it must when the masks
are over."

In another of December 16, the same person says, "Here are two masks intended
this winter; the King is now in practicing his, which shall be presented at
Twelfth-tide, most of the young Lords about the town, who are good dancers,
attend his majesty in this business. The other the Queen makes at Shrove-tide,
a new house being erected in the first court at Whitehall, which cost the King
2500 l. only of deal boards, because the King will not have his pictures in the
banquettinghouse hurt with lights."

The most capital purchase made by King Charles were the cartoons of Raphael,
now at Hampton Court. They had remained in Flanders from the time that Leo X.
sent them thither to be copied in tapestry, the money for the tapestry having
never been paid. Rubens told the King of them, and where they were, and by his
means they were bought.

It may be of use to collectors and virtuosi, for whose service this work is
composed, to know when they meet with the ruins of that royal cabinet, or of
the Earl of Arundel's. On the King's pictures was this mark ^ or ^ on his
drawings a large star thus ^ on the Earl's a smaller. ^

The dials at Whitehall were erected by the order of Charles, while he was
Prince. Mr. Gunter drew the lines, and wrote the description and use of them,
printed in a small tract by order of King James in 1624. There were five dials;
afterward some were made of glass in a pyramidal shape by Francis Hill, and
placed in the same garden. One or two of these may still be extant; Virtue saw
them at Buckinghamhouse in St. James's park, from whence they were sold.

It looks as if Charles had had some thoughts of erecting a monument for his
father. In the lodgings of the warden of New-college Oxford was a mausoleum
with arms, altar-tomb, columns and inscriptions in honor of that Prince dated
1630. It is certain King Charles had no less inclination for architecture than
for the other arts. The intended palace at Whitehall would have been the most
truly magnificent and beautiful fabric of any of the kind in Europe. His
majesty did not send to Italy and Flanders for architects as he did for Albano
and Vandyck: He had Inigo Jones. Under the direction of that genius the King
erected the house at Greenwich.

Charles had in his service another man, both architect and painter, of whom,
though excellent in neither branch, the reader will perhaps not dislike some
account, as he was a remarkable person and is little known.

Sir Balthazar Gerbier D'ouvilly of Antwerp, was born about 1591, came young
into England, and was a retainer of the Duke of Buckingham as early as 1613. In
Finette's master of the ceremonies it is said, "Alonzo Contarini Ambassador
from Venice came to Mr. Gerbier, a gentleman serving the Duke of Buckingham."
Sanderson Graphice page 15.
calls him a common penman, who pensiled the dialogue (probably the decalogue)
in the Dutch church London, his first rise of preferment." It is certain that
he ingratiated himself much with that favorite and attended him into Spain,
where he was even employed in the treaty of marriage, though ostensibly acting
only in the character of a painter. He painted small figures in distemper. De
Piles. While in Spain he drew the Infanta in miniature, which was sent over to
King James.
Among the Harleian MSS. is a letter from the Duchess of Buckingham to her SR.
BALTHAZAR GERBIER.
Vandyck pinx. T.Chambars sculp.

Lord in Spain, "I pray you, if you have any idle time, In a letter, dated
1628, it is said, the King and Queen were entertained at supper at Gerbier, the
Duke's painter's house, which could not stand him in less than 1000 l. The
Countess of Northumberland has a large oval miniature of the Duke of Buckingham
on horseback. The head is well painted; the figure dressed in scarlet and gold,
is finished with great labor, and richness. The head of the horse, which is
dark gray with a long white mane, is lively. Under the horse, a landscape and
figures; over the Duke's head, his motto, Fidei coticula crux; and on the
foreground, B. Gerbier, 1618.
sit to Gerbier for your picture that I may have it well done in little."
Bishop Tanner had a MS. catalogue of the Duke's collection drawn up by Gerbier
who had been employed by the Duke in several of the purchases. However there is
some appearance of his having fallen into disgrace with his patron. In one of
Virtue's MSS. is a passage that seems to be an extract, though the author is
not quoted, in which the Duke treats Gerbier with the highest contempt. The
transcript is so obscure and imperfect, that I shall give it in Virtue's own
words;

"King James I. ill and dying, the Duke of Buckingham was advised to apply a
plaster to his stomach, which he did with proper advice of doctors, physicians
of the King. But the King dying, the Duke was blamed -- one Eglesham printed a
scurrilous The title was, "The Forerunners of Revenge, in two petitions, the
one to the King, the other to the Parliament; concerning the Duke of
Buckingham's poisoning King James, and the Marquis of Hamilton. By George
Englisham, physician to King James, quo. 1642. By the date of this piece, I
suppose it was reprinted at the beginning of the war. The piece itself was
transcribed by Mr. Baker of St. John's coll. Camb. from the printed copy in
possession of Dr. Zachary Gray, editor of Hudibrass. Vide also Loyd's State
Worthies, p. 654, 655.
libel, and flew away into Flanders -- I was told by Sir Balthazar Gerbier
[though his testimony be odious to any man] that Eglesham dealt with him in
Flanders for a piece of money [not more than 400 guilders to defray the
charges] to imprint his recantation, of which the Duke bid Gerbier join malice
and knavery together, and spit their venom 'till they split, and he would pay
for printing that also."

Nothing can be built upon so vague a foundation. It is certain that
immediately after the accession of King Charles, Gerbier was employed in
Flanders to negotiate privately a treaty with Spain, the very treaty in which
Rubens was commissioned on the part of the Infanta, and for which end that
great painter came to England. Among the Conwaypapers I found a very curious
and long letter from Gerbier himself on this occasion, which though too prolix
to insert in the body of this work, I shall affix at the end, not only as
pertinent to my subject from the part these painters had in so important a
business, but as it is more particular than any thing I know in print on that
occasion.

Gerbier kept his ground after the death of Buckingham. In 1628 he was knighted
at Hampton Court, and, as he says himself in one of his books, was promised by
King Charles the office of surveyor-general of the works after the death of
Inigo Jones.

In 1637 he seems to have been employed in some other private transactions of
state, negotiating with the Duke of Orleans, the King's brother, who was
discontented with the court. The Earl of Leicester, Ambassador to Paris, writes
Sidney papers vol. ii, p. 528. In one of his dedications mentioned hereafter,
Gerbier puts this Lord in mind of his having been in a public employment when
his Lordship was at Paris: and De Piles says that the Duke of Buckingham
finding him a man of good understanding, recommended him to the King, who sent
him as his agent to Brussels.
to Mr. Secretary Windebank Nov. 24. "I received a packet from Garbier to
Monsieur d d [French King's brother.]

July 13, 1641, he took the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, having a bill of
naturalization. Journals of the Commons.
From that time to the death of the King I find no mention of him, though I do
not doubt but a man of so supple, and intriguing a nature, so universal an
undertaker, did not lie still in times of such dark and busy complexion.
However, whether miscarrying or neglected, Virtue says he was much hated and
persecuted by the antimonarchic party, being always loyal and faithful to the
King and his son, which may explain and soften what is said above of his
testimony being odious to any man. He bought goods at King Charles's sale to
the value of 350 l.
in 1648 he appears not only in the character of author, but founder of an
academy. In that year he published a thin quarto, entitled, The interpreter of
the academie for foreign languages and all noble sciences and exercises. To all
fathers of families and lovers of virtue, the first part, by Sir Balthazar
Gerbier Knight. Land. French and English; with a There is another print of him,
half length, by Pontius after Vandyck, in which he is styled, Bruxellas
Prolegatus.
print of his head in oval and this motto, Heureux qui en Dieu se confie. It is
a most trifling superficial rhapsody, and deserved the sarcasm that Butler
passed on so incompetent For instance, he translates Arcadia, Orcadys.
an attempt: In his fictitious will of Philip Earl of Pembroke that Lord is
made to say, "All my other speeches, of what color soever, I give to the
academy, to help Sir Balthazar's art of wellspeaking."

In 1649 he published the So Virtue calls it; but it is probably a mistake, Mr.
Masters being possessed of a tract, which is probably the same and corresponds
exactly to Butler's words; it is entitled, The Art of Well-speaking, being a
lecture read gratis at Sir B. Gerbier's academy, dedicated to the right high
and supreme Power of this Nation, the Parliament of England etc. dated 6 Jan.
1649.
first lecture of Geography read at Sir Balthazar Gerbier's academy at
Bednal-green; by which it seems that at least his institution was opened. This
piece I have not seen, nor the next, though from Virtue's extract one learns
another singular anecdote of this projector's history.

"Sir Balthazar Gerbier's manifestation of greater profits to be done in the
hot than the cold parts of America. Rotterdam 1660. Wherein is set forth that
he having a commission to go there, settle and make enquirys, he went to Cajana
(Cayenne) with his family, and settled at Surinam. A governor there from the
Dutch had orders to seize upon him and all his papers and bring him back to
Holland, which they did in a very violent manner, breaking into his house,
killed one of his children, endangered the lives of the rest of his family, and
narrowly escaped himself with his life, having a pistol charged at his breast
if he had resisted. They brought him to Holland: He complained, but got no
redress, the states disowning they had given any such orders. However, it was
just before the restoration, and knowing the obligations he had to England,
they apprehended he might give the King notice of the advantages might be
gained by a settlement there."

This perhaps was one among the many provocations, which, meeting his
inclinations to France, led Charles II. into his impolitic, though otherwise
not wholly unjustifiable, war with Holland, a people too apt even in their
depressed state, to hazard barbarous and brutal infraction of treaties and
humanity, when a glimpse of commercial interest invites it.

Gerbier probably returned to England with that Prince, for the triumphal
arches erected for his reception, are said to have been designed by Sir
Balthazar.

In France he published a book on fortification, and in 1662 at London a small
discourse on magnificent buildings, dedicated to the King, in which he
principally treats of solidity, convenience and ornament, and glances at some
errors of Inigo Jones in the banquettinghouse. Here too he mentions a large
room built by himself near the watergate The gate itself was designed by Inigo.
at York-stairs, thirty-five feet square, and says, that King Charles I. being
in it in 1628 at some representation of scenery, commended it, and expressed as
much satisfaction with it as with the banqueting house. In the piece he
proposes to the Lords and Commons to level the streets, Fleet-bridge and
Cheapside, and erect a sumptuous gate at Temple Bar, of which he had presented
a draught to his majesty. Before this book is a different print of him with a
ribband and a medal, inscribed C. R. 1653. The medal I suppose was given him
when appointed, as he says he was, Master of the Ceremonies to Charles I.

His portrait in one piece with Sir Charles Cotterel and Dobson, painted by the
latter, is at Northumberland-house; Gerbier has been mistaken in that picture
for Inigo Jones. This piece was bought for 44 l. at the sale of Betterton, the
player.

Gerbier's last piece is a small manual, entitled, Counsel and Advice to all
builders, etc. London 1663. A full half of this little piece is wasted on
dedications, of which there are no fewer than forty, and which he excuses by
the example of Antonio Perez. They are addressed to the Queen Mother, Duke of
York, and most of the principal Nobility and Courtiers. The last is to his own
disciple Captain William Wind. There is a heap of a kind of various knowledge
even in these dedications, and some curious things, as well as in the book
itself, particularly the prices of work and of all materials for building at
that time. In one place he ridicules the heads of lions, which are creeping
through the pilasters on the houses in Great Queen Street built by Webb, the
scholar of Inigo Jones.

Hempsted-marshal, the seat of Lord Craven, since destroyed by fire, was the
last production of Gerbier. He gave the designs for it, and died there in 1667
while it was The foundation was laid in 1662.
building, and was buried in the chancel of that church. The house was finished
under the direction of Captain Wind abovementioned.

In the library of Secretary Pepys at Magdalen-college Cambridge, is a
miscellaneous collection in French, of robes, manteaux, couronnes, arms, etc.
d'Empereurs, Rois, Papes, Princes, Ducs et Comtes, anciens et modernes,
blazonnes et enlumines par Balthazar Gerbier.

Among the Harleian MSS. No. 3384, is one, entitled, Sir Balthazar Gerbier,
his admonitions and disputes with his three daughters, retired into the English
nunnery at Paris, 1646.

The late Prince of Wales hearing of a capital picture by Vandyck in Holland,
to which various names of English families were given, as Sir Balthazar
Arundel, Sir Melchior Arundel, Sir Balthazar Buckingham, or Sheffield, the last
of which gained most credit from a resemblance in the arms, his Royal Highness
gave a commission to purchase it, and it was brought to Leicester-house. It
appeared that a celebrated piece, for which Lord Burlington had bid 500 l. at
Lord Radnor's sale, and which Mr. Scawen It was again exposed at Mr. Scawen's
sale, but bought in, and has since been purchased by Sampson Gideon.
bought at a still greater price was the same with this picture, but not so
large nor containing so many figures. Mr. Scawen's had always passed for a
mistress and children of the Duke of Buckingham; but Virtue discovered on that
of the Prince of Wales an almost effaced inscription, written by Vandyck's own
hand, with these words remaining, La famille de Balthazar -- Chevalier; and he
showed the Prince that the arms on a flower-pot were the same with those on two
different prints of Gerbier, and allusive to his name, viz. a chevron between
three garbs or sheafs. There is a group of children on the right hand, very
inferior to the rest of the composition, and certainly not by Vandyck. The
little girl leaning on the mother's knee was originally painted by Rubens in a
separate piece, formerly belonging to Richardson the painter, since that to
General Skeleton and Capt. William Hamilton, and now in the collection of the
Lord Viscount Spenser. It is finer than the large picture -- but it is time to
return to King Charles.

The academy erected by Gerbier was probably imitated from one established by
Charles I. in the eleventh year of his reign and called Museum Minervae. The
patent of erection is still extant in the office of the rolls. None but who
could prove themselves gentlemen were to be admitted to education there, where
they were to be instructed in arts and sciences, foreign languages,
mathematics, painting, architecture, riding, fortification, antiquities and the
science of medals. Professors were appointed, and Sir Francis Kingston, Sir
Francis Kingston, who styled himself Corporis Armiger, printed in 1635 a
translation into Latin verse of Chaucer's Troilus and Cressida.
in whose house in Covent Garden the academy was held, was named regent. There
is a small account of the design of this academy, with it is rules and orders,
printed in 1636. At the end of the little edition of Busbequius's Epistles
printed at Oxford 1660, is the grant of a coat of arms to the regent and
professors of the Museum Minervae from Sir John Buroughs the herald, dated
1635, which arms are prefixed to the rules and orders of that establishment
printed 1636. Previous to it is being set on foot, a committee had been
appointed in the House of Lords, consisting of the Duke of Buckingham and
others, for taking into consideration the state of the public schools and
method of education. What progress was made by this committee is not known, but
probably the Museum Minervae owed it is rise to it.
But it fell to the ground with the rest of the King's plans and attempts --
and so great was the inveteracy to him, that it seems to have become part of
the religion of the time to war on the arts, because they had been countenanced
at court. The parliament began to sell the pictures at York-house so early as
1645, but lest the necessity of their affairs should not be thought sufficient
justification, they colored it over with a piece of fanatic bigotry that was
perfectly ridiculous; passing the following votes among others July 23. Journal
of the Commons.


Ordered, that all such pictures and statues there (York-house) as are without
any superstition, shall be forthwith sold, for the benefit of Ireland and the
North.

Ordered, that all such pictures there, as have the representation of the
second person in trinity upon them, shall be forthwith burnt.

Ordered, that all such pictures there, as have the representation of the
Virgin Mary upon them, shall be forthwith burnt.

This was a worthy contrast to Archbishop Laud, who made a starchamber-business
of a man who broke some painted glass in the cathedral at Salisbury. The cause
of liberty was then, and is always, the only cause that can excuse a civil war:
yet if Laud had not doated on trifles, and the presbyterians been squeamish
about them, I question whether the nobler motives would have had sufficient
influence to save us from arbitrary power. They are the slightest objects that
make the deepest impression on the people. They seldom fight for a liberty of
doing what they have a right to do, but because they are prohibited or enjoined
some folly that they have or have not a mind to do. One comical instance of the
humor of those times I find in Aubrey's history of Surrey; Vol. ii, page 30.
one Bleese was hired for half-a-crown a day to break the painted glass windows
of the church of Croydon. The man probably took care not to be too expeditious
in the destruction.

Immediately after the death I cannot help inserting a short remark here,
though foreign to the purpose. The very day after the execution of the King,
was passed this vote, "Ordered, That the Lord Gray be desired, out of
Haberdasher's-hall, to dispose of one hundred pounds for the service of the
commonwealth, as he shall think fit: and that the committee at
Haberdasher's-hall be required forthwith to pay the same to the said Lord Gray
for that purpose." This order is so covertly worded, without any particular
application, at the same time that the sum is so small for any public service,
that joined to the circumstance of time and the known zeal of the paymaster, I
cannot doubt but this was intended for the reward of the executioner. Mr. West
has an authentic account of the execution, in which it is said, that Richard
Brandon, the executioner, having sound in the King's pocket an orange stuck
with cloves, was offered 20 shillings for it; which he refused, but sold it for
ten on his way home.
of the King, several votes were passed for sale of his goods, pictures,
statues, etc.

Feb. 20, 1648. It was referred to the committee of the navy to raise money by
sale of the crown, jewels, hangings, and other goods of the late King.

Two days after, Cromwell, who, as soon as he was possessed of the sole power,
stopped any farther Ludlow prevented the sale of Hampton Court, for which he
was much blamed by some of his friends. V. Biogr. Brit. vol. 5. p. 3024.
dispersion of the royal collection, and who even in this trifling instance
gave an indication of his views, reported from the council of state, that
diverse goods belonging to the state were in danger of being embezzled; which
notification was immediately followed by this order;

That the care of the public library at St. James's and of the statues and
pictures there, be committed to the council of state, to be preserved by them.

However, in the ensuing month, March 23, 1648.
the house proceeded to vote, that the personal estate Somerset House had a
narrow escape during that lust of destruction, of which an account is preserved
in a very scarce tract, entitled, "An Essay on the wonders of God in the
harmony of the times that preceded Christ, and how they met in him, written in
French by John D'Espagne minister of the gospel [who died in 1650] and now
published in English by his executor Henry Brown, London, 1662, octavo." In
the preface the editor tells us, "that the author preached at the French church
in Durham-house, where his sermons were followed by many of the nobility and
gentry. That demolished, he says, it pleased God to touch the hearts of the
nobility to procure us an order of the House of Peers to exercise our devotions
at Somerset-house-chapel, which was the cause, not only of driving away the
Anabaptists, Quakers and other sects, that had got in there, but also hindered
the pulling down of Somerset House, there having been twice an order from the
late usurped powers for selling the said house; but we prevailed so, that we
still got order to exempt the chapel from being sold, which broke the design of
those that had bought the said house, who thought for their improvement to have
made a street from the garden through the ground the chapel stands on, and so up
the back yard to the great street of the Strand by pulling down the said
chapel."
of the late King, Queen and Prince should be inventoried, appraised and sold,
except such parcels of them as should be thought fit to be reserved for the use
of the state; and it was referred to the council of state to consider and
direct, what parcels of the goods and personal estates aforesaid were fit to be
reserved for the use of the state. Certain commissioners were at the same time
appointed to inventory, secure and appraise the said goods, and others, not
members of the house, were appointed to make sale of the said estates to the
best value. The receipts were to go toward satisfying the debts and servants
of the King, Queen and Prince, provided such servants had not been delinquents;
the rest to be applied to public uses; the first thirty thousand pounds to be
appropriated to the navy. This vote in which they seem to have acted honestly,
not allowing their own members to be concerned in the sale, was the cause that
the collection fell into a variety of low hands, and were dispersed among the
painters and officers of the late King's household, where many of them remained
on sale with low prices affixed. The principal pieces were rated more highly,
and some of them were even sold above their valuation.

Ireton on the 2d of June 1648 reported the act for sale, and mention is made
of some proposition of Captain Myldmay concerning the pictures and statues, to
be referred to the council of state. This proposal it seems had been accepted
but was revoked. Probably this person might be an agent of Cromwell to prevent
the dispersion. Cromwell had greater matters to attend to; the sale proceeded.
Two years afterward, viz. in October and November 1650, the journals speak of
sums of money received from the sale of the King's goods, and of various
applications of the money toward discharge of his debts. From that time I find
no farther mention of the collection in the records.

With regard to the jewels, the parliament immediately after the King's death
ordered the crown and sceptres, etc. to be locked up. The Queen had already
sold several jewels abroad to raise money and buy arms, Some had been sold in
foreign countries early in the King's reign, particularly what was called the
inestimable collar of rubies; There is a long warrant in Rymer directing the
delivery of this collar, there termed the great collar of ballast rubies, and
sundry other valuable jewels, to the Duke of Buckingham and Earl of Holland to
be disposed of by them beyond the seas, according to private orders which they
had received from his majesty. The whole piece is curious, and mentions the
danger there might be to the keepers of those jewels to let them go out of
their hands, as they were of great value, and had long continued as it were in
a continual descent for many years together with the crown of England.
Foedera vol. xviii, p. 236. In Thoresby's Museum was Sir Sackville Crow's book
of accounts from the year 1622 to 1628, containing the receipts and
disbursements of the private purse of the Duke of Buckingham in his voyages
into Spain and France; with the charge of his embassage into the Low Countries;
with the moneys received upon the pawning the King's and his Grace's jewels,
etc. V. Duc. Leod. p. 523. That Museum is dispersed: but part of it being sold
by auction in March 1764, I purchased the MS. in question, and shall hereafter
perhaps print it with some other curious papers.
it had belonged to Henry VIII. and appears on his pictures and on a medal of
him in Evelyn. His George, diamond and seals, which Charles at his execution
destined to his successor, the parliament voted should not be so delivered. A
pearl which he always wore in his ear, as may be seen in his portrait on
horseback by Vandyck, was taken out after his death, and is in the collection
of the Duchess of Portland, attested by the handwriting of his daughter the
Princess of Orange, and was given to the Earl of Portland by King William.
Tavernier book iv. chap. 17. mentions having a diamond on which were engraved
the arms of Charles I. The Sophy of Persia and his court were extremely
surprised at the art of engraving so hard a jewel; but, says Tavernier, I did
not dare to own to whom it belonged, remembering what had formerly happened to
the Chevalier de Reville on the subject of that King. The story, as he had
related it before, in book ii. chap. 10. was, that Reville having told the
Sophy that he had commanded a company of guards in the service of Charles, and
being asked why he came into Persia, replied, that it was to dissipate the
chagrin he felt on his master being put to death, and that since that time he
could not endure to live in Christendom. The Sophy fell into a rage, and asked
Reville, how it was possible, if he was captain of the King's guards, that he
and all his men should not have shed the last drop of their blood in defense of
their Prince? Reville was thrown into prison and remained there 22 days, and
escaped at last by the intercession of the Sophy's eunuchs. -- Had all
Charles's soldiers been as loyal as the Persian Monarch thought it their duty
to be, we might now have the glory of being as faithful slaves as the Asiatics.


A catalogue of the pictures, statues, goods, tapestries and jewels, with the
several prices at which they were valued and sold, was discovered some years
ago in Moorfields, and fell into the hands of the late Sir John Stanley, who
permitted Mr. Vicechamberlain Cook, Mr. Fairfax and Mr. Kent to take copies,
from one of which Virtue obtained a transcript. The particulars are too
numerous to insert here. The total of the contracts amounted to 118080 l. -- 10
s. -- 2 d. Thirty one pages at the beginning relating to the plate and jewels
were wanting, and other pages here and there were missing. Large quantities
were undoubtedly secreted and embezzled, and part remained unsold by the
accession of Cromwell, who lived both at Whitehall and Hampton Court. All other
furniture from all the King's palaces was brought up and exposed to sale; there
are specified particularly Denmark or Somerset House, Greenwich, Among the
pictures from Greenwich is mentioned one piece of writing by Holbein, sold for
ten pounds. I know not what this writing was.
Whitehall, Nonsuch, Oatlands, Windsor, Wimbleton-house, St. James's,
Hampton Court, Richmond, Theobald's, Ludlow, Carisbrook and Kenelworth castles;
Bewdley-house, Holdenby-house, Royston, Newmarket, and Woodstock manor-house.
One may easily imagine that such a collection of pictures, with the remains of
jewels and plate, and the furniture of nineteen palaces ought to have amounted
to a far greater sum than an hundred and eighteen thousand pounds. R. Symonds
says, the committee of Somerset House prized the King's goods and movables
with the pictures at 200,000 l. notwithstanding the Queen had carried away and
himself caused to be conveyed away abundance of jewels; and for this he cites
Beauchamp, clerk to the committee.


The sale continued to August 9, 1653. The prices were fixed, but if more was
offered, the highest bidder purchased; this happened in some instances, not in
many. Part of the goods were sold by inch of candle. The buyers, called
contractors, signed a writing for the several sums. If they disliked the
bargain, they were at liberty to be discharged from the agreement on paying one
fourth of the sum stipulated. Among the purchasers of statues and pictures were
several painters, as Decritz, Wright, Baptist Van Leemput, Sir Balthazar
Gerbier, etc. The prices of the most remarkable lots were as follows: The
cartoons of Raphael, 300 l. bought by his Highness (Cromwell.) The royal family
(now in the gallery at Kensington) 150 l. The King on horseback (in the same
place) 200 l. The triumphs of Julius Caesar by Andrea Mantegna (now at
Hampton Court) 1000 l. Twelve Caesar's by Titian, 1200 l. The muses by Tintoret,
(at Kensington) valued at 80 l. sold for 100 l. Alexander VI. and Caesar Borgia
by Titian, 100 l. Triumph of Vespasian and Titus by Julio Romano (at Paris) 150
l. The great piece of the Nativity by Julio Romano, 500 l. It seems the act for
destroying what they called superstitious pieces was not well observed. Two
pieces of tapestry of the five senses by Sir Francis Crane, 270 l. Mention is
made of two sets more ancient, of the landing of Henry VII. and the This latter
piece is extant at an abandoned house of the late Lord Aston's, now a popish
seminary, at Standon near Puckeridge, Hertfordshire. The work is coarse, and
the figures do not seem to have been portraits, but the habits are of the time.
In one corner Henry VII. and Ferdinand are conferring amicably on a jo^nt
throne.
marriage of Prince Arthur. From Windsor a picture of Edward III. with a green
curtain before it, 4 l. Mary, Christ, and many Angels dancing by Vandyck,
valued only at 40 l. This is the picture at Houghton, for which my father gave
800 l. it was twice sold before for above 1000 l. whence I conclude there was
some knavery in the valuation of it. Sleeping Venus by Correggio, 1000 l. Mary,
Child and St. Jerome, by Parmegiano, 150 l. The Venus del Pardo by Titian,
valued at 500 l. sold for 600 l. Marquis del Guasto haranguing his soldiers by
Titian, 250 l. Venus dressing by the Graces, Guido (at Kensington) 200 l.
Herodias with the head of St. John, by Titian, 150 l. (with his Highness.) The
little Madonna and Christ by Raphael, 800 l. St. George by Raphael, 150 l.
Marquis of Mantua by ditto, 200 l. Frobenius and Erasmus by Holbein, 200 l. Our
Lady, Christ and others by Old Palma, 200 l. A man in black by Holbein, 120 l.
St. John by Leonardo da Vinci, 140 l. Duke of Bucks and his brother by Vandyck,
(now at Kensington) valued at 30 l. sold for 50 l. This is one of the finest
pictures of that master. A Satyr flayed by Correggio, 1000 l. Mercury teaching
Cupid to read, Venus standing by, by Correggio, 800 l. The King's head by
Bernini, 800 l. A statue of Tiberius larger than life, 500 l. The Gladiator in
brass (now at Houghton) 300 l. Christ washing the feet of his disciples, 300 l.

Among the contractors appears Mr. John Leigh, who on August 1, 1649, buys
goods for the use of Lieutenant General Cromwell to the value of 109 l. -- 5 s.
-- 0 d. and on the 15th are sold to the Right hon, the Lady Cromwell goods to
the amount of two hundred pounds more. But no sooner was Cromwell in possession
of the sole power, than he not only prevented any farther sale, but even
detained from the purchasers much of what they had contracted for. This appears
by a Copied by Virtue from a paper in possession of Mr. Martin.
petition, addressed, after the protector's death, to the council of state, by
major Edward Bass, Emanuel de Critz, William Latham, and Henry Willet in behalf
of themselves and diverse others, in which they represent,

"That in the year 1651, the petitioners did buy of the contractors for the
sale of the late King's goods, the several parcels there undernamed, and did
accordingly make satisfaction unto the Treasurer for the same. But for as much
as the said goods are in Whitehall, and some part thereof in Mr. Kinnersley's
custody in keeping, the petitioners do humbly desire their honor's order,
whereby they may receive the said goods, they having been great sufferers by
the late General Cromwell's detaining thereof; and the petitioners, etc."

The goods specified are hangings, and statues in the garden at Whitehall. It
is very remarkable that in this piece they style the Protector, the late
General Cromwell.

Whence Charles had his statues we learn from Peacham; "The King also, says he,
ever since his coming to the crown has amply testified a royal liking of
ancient statues, by causing a whole army of old foreign Emperors, Captains and
Senators all at once to land on his coasts, to come and do him homage, and
attend him in palaces of St. James's and Somerset House. A great part of these
belonged to the late Duke of Mantua; and some of the old Greek marble bases,
columns, and altars were brought from the ruins of Apollo's temple at Delos, by
that noble and absolutely complete gentleman Sir Kenelm Digby Knight." Complete
Gentleman, 107.


Some of the most capital pictures were purchased by the King of Spain, which
arriving there while the Ambassadors of Charles II. were at that court, they
were desired, by an odd kind of delicacy, to withdraw, they supposing that this
dismission was owing to an account received at the same time of Cromwell's
victory over the Marquis of Argyle; "but, says Lord Clarendon, In his life p.
119. fol. edit.
they knew afterward that the true cause of this impatience to get rid of
them, was that their minister in England, having purchased many of the King's
pictures and rich furniture, had sent them to the Groyne; from whence they were
expected to arrive about that time at Madrid; which they thought could not
decently be brought to the palace while the ambassadors remained at the court."

After the restoration endeavors were used to reassemble the spoils. A
commission was issued out to examine Hugh Peter's concerning the disposal of the
pictures, jewels, etc. that had belonged to the royal family, but without
effect, by the obstinacy or ignorance of Peter's, who would not or could not
give the desired satisfaction. See General Dict. vol. ii. p. 384.
Some of the pictures had been purchased by Gerard Reyntz, They are engraved in
Reyntz's gallery.
a Dutch collector, after whose death they were bought of his widow by the
states and presented to Charles II. One only picture [the King on horseback by
Vandyck] was recovered by a process at law from Remee or Remigius Van Leemput,
a painter then in England, who had bought it at the sale.

Notwithstanding the havoc that had been made, it is plain from the catalogue
of the collection of James II. that the crown still possessed a great number of
valuable pictures, but the fire of Whitehall destroyed almost all that the rage
of civil war had spared. Some valuable pieces indeed were carried to Lisbon
from Somerset House by the Queen Dowager, when she returned to Portugal. The
then Lord Chamberlain, it is said, put a stop to their embarkation, 'till
mollified by the present of one of them that he admired.

The royal library escaped better: This was founded by James I. It contained
the collection belonging to the crown, among which were several fine editions
on vellom, sent as presents from abroad, on the restoration of learning, to
Henry VII. Henry VIII. and Queen Elizabeth; the library of the Lord Lumley,
purchased by James for Prince Henry, the collection of Casaubon bought of his
widow, and some curious MSS. brought from Constantinople by Sir Thomas Roe.
These books have been given to the British Museum by his late majesty. To this
library Prince Henry had added a large number of coins, medals, cameos and
intaglias, the Dactyliotheca of Gorlaeus. Mr. Young, librarian to Charles I. In
this library, says Perinchief, was kept a collection of his, of the excellent
sayings of authors, written by his own hand, and in his youth, presented to his
father King James. Life of Charles p. 219.
was removed by the council of state in 1649, at which time an account of the
books and coins was taken; of the latter there were 1200, of which 400 only
remained at the restoration. Among the Duke of Ormond's letters is one dated
April 2, 1649, where he says, "All the rarities in the King's library at St.
James's are vanished." Yet it is evident many remained, for in June 1659 a Vote
passed "that the Lord Whitlocke be desired and authorized to take upon him the
care and custody of the library at James-house, and of all the books,
manuscripts and medals, that are in or belonging to the said library, that the
same be safely kept and preserved, and to recover all such as have been
embezzled or taken out of the same." Charles II. after his return ordered
Ashmole Memoires of El. Ashmole prefixed to his Berkshire; p. 10. 24.
to draw up an account of the medals that were left, and placed them in the
closet of Henry VIII. at Whitehall, where they were lost at the fire.

What farther relates to Charles I. as protector of the arts, will be found in
the subsequent pages, under the articles of the different professors whom he
countenanced. If this chapter has not been thought tedious and too
circumstantial, the readers who excuse it, will not perhaps be sorry if I add a
little more to it on that other patron of genius, the Earl of Arundel.

There is a short view of his life in Sir Edward Walker's historical
discourses, and some curious particulars in Lilly's observations on the life
and death of King Charles. As the book is not in every body's hands, one
anecdote may be worth transcribing. The King taking the part of a priest, who
pretended that his majesty had a right to a rectory which the Earl challenged
as his, Arundel said to Charles, "Sir, this rectory was an appendent to a
manor of mine, until my grandfather unfortunately lost both his life and
seventeen lordships more, for the love he bore to your grandmother." P. 51.
Thomas Howard Earl of Arundel is sufficiently known in his public character by
that admirable portrait drawn of him by Lord Clarendon. Living much within
himself, but in all the state of the ancient nobility, his chief amusement was
his collection, the very ruins of which are ornaments now to several principal
cabinets. He was the first who professedly began to collect in this country,
and led the way to Prince Henry, King Charles, and the Duke of Buckingham. "I
cannot, says Peacham, Complete Gentleman p. 107.
but with much reverence mention the every way Right Honorable Thomas Howard
Lord High Marshal of England, as great for his noble patronage of arts and
ancient learning, as for his high birth and place; to whose In one of R.
Symondes's pocket-books in the museum is a character not quite so favorable of
the Earl. "May, says he, rimunero persona. Era molto generoso e libero a
forastieri per guadagnare fama, ed in quella cosa spendea liberamente." There
are also the following hints. "Old Earl fece rubare pezzo di quel quadro di
Veronese a Padova, but it was spoiled, says Mr. Jer. Lanier. Last Earl Thomas,
molto lodato di Jer. Lanier per uom honestissimo et civil ed intendentissimo:
per patto furono d'accordo d'andare in Italia quest' anno 1654 per comprare
disegni e quadri." This Thomas must be the person who was restored to the title
of Duke of Norfolk by Charles II. and died at Padua in 1678.
liberal charges and magnificence this angle of the world owes the first sight
of Greek and Roman statues, with whose admired presence he began to honor the
gardens and galleries of Arundel-house about twenty This was printed in 1634.
years ago, and has ever since continued to transplant old Greece into
England." The person chiefly employed by the Earl in these researches was Mr.
Petty. It appears from Sir Thomas Roe's letters, who had a commission of the
like nature from the Duke of Buckingham, "Neither am I, says the Duke, so fond
of antiquity, as you rightly conjecture, to court it in a deformed or misshapen
stone." Page 534.
that no man was ever better qualified for such an employment than Mr. Petty;
"He encounters, says Sir Thomas, Page 495. See the particulars of several
purchases made by Sir Thomas, and Mr. Petty, in various letters in that
collection. They are worth reading.
all accidents with unwearied patience, eats with Greeks on their work-days,
lies with fishermen on planks, is all things that may obtain his ends." Mr.
Petty returning with his collection from Samos, narrowly escaped with his life
in a great storm, but lost all his curiosities, and was imprisoned for a spy,
but obtaining his liberty pursued his searches.

Many curious pieces of painting and antiquities, especially medals, the Earl
bought of Henry Vanderborcht a painter of Brussels, who lived at Frankendal,
and whose son Henry, Lord Arundel finding at Frankfort, sent to Mr. Petty then
collecting for him in Italy, and afterward kept in his service as long as he
lived. Vanderborcht the younger was both painter and graver; he drew many of
the Arundelian curiosities, and etched several things both in that and the
royal collection. A book of his drawings from the former, containing 567
pieces, is preserved at Paris, and is described in the catalogue of L'orangerie
p. 199. After the death of the Earl, the younger Henry entered into the service
of the Prince of Wales, afterward Charles II. and lived in esteem in London
for a considerable time, but returned to Antwerp and died there. See English
School p. 467. There is a print by Hollar of Elias Allen, from a painting of
Vanderborcht.
There are prints by Hollar of both father and son; the former done from a
painting of the latter.

The Earl was not a mere selfish virtuoso; he was bountiful to men of talents,
retaining some in his service, and liberal to all. The famous Oughtred was
taken into Arundel-house to instruct the Earl's son, Lord William Howard, in
mathematics -- but it seems was disappointed of preferment. See Biogr. Brit.
vol. v. p. 3280. 3283. 3284.
He was one of the first who discovered the genius of Inigo Jones, Some carved
seats by Inigo were purchased from Tarthall and placed in a temple at Chiswick
by Lord Burlington.
and was himself, says Lilly, Observations on the life of K. Charles, p. 51.
the first who "brought over the new way of building with brick in the city,
greatly to the safety of the city, and preservation of the wood of this
nation." Norgate whom I have mentioned partook of his favors. On his An
account of this embassy was drawn up and published by Crown, who attended the
Earl.
embassy to Vienna he found Hollar at Prague and brought him over, where the
latter engraved a great number of plates from pictures, drawings and
curiosities in the Arundelian collection. There is a set of small prints by
Hollar, views of Albury, the Earl's seat in Surrey. "Lord Arundel thought,
Sculptura p. 103.
says Evelyn, that one who could not design a little, would never make an
honest man." A foolish observation enough, and which, if he had not left better
proofs, would give one as little opinion of the judgment of the speaker, as it
does of that of the relator. The Earl seems to have had in his service another
painter, one Harrison, now only known to us by a chronologic diary, in which he
records particulars relating to old Parr, whom Lord Arundel had a curiosity to
see. See Peck's collection of diverse curious historic 1 pieces, subjoined to
his lives of Cromwell and Milton. The Earl sent Parr, who was then blind, to
King Charles. The King said to him, "You have lived longer other men; what have
you done more than other men?" He replied, "I did penance when I was an hundred
years old."


At the beginning of the troubles the Earl transported himself and his
collection to Antwerp, and dying not long after at Padua, he divided his
personal estate between his sons Henry Lord Maltravers, and Sir William Howard
Viscount Stafford. Of what came to the eldest branch, since Dukes of Norfolk,
the most valuable part fell into the hands of the Duchess who was divorced; the
statues she sold The Duchess it is said wanted money and sold them for 300 l.
to the last Earl of Pomfret's father, which have been lately given by the
Countess Dowager to the university of Oxford, which had before been enriched
with those curious records called the Arundelian marbles: The cameos and
intaglias the Duchess of Norfolk bequeathed to her second husband Sir John
Germayne: They Part of this collection were the antique gems published by
Apollina at Rome, 1627, and afterward by Licetus of Genoa.
are now in the possession of his widow Lady Elizabeth Germayne. Since the
first edition of this book, Lady E. Germayne has given them to Lord Charles
Spencer, on his marriage with her great neice Miss Beauclere, and he to his
brother the Duke of Marlborough.
Among them is that inimitable cameo, the marriage of Cupid and Psyche, which I
should not scruple to pronounce the finest remain of antique sculpture in that
kind. The coins and medals came into the possession of Thomas Earl of
Winchelsea, and in 1696 were sold by his executors to Mr. Thomas Hall.
Arundel-house was pulled down in 1678. The remainder of the collection was
preserved at Tarthall, without the gate of St. James's park near
Buckingham-house. Those curiosities too were sold by auction in 1720, Mr. West
has the printed catalogue (which was miserably drawn up) with the prices. That
sale produced 6535 l.
and the house itself has been lately demolished. At that sale Dr. Meade bought
the head of Homer, It is engraved in a print from Vandyck of the Earl and
Countess, in which the Earl, who has a globe near him, is pointing to
Madagascar, where he had thoughts of making a settlement.
after whose death it was purchased by the present Earl of Exeter, and by him
presented to the British Museum. It is believed to have been brought from
Constantinople, and to have been the head of the very statue in the imperial
palace described by Cedrenus. The rest of the figure was melted in the fire.
The Earl of Arundel had tried to procure the obelisk, since erected in the
Piazza Navona at Rome; and he offered the value of 7000 l. in money or land to
the Duke of Buckingham for a capital picture of Titian called the Ecce homo, in
which were introduced the portraits of the Pope, Charles V. and Solomon the
magnificent.

The Earl has been painted by Rubens and Vandyck. The present Duke of Argyle
has a fine head of him by the former. By the latter he was drawn in armor with
his grandson Cardinal Howard. The Earl had designed too to have a large
picture, like that at Wilton, of himself and family: Vandyck actually made the
design, but by the intervention of the troubles it was executed only in small
by Ph. Frutiers at Antwerp, from whence Virtue engraved a plate. The Earl and
Countess are sitting under a state; before them are their children, one holds a
shield This shield is now in the possession of his Grace the Duke of Norfolk.
presented by the great Duke of Tuscany to the famous Earl of Surrey at a
tournament, and two others bring the helmet and sword of James IV. taken at the
victory of Floddenfield, by the Earl of Surrey's father, Thomas Duke of
Norfolk. Portraits of both those noblemen are represented as hanging up near
the canopy.

I will conclude this article and chapter with mentioning that Franciscus
Junius See his article in the General Dictionary.
was taken by the Earl of Arundel for his librarian, and lived in his family
thirty years. The Earl had purchased part of the library of the Kings of
Hungary from Pirkeymerus; Henry Duke of Norfolk, by persuasion of Mr. Evelyn,
bestowed it on the Royal Society. See London, and the Environs, vol. 5. p. 291.


ANECDOTES of PAINTING, etc.
CHAP. III.
Painters in the Reign of CHARLES I.
Sir PETER PAUL RUBENS.

ONE cannot write the life of Rubens without transcribing twenty authors. The
most common books expatiate on a painter, whose works are so numerous and so
well known. His pictures were equally adapted to please the ignorant and the
conoisseurs. Familiar subjects, familiar histories, treated with great luster
and fullness of coloring, a richness of nature and propriety of draperies,
recommend themselves at first sight to the eyes of the vulgar. The just
boldness of his drawing, the wonderful chiaro scuro diffused throughout his
pictures, and not loaded like Rembrandt's to force out one peculiar spot of
light, the variety of his carnations, the fidelity to the customs and manners
of the times he was representing, and attention to every part of his
compositions, without enforcing trifles too much or too much neglecting them,
all this union of happy excellencies endear the works of Rubens to the best
judges: he is perhaps the single artist who attracts the suffrages of every
rank. One may justly call him the SR. PETER PAUL RUBENS.
T Chambars sculp

popular painter; he wanted that majesty and grace which confine the works of
the greatest masters to the fewest admirers. I shall be but brief on the
circumstances of his life; he staid but little here, in which light only he
belongs to this treatise.

This extract is chiefly made from Felibien. vol. iii. p. 404. from Descamps,
p. 297. and Sandrart.
His father was doctor of laws and senator of Antwerp, which he quitted on the
troubles of that country and retired with his family to Cologn, where on the
feast of St. Peter and Paul his wife was delivered of Rubens in 1577. Great
care was taken of his education; he learned and spoke Latin in perfection. When
Antwerp was reduced by the arms of Philip, Rubens the father returned to his
native country. The son was grown up, and was well made. The Countess of Lalain
took him for her page, but he had too elevated a disposition to throw away his
talents on so dissipated a way of life. He quitted that service, and his father
being dead, his mother consented to let him pursue his passion for painting.
Toby Verhaest, a landscape-painter, and Adam Van Oort were his first masters,
and then Otho Venius, under whom he imbibed (one of his least merits) a taste
for allegory. The perplexed and silly emblems of Venius are well known. Rubens
with nobler simplicity is perhaps less just in his. One may call some of his
pictures a toleration of all religions. In one of the compartments of the
Luxemburgh gallery, a cardinal introduces Mercury to Mary de' Medici, and Hymen
supports her train at the sacrament of marriage, before an altar on which are
the images of God the Father and Christ. See more on this subject at the end of
Mr. Spence's Polymetis.
At the age of twenty-three Rubens set out for Italy, and entered into the
service of Vincent Gonzaga Duke of Mantua. One day while he was at that court,
and was painting the story of Turnus and Aeneas, intending to warm his
imagination by the rapture of poetry, he repeated with energy those lines of
Virgil. No wonder his emulation was raised at Mantua, where the works of Homer
were treated by Raphael and Julio Romano.
Ille etiam patriis agmen ciet, etc. The Duke who over heard him and entered
the chamber, was surprised to find the mind of his painter cultivated with a
variety of graceful litterature. Rubens was named Envoy to Spain, and carried
magnificent presents to the favorite Duke of Lerma; exerting at that court his
political and elegant talents with a dignity and propriety that raised the
latter without debasing the former. He conversed little with the painters of
that country except Velasquez, with whom he continued a correspondence of
letters.

The fame of the young painter reached Don John of Braganza, afterward King of
Portugal, who invited him to Villa Viciosa. Rubens set out with such a train,
that the Duke apprehended the expense of entertaining so pompous a visitor, and
wrote to stop his journey, accompanying the excuse with a present of fifty
pistoles. The painter refused the present, said he had not proposed to paint,
but to pass a week at Villa Viciosa, and had brought a thousand pistoles that
he intended to spend there.

Returned to Mantua, the Duke sent him to Rome to copy the works of the great
masters. There he studied them, not what they had studied, the ancients; Rubens
was too careless of the antique as Poussin copied it too servilely. The former
seemed never to have seen a statue, the latter nothing else. The reputation of
Titian and Paul Veronese drew Rubens to Venice; there he was in his element, in
the empire of colors. There he learned to imitate nature; at Rome he had
missed the art of improving on it. If he has not the simplicity of Titian, he
has far more than Paul Veronese. The buildings with which he has enriched the
back grounds of his compositions, do not yield to those of the latter; his
landscapes are at least equal to those of the former. Seldom as he practiced
it, Rubens was never greater than in landscape; the tumble of his rocks and
trees, the deep shadows in his glades and glooms, the watery sunshine, and dewy
verdure, show a variety of genius, which are not to be found in the inimitable
but uniform glow of Claud Lorrain.

Rubens was much worse employed at Genoa, where he drew most of their palaces,
and caused them to be engraved in two volumes. How could a genius like his
overlook the ruins of Rome, the designs of Raphael and Michael Angelo, and the
restorers of ancient architecture at Venice, and waste his time on the very
moderate beauties that he found at Genoa, where their greatest art lay in
crowding magnificence into a narrow and almost useless situation? where most of
their palaces can only be seen from a sedan chair!

His mother's illness drew him back to Antwerp, where the Archduke Albert
detained him, and where he married his first wife Elizabeth Brants. He built a
palace and painted it within and without. His cabinet or rotunda was enriched
with antique vases, statues, medals and pictures. The Duke of Buckingham saw
and coveted it. Le Blond, whom I have mentioned in the life of Holbein,
negotiated the bargain, to which Rubens consented with regret. The favorite,
who was bent on the purchase, gave, it is said, ten thousand pounds for what
had not cost above a thousand.

In Flanders he executed many great works, which created him as many enemies.
They affected to ascribe to the scholars whom he had formed or been forced to
take to assist him, as Jordaens, Van Uden, Snyder, and Wildens, the merits of
the master -- but the greater the talents of the assistants, the higher the
genius of the master. Do able painters work under an indifferent one? Abraham
Janssens challenged Rubens to a trial of their art; Rubens replied he would
engage with him, when Janssens had proved himself worthy to be his competitor.
A more friendly offer was rejected by him with equal wit. A chemist tendered
him a share of his laboratory and of his hopes of the philosopher's stone.
Rubens carried the visionary into his painting room, and told him his offer was
dated twenty years too late, "for so long it is, said he, since I found the art
of making gold with my pallet and pencils."

From Antwerp he was called to Paris by Mary de' Medici, and painted the
ostensible history of her life in the Luxemburgh. It is said that she designed
he should fill another gallery with the story of Henry IV. her husband, and
that he had begun several of the compartments, but the troubles of that
Princess prevented the execution. Abrege de la vie des peintres. Vol. ii, p.
141.
A peculiar honor, as that Princess was an Italian. It is even said that he
gave her some lessons in drawing. If the prodigious number of large pieces
painted by Rubens were not testimonies of the abundance and facility of his
genius, this gallery alone, completed in three years, would demonstrate it. As
soon as it was finished, he returned to Antwerp, where his various talents were
so conspicuous, that he was pitched upon to negotiate a treaty of peace between
Spain and England. The Infanta Isabella sent him to Madrid for instructions,
where he ingratiated himself so much with the Conde-Due D'olivarez, that
besides many valuable presents, he had a brevet for himself and his son of
secretary of the Privy Council, and was dismissed with a secret commission to
King Charles, as I have mentioned before, in which he had the honor of
succeeding.

Neither Charles nor Rubens overlooked in the Ambassador the talents of the
Painter. The King engaged him to paint the cieling of the Banqueting House.
The design is the apotheosis of King James, for whom, when once deified, there
seems to have been no farther thought of erecting a monument. The original
sketch for the middle compartment is preserved at Houghton: It had belonged to
Sir Godfrey Kneller, who often studied it, as is evident by Sir Godfrey's
original sketch, at Houghton too, for the great equestrian picture of King
William at Hampton Court, though in the larger piece he seems to have forgot
that he ever had studied the former design. Sir Godfrey had heard that Jordaens
assisted Rubens in the execution; if true, some of the compartments must have
been painted in Holland and sent over hither, for I do not find that Jordaens
was ever in England. Rubens received three thousand pounds for his work. The
building itself cost seventeen thousand pounds. What had it been, if
completed! Vandyck was to have painted the sides with the history of the order
of the garter. Inigo Jones, Rubens, and Vandyck! Europe could not have shown a
nobler chamber. Kent in the late reign repaired the painting on the cieling.

During his residence here Rubens painted for the King a St. George, In a
letter in the Museum dated March 6, 1630, it is said, "My Lord Carlisle has
twice in one week most magnificently feasted the Spanish Ambassador and Mons.
Rubens also, the agent who prepared the way for his coming: who in honor of
our nation has drawn with his pencil the history of St. George, wherein (if it
be possible) he has exceeded himself; but the picture he has sent home into
Flanders to remain as a monument of his abode and employment here." This, I
suppose, was a repetition of the picture he drew for the King: One of them is
now in the collection of the Earl of Lincoln.
four feet high and seven feet wide. His majesty was represented in the Saint,
the Queen in Cleodelinde; each figure one foot and half high; at a distance a
view of Richmond and the Thames. In another picture the benefits of peace and
miseries of war. See King Charles's catalogue p. 86.


Theodore Rogiers There is a head of Rogiers among the artists drawn by Vandyck.
modelled for the King a silver ewer designed by Rubens, with the judgment of
Paris. There is a print from this vase by James Neffs.

This great painter was knighted at Whitehall Feb. 21, 1630, and the King gave
him an addition to his arms, on a dexter canton, gules, a lion passant, or.

A large print from his picture of the descent from the cross, engraved by
Vosterman in 1620, is thus dedicated, Illustrissimo, excellentissimo et
prudentissimo domino, domino Dudleio Carleton equiti, magnae Britanniae regis
ad confaederatos in Belgio ordines legato, pictoriae artis egregio There is a
print of Sir Dudley Carleton by W. Delff, from a painting of Mirevelt, thus
inscribed, "Illust. excel. ac prudent. domino Dn. Dudleyo Carleton equiti,
magnae Britanniae regis apud confoederatarum provinciarum in Belgio ordines
legato, etc. pictoriae artis non solum admiratori, sed etiam insigniter perito.
Sculptor dedicat.
admiratori, P. P. Rubens, gratitudinis et benevolentiae ergo, nuncupat,
dedicat.

We have in England several capital works of Rubens. Villiers Duke of
Buckingham had thirteen, and Sir Peter Lely five. See their catalogues by
Bathoe.
The Duchess of Marlborough gave any price for his pictures. They There are
sixteen pieces by this master; the best are, his own portrait with his wife and
child, the offering of the Magi, and the Roman charity.
are the first ornaments of Blenheim but have suffered by neglect. At Wilton
are two; one, the Assumption of the Virgin, painted for the Earl of Arundel
while Rubens was in England, and with which he was so pleased himself, that he
afterward made a large picture from it for a convent at Antwerp. The other
contains four children, Christ, an Angel, St. John, and a girl representing the
church. This picture which is far superior to the foregoing, and very fine, is
said in the catalogue to be allowed to be the best picture in England of
Rubens; an hyperbole indeed. See Kennedy's account of Wilton, p. 76. 79.
At the Earl of Pomfret's at Easton was a portrait of Lodowic Duke of Richmond
and Lenox. At Houghton is that masterly piece, Mary Magdalen anointing the feet
of Christ; and a large cartoon of Meleager and Atalanta. There too are three
pieces in three different styles, in each of which he excelled, a landscape;
and satyrs; and lions. Animals, especially of the savage kind, he painted
beyond any master that ever lived. In his satyrs, though highly colored and
with characteristic countenances, he wanted poetic imagination. They do not
seem a separate species, but a compound of the human and animal, in which each
part is kept too distinct. His female satyrs are scarce more indelicate than
his women; one would think that, like Swift, he did not intend that Yahoos
should be too discriminate from human nature; though what the satyrist drew
from spleen, flowed in the painter from an honest love of flesh and blood.
There are besides in Lord Orford's collection the sketches for the Cardinal
Infant's entry into Antwerp, the family of Rubens by his scholar Jordaens, and
his second wife Helena Forman, a celebrated whole length by Vandyck.

The fine picture of St. Martin the late Prince of Wales bought of Mr. Bagnol,
who brought it from Spain. It is remarkable that in this piece Rubens has
borrowed the head of an old man from the cripple in one of the cartoons, of
which I have said he gave information to King Charles, who purchased them. At
Lord Spencer's at Wimbleton is a fine portrait of Cardinal Howard. At Burleigh
is an Ebony Cabinet the front and Sides of which are painted by Rubens; at one
End are his three Wives, highly colored.

I do not find how long Rubens stayed in England, probably not above a year. He
died of the gout in his own country in 1640. A catalogue of his works may be
seen in Descamps. See also a list of the works of Rubens in Le Comte's cabinet
des singularitez d' architecture, peinture, etc. vol. i, p. 251. There are
forty six pieces painted by him in the Elector Palatine's gallery at
Dusseldorp; one of them, the last judgment, is 20 feet high, and 15 wide.


Mr. Maurice Johnson of Spalding in Lincolnshire, a great antiquarian, produced
to the Society of Antiquaries some years ago a MS. containing discourses and
observations on human bodies, and on the statues and paintings of the ancients
and moderns, written partly in Latin, partly in Italian, and some notes in
Dutch, and illustrated with several drawings, as heads, attitudes, proportions,
etc. habits of Greeks and Romans, various instruments, utensils, armor, and
head-dresses from coins and statues, and comparisons of Raphael, Michael Angelo
and others. It was an octavo pocketbook, and appeared to be an exact copy of
Rubens's Album, which he used in his travels; the drawings, and even
handwriting and different inks being exactly imitated This book was brought
from Brussels by Capt. Johnson, Mr. Johnson's son, and had one leaf of the
original in it, with a sketch of the head of the Farnesian Hercules. The
original itself is at Paris, where they intended to publish it. An account of
it is given in the catalogue raisonne de monsieur Quintin de L'orangerie, par
Frederic Gersaint, 1744.

ABRAHAM DIEPENBECK,

among the various scholars of Rubens, was one of the few that came to England,
where he was much employed by William Cavendish Duke of Newcastle, whose
managed horses he drew from the life, from whence were engraved the cuts that
adorn that Peer's book of horsemanship. Several of the original pictures still
remain in the hall at Welbeck. Diepenbeck drew views of the Duke's seats in
Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, and portraits of the Duke, Duchess, and his
children, and gave designs for several plates prefixed to the works of both
their Graces. "Diepenbeck, says De Piles, was born at Boisleduc, and in his
youth was much employed in painting upon glass, Sandrart says he excelled all
the other painters on glass.
and entering afterward into the school of Rubens, became one of his best
disciples." Several prints were made from his works, particularly those he
designed for a book, called, The Temple of the Muses, engraved by Bloemart and
Mattham in 1663, Sandrart. See a farther account of Diepenbeck in the Abrege de
la vie des plus fameux peintres. vol. ii p. 198. At Cashiobury is the story of
Dido and Aeneas by him. Sir R. Walpole had another, but smaller.
and his portraits of Lessius and Bellarmine by Bolsvert, V. Evelyn's
Sculptura, p. 73.
and of Sir Hugh Cartwright 1656 by Vosterman.

Sir ANTONY VANDYCK,

whose works are so frequent in England that the generality of our people can
scarce avoid thinking him their countryman, was born at Antwerp in 1598, the
only son of a merchant, and of a mother, who was admired for painting flowers
in small, and for her needleworks in silk. Vandyck was first placed with Van
Balen, who had studied at Rome, and painted figures both in large and small;
but the fame of Rubens drew away to a nobler school the young congenial artist.
The progress of the disciple speedily raised him to the glory of assisting in
the works from which he learned. Fame that always supposes jealousy is felt
where there are grounds for it, attributes to Rubens an envy of which his
liberal nature I believe was incapable, and makes him advise Vandyck to apply
himself chiefly to portraits. I shall show that jealousy, at least emulation,
is rather to be ascribed to the scholar than to the master. If Rubens gave the
advice in question, he gave it with reason; not maliciously. Vandyck had a
peculiar genius for portraits; his draperies His sattins of which he was fond,
particularly white and blue, are remarkably finished; his back-grounds heavy,
and have great sameness.
are finished with a minuteness of truth not demanded in historic compositions;
besides his invention was cold and tame, nor does he any where seem to have had
much idea of the passions, and their expression: Portraits require none. If
Rubens had been jealous of Vandyck, would he, as all their biographers agree he
did, persuade him to visit Italy, whence himself had drawn his greatest lights?
Addison did not advise Pope to translate Homer, but assisted Tickell in a rival
translation. Vandyck after making presents to Rubens of two or ANTONY VANDYCK
(...) pinx. (...) Bannerman, Sculp.

From an original in the Collection of the (...)

three histories, and the famous portrait of the latter's wife, set out for
Italy, and made his first residence at Genoa. From thence he went to Venice,
which one may call the metropolis of the Flemish painters, who seem so
naturally addicted to coloring, that even in Italy they see only with Flemish
eyes. Vandyck imbibed so deeply the tints of Titian, that he is allowed to
approach nearer to the carnations of that master even than Rubens; Sir Anthony
had more delicacy than the latter, but like him never reached the grace and
dignity of the antique. He seldom even arrived at beauty. His Madonnas are
homely; his ladies so little flattered, that one is surprised he had so much
custom. He has left us to wonder that the famous Countess of Carlisle could be
thought so charming; and had not Waller been a better painter, Sacharissa would
make little impression now. One excellence he had, which no portrait-painter
ever attained except Sir Godfrey Kneller; the hands are often the finest part
of his pictures.

He went to Rome and lived splendidly, avoiding the low conversation of his
countrymen, and distinguished by the appellation of the Pittore Cavalieresco.
It was at Rome he drew that capital portrait of Cardinal Bentivoglio, who
having been Nuncio in Flanders, had a partiality for their artists, and as he
celebrated their history with his pen, was in return almost immortalized by one
of their best pencils.

Vandyck, while at Rome, received an invitation to Palermo, and went thither.
There he painted Prince Philibert of Savoy, the Viceroy, and a paintress of
some name, At the Lord Spenser's at Wimbledon is a good portrait of Sophonisba
Anguisciola playing on a harpsichord, painted by herself, and an old woman
attending her; on the picture is written, Jussu Patris. Lord Ashburnham has a
small head of her in a round.
Sophonisba Anguisciola, then at the age of ninety-one. But the plague soon
drove him from Sicily; he returned to Genoa, where he had gained the highest
reputation, and where he has left many considerable works.

He went back to Antwerp, and practiced both history and portrait. Of the
former kind were many applauded Altar-pieces; in the latter, were particularly
the heads of his cotemporary artists. He drew them in Chiaro scuro on small
pannels, thirty-five of which are in the collection of the Countess of Cardigan
at Whitehall. Admirable is the variety of attitudes and airs of heads; but in
those pieces he meaned to surpass as well as record. The whole collection has
been thrice published; the first edition by Vanden Enden contains fourscore
plates; the second by Giles Hendrix, one hundred; the last by Verdussen, who
effaced the names and letters of the original engravers. Some of the plates
were etched by Vandyck himself. I say nothing of the numbers of prints from his
other works.

Hearing of the favor King Charles showed to the arts, Vandyck came to
England, and lodged with his friend Geldorp, a painter, hoping to be introduced
to the King; it is extraordinary he was not. He went away chagrined; but his
majesty soon learning what a treasure had been within his reach, ordered Sir
Kenelm Digby, who had sat to Vandyck, to invite him over. He came, and was
lodged among the King's artists at Black-fryars, which Felibien, according to
the dignity of ignorance which the French affect, calls L'Hotel de Blaifore.
Vol. iii, page 445.
Thither the King went often by water, and viewed his performances with
singular delight, frequently sitting to him himself, and bespeaking pictures of
the Queen, his children and his courtiers, and conferring the honor of
knighthood The French author of the lives of the painters says he was created
Knight of the Bath; a mistake. Abrege vol. ii. p. 170. Another mistake is his
supposing that Vandyck was only to give designs for tapestries in the
Banqueting House, p. 171.
on him at St. James's July 5, 1632. This was soon attended by the grant of an
annuity of 200 l. a year for life. The patent is preserved in the rolls, and
dated 1633, in which he is styled painter to his majesty. I have already
mentioned the jealousy of Mytens on this occasion.

Of the various portraits by Vandyck of King Charles, the principal are, a
whole length in the coronation robes at Hampton Court; In the same palace are
whole lengths of James I. his Queen, the Queen of Bohemia, and Prince Henry,
copied by Vandyck from painters of the preceding reign. Prince Henry's is in
armor, in which Vandyck excelled, has an amiable countenance, and is a fine
picture.
the head has been engraved by Virtue among the Kings of England. Another in
armor on a dun horse at Blenheim. This was in the royal collection, was sold
in the civil war, and was bought by the Duke of Marlborough from Munich.
A whole length in armor at Houghton. Another, a large piece at the Duke of
Grafton's, in which the King (a most graceful figure) in white satin, with
his hat on, is just descended from his horse; at a distance, a view of the Isle
of Wight. The This is the picture that was recovered from Remee.
King in armor on a white horse, Mons. de St. Antoine, He had been a chief
equerry to Prince Henry, and led a mourning horse at his funeral. See Birch's
life of that Prince, append. 527.
his equerry, holding his helmet. The head of the latter is fine; the King's is
probably not an original. This and the following are at each end of the gallery
at Kensington. The King and Queen sitting, Prince Charles, very young standing
at his knee; the Duke of York, an infant, on hers. This picture has been
heightened to make it match it is opposite.
At Turin is another whole length of the King, in a large piece of
architecture. At Somerset House, the King and Queen, half lengths, holding a
crown of laurel between them. At Windsor is a beautiful half length of the
Queen in white. Many portraits of her pretend to be by Vandyck, but none are so
lovely as this. He two or three times drew Prince Charles in armor standing.
At Kensington in one piece are Prince Charles, Prince James, and the Princess
Mary; lately engraved by Strange. In the same palace is one of his finest
works; George Villiers, the second Duke of Buckingham, and Lord Francis his
brother, when children. Nothing can exceed the nature, luster, and delicacy of
this sweet picture. At Houghton are two young daughters of the Lord Wharton,
admirable too, but rather inferior to the foregoing. In Lord Orford's
collection are several principal works See a particular description of these
pictures in the Aedes Walpolianae.
of this master. The holy family with a dance of Angels; it belonged to King
Charles, is a capital picture, but has it is faults. Inigo Jones, a head;
Rubens's wife in black satin; Henry Danvers Earl of Danby whole length, in the
robes of the garter; and a half length of Sir Thomas Chaloner, governor of
Prince Henry. Besides these my father bought of the last Duke the whole
collection of the Wharton family: There were twelve whole lengths, the two
girls, six half lengths, and two more by Sir Peter Lely; he paid an hundred
pounds each for the whole lengths and the double picture, and fifty pounds each
for the half lengths. Most of them were carried to Houghton, but some not
suiting the places, were brought back, and sold for a trifle after the death of
my father. Those that remain, are, King Charles, the Queen, very indifferent,
Sir Thomas Wharton: Of the half lengths, Laud, a celebrated but not very fine
picture; Sir Christopher Wandesford, Lady Wharton, Mrs. Wharton, Mrs. Wenman
and the Lely's. The rest were, Lord Wharton, bought by Lord Royston; Lady
Wharton in white, Lady Chesterfield, ditto; Countess of Worcester in blue; Lady
Rich in black, very handsome, on whose death Waller wrote a poem; Mrs. Smith in
blue, a homely woman, but a fine picture, now mine; Lady Carlisle, bought by
Mr. West; Arthur Goodwin, father of Mrs. Smith, one of the best, given by my
father to the late Duke of Devonshire; and two portraits of Prince Rupert,
whole and half lengths; both very poor performances. Some of the whole lengths
were engraved by Van Gunst.


At Cornbury, the seat of the Earls of Clarendon in Oxfordshire, was a noble
collection of portraits of the principal persons in the reign of King Charles,
many of which were drawn by Vandyck. The collection has since been divided
between the Duchess of Queensberry, Lady Hyde and Lady Mary Forbes, the
heiresses of the family. Several others of his works are at the Earl of
Denbigh's and at Lord Spenser's at Althrop. Among the latter, a celebrated
double whole length of the first Duke of Bedford and the famous Lord Digby,
afterward Earl of Bristol. The whole figure of the latter is good, and both
the heads fine; the body of Bedford is flat, nor is this one of his capital
works. Here too is a good picture of Daedalus and Icarus; half lengths; a fine
surly impatience in the young man, and his body well colored. The Duke of
Devonshire has some good pictures by him; at Chiswick is the well known Lord
Burlington gave 1000 l. for this picture at Paris, and had another of Luca
Jordano into the bargain.
Belisarius, though very doubtful if by the hand of Vandyck. The expressive
figure of the young soldier redeems this picture from the condemnation it would
deserve by the principal figure being so mean and inconsiderable. The Duke has
Vandyck's traveling pocketbook in which are several sketches, particularly
from Titian, and of Sophonisba Anguisciola, mentioned above.

At Holkham is a large equestrian picture of a Count D'Aremberg; both the rider
and horse are in his best manner; and at Earl Cowper's a large piece of John
Count of Nassau and his family, lately engraved by Baron.

Mr. Skinner, with the collection of the late Mr. Thomas Walker, has a fine
little picture of the Lady Venetia Digby, wife of Sir Kenelm; though only a
model for the large one at Windsor; it is exquisitely finished. She is
represented as treading on Envy and Malice, and is unhurt by a serpent that
twines round her arm. This galant compliment is a little explained in the new
life of Lord Clarendon, who mentions Sir Kenelm's marriage with a Lady, "though
of an extraordinary beauty, of as extraordinary fame." There is an elegy and
epitaph on this Lady in Randolph's poems, page 28, in which her beauty is
exceedingly commended. She was daughter and co-heiress of Sir Edward Stanley,
grandson of Edward Earl of Derby, by the Lady Lucy Percy, daughter of Thomas
Earl of Northumberland. Lady Venetia was found dead in her bed. Sir Kenelm
erected for her a monument of black marble with her bust in copper gilt, and a
lofty epitaph, in Christ-church without Newgate; but it was destroyed in the
fire of London. Lodge's peerage of Ireland. vol. iv, p. 89. There are two
copper busts of the Lady Venetia extant at Mr. Wright's at Gothurst in
Buckinghamshire, with several portraits of the family of Digby. The house
belonged to Sir Kenelm, and was purchased by Sir Nathan Wright.
Mr. Walker's collection was chiefly chosen for him by a set of virtuosi called
Vandyck's or the club of St. Luke, and it is plain from the pictures they
recommended, that they understood what they professed. There was another large
piece of Sir Kenelm, his lady and two children, in the collection of the Earl
of Oxford; and a fine half length of Sir Kenelm alone is at Kensington. Vandyck
painted too for the King a twelfth Roman Emperor, to complete the set of
Titian, in the room of one which was spoiled and left at Mantua. They cost the
King 100 l. a piece, and after his death were bought by the Spanish Ambassador,
the first purchaser of those effects. As the King's collection was embezzled or
taken by his servants for their arrears, that minister laid out 500 l. in those
purchases with Harrison (possibly the person mentioned p. 75.) the King's
embroiderer by Somerset House, and of Murray his tailor he bought a half figure
of a Venus. These and many other notices are taken from the Pocket-books of
Richard Symonds of Black-Notley in Essex, gent. who was born at Okehampton, and
was in the army of King Charles during the civil war, writing memoires of
battles, actions, motions, and promotions of officers from time to time in
small pocket-books; and through the several counties he passed, memorandums of
churches, monuments, painted windows, arms, inscriptions, etc. 'till January 1,
1648, when he left London, and traveled, first to Paris, and then to Rome and
Venice (always continuing his memoires) where he stayed 'till his return to
England in 1652. Eight or ten of these books were in the Harleian library, two
in that of Dr. Meade, and two or three in the herald's office, where is the
pedigree of his family with his picture (probably) in red wax from a seal,
engraved by T. Simon, his namesake, but no relation.
The Flemings gave any price for the works of Vandyck from that collection. Sir
Peter Lely, as may be seen in his catalogue, had several capital ones.

But it is at the Earl of Pembroke's at Wilton that Vandyck is on his throne.
The great Salon is entirely furnished by his hand. There is that principal
picture of Earl Philip and his family, which though damaged, would serve alone
as a school of this master. Yet with great admiration of him I cannot but
observe how short he falls of his model Titian. What heads both of age and
youth are in the family of Cornaro at Northumberland-house! How happily is the
disposition of a religious act chosen to throw expression into a groupe of
portraits! It is said that the Earl of Pembroke had obtained leave to have a
piece of the whole royal family by the same hand as a companion to his own.

At Leicester-house is a double portrait, bought by the late Prince of Wales of
Mr. Bagnols. It represents two of the wits of that time, T. Carew, of the
privy-chamber to Charles I. and a poet, and Henry Killigrew. They had a
remarkable dispute before Mrs. Cecilia Crofts, sister of the Lord Crofts, to
which Virtue supposed this picture alluded, as in a play called the Wanderer,
was a song against jealousy, written on the same occasion.

I have reserved to the last I have here, as in the case of Holbein, mentioned
only the capital pieces, or those, which being in great collections are most
easy of access. I do not pretend to enumerate all that are or are called of
this master.
the mention of the finest picture in my opinion of this master. It is of the
Earl of Strafford and his secretary, at the Marquis of Rockingham's at
Wentworth-house in Yorkshire. I can forgive him any insipid portraits of
perhaps insipid people, when he showed himself capable of conceiving and
transmitting the idea of the greatest man of the age. There is another of these
pictures at Blenheim, but infinitely inferior.

In the cathedral of Gloucester are two cumbent figures of an alderman and his
wife, evidently wrought from a design of Vandyck. It is great pity the sculptor
is not known, so successfully has he executed the manner of the painter. The
figures, even in that tasteless attitude, are easy and graceful, and the
draperies have a peculiar freedom. Sanderson, a quaint writer, uses a phrase,
which, though affected, is expressive; He says "Vandyck was the first painter,
who e're put ladies dress into a careless romance." Graphice p. 39.


Vandyck had 40 l. for a half, and 60 l. for a whole length; a more rational
proportion than that of our present painters, who receive an equal price for
the most insignificant part of the picture.

He was indefatigable, This is evident by the number of his works, for though
he was not above forty-two when he died, they are not exceeded by those of
Rubens.
and keeping a great table, often detained the persons who sat to him, to
dinner, for an opportunity of studying their countenances, and of retouching
their pictures again in the afternoon. Sir Peter Lely told Mrs. Beale, that
Laniere assured him he had sat seven entire days to him morning and evening,
and that, notwithstanding, Vandyck would not once let him look at the picture,
'till he was content with it himself. This was the portrait that determined the
King to invite him to England a second time. It is at the seat of the Lord
Chancellor Henley at the Grange in Hampshire.


In the summer he lived at Eltham in Kent; in an old house there, said to have
been his, Virtue saw several sketches of stories from Ovid in two colors,
ascribed to him.

At the Duke of Grafton's is a fine half length of I have a fine sketch of the
sace only, by himself.
Vandyck by himself, when young, holding up his arm, the hand declined. There
is a print of it, and of two others of him, older; one looking over his
shoulder, the other with a sun-flower. At Hampton Court in the apartment below
is his From the minutes of the Antiquarian Society I find that in 1723 they
were informed that at Mr. Isaac Ewer's in Lincoln's-inn-fields was a copy by
Vanderbank of Thurloe's portrait, painted by Mr. Churchill's pupil, mistress to
Vandyck. This person, I suppose, was Mrs Carlisle, mentioned hereafter; but of
Churchill, I have seen no other account.
mistress Mrs. Lemon highly finished. There is a print of the same person by
Hollar, but not from this picture. In the pocketbook of R. Symonds that I have
mentioned, he says, "It was much wondered at, that he (Vandyck) should openly
keep a mistress of his (Mrs. Lemon) in the house and yet suffer Porter to keep
her company." This was Endymion Porter, of the bedchamber to King Charles, of
whom and his family there was a large piece by Vandyck at Buckingham-house. See
a list of Vandyck's works in Le Comte's cabinet des singularitez d'
architecture, peinture, etc. vol. i, p. 282. Many are in the gallery at
Dusseldorp.


He was much addicted to his pleasures and expense; I have mentioned how well
he lived. He was fond of music and generous to musicians. His luxurious and
sedentary life brought on the gout, and hurt his fortune. He sought to repair
it, not like his master by the laboratory of his painting room, but by that
real folly, the pursuit of the Philosopher's stone, in which perhaps he was
encouraged by the example or advice of his friend Sir Kenelm Digby. Toward the
end of his life the King bestowed on him for a wife, Mary the daughter of the
unfortunate Lord Gowry, which if meaned as a signal honor, might be calculated
too to depress the disgraced family by connecting them with the blood of a
painter. It is certain that the alliance does not seem to have attached Vandyck
more strongly to the King; whether he had any disgusts infused into him by his
new wife, or whether ambitious, as I have hinted, of vying with the glory of
his master in the Luxemburg, Sir Antony soon after his marriage set out for
Paris, in hopes, of being employed there in some public work. He was
disappointed He was not totally unemployed there Sir Richard Lyttelton has two
small pictures in chiaro scuro, evidently designed for altar-pieces, and
representing Anne of Austria and some monkish saint.
-- their own Poussin was then deservedly the favorite at that court. Vandyck
returned to England, and in the same humor of executing some public work, and
that in competition with his master. He proposed to the King by Sir Kenelm
Digby to paint the walls of the banqueting house, of which the cieling was
already adorned by Rubens, with the history and procession of the order of the
garter. The proposal struck the King's taste, and by a small sketch Now at the
Lord Chancellor Henley's at the Grange in Hampshire.
in chiaro scuro for the procession, in which, though very faint, some
portraits are distinguishable, it looks as if it had been accepted, though some
say it was rejected, on the extravagant price demanded by Vandyck: I would not
specify the sum, it is so improbable, if I did not find it repeated in Fenton's
notes on Waller. It was fourscore thousand pounds! The civil war prevented
farther thoughts of it, as the death of Vandyck would have interrupted the
execution, at least the completion of it. He died in Black-fryars December 9,
1641, and was buried on the 11th in St. Paul's near the tomb of John of Gaunt.

By Maria Ruthven his wife, he left one daughter married to Mr. Stepney, a
gentleman who rode in the horse-guards on their first establishment by Charles
II. Their grandson Mr. Stepney was Envoy to several courts, and is known by his
poems published in the collection of the works of our minor poets. Sir John
Stepney, another descendent, died on the road from Bath to Wales in 1748. Lady
Vandyck the widow was married again to Richard Pryse son of Sir John Pryse of
Newton-Aberbecham in Montgomeryshire Knight. Richard, who was created a Baronet
August 9, 1641, was first married to Hesther, daughter of Sir Hugh Middleton;
by Vandyck's widow he had no issue. Virtue ascertained these matches by books
in the college os arms.


Besides his legitimate children Vandyck had a natural daughter called Maria
Teresa, to whom, as appears by his will in Doctor's Commons, he left four
thousand pounds, then in the hands of his sister Susannah Vandyck in a convent
at Antwerp, whom he appoints trustee for that daughter. To his sister Isabella
he bequeaths 250 guilders yearly; and in case his daughter Maria Teresa die
unmarried, he entails 4000 l. on another sister, married to Mr. Derick, and her
children. To his wife Mary and his newborn daughter Justiniana Anna he gives
all his goods, effects and moneys, due to him in England from King Charles, the
Nobility, and all other persons whatever, to be equally divided between them.
His executors are his wife, Mr. Aurelius de Meghan, and Katherine Cowley, to
which Katherine he leaves the care of his daughter to be brought up, allowing
ten pounds per ann. 'till she is eighteen years of age. Other legacies he gives
to his executors and trustees for their trouble, and three pounds each to the
poor of St. Paul's and St. Anne's Black-friar's, and to each of his servants
male and female.

The war prevented the punctual execution of his will, the probate of which was
not made 'till 1663, when the heirs and executors from abroad and at home
assembled to settle the accounts and recover what debts they could -- but with
little effect. In 1668, and in 1703, the heirs, with Mr. Carbonnel who had
married the daughter of Vandyck's daughter, made farther inspections into his
affairs and demands on his creditors, but what was the issue does not appear.

Lady Lempster, mother of the last Earl of Pomfret, who was at Rome with her
Lord, wrote a life of Vandyck, with some description of his works.

Sir Kenelm Digby in his discourses compares Vandyck and Hoskins, and says the
latter pleased the most, by painting in little.

Waller has addressed a poem to Vandyck, beginning, Rare artisan; Lord Halifax
another on his portrait of Lady Sunderland, printed in the third volume of
State Poems, and Cowley wrote an elegy on his death.

Among the scholars John de Reyn, a scholar of Vandyck, is said by Descamps, to
have lived with his master in England till the death of the latter, after which
he was in France and settled at Dunkirk. If De Reyn's works are little known,
adds his Biographer, it is owing to their approaching so nearly to his master's
as to be confounded with them. Vol. ii. p. 189.
of Vandyck was The French author of the Abrege says that Gerard Seghers came
hither aster the deaths of Rubens and Vandyck, and softened his manner here.
This is all the trace I find of his being in England. Vol. ii. p. 162. At
Kensington is an indifferent piece of flowers by him, but I do not know that it
was painted here.


DAVID BECK,

born at Arnheim in 1621; he was in favor with Charles I. and taught the
Prince and the Dukes of York and Gloucester to draw. Descamps says that Beck's
facility in composition was so great, that Charles I. said to him, "faith!
Beck, I believe you could paint riding post." Vol. ii. p. 315.
He afterward went to France, Denmark and Sweden, and died in 1656.

GEORGE GELDORP,

of Antwerp, a countryman and friend of Vandyck, in whose house that painter
lodged at his first arrival, had been settled here some time before. He could
not draw himself, but painted on sketches made by others, and was in repute
even by this artificial practice; This must not be supposed to include his
portraits, for which he certainly would have had no custom, if the persons had
been obliged to sit to two different men. A painter may execute a head, though he
cannot compass a whole figure. A print by Voerst of James Stewart Duke of
Lenox, with Geo. Geldorp pinx. is indubitable proof that the latter painted
portraits.
though Virtue was told by Mr. Rose that it was not his most lucrative
employment, his house being reckoned convenient for the intrigues of people of
fashion. He first lived in Drury Lane in a large house and garden rented from
the crown at 30 l. per ann. and afterward in 1653 in Archer-street. He had
been concerned in keeping the King's pictures, and when Sir Peter Lely first
came over, he worked for Geldorp, who lived 'till after the restoration, and
was buried at Westminster. Another of the apprentices of Geldorp was

ISAAC SAILMAKER

who was employed by Cromwell to take a view of the fleet before Mardyke. A
print of the confederate fleet under Sir George Rooke engaging the French
commanded by the Count de Toulouse, was engraved in 1714 from a design of
Sailmaker, who lived to the age of eighty-eight, and died June 28, 1721.

(...) BRADSHAW

was another painter in the reign of Charles I. whom I only mention with other
obsolete names to lead inquirers to farther discoveries. All I find of him is a
note from one of the pocket-books of R. Symonds abovementioned, who says,
"Pierce in Bishopgate-street told me that Bradshaw is the only man that does
understand perspective of all the painters in London."

B. VAN BASSEN

of Antwerp, was a very neat painter of architecture. In the private apartment
below stairs at Kensington are two pictures by him; in one are represented
Charles I. and his Queen at dinner; in the other the King and Queen of Bohemia,
distinguished by their initial letters F. and E. The Duchess of Portland has a
magnificent Lord Oxford paid three hundred and ten pounds for it.
cabinet of ebony, bought by her father the Earl of Oxford from the Arundelian
collection at Tart-hall. On each of the drawers is a small history by
Polenburg, and pieces of architecture in the manner of Steenwyck by this Van
Bassen, who must not be confounded with the Italian Bassans, nor with the
Bassanos, who were musicians to Charles, and of which name there was also a
herald-painter. The first Bassano, who came hither in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth and was related to the Italian painters of that name, settled in
Essex and purchased an estate, which was sold in 1714 by the male descendent.
In the mansion was a portrait of the musician, holding a bass-viol. It is now
at Narford in Norfolk, the seat of the late Sir Andrew Fountain.

CORNELIUS POLENBURG

the sweet painter of little landscapes and figures, was born at Utrecht in
1586, and educated under Bloemart, whom he soon quitted to travel to Italy, as
he abandoned, say our books, the manner of Elsheimer to study Raphael -- but it
is impossible to say where they find Raphael in Polenburg. The latter formed a
style entirely new, and though preferable to the Flemish, unlike any Italian,
except in having adorned his landscapes with ruins. There is a varnished
smoothness and finishing in his pictures that makes them always pleasing,
though simple and too nearly resembling one another. The Roman Cardinals were
charmed with the neatness of his works; so was the great Duke, but could not
retain him. He returned to Utrecht and pleased Rubens who had several of his
performances. King Charles invited him to London, where he lived in
Archer-street next door to Geldorp, and generally painted the figures in
Steenwyck's perspectives. There is a very curious picture at Earl Poulet's at
Hinton St. George, representing an inside view of Theobald's, with figures of
the King, Queen, and the two Earls of Pembroke and Montgomery, William and
Philip. This piece is probably of Steenwyck, and the figures, In King Charles's
catalogue are mentioned the portraits of his majesty, and of the children of
the King of Bohemia, by Polenburg: and in King James's are eight pieces by him.
which are copied from Vandyck, either of Polenburg or Van Bassen.

CORNELIUS POLENBURG.
Ipse pinx. T.Chambars sculp.



HENRY STEENWYCK.
Ant. Van Dyck pinx. Bannerman, Sculp.



The works of Polenburg are very scarce; There are sixteen mentioned in the
catalogue of James II.
his scholar, John de Lis of Breda, imitated his manner so exactly, that his
pieces are often taken for the hand of his master. The best picture in England
of the latter is at the Viscount Midleton's. I have his own and his wife's
portrait by him in small ovals on copper; they were my father's. The wife is
stiff and Dutch; his own is inimitable: Though worked up to the tender
smoothness of enamel, it has the greatest freedom of pencil, the happiest
delivery of nature.

Charles could not prevail on Polenburg to fix here: He returned to Utrecht and
died there in 1660, at the age of seventy-four.

HENRY STEENWYCK

was son Descamps has proved that it is a mistake to call the son Nicholas, as
Sandrart and others have done. See p. 384.
of the famous painter of architecture, and learned that manner of his father.
I find no particulars of the time of his arrival here, or when he died. It is
certain he worked for King Charles. In King James's catalogue are recorded ten
of his works.
The ground to the portrait of that Prince, in the royal palace at Turin, I
believe, was painted by him. In France are the portraits of Charles and his
Queen by him, about a soot high, in one piece, with a front of a royal palace
in the back ground. Descamps says this picture is more carefully labored than
any work of Vandyck, and equal to the most valuable of Mieris. p. 385. I
believe the fine piece of architecture at Houghton is by the hand of Steenwyck,
the father. By the son was a capital picture of St. Peter in prison, which at
Streater's sale in 1711 sold for 25 l. It was afterward in Dr. Meade's
collection, who sold it to the late Prince of Wales.
In a MS. catalogue of King Charles's collection is mentioned a perspective by
Steenwyck, with the King and Queen, in little, by Belcamp: In the same
catalogue is recorded a little book of perspectives by Steenwyck, which on the
sale of the King's goods sold for no more than two pounds ten Shillings.
Steenwyck's name and the date 1629 are on the picture of Frobenius at
Kensington, which he altered for King Charles. It is the portrait of the son,
that is among the heads of painters by Vandyck. His son Nicholas was in England
also, painted for King Charles, and probably died here.

JOHN TORRENTIUS

of Amsterdam, is known to have been here, not by his works, but on the
authority of Schrevelius, in his history of Arlem, from whom Descamps took his
account. Torrentius, says the latter, painted admirably in small, but his
subjects were not calculated to procure him many avowed admirers. He painted
from the lectures of Petronius and Aretine, had the confidence to dogmatize on
the same subjects, and practiced at least what he preached. To profligacy he
added impiety, 'till the magistrates thought proper to put a stop to his
boldness. He underwent the question, and was condemned to an imprisonment of
twenty years; but obtained his liberty by the intercession of some men of
quality, and particularly of the English Ambassador -- what the name of the
latter was we are not told. Torrentius came over to England, but giving more
scandal than satisfaction, he returned to Amsterdam, and remained there
concealed 'till his death in 1640, aged fifty-one. King Charles had two pieces
of his hand; one representing two glasses of Rhenish; the other, a naked man.
V. Catalogue, P p. 158, 162.


KEIRINCX,

called here Carings, was employed by King Charles to draw views; his works are
mentioned in the royal catalogue, particularly prospects of his majesty's
houses in Scotland. In a sale of pictures in March 1745 was a landscape by him
freely and brightly touched, with his name written on it as above, The French
author of the Abrege calls him Alexander, which must be a mistake. He says he
acquired his reputation by what should have destroyed it; as he could not paint
figures, Polenburg generally added them for him. I have the view of a seat in a
park by him, freely painted, not to say, very carelessly. It has King Charles's
mark behind it.
and a few small figures added by Polenburg. In Dagar's sale were three
drawings with a pen and washed, by Keirincx; one of them had a view of the
parliament house and Westminster stairs to the water, dated 1625.

JOHN PRIWITZER

was too good a painter to remain so long unknown. At Woburn, besides some
young heads of the family, is a whole length of Sir William Russel, a youth,
and Knight of the Bath in the robes of the order, with a dwarf aged thirty-two.
It is painted with great brightness and neatness, and does not want freedom.
Upon it is written Johannes Priwitzerus de Hungaria faciebat 1627. I have never
met with any other mention of this name.

GEORGE JAMESONE The materials of this article were communicated by Mr. John
Jamisone, wine-merchant in Leith, who has another portrait of this painter by
himself, 12 inches by 10.


was the Vandyck of Scotland, to which title he had a double pretension, not
only having surpassed his countrymen as a portrait-painter, but from his works
being sometimes attributed to Sir Antony, who was his fellow-scholar; both
having studied under Rubens at Antwerp.

Jamesone was son of Andrew Jamesone, an architect, and was born at Aberdeen in
1586. At what age he went abroad, or how long he continued there, is not known.
After his return, he applied with indefatigable industry to portrait in oil,
though he sometimes practiced in miniature, and in history and landscape too. His
largest portraits His earliest works are chiefly on board, afterward on a fine
linen cloth, smoothly primed with a proper tone to help the harmony of his
shadows. His best works were from 1630 to his death.
were generally somewhat less than life. His excellence is said to consist in
delicacy and softness, with a clear and beautiful coloring, his shades not
charged, but helped by varnish, with little appearance of the pencil. There is
a print of him, his wife Isabella Tosh and a young son, painted by himself in
1623, engraved by Alexander Jamesone, his descendent, in 1728, and now in the
possession of Mr. John Alexander, limner at Edinburgh his great grandson, with
several other GEORGE JAMESONE.
Bannerman Sculp.

portraits of the family, painted by George; particularly another of himself in
his school, with sketches both of history and landscape, and with portraits of
Charles 1st. his Queen, Jamesone's wife, and four others of his works from the
life.

When King Charles visited Scotland in 1633, the magistrates of Edinburgh,
knowing his majesty's taste, employed Jamesone to make drawings of the Scottish
monarchs, with which the King was so much pleased, that inquiring for the
painter, he sat to him and rewarded him with a diamond ring from his own finger.

It is observable that Jamesone always drew himself with his hat on, either in
imitation of his master Rubens, or on having been indulged in that liberty by
the King when he sat to him.

Though most of the considerable families in Scotland are possessed of works by
this master, the greatest collection of them is at Taymouth, the seat of the
Earl of Breadalbane; Sir Colin Campbell of Glenorchy, his Lordship's ancestor,
having been the chief and earliest patron of Jamesone, who had attended that
gentleman on his travels. From a MS. on vellom, containing the genealogy of the
house of Glenorchy, begun in 1598, are taken the following extracts, written in
1635, page 52;

"Item, The said Sir Coline Campbell (8th. Lord of Glenorchy) gave unto George
Jamesone, painter in Edinburgh, for King Robert and King David Bruysses, Kings
of Scotland, and Charles the 1st King of Great Brittane France and Ireland, and
his Majesty's Quein, and for nine more of the Queins of Scotland their
portraits, quhilks are set up in the hall of Ballock [now Taymouth] the sum of
tua hundredth thrie scor punds."

"Mair the said Sir Coline gave to the said George Jamesone for the Knight of
Lockow's Lady, and the first Countess of Argylle, and six of the Ladys of
Glenurquhay their portraits, and the said Sir Coline his own portrait, quhilks
are set up in the chalmer of Deass of Ballock, ane hundredth four scoire punds."

Memorandum. In the same year 1635 the said George Jamesone painted a large
genealogical tree of the family of Glenorchy, 8 feet long and 5 broad,
containing in miniature the portraits of Sir Duncan Campbell of Lockow, of
Archibald Campbell his eldest son, first Earl of Argylle, and of Sir Coline
Campbell his second son, first Lord of Glenorchy, together with the portraits
of eight successive Knights, Lairds of Glenorchy, with the branches of their
inter-marriages, and of those of their sons and daughters, beautifully
illuminated. At the bottom of which tree the following words are painted on a
scroll; "The genealogy of the House of Glenurquhie, whereof is descendit
sundry nobill and worthy houses, 1635, ^amesone faciebat."

Besides the foregoing, Lord Breadalbane has at Taymouth, by the same hand,
eleven portraits of Lords and Ladies of the first families in Scotland, painted
in 1636 and 1637.

From the extract above, it appears that Jamesone received no more for each of
those heads than twenty pounds Scots, or one pound thirteen shillings and
four-pence English: Yet it is proved by their public records that he died
possessed of an easy fortune, which he left to his three daughters, two of whom
were honorably married. One of them, named Mary, distinguished herself by
admirable needlework, a piece of which used to be exhibited on festivals in the
Church of St. Nicholas at Aberdeen. Her descendent Mr. Thomson of Portlethem
has an original picture of her father by himself. Three small portraits of the
house of Haddington are in the possession of Thomas Hamilton Esquire. of Fala.

Many of Jamesone's works are in both colleges of Aberdeen. The Sibyls there,
it is said, he drew from living beauties of that city. Mr. Baird of Auchmedden
in Aberdeenshire has in one piece three young Ladies, cousins, of the houses of
Argyle, Errol and Kinnoul, their ages, six, seven and eight, as marked on the
side of the picture. The same Gentleman has a small whole length of William
Earl of Pembroke, by some ascribed to Vandyck. At Mr. Lindsay's of Wormeston in
Fife is a double half length of two boys, of that family, playing with a dog,
their ages five and three, 1636.

There is a perspective view of Edinburgh by Jamesone, with a Neptune on the
fore ground.

Having finished a fine whole length of Charles I. he expected the magistrates
of Aberdeen would purchase it for their hall, but they offering him too
inconsiderable a price, he sold it to a gentleman in the north of England.

Jamesone had many scholars, particularly Michael Wright, mentioned in the
third Volume of these Anecdotes. His own portrait is in the Florentine chamber
of Painters.

Though Jamesone is little known in England, his character as well as his works
were greatly esteemed in his own country. Arthur Johnston, the Poet, addressed
to him an elegant Epigram on the picture of the Marchioness of Huntley, which
may be seen in the works of that author printed at Middleburgh in 1642. The
portrait itself is extant in the collection of the Duke of Gordon; and in the
Newton-college of Aberdeen is the picture of Doctor Johnston himself by the
same hand. A Latin Elegy composed by David Wedderburn was printed on his death,
which happened in 1644 at Edinburgh, where he was interred in the churchyard
by the Gray-friars, but without any monument.

By his will, written with his own hand in July 1641, and breathing a spirit of
much piety and benevolence, he provides kindly for his wife and children, and
leaves many legacies to his relations and friends, particularly to Lord Rothes
the King's picture from head to foot, and Mary with Martha in one piece: to
William Murray he gives the medals in his coffer, makes a handsome provision
for his natural daughter, and bestows liberally on the poor. That he should be
in a condition to do all this, seems extraordinary, his prices having been so
moderate; for enumerating the debts due to him, he charges Lady Haddington for
a whole length of her husband, and Lady Selon's of the same dimensions, frames
and all, but three hundred marks; and Lord Maxwell for his own picture and his
Lady's, to their knees, one hundred marks; both sums of Scots money.

Mr. Jamisone So the name is now written, not Jamesone.
has likewise a memorandum written and signed by this Painter, mentioning a MS.
in his possession, "containing two hundred leaves of parchment of excellent
write adorned with diverse historys of our Savior curiously limned," which he
values at two hundred pounds sterling, a very large sum at that time! What is
become of that curious book is not known.

WILLIAM DOBSON,

whom King Charles called the English Tintoret, was born in 1610, in St.
Andrew's parish in Holbourn; his family had been gentlemen of DOBSON.
Bannerman Sculp.

good rank at St. Alban's, but having fallen into decay, he was put apprentice
R. Symonds says he learned most of Old Cleyn.
to Sir Robert Peake, whom I have mentioned, a painter and dealer in pictures.
Under him, though no excellent performer, but by the advantage of copying some
pictures of Titian and Vandyck, Dobson profited so much, that a picture he had
drawn being exposed in the window of a shop on Snow-hill, Vandyck passing by
was struck with it, and inquiring for the author, found him at work in a poor
garret, from whence he took him and recommended him to the King. On the death
of Vandyck, Dobson was appointed Serjeant-painter, and groom of the
privy-chamber, and attended the King to Oxford, and lodged in the high street
almost over against St. Mary's church in a house where some of his works
remained 'till of late years. At Oxford his Majesty, Prince Rupert, and several
of the Nobility The author of the Abrege de la Vie des plus fameux Peintres
says, that Dobson being overwhelmed with business thought of a lucky way to
check it. It was, obliging persons who sat to him to pay half the price down;
and that he was the first who used this practice. By the swarms of portraits
that are left on the hands of his successors, this method is either neglected,
or has very little effect!
sat to him; but the declension of the King's affairs proved fatal to Dobson;
he loved his pleasures, and not having had time to enrich himself, was involved
in debts and thrown into prison, from whence he was delivered by one Mr.
Vaughan of the Exchequer, whose picture he drew and thought it the best of his
portraits. He enjoyed this release but a short time; dying at the age of
thirty-six, he was buried at St. Martin's October 28, 1646. A short life, in
which he had promised much excellence. His pictures are thought the best
imitations of Vandyck; they are undoubtedly very faithful transcripts of
nature. He painted history as well as portrait; and even the latter generally
containing more than a single figure, rise almost above that denomination.

Of the first sort, is the Decollation of St. John at Wilton. It is in a good
style, but the coloring is raw. The idea of St. John is said to have been
taken from the face of Prince Rupert. At Chatsworth is a very particular
picture, said to be General Monk, his child, and his mistress, whom he took
against the consent of her husband. The man in armor, undoubtedly resembles
Monk, but the whole piece has the air of a holy family; nor is there any other
tradition of any mistress of Monk, but the famous See an account of her in
Lord Clarendon's history of his life, in Ludlow's memoires, and in the
collection of state poems, vol. i. p. 38.
Anne Clarges whom he afterward married, and who, some say, was a milliner.
There are many instances of painters who have deified their mistresses, but the
character of the Virgin Mary was never more prostituted, than if assumed by
Anne Clarges. Mr. Stanley has a picture extremely like this, by (...). At
Albury in Surrey, the seat of the Earl of Arundel, was a picture by Dobson of
the woman caught in adultery, with several figures; the heads taken from
persons then living, among whom was the poet Cowley. At Chippenham, in
Cambridgeshire, formerly the seat of Russel Earl of Orford, in one piece are
Prince Rupert, Colonel John Russel and Mr. William Murray drinking, and dipping
their favour-ribbands in the wine. At Blenheim, is a family, by some said to be
that of Francis Carter, an architect and scholar of Inigo Jones; by others of
Lilly the Astrologer, whom Virtue thought it resembled. But Whitlocke says that
Lilly had no family.
The man holds a pair of compasses. I have seen nothing of Dobson preferable to
this; there is the utmost truth in it. At Devonshire-house house is another
family piece of Sir Thomas Brown, author of Religio Medici, his wife, two sons
and as many daughters. Mr. Willett, merchant in Thames Street, has a small
family-piece of Dr. Hibbard, physician, his wife and five children. The father
and mother are particularly well painted. A little boy leans on the father's
knee, evidently borrowed from the well-known attitude by Rubens of Sir B.
Gerbier's daughter. Two children on the right hand were certainly added
afterward, and are much inferior to the rest. The dates were probably inserted
at the same time. A whole length of Sir William Compton is in the possession of
the family. At the Lord Byron's is the portrait of Sir Charles Lucas; and at
Drayton in Northamptonshire, Henry Mordaunt Earl of Peterborough in armor with
a page holding his horse, and an angel giving him his helmet. The last
circumstance may relate to his preservation in the Civil War, in which he was
wounded, and made his escape when taken prisoner with Duke Hamilton and Lord
Holland. This picture has great merit.
A head of the Marquis of Montrose was taken for the hand of Vandyck: in a
corner in stone color is a statue of peace, on the other side, his helmet. At
Mr. Skinner's (Mr. Walker's collection) is a large piece of Prince Charles in
armor, drawn about 1638, Mr. Windham, a youth, holding his helmet; at bottom
are arms and trophies. I have mentioned a fine head of Vanderdort at Houghton.
Dobson's wife, by him, is on the stairs of the Ashmolean museum at Oxford; and
his own head is at Earl Paulett's; the hands were added long since by Gibson,
as he himself told Virtue. Charles Duke of Somerset had a picture of an old man
sitting, and his son behind him; on this picture was written the following
epigram, published by John Elsum among his epigrams on painting, a work I have
mentioned before, though of no merit but by ascertaining some particular
pictures; Page 112. It is a thin octavo, printed in 1700, with only his initial
letters J. E. Esquire This John Elsum published another piece in 1703 called, the
Art of Painting after the Italian manner, with practical observations on the
principal colors, and directions how to know a good picture; with his name.
Perceiving somebody behind his chair,
He turns about with a becoming air:
His head is raised, and looking over his shoulder
So round and strong, you never saw a bolder.
Here you see nature th'roughly understood;
A portrait not like paint, but flesh and blood;
And, not to praise Dobson below his merit,
This flesh and blood is quickened by a spirit.


At Northumberland-house as I have said is a triple portrait, of Sir Charles
Cotterel embraced by Dobson, and Sir Balthazar Gerbier in a white wastecoat.
Sir Charles was a great friend and patron of Dobson: At Rousham in Oxfordshire,
the seat of the Cotterels are several good portraits by him. Sir Charles
Cotterel, when at Oxford with the King, was engaged by his majesty to translate
Davila's history of the civil wars of France; the frontispiece designed by Sir
Charles himself, was drawn by Dobson; it represented Francis II. Charles IX.
Henry III. and IV. with two dogs, a popish and protestant cur, fighting before
them. This sketch is still preserved in the family, and in 1729 was engraved in
London for the history of Thuanus. He etched his own portrait. At Mr.
Nicholas's at Horseley is a portrait of Sir Richard Fanshaw, which has been
taken for the hand of Dobson; it was painted by one De Meetre; a name unknown
to me.


GERARD HONTHORST.
T.Chambars sculp.



In a collection of poems called Calanthe is an elegy on our painter.

GERARD HONTHORST,

The favorite painter of the Queen of Bohemia, was born in 1592 at Utrecht, and
instructed in painting by Bloemart, but he completed his studies at Rome,
where he stayed several years, and painted many things for Prince Justiniani,
and other works, excelling particularly in night-pieces and candlelights. On
his return he married well, and having a fair character, was remarkable for the
number of his disciples of rank. Sandrart who was one, says they were
twenty-eight at the same time, who each paid him an hundred florins yearly.
But his greatest honor was instructing the Queen of Bohemia and her children,
At Cashiobury, Lord Essex's, is a large picture of the Queen of Bohemia and her
children by Honthorst. The elder sons are killing monsters that represent Envy,
etc. The King of Bohemia, like Jupiter, with the Queen again, like Juuo, are in
the clouds. The head of the Queen (not the latter) is pretty well painted; the
rest very flat and poor.
among whom the Princess De Piles. Of the Princess Sophia there is a portrait
in a straw hat by Honthorst, at Wilton, natural, but not very good. The other
Princess was Louisa Hollandina, who practiced that art with success. Two
pictures painted by her were in the collection of her uncle King Charles. See
catal. p. 53, No. 70, 71. One of them is at Kensington, Tobit and the Angel in
watercolors, but now quite spoiled. In Lovelace's Lucasta is a poem on
Princess Loysa drawing, p. 17. She was bred a protestant, but in 1664, went to
Paris, turned catholic and was made Abbess of Maubuisson. She died in 1709 at
the age of eighty-six.
Sophia and the Abbess of Maubuisson chiefly distinguished themselves. King
Charles invited him to England where he drew various There were seven in King
James's collection.
pictures, particularly one very large emblematic piece, which now hangs on the
Queen's staircase at Hampton Court. Charles and his Queen, as Apollo and Diana,
are sitting in the clouds; the There is another at Kensington of the Duke and
Duchess (to the knees) sitting with their two children. The Duke's portrait is
particularly good. The Duke had a large picture by Honthorst, representing a
tooth-drawer with many figures round him, five feet by seven feet.
Duke of Buckingham under the figure of Mercury introduces to them the arts and
sciences, while several genii drive away Envy and Malice. It is not a pleasing
picture, but has the merit of resembling the dark and unnatural coloring of
Guercino. This and other Among the Harleian MSS. No. 6988. art. 19. is a letter
from King Charles to the Duke of Buckingham, in the postscript to which he asks
the Duke if Honthorst had finished the Queen's picture?
things he completed Sandrart.
in six months, and was rewarded with three thousand florins, a service of
silver-plate for twelve persons, and a horse; and though he returned to
Utrecht, he continued to paint for the King. It must have been during his
residence here that he drew an admirable half length of Lucy Countess of
Bedford now at Woburn: it is painted and finished with the greatest vivacity
and clearness. She is in black, leaning on her hand. Mr. West has the portraits
of the Marquess of Montrose, of the Princes Rupert and Maurice with his name
written to them thus, Honthorst. Another of their eldest brother Charles
Lodowick, Count Palatine, In the gallery at Dusseldorp is the story of the
Prodigal Son by Honthorst.
is dated 1633. A print of Mary de' Medici is inscribed, G. Honthorst effigiem
pinxit 1633. Rubens was a great admirer of Honthorst's JOHN VAN BELCAMP.
GELDORP.
Bannerman sculp.

night-pieces. The latter worked for the King of Denmark; the close of his life
was employed in the service of the Prince of Orange, whose houses at the Hague,
Hounslaerdyck and Reswick were adorned by his pencil with poetic histories. At
the last of the three he painted a chamber with the habits, animals and
productions of various countries, and received 8000 florins for his labor. He
died at the Hague in 1660. Descamps in his second volume says, that Honthorst
brought to England Joachim Sandrart, his scholar, and that the king bespoke
many pictures of him; and that for the Earl of Arundel he copied from Holbein,
Henry 8th, Sir T. More, Erasmus, and several others; and that he left England
and went to Venice in 1627. I find no other authority for this account: not one
work of Sandrart is mentioned in K. Charles's collection; and what is more
conclusive against his having been in England, he takes not the least notice of
it himself in the life of Honthorst, though he relates his master's journey to
England and his works here, and calls himself one of his disciples.

JOHN VAN BELCAMP

was employed under Vanderdort as a copyer of the King's One was of the Queen
in small in a piece of perspective, sold at the dispersion of the collection.
pictures, and was reckoned to succeed. The whole length of Edward IV. in his
nightgown and slippers, (the face in profile) which hangs over the chimney in
the antichamber at St. James's, was painted by Belcamp, the face probably
taken from the ancient original. In the catalogue of James II. are mentioned
pictures of Edward III. the Black Prince, Anne of Denmark, Louis XIII. and of a
large stag; Edward III. and the Black Prince are still in an anti-room at St.
James's, and that of the King of France is perhaps the portrait now at
Hampton Court. At Drayton, the seat of the Lady Elizabeth Germain in
Northamptonshire, are whole lengths of Henry 7th. and 8th. copied by Belcamp
from the large picture of Holbein, which was burned at Whitehall. When King
Charles secretly withdrew from that palace, in the letter which he left for
Colonel Whalley were these directions,

"There are here three pictures which are not mine, that I desire you to
restore, my wife's picture in blew satin sitting in a chair you must send to
Anne Kirk, one of the Queen's dressers, which place she carried on a
competition against Mrs. Neville. See Strafford-papers vol. ii, p. 73. There is
a metzotinto whole length of Mrs. Kirk from Vandyck.
Mrs. Kirk. My eldest daughter's picture copied by Belcam to the Mary Bayning,
wife of Charles Villiers Earl of Anglesey, nephew of the Duke of Buckingham.
Countess of Anglesey; and my Catherine daughter of Thomas Lord Wotton, wife of
Henry Lord Stanhope, who died before his father the Earl of Chesterfield. She
had been governess to Mary Princess of Orange, daughter of Charles I. and
having been very zealous in the King's service, was after the restoration made
Countess of Chesterfield. Vandyck was said to be in love with her, but was so
ungalant as to dispute with her on the price of her picture, which he
threatened to sell if she would not give him what he demanded. See a letter of
Lord Conway to Lord Wentworth in a collection published by Dodsley in two
volumes 1754. vol. i. p. 136. It was thought the Lord Cottington would have
married her, but that she was in love with Carey Raleigh, Sir Walter's son,
mentioned in the text. At last she married Poliander Kirkhoven Lord of
Helmfleet in Holland, and died April 9, 1677. There is a whole length print
from Vandyck, where by mistake she is called Anne instead of Catherine; the
original was bought by Sir Robert Walpole from the Wharton collection.
Lady Stanhope's picture to HORATIO GENTILESCHI
EDWARD MASCALL
T.Chambars sculp.

Carey Raleigh. There is a fourth which I had almost forgot; it is the original
of my eldest daughter, it hangs in this chamber over the board near the
chimney, which you must send to my Lady Catherine Howard eldest daughter of
Theophilus Earl of Suffolk. She was in love with George Lord Aubigney second
son of the Duke of Lenox, and turned catholic to marry him. See Strafford
papers vol. ii, p. 165. She was secondly married to James Levingston Earl of
Newburgh. There is a half length print of her from Vandyck.
Aubigney." At Wimpole in Cambridgeshire the seat of the Earl of Oxford, which
had been Sir Henry Pickering's and before him the seat of the Tempests, were
copies by Belcamp of several English heads, remarkable persons in the reigns of
Henry 8th. Elizabeth, James, and Charles 1st. but they were all sold and
dispersed with the rest of the Harleian collection.

Belcamp was added by a vote of the Commons June 2, 1649, to the number of
trustees for the sale of the King's goods; and the directions for the sale in
1650 are witnessed by him. In one of the pocket-books of R. Symonds he is said
to be lately dead in 1653.

HORATIO GENTILESCHI

a native of Pisa, was disciple of Aurelio Lomi his half brother. After
distinguishing himself at Florence, Rome and Genoa, he went to Savoy, and from
thence passing into France, was invited over by King Charles, who gave him
lodgings and a considerable salary, and employed him in his palaces,
particularly at Greenwich, in painting cielings. Nine pieces, which were in
that palace, were sold after the King's death for 600 l. and are now the
ornaments of the hall at Marlborough-house. He worked too for Villiers In that
Duke's collection are mentioned two pictures by him of a Magdalen and the holy
family. See the catalogue published by Bathoe.
Duke of Buckingham, at York-house. A ceiling from thence was since at the
house of Sheffield Duke of Buckingham in St. James's park. It represented the
nine muses in a large circle. He painted too the family of Villiers, and a
large picture for him eight feet wide by five high, of a Magdalen lying in a
grotto contemplating a skull. At Hampton Court is his Joseph and Potiphar's
wife; he drew other things for the King and presented him with a book of
drawings. Of Lot and his daughters there is a print after him, in which he is
called by mistake Civis Romanus, engraved by Lucas Vosterman. He made several
attempts at portrait painting, but with little success, and after residing here
about twelve years, died at the age of eighty-four, and was buried under the
altar in the chapel at Somerset House. His daughter

ARTEMISIA GENTILESCHI

was also in England, was reckoned not inferior to her father in history, and
excelled him in portraits: Her own is in the gallery at Althorp. King Charles
had several of her works. Her best was David with the head of Goliath. She drew
some of the royal family and many of the nobility -- but the chief part of her
life was passed at Naples where she lived splendidly, and was as famous, says
Graham, English School, at the end of the translation of Depiles.
for her amors R. Symondes speaking of Nic. Laniere, says, "Inamorato
d'Artemisia Gentileschi, che pingeva been."
as for her painting. NICHOLAS LANIERE.
(...) pinx. T.Chambars sculp.



NICHOLAS LANIERE

was one of those artists, whose various talents were so happy all as to suit
the taste of Charles the first. Laniere was born in Italy, was a musician,
painter, engraver, and understood hands. He had great share in the The author
of the English School says he put a particular mark on the pictures bought by
him for the King, but does not tell us what; it was thus ^. He marked his own
etchings with an L.
purchases made for the royal collection, R. Symondes says, the Duke of
Buckingham once gave Laniere 500 l. in gold because he could not get of King
James what Laniere deserved. Another time gave him 300 l. in gold.
and probably was even employed in the treaty of Mantua. One picture is said
expressly in the King's catalogue to have been changed with Mr. Laniere. His
fame was most considerable as a musician. In Ben Johnson's works is a masque
performed at the house of the Lord Hay in 1617 for the entertainment of the
French Ambassador, the whole masque after the Italian manner, stylo recitativo,
by master Nicholas Laniere, who ordered and made both scenes and music. He was
employed many years afterward in a very different and more melancholy manner;
a vocal composition for a funeral hymn on his royal master, written by Thomas
Pierce, was set by Laniere. Wood's Athenae vol. ii, p. 862.
It was in this capacity that he had a salary of 200 l. a year. The patent is
dated July 11, 1626. See Rymer's Foedera.
He had besides the office of closet-keeper to the King. As a painter he drew
for Charles a picture of Mary, Christ and Joseph; his own portrait There was
another portrait of him and of Isaac Oliver in one piece in the collection of
James II. See the catalogue published by Bathoe.
done by himself, with a pallet and pencils in his hand, and musical notes on a
scrip of paper, is in the music school at Oxford. There is a print of him,
painted by John Lyvyus, and enengraved by Vosterman, and another portrait of
him at the late Sir Andrew Fountain's at Narford in Norfolk. On one of the
plates which he etched Mr. Rose the jeweller had all the plates for a
drawing-book by Laniere, etched by himself. It is called, Prove primo fat a
l'acqua forte da N. Laniere a l'eta sua giovanile di sessanta otto anni, 1636.
Another small book he entitled, Maschere delin. da J. Romano, ex coll. N.
Laniere, 1638.
himself, he has put in Italian, done in my youthful age of 74. At the sale of
the King's goods he gave 230 l. for four pictures. His brothers There was also
a John Laniere, I suppose son of one of the brothers, who set two ballads of
Lovelace. See his Lucasta, p. 3. 43.
Clement and Jerome were likewise purchasers. In one of R. Symonds's
pocket-books is this memorandum,

"When the King's pictures came from Mantua, quicksilver was got in amongst
them and made them all black. Mr. Hieronymo Laniere told me that to cleanse
them, first he tried fasting spittle; then he mixed it with warm milk, and those
would not do. At last he cleansed them with aqua-vitae alone, and that took off
all the spots and he says 'twill take off old varnish." Laniere seems to have
been an adept in all the arts of picture-craft; Sanderson speaks of him as the
first who passed off copies for originals, by tempering his colors with soot,
and then by rolling them up, he made them crackle and contract an air of
antiquity. Graphice p. 16.


Nicholas died at the age of 78, and was buried in St. Martin's Nov. 4, 1646.
FRANCIS WOUTERS.
Mr. Wouters pinx. A.Bannerman Sculp.



FRANCIS WOUTERS

of Lyere, was born in 1614, and bred in the school of Rubens, but chiefly
practiced in landscape, to which he added small naked figures, as Cupids,
Nymphs, etc. He was much in favor with the Emperor Ferdinand II. but coming to
England with the Ambassador of that Prince in 1637, his pictures pleased at
court, and he was made chief painter to the Prince of Wales, afterward Charles
II. In a MS. catalogue of King Charles's pictures he is said to have painted a
cieling with Hercules and other Gods, in a room there called, the Contractor's
room, but in which palace is not specified. In the catalogue of James II. are
mentioned three landscapes and the story of St. Sebastian, by Wouters, and in
Sir Peter Lely's, a landscape with figures.
On the misfortunes of the royal family he retired to Antwerp, where in 1659 he
was shot by the accidental discharge of a gun. There is an epitaph on him in De
Bie's Gulden Cabinet. A large print after Titian, engraved by Hollar in 1650,
is dedicated to Wouters.

(...) WEESOP

arrived here in 1641, a little before the death of Vandyck, of whose manner he
was a lucky imitator, and had the honor of having some of his pictures pass
for that master's. He left England in 1649, saying, "He would never stay in a
country where they cut off their King's head and were not ashamed of the
action." It had been more sensible to say, he would not stay where they cut off
the head of a King that rewarded painters, and defaced and sold his collection.
One John Weesop, probably his son, was buried in St. Martin's in 1652.

JOHN DE CRITZ

has been mentioned in the former volume. Though sergeant painter to Charles I.
He may more properly be called a retainer to the arts than a professor. His
life is to be collected rather from office-books than from his works or his
reputation. Yet he was not ignorant. I have two sketches of heads drawn by him
with a pen, that are masterly. Virtue saw many more in the hands of Murray the
painter who was scholar of a son or nephew of De Critz, who, according to
Murray, painted bravely scenes for masks. Among those drawings was a sketch
from a picture of In the Earl of Oxford's library was a copy of Holland's
Heroologia, in which in an old hand, supposed to be done immediately after the
publication of the book in 1618, was written where every picture was from which
the prints were taken. That of Sir Philip Sidney is the same with Lord
Chesterfield's and under was written, at Mr. De Critz's -- strong evidences of
this being a genuine picture.
Sir Philip Sidney, then at the house of De Critz, and now in the possession of
Lord Chesterfield. At Oatlands he painted a middle piece for a cieling, which
on the dispersion of the King's effects was sold for 20 l. In 1657 he painted
the portrait of sergeant Maynard with a paper in his hand. In a book belonging
to the board of works was a payment to John De Critz for repairing pictures of
Palma and the Caesar's of Titian. This was in 1632. Among the annuities and fees
payable out of the customs in the port of London in that reign was a payment to
John De Critz his majesty's serjeantpainter, for his annuity at 40 l. a year
due to him for one year ended at Michaelmas 1633. And in a wardrobe account,
lost in the fire in the temple, was this entry. "To John De Critz
serjeant-painter, for painting and gilding with good gold the body and
carriages of two coaches and the carriage of one chariot and other necessaries,
179 l. 3 s. 4 d. anno 1634." If this bill should seem to debase the dignity of
sergeant painter, it may comfort the profession to know that Solimeni, who was
inferior to no painter of any age in vanity, whatever he was in merit, painted
a coach for the present King of Spain, when King of Naples, which cost 12000 l.
Indeed I can produce no precedent of any great master who painted and gilded
barges, as sergeant De Critz appears to have done by the following paper, a
memorandum in his own hand;

"John De Critz demands allowance for these parcells of Work following,
viz. For repayreing, refreshing, washing and varnishing the whole body of his
majesty's privy barge, In the court-books at painter's-hall there is a letter
to the company from the Earl of Pembroke, directing them to appoint certain
persons of their hall to view the King's and Queen's barges lately beautified,
painted, and gilded by De Creetz, serjeant-painter, and give an estimate of the
work, which they did of 280 l. and some other expenses.
and mending with fine gould and fair colors many and diverse parts thereof,
as about the chair of state, the doors, and most of the antiques about the
windows, that had been galled and defaced, the two figures at the entrance
being most new colored and painted, the Mercury and the lion that are fixed to
the sternes of this and the row barge being in several places repaired both
with gould and colors, as also the taffarils on the top of the barge in many
parts gilded and strowed with fair byse. The two figures of Justice and
Fortitude most an end being quite new painted and gilded. The border on the
outside of the bulk being new laid with fair white and trayled over with
green according to the custom heretofore -- and for baying and coloring the
whole number of the oars for the row barge being thirty-six."

On the other side of this scrap of paper is another bill. "For several times
oyling and laying with fair white a stone for a sun-dyall opposite to some
part of the King and Queen's lodgings, the lines thereof being drawn in
several colors, the letters directing to the hours gilded with fine gould,
as also the glory, and a scrowle gilded with fine gould, whereon the number
and figures specifying the planetary hours are inscribed; likewise certain
letters drawn in black informing in what part of the compass the sun at any
time there shining shall be resident; the whole work being circumferenced with
a frett painted in a manner of a stone one, the complete measure of the whole
being six foot."

At bottom of each of these bills are the sketches of heads I mentioned. De
Critz and others were buyers of the King's goods to the value of 4999 l. Rich.
Symonds says that at De Critz's house in Austin-fryars were three rooms full of
the King's pictures. Emanuel De Critz, brother or son, was one of the
petitioners to the council of state for delivery of the goods they had
purchased, which had been detained by Cromwell. Thomas De Critz, brother of
John, was a painter too, and superior, said Murray, to his brother. One of the
name was mace-bearer to the house of parliament. A head of one Oliver De Critz,
with a paper in his hand, is in the museum at Oxford. John De Critz had a
scholar called Le Mense, who was born at Antwerp.

ADRIAN HANNEMAN

was born at the Hague, and painted both history and portraits, having studied
under one Ravesteyn, but more from the works of Vandyck, of whose airs of heads
Virtue thought him the best imitator. He made ADRLIN HANNEMAN.
A.Bannerman Sculp.

love, as is said before, to the niece of Cornelius Johnson though without
success, and drew that painter, his wife and son. He came to England in the
reign of King Charles, and for some time worked under Mytens, and continued
here sixteen years. Returning to Holland, he became the favorite painter of
Mary Princess of Orange. There is a picture of her and the Prince in armor at
Lord Strafford's at Wentworth-castle, painted, I believe, by Hanneman. At
Windsor, There were five other portraits of the royal family by him in the
collection of James II. See the catalogue.
a portrait of Duke Hamilton: at Worksop, the Duke of Norfolk's, a picture of
kettles and utensils. Sir Peter Lely had a man playing on a lute two feet ten
square. In the library belonging to the cathedral of Lincoln, the portrait of
one Honeywood, whose mother lived to see 365 of her own descendents. There is a
print of Charles II. painted before his restoration by Hanneman, engraved by
Hen. Danckers at the Hague; and at General Compton's Virtue saw one done by
Hanneman at the same time. English School.
He painted in the chamber of the States at the Hague; and for the Here Van
Wenwing two usurers counting their money; while he worked on this he wanted a
sum himself, which he borrowed of the person who had ordered the picture, and
which when it was finished, Wenwing would have deducted, but Hanneman told him
that all the gold he had borrowed was put into the picture, and was what the
misers were counting. He died about 1680. His son, called William, was buried
in St. Martin's in 1641.

There were several other painters here in the reign of Charles, who were so
inconsiderable, or of whom I find so little, that I shall mention them very
briefly.

Cornelius Neve drew the portraits of Richard Lord Buckhurst and Mr. Edward
Sackville in one piece in 1637. It is at Knowle. No. 73. in the picture-gallery
at Oxford is painted by him, where he is called a celebrated painter. In 1664
he drew the portrait of Mr. Ashmole in his herald's coat. Ashmole's Diary, p.
39.


K. Coker, painted a head of Colonel Massey, preserved at Coddington in
Cheshire.

Matthew Goodricke or Gothericke, is mentioned as a painter in one of the
office books of that reign.

In the inventory of the pictures at Oatlands was a view of Greenwich by
Stalband; and in Mr. Harene's sale 1764, was an octagon landscape with the
story of the Centurion, by the same hand; something in the manner of Paul
Brill, but the colors exceedingly bright and glaring. And in another catalogue
of the King's pictures was a prospect of Greenwich by Portman.

Mr. Greenbury is mentioned in the Page 173.
catalogue of the King's collection for copying two pictures of Albert Durer by
the direction of the Lord Marshal. Probably he was one of Lord Arundel's
painters.

Horatio Paulin lived chiefly in Holland. He came to England, went to Hamburgh,
and thence to the Holy Land. Rotiere agreed to go with him but was discouraged.
Descamps Page 151. vol. iii.
expresses surprise, "that pious painters should have exhibited to the public
very licentious pieces and scandalous nudities." But by the account which he
has given of Horatio Paulin, he seemed to present himself with a very easy
solution of this paradox. Paulin set on foot a kind of promiscuous crusado to
the Holy Land; they were stored with crosses, relics, etc. and on the road
made many proselytes of both sexes. A baker's wife in particular was so devout,
that she thought it a meritorious action to plunder her husband of his plate,
that she might equip herself for the pilgrimage. When the caravan was furnished
by theft, one may easily conceive why it is apostle painted indecent
altar-pieces.

Povey lived in this reign and painted a head which was in the possession of
Mr. Leneve, Norroy.

One Hamilton an Englishman, is mentioned by Page 384.
Sandrart as excelling in painting birds and grapes, and doing several things
for the Elector of Brandenburgh.

Edward Bower drew the portrait of Mr. Pym; an equestrian figure of General
Fairfax, and John Lord Finch of Fordwich: The two last were engraved by Hollar.

Holderness drew the picture of an old woman with a skull, which was in the
collection of Villiers Duke of Buckingham.

T. Johnson made a draught of Canterbury in 1651, which hangs on the stairs of
the library belonging to the cathedral.

Reurie is mentioned by In his Graphice.
Sanderson as a painter in little in 1658.

FRANCIS BARLOW

was of more note than the preceding artists. See English School.
He was born in Lincolnshire, and placed with one Sheperd a face-painter; but
his taste lay to birds, fish and animals, in which he made great figure, though
his coloring was not equal to his designs -- consequently, which is not often
the case, the prints from his works did him more honor, than the works
themselves, especially as he had the good fortune to have some of them engraved
by Hollar and Faithorn. The title to one of his books, in which some are etched
by Hollar, is, "Diversae Avium species studiosissime ad vitam delineatae per
Fran. Barlow ingeniofissimum Anglum pictorem. Guil. Faithorn excudit 1658."
There are six books of animals from the drawings of Barlow, and a set of cuts
for Aesop's Fables. Some cielings for birds he painted for noblemen and At
Clandon, Lord Onslow's, are five pieces by Barlow.
gentlemen in the country; and he drew some of the monuments in
Westminster-abbey, designed for an edition of Mr. Keep's history of that
cathedral. Mr. Symonds says he lived near the drum in Drury Lane, and received
eight pounds for a picture of fishes. He once painted a half length of General
Monk; and the hearse was designed by him, as was expressed in the Lord
Chamberlain's warrant to Sir Christopher Wren to prepare timber for it at
Monke's funeral. I have a curious long roll, engraved by White, exhibiting the
ceremonies and procession of that magnificent interment, with a full
description of it; the frontispiece is well designed by Barlow. It is
remarkable that forty gentlemen of good families submitted to wait as mutes
with their backs against the wall of the chamber where the body laid in state,
for three (...)

weeks, waiting alternately twenty each day. Barlow, though inheriting a large
sum of money from a friend, died poor so lately as 1702.

Sir TOBY MATTHEWS

one of those heteroclite animals who finds his place any where. His father was
Archbishop of York, and he a jesuit. He was supposed a wit, and believed
himself a politician. His works are ridiculous, and his greatest success was a
little mischief in making converts. On the Lady Newburgh being converted to
popery, Lord Conway writes thus to the Earl of Strafford, "The King did use
such words of Wat. Montagu and Sir Tobie Matthew, that the fright made Wat keep
his chamber longer than his sickness would have detained him; and Don Tobiah
was in such perplexity that I find he will make a very ill man to be a martyr;
but now the dog does again wag his tail." Strafford papers vol. ii. p. 125. It
seems in this business Matthews was unjustly accused; the conversion had been
made by the Duchess of Buckingham and Signor Con, the Spanish resident, p. 128.
The famous Countess of Carlisle, as meddling as Matthews, and as affected, was
the object of his adoration. He drew a character of her, See this character
prefixed to his letters.
which commends her so impertinently, that with scarce straining, it might pass
for a satire. For instance, he says, "She has as much sense and gratitude for
the actions of friendship as so extreme a beauty will give her leave to
entertain; and that although she began to be civil to people at first, she
would rather show what she could do, than let her nature continue in it, and
that she never considered merit in others but in proportion as they had any to
her. That she affected particularity so much, that you might fear to be less
valued by her for obliging her; that she had little religion, was passionate,
could suffer no condition but plenty and glory, was fickle, and gay only out of
contradiction because her physicians had told her she was inclined to
melancholy" -- with a heap of such nonsense -- in short, I believe, no proud
beauty was ever so well flattered to her own contentment. Mr. Garrard, master
of the charter house, a man of more sense and more plain sense than Matthews,
has drawn this Lady's character in fewer words, and upon the whole not very
unlike Sir Toby's picture; "My lady Carlisle will be respected and observed by
her superiors, be feared by those that will make themselves her equals, and
will not suffer herself to be beloved but of those that are her servants."
Strafford papers vol. i. p. 363.
Sir Toby Matthews's title to a place in this work depends singly upon a letter
from the Duchess of Buckingham to the Duke, R. Symondes says, Mr. Gage, Sir
Thoby Matthewes, Mr. Fl^ill were buyers of pictures for the Duke of Buckingham.
in which she tells him she had not yet seen the picture which Toby Matthews
had drawn of the Infanta and sent over. Virtue adds that he had some small
skill in limning; otherwise I should have concluded, that he had only drawn the
Infanta's portrait in the same fantastic colors which he had employed on Lady
Carlisle. However as it is not foreign to the design of this work to throw in
as many lights as possible on the manners of the several ages, I did not
unwillingly adopt Virtue's mistake, if it is one. Whoever desires to know more
of this person, will find his life in the Athenae Oxonienses. But I have not
yet done with these motley characters; the King's taste made his court affect
to be painters and virtuosi; among these was

Sir JAMES PALMER,

often mentioned in the catalogue of the royal collection; in which he sold,
gave and painted pictures. Of the latter was a Page 52. for the others see p.
10. 53. 84. 115. 137. 159.
piece of Tarquin and Lucretia copied from Titian. Another, the feast of
Bacchus, was delivered to him by the King's own hands, to be copied in tapestry
at the manufacture in Mortlack. He had lodgings in the tennis-court at
Whitehall, and is often mentioned as a domestic servant. He was chancellor of
the garter, and married Katherine eldest daughter of William Lord Powys, widow
of Sir Robert Vaughan, and was father of Roger Palmer Earl of Castlemain,
husband of the Duchess of Cleveland.
He was the person sent to Richard Atkyns for the picture in which the King
distinguished two different painters; and Mr. Garrard in a letter to Lord
Strafford dated Jan. 9. 1633, says, "I had almost forgot to tell your Lordship
that the diceing-night the King carried away in James Palmer's hat 1850 pieces.
The Queen was his half and brought him that good luck; she shared presently
900." In Stone's accounts, from which I have given some extracts above, is
mention of a monument for Palmer's wife. If these men add no great ornament to
our list, it will at least be honored by our next; the Hogarth of poetry was a
painter too; I mean,

SAMUEL BUTLER

the author of Hudibras. In his life prefixed to his works we are told, "That
for his diversion he practiced music and painting. I have seen, adds the
writer, some pictures said to be of his drawing which remained Several are
actually extant in the possession of a person in Worcestershire.
in that family (of Mr. Jefferys) which I mention not for the excellency of
them, but to satisfy the reader of his early inclinations to that noble art;
for which also he was afterward entirely beloved by Mr. Samuel Cooper, one of
the most eminent painters of his time."

FRANCIS CLEYN

was a painter in a different style from any we had seen here; for which
reason, though he arrived earlier than many I have mentioned, I reserved him
'till I had dispatched the performers in oil. He was born at Rostock and
retained in the service of Christian IV. King of Denmark, but the excellence of
his genius prompted him to the search of better models than he found in that
northern climate. He traveled to Italy and stayed there four years; it was at
Rome, I suppose, he learned those beautiful grotesques, in which he afterward
shone. At Venice he became known to Sir Henry Wotton, and Sir Robert Anstruther
recommended him to Prince Charles. He arrived while the Prince was in Spain,
but notwithstanding was graciously received by King James, who mentions that
circumstance in a Latin letter that he wrote to the King of Denmark, desiring
leave to detain Cleyn in England, though with a permission to return first to
Copenhagen and finish a work he had begun there, and promising to pay the
expense of his journey. The letter is preserved by Fuller. In his Worthies of
Surrey, p. 77.
The request was granted, and Cleyn returned to London at the end of the
summer. The King had just then given two thousand pounds toward Sir Francis
Crane's new manufacture of tapestry at Mortlack. They had worked only after old
patterns; Cleyn was placed there, and gave designs both in history and
grotesque, which carried those works to singular perfection. It appears by King
Charles's catalogue that five of the cartoons were sent FRANCESCO CLEYN.
T.Chambars sculp.

thither to be copied by him in tapestry. His pension is recorded by Rymer.
Vol. xviii, p. 112.
"Know ye that we do give and grant unto Francis Cleyne a certain annuitie of
one hundred pounds by the year during his natural life." He enjoyed this salary
'till the civil war; and was in such favor with the King and in such
reputation, that on a small drawing of him in Indian ink about six inches
square, which Virtue saw, he is called, Il famosissimo pittore Francesco Cleyn,
miracolo del secolo, e molto stimato del re Carlo della gran Britania, 1646."
Cleyn was not employed solely in the works at Mortlack; he had a house near the
church in Covent Garden, and did several other things for the King and
Nobility. At Somerset House he painted a cieling of a room near the gallery
with histories and compartments in gold. The outside of Wimbledon-house he
painted in fresco. Bolsover in Nottinghamshire, Stonepark in Northamptonshire,
and Carew-house at Parson's-green (since Lord Peterborough's) were ornamented
by him. There is still extant a beautiful chamber adorned by him at
Holland-house, with a cieling in grotesque, and small compartments on the
chimnies, in the style and not unworthy, of Parmegiano. Two chairs, carved and
gilt, with large shells for backs, belonging to the same room, were undoubtedly
from his designs; and are evidences of his taste. A letter Strafford papers.
from Lord Cottington to Lord Strafford, describing the former's house at
Hanworth, mentions Cleyn, though not by name. "There is a certain large low
room made under the building with a fountain in it, and other rare devises, and
the open gallery is all painted by the hand of a second Titian. Aug. 1629." In
King Charles's catalogue is mention of four patterns for the great seal,
drawings I am informed that some drawings by Cleyn are in the possession of the
Earl of Moray in Scotland.
on blue paper by Cleyn. He made designs for various artists; particularly for
several of Hollar's plates to Virgil and Aesop: for these he received fifty
shillings a piece. There are two small books of foliages from his drawings; one
containing six small slips with animals in grotesque; the other, in five slips,
of the senses; and the initial letters of his name F. C. inv. 1646. And two
books for carvers, goldsmiths, etc. containing 25 plates. It is however
uncertain whether these and a few other plates of the same kind are not by his
son, who had the same christian name, and imitated his father's manner. Such is
a title page to Lacrymae Musarum, elegies on the Lord Hastings, who died in
1650, the day before he was to have been married. Also, seven plates of the
liberal arts, about four or five inches square, prettily designed and neatly
etched. On a small print of the father, etched by the son, Mr. Evelyn wrote, "A
most pious man, father of two sons, who were incomparable painters in
miniature; all died in London." By the register of Mortlack it appears that he
had three sons; Francis born in 1625, who died and was buried at Covent Garden
October 21, 1650. Charles and John; and two daughters, Sarah and Magdalen. He
had another daughter, probably born in London, and called Penelope. Virtue saw
a miniature, like Cooper's manner, but not so well, of Dorothea, youngest
daughter of Richard Cromwell, act. 4, 1668, with these letters, P. C. which he
thought signified Penelope Cleyn. At Burleigh is a head of Cecil Lord Roos,
1677, with the same letters.
In the catalogue of plates and prints exhibited to sale by Peter Stent 1662,
was a book of grotesques in ten plates; Francis Cleyn inv. et sculpsit. Cleyn
besides his own sons, instructed Dobson; and died himself about 1658. Mr.
English He etched a small print from Titian, Christ and the two Disciples at
Emaus.
a painter who died at Mortlack in 1718 had a picture of Cleyn and his wife and
several of his designs for tapestries, all which came to Mr. Crawley of
Hempsted Hertfordshire. Richard Symonds in one of his pocket-books mentions
another piece of Cleyn and his family by candlelight, and a copy by the son of
a sacrifice from Raphael, which was in the royal collection, and a drawing on
colored paper. At Kensington I have lately found a picture which I do not
doubt is of Cleyn's hand. It represents Christ and Mary in a chamber, the walls
and windows of which are painted in grotesque. Different rooms are seen through
the doors, in one I suppose is Martha employed in the business of the family.
There is merit in this piece, particularly in the perspective and grotesques,
the latter of which, and the figures in the manner of the Venetian school, make
me not hesitate to ascribe it to this master.

JOHN HOSKINS.

For the life of this valuable master I find fewer There is not even a portrait
of him extant.
materials, than of almost any man in the list who arrived to so much
excellence. Virtue knew no more of him than what was contained in Graham's
English School, where we are only told "that he was bred a face-painter in oil,
but afterward taking to miniature, far exceeded what he did before; that he
drew King Charles, his Queen and most of the court, and had two considerable
disciples, Alexander and Samuel Cooper, the latter of whom became much the more
eminent limner." Hoskins, though surpassed by his scholar, the younger Cooper,
was a very good painter; there is great truth and nature in his heads; but the
carnations are too bricky, and want a degradation and variety of tints. I have
a head of sergeant Maynard by him, boldly painted and in a manly style, though
not without these faults; and another good one of Lord Falkland, more
descriptive of his patriot melancholy than the common prints; it was in the
collection of Dr. Meade. At Burleigh is a portrait of David Cecil, son of John
4th. Earl of Exeter by Frances, daughter of the Earl of Rutland; it is dated
1644; and another of Sir Edward Cecil, afterward Viscount Wimbledon.
There is indeed one Since the first edition of this book I have seen another
at Burleigh, scarce inferior. It is the profile of a boy, in brown, holding in
one hand a plaything like castanets. It is admirably natural.
work of Hoskins that may be called perfect; it is a head of a man, rather
young, in the gown of a master of arts, and a red satin wastecoat. The
clearness of the coloring is equal to either Oliver; the dishevelled hair
touched with exquisite freedom. It is in the possession of Mr. Fanshaw, but not
known whose portrait. Virtue mentions a son of Hoskins of the same name, and
says, that this mark ^ distinguishes the works of the father from those of the
son, which have I. H. simply. I meet with no other hint of a son of that name
except in Sanderson, who barely names him. Page 20. In the same place he speaks
in the like transient manner of a son of Hilliard.
One Peter Hoskins is entered into the register of Covent Garden as buried July
1, 1681. Hoskins the father was buried in that church Feb. 22, 1664. In the
Page 75.
catalogue of King Charles are mentioned two drawings by Hoskins for the great
seal. Colonel Sothby has a head of Sir Benjamin Rudyard by him, and a profile,
which Virtue thought might be Hoskins himself. Prefixed to Coryat's Crudities
is a copy of verses with his name to them.

ALEXANDER COOPER

was nephew of Hoskins, and with his brother Samuel, of whom an account will be
given in the ensuing volume, was instructed in watercolors by their uncle.
Alexander painted landscapes in this manner as well as portraits. At Burleigh
is the Story of Acteon and Diana by him. He went abroad, resided some time at
Amsterdam, and at last entered into the service of Queen Christina.

ANNE CARLISLE,

a paintress, admired for her copies (it is not said whether in oil or
miniature) from Italian masters. Graham English School.
says, she was in such favor with King Charles, that he presented her and
Vandyck with as much ultramarine at one time as cost him above five hundred
pounds. If her share was near equal, I should suppose she painted in oil. It
would be a very long time before the worth of 200 l. in ultramarine could be
employed in miniatures. Virtue mentions her teaching a lady to paint, whose
picture she drew standing behind her own; herself was sitting with a book of
drawings in her lap; and he adds, that many pieces painted by her were in the
possession of a widow Lady Cotterel. Mrs. Carlisle died about 1680.

JOHN PETITOT

was patronized by the two monarchs, who of late years have given the noblest
encouragement to artists, Charles 1st. and Louis 14th. He deserved their
protection as a genius, and has never been equalled in enamel. Zincke alone has
once or twice, and but once or twice, produced works that might stand in
competition with any single performance of Petitot.

The latter was born at Geneva in 1607; his father, a sculptor and architect,
having passed part of his life in Italy, had retired to that city. The son was
designed for a jeweller, and having frequent occasion to make use of enamel, he
attained such a tone of color, that Bordier, who afterward became his
brother-in-law, conceived, that if Petitot would apply himself to portrait, he
might carry the art to great perfection. Though both wanted several colors,
which they knew not how to prepare for the fire, their attempts had great
success. Petitot executed the heads and hands, Bordier, the hair, draperies and
grounds.

In this intercourse of social labor, the two friends set out for Italy. As
painters, the treasures of the art were open to them; as enamellers, they
improved too by frequenting the best chemists of that country; but it was in
England that they were so fortunate as to learn the choicest secrets in the
branch to which they had devoted themselves. Sir Theodore Mayern, first
physician to Charles, and a great chemist, communicated to them the process of
the principal colors which ought to be employed in enamel, and which surpassed
the famous vitrifications of Venice and Limoges.

Mayern introduced Petitot to the King, who knighted and gave him an apartment
in Whitehall. The French author of the Abrege de la Vie des plus fameux
Peintres, whom I copy, and am sorry to criticize while I am indebted to him,
says, that Vandyck seeing some designs of Petitot at the King's goldsmith's,
and informing himself of the author, advised him to quit the profession of
jeweller, and apply himself to painting portraits in enamel. But the biographer
had told us that that step was already taken; and surely had not been abandoned
during a long stay in Italy. What the same writer adds, that Vandyck gave him
instructions, when Petitot copied the works of that master, and that his copies
from Vandyck are his best performances, is much more agreeable to probability
and fact. The magnificent whole length of Rachel de Rouvigny Countess of
Southampton, in the collection of the Duke of Devonshire, is painted from the
original in oil by Vandyck, in the possession of Lord Hardwicke, and is
indubitably the most capital work in enamel in the world; it is nine inches
three quarters high, by five inches and three quarters wide; and though the
enamel is not perfect in some trifling parts, the execution is the boldest and
the coloring the most rich and beautiful that can be imagined. It is dated
1642. His Grace has a head of the Duke of Buckingham by the same hand; with the
painter's name and the date 1640; consequently a copy performed It is evidently
copied from the Duke's portrait in his family-piece by Honthorst at Kensington.
after the Duke's death. In the same collection is a portrait of a middle-aged
man in armor, enclosed in a case of tortoishel, the person unknown, but
inferior to none I have seen of this master. The Duchess of Portland has
another of the Duke of Buckingham, exactly the same as the preceding; Charles
first and his Queen, and the Lady Morton, governess of the royal children, who
is celebrated by Waller. I have a fine head of Charles 1st. in armor, for
which he probably sat, as it is not like any I have seen by Vandyck; James 2d.
when Duke of York, freely painted, though highly finished, and I suppose done
in France; a very large and capital one of his sister Henrietta Duchess of
Orleans, exquisitely labored; a very small, but fine head of Anne of Austria;
another of Madame de Montespan; and a few more of less note, but all of them
touched in that minute and delicate style, into which he afterward fell in
France, and which, though more labored, has less merit in richness of tints,
than his English works. Vanderdort mentions a carving by Petitot from Titian's
Lucretia, in which way I find no other account of his attempts, though, as his
father was a sculptor, he probably had given his son some instructions.

The tragic death of his royal protector was a dreadful stroke, says his
biographer, to Petitot, who attended the exiled family to Paris. I question, as
so few English portraits appear by his hand, and none that I know later than
1642, whether the Civil War did not early drive him back to France; but Bordier
undoubtedly remained here sometime longer, having been employed by the
parliament to paint a memorial of the battle of Naseby, which they presented to
Fairfax their victorious general. This singular curiosity is now in my
possession, purchased from the Museum of Thoresby, who I have the receipt of
the executors of Fairfax to Thoresby, who paid 185 l. for his purchases. He
has, at the end of his Ducatus Leodiensis, in the account of his own Museum,
given a more minute description of these enamels.
bought it, with other rarities, from the executors of Fairfax. It consists of
two round plates each but an inch and half diameter, and originally served, I
suppose, for the top and bottom of a watch, such enamelled plates being
frequent to old watches instead of crystals. On the outside of that which I
take for the bottom, is a representation of the House of Commons, as exhibited
on their seals by Simon. Nothing can be more perfect than these diminutive
figures; of many even the countenances are distinguishable. On the other piece,
within, is delineated the battle of Naseby; on the outside is Fairfax himself
on his chestnut horse, men engaging at a distance. The figure and horse are
copied from Vandyck, but with a freedom, and richness of coloring, perhaps
surpassing that great master. Under the horse, one reads P. B. fecit. This is
the single work which can with certainty be allotted to Bordier alone, and
which demonstrates how unjustly his fame has been absorbed in the renown of his
brother-in-law. Charles 2d. during his abode in that kingdom took great notice
of Petitot; and introduced him to Louis, who, when the restoration happened,
retained Petitot in his own service, gave him a pension and lodged him in the
Louvre. Small portraits of that monarch by this great enameller, are extremely
common, and of the two Queens, his mother and wife.

In 1651 he married Margaret Cuper; the celebrated Drelincourt performed the
ceremony at Charenton; for Petitot was a zealous protestant, and dreading the
consequences of the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685, he begged
permission of the King to retire to Geneva. Louis, who did not care to part
with so favorite a painter, and who perhaps thought that an enameller's
religion was not composed of sterner stuff, than the great Turenne's, eluded
his demand; and at last being pressed with repeated memorials, sent Petitot to
Fort-l'eveque, and Bossuet to convert him. The subtle apostle, who had woven
such a texure of devotion and ambition, that the latter was scarce
distinguishable from the former, had the mortification of not succeeding, and
Petitot's chagrin bringing on a fever, he at last obtained his liberty, now
almost arrived at the age of fourscore, which makes it probable that his
conversion rather than his pencil had been the foundation of detaining him. He
no sooner was free, than he escaped with his wife to Geneva in 1685. His
children, who dreaded the King's wrath, remained at Paris, and throwing
themselves at his feet, implored his protection. His Majesty, says my author,
received them with great goodness, and told them, he willingly forgave an old
man, who had a whim of being buried with his fathers. -- I do not doubt but
this is given, and passed at the time, for a bonmot -- but a very flat
witticism cannot depreciate the glory of a confessor, who has suffered
imprisonment, resisted eloquence, and sacrificed the emoluments of court-favour
to the uprightness of his conscience. Petitot did not wish to be buried with
his fathers, but to die in their religion.

Returned to his country, the good old man continued his darling profession.
The King and Queen of Poland desired to be painted by his hand, and sent their
portraits to be copied by him in enamel, but the messenger finding him
departed, proceeded to Geneva, where he executed them with all the vigor of
his early pencil. The Queen was represented sitting on a trophy, and holding
the picture of the King. For this piece he received an hundred Louis d'or's.

So great was the concourse to visit him, that he was obliged to quit Geneva
and retire to Very, a little town in the canton of Berne, where as he was
painting his wife, an illness seized and carried him off in a day, in 1691, at
the age of fourscore and four. He had had seventeen children; one of his
daughters, a widow, was living in 1752. My portrait of Charles 1st. came from
one of his sons, who was a major in our service. Of the rest, one only attached
himself to his father's art and practiced in London, his father often sending
him his works for models. This son painted in miniature too, and left
descendents, who are settled at Dublin.

It is idle to write a panegyric on the greatest man in any vocation. That rank
dispenses with encomiums, as they are never wanted but where they may be
contested. Petitot generally used plates of gold or silver, seldom copper. In
the dawn of his reputation he received twenty guineas for a picture, which
price he afterward raised to forty. His custom was to have a painter to draw
the likeness in oil, from which he made his sketches, and then finished them
from the life. Those of Louis he copied from the best pictures of him, but
generally obtained one or two sittings for the completion. His biographer says,
that he often added He specifies one at Paris of Michel L'asne, the engraver, a
large oval with hands, of which one rests on his breast.
hands to his portraits; I have seen but one such, the whole length of Lady
Southampton; and that at Loretto there is of his work an incomparable picture
of the Virgin. A collector at Paris possesses more than thirty of this great
master's performances, particularly the portraits of Mesdames de la Valiere,
Montespan, Fontanges etc. Another has those of the famous Countess d'Olonne,
the Duchess of Bouillon, and other ladies of the court. Van Gunst engraved
after Petitot the portrait of Chevreau.

Of Bordier, we have no fuller account than this incidental mention of him; yet
I have shown that his is no trifling claim to a principal place among those
artists whose works we have most reason to boast. I wish this clue may lead to
farther discoveries concerning him!

I come now to other artists in the reign of Charles; and first of statuaries.

ANDREW KEARNE

a German, was brother of Nicholas Stone the elder, for whom he worked. Kearne
too carved many statues for Sir Justinian Isham, at his house near Northampton.
At Somerset-stairs he carved the Rivergod which answered to the Nile, made by
Stone, and a lioness on the watergate of York-stairs. For the Countess of
Mulgrave a Venus and Apollo of Portland stone, six feet high, for each of which
he had seven pounds. He died in England, and left a son that was alive since
1700.

JOHN SCHURMAN

born at Emden, was another of Stone's workmen, and afterward set up for
himself. He was employed by Sir John Baskerville; made two shepherds sitting
for Sir John Davers of Chelsea; a marble statue of Sir T. Lucy, for his tomb in
Warwickshire, for which he was paid eighteen pounds, and fifty shillings for
polishing and glazing; the same for a statue on This tomb of Douglas Lord
Belhaven is in the church of the abbey of Holyrood-house.
Lord Belhaven's tomb; a little boy on the same monument; two sphinxes for Sir
John Davers; and Hercules and Antaeus for that gentleman's garden, at the rate
of sixteen pounds.

EDWARD PIERCE

father and son, are mentioned here together, though the father was a EDWARD
PIERCE. SENR. and JUNR.
Bannerman, Sculp

painter chiefly in the reign of the first Charles, the son a statuary who
worked mostly under the second Charles, but each may be allotted to either
period. The father painted history, landscape James II. had one of his hand.
See the catalogue.
and architecture; but the greater part of his works consisting of altar-pieces
and cielings of churches were destroyed in the fire of London. One of his
cielings was in the church of Covent Garden. For some time he worked under
Vandyck, and several of his performances are at the Duke of Rutland's at
Belvoir. A book of freeze-work in eight leaves, etched in 1640, was I suppose
by the hand of the father; as to him must be referred an entry in an
office-book, where he is mentioned for painting and gilding frames of pictures
at Somerset House at two shillings the foot, Feb. 17, 1636. He also agrees to
paint and gild the chimney piece in the cross-gallery there for eight pounds.
Dobson drew his picture. He died a few years after the restoration and was
buried at Stamford. He had three sons, who all, says Graham, English School.
became famous in their different ways. One was John Pierce, a painter; of the
third, I find no account of his profession; the other was Edward the statuary
and architect. He made the statues of Sir Thomas Gresham, of Edward III. at the
Royal Exchange, and of Sir William Walworth at Fishmonger's-hall; a marble bust
of Thomas Evans, master of, and a great benefactor to, the company of painters
in 1687: The bust is in their hall: a model of the head of Milton, which Virtue
had, the bust of Sir Christopher Wren in the picture-gallery at Oxford, and a
bust of Cromwell sold at an auction in 1714. He much assisted Sir Christopher
in many of his designs, and built the church of St. Clement under his
direction. Edward Pierce too carved the four dragons on the monument, at fifty
pounds each. The whole cost of that column, exclusive of the dragons, and of
the basrelief which is not mentioned in the account, appears by the survey of
Hook, Leybourn and others, to have amounted to 8000 l. A rich vase at
Hampton Court is another of the works of Pierce. He lived and died at his house
the corner of Surrey-street in the Strand, and was buried at St. Mary's le
Savoy, in School.

HUBERT LE SOEUR,

one of the sew we have had that may be called a clasfic artist, was a
Frenchman, and disciple of John of Boulogne. He arrived at least as early as
1630, and by the only I have been told that the monument of the Duchess of
Lenox was Le Soeur's, but I am not certain of it.
two of his works that remain, we may judge of the value of those that are lost
or destroyed. Of the latter were a Vanderdort's catalogue p. 180. I believe
this very bust is now in the collection of Mr. Hoare at Stourhead; I had not
seen it when the first edition of this work was published.
bust of Charles I. in brass, with a helmet surmounted by a dragon a la
Roman, three feet high, on a black pedestal: The fountain at Somerset House
with several statues; and six brazen statues at St. James's. Of those extant
are, the statue in brass of William Earl of Pembroke in the picture-gallery at
Oxford, given by the grandfather of the present Earl; and the noble equestrian
figure of King Charles at Charing Cross, in which the commanding-grace of the
figure and exquisite form of the horse are striking to the most unpracticed
eye. This piece was cast in 1633 in a spot of ground near the church of
Covent Garden, and not being erected before the commencement of Peacham.
LA SOEUR.
Bannerman, Sculp.

the civil war, it was sold by the parliament to John Rivet a brazier living at
the dial near Holbourn-conduit, with strict orders to break it in pieces. But
the man produced some fragments of old brass, and concealed the statue and
horse under ground 'till the restoration. They had been made at the expense of
the family of Howard-Arundel, who have still receipts to show by whom and for
whom they were cast. They were set up in their present situation at the expense
of the crown, about 1678, by an order from the Earl of Danby, afterward Duke
of Leeds. The pedestal was made by Mr. Grinlin Gibbons. Le Soeur had a son
Isaac who was buried Nov. 29, 1630, at Great St. Bartholomew's. The father
lived in the close.

ENOCH WYAT

carved two figures on the water stairs of Somerset House, and a statue of
Jupiter. And he altered and covered the King's statues, which during the
troubles were thrust into Whitehall-garden, and which, it seems, were too
heathenishly naked to be exposed to the inflammeable eyes of that devout
generation.

ZACHARY TAILOR

lived near Smithfield, was a surveyor and carver to the King, as he is called
in a book belonging to the board of works in 1631. In 1637 he is mentioned for
carving the frames of the pictures in the cross-gallery at Somerset House at
two shillings and twopence per foot. He carved some things too at One Bowden,
a captain of the trained-bands, was another carver at Wilton, I believe, at the
same time with Tailor.
Wilton. Mr. Davis of the Tennis-court at Whitehall had a good portrait of
Tailor with a compass and square in his hands.

JOHN OSBORN

was another carver of that time: Lord Oxford had a large head in relievo on
tortoise-shell of Frederic Henry Prince of Orange; and these words, Joh.
Osborn, Angl. Amstelod. fecit, 1626.

MARTIN JOHNSON

was a celebrated engraver of seals, and lived at the same time with Thomas and
Abraham Simon, the medallists. He was a rival of the former, who used puncheons
for his graving, which Johnson never did, calling Simon a puncher, not a
graver. Johnson besides painted landscapes from nature, selecting the most
beautiful views of England, which he executed, it is said, English School.
with much judgment, freedom and warmth of coloring. His works are scarce. He
died about the beginning of the reign of James II.

(...) GREEN,

a seal-cutter, is only mentioned in a letter Strafford papers, June 9, 1633.
to the Lord Treasurer from Lord Strafford, who says he had paid him one
hundred pounds, for the seals of Ireland, but which were cut in England.

CHRISTIAN VAN VIANEN. He was of Nuremberg. See Wren's Parentalia, p. 136.


As there was no art, which Charles did not countenance, the chacers and
embossers of plate were among the number of the protected at court. The chief
was Vianen, whose works are greatly commended by Ashmole. Order of the Garter,
p. 492.
Several pieces of plate of his design were at Windsor, particularly two large
gilt water-pots, which cost 235 l. two candlesticks weighing 471 ounces; on the
foot of one of them was chased Christ preaching on the mount; on the other, the
parable of the lost sheep; and two covers for a bible and common prayer book,
weighing 233 ounces; the whole amounting to 3580 ounces, and costing 1564 l.
were in the year 1639, when the last parcels were delivered, presented as
offerings by his majesty to the chapel of St. George. But in 1642 captain Foy
broke open the treasury, and carried away all these valuable curiosities, as
may be seen more at large in Dugdale. An agreement was made with the
Earl-marshal, Sir Francis Windebank, and Sir Francis Crane, for plate to be
wrought for the King at twelve shillings per ounce, and before the month of
June 1637, he had finished nine pieces. Some of these I suppose were the
abovementioned: others were gilt, for Vianen complained that by the expense of
the work, and the treble-gilding, he was a great loser, and desired to be
considered. The designs themselves were thought so admirable, as to be
preserved in the royal collection. King Charles had besides four plates chased
with the story of Mercury and Argus. Vanderdort's catal. p. 74.
Mr. West has two oval heads in alto relievo six inches high of Charles and his
Queen, with the initial letters of the workman's name, C. V. Land. There were
others of the name, I do not know how related to him. The Ib. p. 137.
King had the portrait of a Venetian captain by Paul Vianen; and the offering
Ib. p. 155.
of the wisemen by Octavian Vianen. There is a print of a head of Adam Van
Vianen, painted by Jan. Van Aken, and etched by Paul Vianen, abovementioned.
Christian Vianen had a very good disciple

FRANCIS FANELLI,

a Florentine, who chiefly practiced casting in metal, and though inferior to
Le Soeur, was an artist that did credit to the King's taste. Vanderdort
mentions in the royal collection a little figure of a cupid sitting on a horse
running, by Fanelli, and calls him the one-eyed Italian. The figures of Charles
I. and his Queen in niches in the quadrangle of St. John's college Oxford were
cast by him, and are well designed. They were the gift of Archbishop Laud, and
were buried for security in the civil war. William Duke of Newcastle was a
patron of Fanelli, and bought many of his works, still at Welbeck; particularly
a head in brass of Prince Charles 1640; with the founder's name behind the
pedestal, Fr. Fanellius, Florentinus, sculptor magn. Brit. regis. And several
figures in small brass; as, St. George with the dragon dead; another combating
the dragon; two horses grazing; four others in different attitudes; a cupid and
a turk, each on horseback, and a centaur with a woman. By the same hand, or Le
Soeur's, are, I conclude, the three following curious busts, in bronze; a head
of Edward Lord Herbert of Chirbury, the Author, in the possession of the Earl
of Powis; and two different of the Lady Venetia Digby, wife of Sir Kenelm.
Behind the best of them, on which the point-lace of her handkerchief is well
expressed, is written this tender line, "Uxorem vivam amare voluptas, defunctam
religio." One of these was probably saved from her monument. See before p. 102.
Fanelli published two books of designs, of architecture, fountains, vases, etc.
One consists of fourteen plates in folio, no date. The other in twenty-one
leaves, was published by Van Merle at Paris 1661, engraved, as Virtue thought,
by Faithorne, who was about that time in France. Fanelli had a scholar, called
John Bank, who was living in 1713.

THEODORE ROGIERS

is mentioned by Vanderdort, Page 73, 74.
as the chaser of five square plates of silver with poetic stories in the
King's collection; and he made an ewer from a design of Rubens, mentioned in
the life of that painter. He must not be confounded with William Rogers an
Englishman, who engraved the title page to John Linschoten's collection of
voyages to the East Indies.

I shall now set down what little I have to say of the medallists of King
Charles. Briot has been mentioned under the preceding reign: He and T. Simon,
his disciple, possessed the royal favor 'till the beginning of the troubles,
when Simon falling off to the parliament, I have already referred the reader to
Virtue's account of the two Simons and their works, which he intended as a part
of this history of the arts, which is too long to transcribe here, and which
would be mangled by an abridgment. Abraham Simon, one of the brothers, a man of
a very singular character, had fancied that the Queen of Sweden was in love
with him, and at last had an ambition of being a bishop.
a new medallist was employed on the few works executed for the King during the
remainder of his life; his name was

THOMAS RAWLINS.

The first work by which he was known to the public was of a nature very
foreign from his profession; in 1640 he wrote a play called The Rebellion. See
Langbaine, p. 117. Subjoined to a book called Goodfriday, being meditations on
that day, printed in 1648, is a collection of poems called Calanthe; by T. R.
who by the presentation-book Mr. Oldys sound was our Thomas Rawlins.
and afterward a Comedy, called Tom Essence. V. notes to Dryden's poems
published in 4 volumes 1760. p. lxxxii. vol. i.
He was appointed engraver to the mint, now become ambulatory, by patent in
1648; having in the preceding year while the King was at Oxford struck a medal
on the action of Keinton-field. Under the date on the reverse is the letter R.
sideways. Evelyn, p. iii, No. 32.
The next year he struck another, after many offers of peace had been made by
the King and been rejected; on the reverse are a sword and a branch of laurel;
the legend, in utrumque paratus. The letter R. under the bust of the King. In
1644 he made a large oval medal, stamped in silver, with the effigies of a man
holding a coin in his hand, and this inscription, Guliel. Parkhurst Eq. aurat.
custos Camb. et monet. totius Angliae 1623. Oxon. 1644. ^ sculps. I take for
granted this Mr. Parkhurst had been either a patron or relation of Rawlins, or
one cannot conceive why he should have gone back twenty one years to
commemorate an obscure person, so little connected with the singular events of
the period when it was struck. This medal was in the collection of Sir Hans
Sloane, and is now in the museum, as was and is, an oval piece of gold of
Charles II. the reverse a ship; better workmanship than the preceding. There is
but one piece more certainly known for his, a cast in lead, thus inscribed,
Rob. Bolles de Scampton in com. Lincol. Baronet; under the shoulder T. Rawlins
F. 1665. There might be and probably were other works of his hand, to which in
prudence he did not set his name. Such is the bold medalion of Archbishop Laud,
struck in 1644. He was employed by the crown 'till 1670, when he died. There is
a print of his wife, with this inscription; Dorothea Narbona uxor D. Thomae
Rawlins supremi sculptoris sigilli Carol. I. et Carol. II. D. G. magn. Brit.
Franc. et Hiber. regum. In Fleckno's works published in 1653 is "A poem on that
excellent cymelist or sculptor in gold and precious stones, etc. Tho. Rawlins.

JOHN VARIN or WARIN

was an eminent medallist in France, but appears by some works to have been in
England, at least to have been employed by English; there are four such pieces
in the collection of Mr. West; the first, a large medalion cast, Guil. sil.
Rob. Ducy mil. et baronet. aetat suae 21, 1626. Another, a cast medal of Philip
Howard S. R. E. Card. Norfolk. Endymion Porter aetat. 48, 1635. And Margareta,
uxor, aet. 25, 1633. I have a good medal of Cardinal Richelieu by Warin, who
died in 1675, as I learn from a jetton of him by Dacier.

The last artist that I have to produce of this period, but the greatest in his
profession that has appeared in these kingdoms, and so great, that in that
reign of arts we scarce know the name of another architect, was

INIGO JONES,

who, if a table of fame like that in the Tatler, were to be formed for men of
real and indisputable genius in every country, would save England from the
disgrace of not having her representative among the arts. She adopted Holbein
and Vandyck, she borrowed Rubens, she produced Inigo Jones. Vitruvius drew up
his Grammar, Palladio showed him the practice, Rome displayed a theater worthy
of his emulation, and King Charles was ready to encourage, employ, and reward
his talents. This is the history of Inigo Jones as a genius. The particulars of
his life have been often written, and therefore I shall run them over very
briefly; adding some less known minutiae [which, I fear, are the
characteristics of these volumes] and some catalogue of his works.

He was born about 1572, the son of a cloth-worker, and by the most probable
accounts, bound apprentice to a joiner, but even in that obscure situation, the
brightness of his capacity burst forth so strongly, that he was taken notice of
by one of the great Lords at court; some say, it was the Earl of Arundel; the
greater Among whom is Loyd in his Memoires, p. 577.
number that it was William Earl of Pembroke; though against that opinion there
is, at least, a negative evidence, which I shall mention presently. By one of
these Lords, Inigo was sent to Italy to study landscape-painting, to which his
inclination then pointed, and for which that he had a talent, appears INIGO
JONES.
A.Bannerman Sculp.

by a small piece preserved at Chiswick: the coloring is very indifferent, but
the trees freely and masterly imagined. He was no sooner at Rome, than he found
himself in his sphere. He felt that nature had not formed him to decorate
cabinets, but design palaces. He dropped the pencil, and conceived Whitehall.
In the state of Venice he saw the works of Palladio, and learned how
beautifully taste may be exerted on a less theater than the capital of an
empire. How his abilities distinguished themselves in a spot where they
certainly had no opportunity to act, Though no building at Venice is attributed
to Inigo, the palace and a front of a church at Leghorn are said to be designed
by him.
we are not told, though it would not be the least curious part of his history;
certain it is, that on the strength of his reputation at Venice, Christian IV.
invited him to Denmark and appointed him his architect; but on what buildings
he was employed in that country we are yet to learn. James I. found him at
Copenhagen, and Queen Anne took him in the quality of her architect to
Scotland. He served Prince Henry in the same capacity, and the place of
surveyor-general of the works was granted to him in reversion. On the death of
that Prince, with whom at least all his lamented qualities did not die, Jones
traveled once more to Italy, and assisted by ripeness of judgment perfected
his taste. To the interval between those voyages I should be inclined to assign
those buildings of Inigo, which are less pure, and border too much upon that
bastard style, which one calls King James's Gothic. Inigo's designs of that
period are not Gothic, but have a littleness of parts and a weight of
ornaments, with which the revival of the Grecian taste was encumbered, and
which he shook of in his grander designs. The surveyor's place fell and he
returned to England, and as if architecture was not all he had learned at Rome,
with an air of Roman disinterestedness he gave up the profits of his office,
which he found extremely in debt, and prevailed on the comptroller and
paymaster to imitate his example, 'till the whole arrears were cleared.

In the reign of James I find a payment by a warrant from the council to Inigo
Jones, Thomas Baldwin, William Portington and George Weal, officers of his
majesty's works, for certain scaffolds and other works by them made, by the
command of the Lord Chamberlain, against the arraignment of the Earl of
Somerset and the Countess his Lady. The expense was twenty pounds.

In the Foedera Vol. xviii, p. 97. See also in the Strafford papers some
letters of Mr. Garrard which contain an account of proceedings under that
commission, by virtue of which twenty newly erected houses in St. Martin's-lane
were pulled down.
is a commission to the Earl of Arundel, Inigo Jones and several others, to
prevent building on new foundations within two miles of London and palace of
Westminster.

In 1620 he was employed in a manner very unworthy of his genius. King James
set him upon discovering, that is, guessing, who were the founders of
Stone-henge. His ideas were all romanized; consequently his partiality to his
favorite people, which ought rather to have prevented him from charging them
with that mass of barbarous clumsiness, made him conclude it a Roman Temple. It
is remarkable that whoever has treated of that monument, has bestowed it on
whatever class of antiquity he was peculiarly fond of; and there is not a heap
of stones in these Northern countries, from which nothing can be proved, but
has been made to depose in favor of some of these fantastic hypotheses. Where
there was so much room for vision, the Phoenicians could not avoid coming in
for their share of the foundation; and for Mr. Toland's part, he discovered a
little stone-henge in Ireland, built by the Druidess Gealcopa, (who does not
know the Druidess Gealcopa?) who lived at Inisoen in the county of Donnegal.
See a summary of this controversy in the life of Inigo Jones in the Biographia
Britannica.


In the same year Jones was appointed one of the commissioners for the repair
of St. Paul's, but which was not commenced 'till the year 1633, when Laud, then
Bishop of London, laid the first stone and Inigo the fourth. In the restoration
of that cathedral he made two capital faults. He first renewed the sides with
very bad Gothic, and then added a Roman portico, magnificent and beautiful
indeed, but which had no affinity with the ancient parts that remained, and
made his own Gothic appear ten times heavier. He committed the same error at
Winchester, thrusting a screen in the Roman or Grecian taste into the middle of
that cathedral. Jones indeed was by no means successful when he attempted
Gothic. The chapel of Lincoln's End has none of the characteristics of that
architecture. The cloister beneath seems oppressed by the weight of the
building above. In Dugdale's Origines Judiciales, p. 34, is an account of the
building of that chapel from a design of Inigo. The first proposal of building
it was in 1609, but it was retarded 'till about 1617. The charge was estimated
at two thousand pounds. It was finished in five years, and consecrated on
Ascension-day 1623 by the Bishop of London, Dr. Done preaching the sermon.


The authors of the life of Jones place the erection of the banqueting house
in the reign of King Charles; but, as I have shown from the accounts of
Nicholas Stone, it was begun in 1619, and finished in two years -- a small part
of the pile, designed for the palace of our Kings; but so complete in itself,
that it stands a model of the most pure and beautiful taste. Several plates of
the intended palace of Whitehall have been given, but, I believe, from no
finished design. The four great sheets are evidently made up from general
hints, nor could such a source of invention and taste, as the mind of Inigo,
ever produce so much sameness. The strange kind of cherubims on the towers at
the end are proposterous ornaments, and whether of Inigo or not, bear no
relation to the rest. The great towers in the front are too near, and evidently
borrowed from what he had seen in Gothic, not in Roman buildings. The circular
court is a picturesque thought, but without meaning or utility. The whole
fabric however was so glorious an idea, that one forgets for a moment, in the
regret for it is not being executed, the confirmation of our liberties obtained
by a melancholy scene that passed before the windows of that very
banqueting house.

In 1623 he was employed at Somerset House, where a chapel was to be fitted up
for the Infanta, the intended bride of the Prince. Sir H. Bourgchier in a
letter to archbishop Usher, dated July 14, 1623, says, "The new chapel for the
Insanta goes on in building." There was another chapel erected for her at St.
James's, of which Don Carlos Colonna laid the first stone. V. Rushworth.
The chapel is still in being. The front to the river, part only of what was
designed, and the watergate, were erected afterward on the designs of Inigo;
as was the gate at York-stairs.

Upon the accession of Charles he was continued in his posts under both King
and Queen. His fee as surveyor was eight shillings and four-pence per day, with
an allowance of forty-six pounds a year for house-rent, besides a clerk, and
incidental expenses. What greater rewards he had are not upon record.
Considering the havoc made in offices and repositories during the war, one is
glad of being able to recover the smallest notices.

During the prosperous state of the King's affairs, the pleasures of the court
were carried on with much taste and magnificence. Poetry, painting, music, and
architecture, were all called in to make them rational amusements; and I have
no doubt but the celebrated festivals of Louis XIV. were copied from the shows
exhibited at Whitehall, in it is time the most polite court in Europe. Ben
Johnson was the laureat; Inigo Jones, the inventor of the decorations; Laniere
and Ferabosco composed the simphonies; the King, the Queen, and the young
nobility danced in the interludes. We have accounts of many of these
entertainments, called masks: They had been introduced by Anne of Denmark. I
shall mention those in which Jones was concerned.

Hymenaei, or solemnities of masque and barriers, performed on the
twelfth-night 1606, upon occasion of the marriage of Robert Earl of Essex, and
the Lady Frances daughter of the Earl of Suffolk; at court; by Ben Johnson.
Master Alphonso Ferabosco sung; master Thomas Giles made and taught the dances.

Tethys's festival, a masque, presented on the creation of Henry Prince of
Wales, June 5, 1610. The words by S. Daniel, the scenery contrived and
described by master Inigo Jones. This was called the Queen's wake. Several of
the Lords and Ladies acted in it. Daniel owns that the machinery, and
contrivance and ornaments of the scenes made the most conspicuous part of the
entertainment.

February 16, 1613, a masque at Whitehall on the nuptials of the Palsgrave and
the Princess Elizabeth, invented and fashioned by our kingdom's most artfull
and ingenious architect Inigo Jones; digested and written by the ingenious
poet, George Chapman. Chapman was an intimate friend of Jones, and in 1616
dedicated his translation of Musaeus "To the most generally ingenious and
learned architect of his time, Inigo Jones, Esquire surveyor of his majesty's
works." See Wood's Athenac p. 591. Jones made the monument for Chapman in the
churchyard of St. Gyles.


Jones had dabled in poetry himself: there is a copy of verses by him prefixed
to Coryat's Crudities, among many others by the wits of that age, who all
affected to turn Coryat's book into ridicule, but which at least is not so
foolish as their verses.

Pan's anniversary, a masque at court before King James I. 1625. Inventors
Inigo Jones and Ben Johnson.

Love's Triumph, 1630, by the King and nobility, the same inventors.

Chlorida, the Queen's masque at court, 1630. The same.

Albion's triumph, a masque presented at court by the King's Majesty and his
Lords, on twelfth-night, 1631; by Inigo and Johnson.

The temple of love, a masque at Whitehall, presented by the Queen and her
Ladies, on Shrove-tuesday 1634, by Inigo Jones, surveyor, and William Davenant.

Coelum Britannicum, a masque at Whitehall in the banqueting house on
Shrove-tuesday-night; the inventors, Thomas Carew, Inigo Jones.

A masque presented by Prince Charles September 12, 1636, after the King and
Queen came from Oxford to Richmond.

Britannia triumphans, a masque presented at Whitehall by the King and his
Lords on twelfth-night 1637.

Salmacida Spolia, a masque presented by the King and Queen at Whitehall on
tuesday January 21, 1639. The invention, ornaments, scenes and apparitions,
with their descriptions, were made by Inigo Jones, surveyor-general of his
majesty's works; what was spoken or sung, by William Davenant, her majesty's
servant.

Love's mistress, or the Queen's masque, three times presented before their
Majesty's at the Phoenix in Drury Lane, 1640. T. Heywood gives the highest
commendation of Inigo's part in this performance.

Lord Burlington had a folio of the designs for these solemnities, by Inigo's
own hand, consisting of habits, masks, scenes, etc.

The harmony of these triumphs was a little interrupted by a war that broke out
between the composers, Inigo and Ben; in which whoever was the aggressor, the
turbulent temper of Johnson took care to be most in the wrong. Nothing exceeds
the grossness of the language that he poured out, except the badness of the
verses that were the vehicle. There he fully exerted all that brutal abuse
which his cotemporaries were willing to think wit, because they were afraid of
it; and which only serves to show the arrogance of the man, who presumed to
satirize Jones and rival Shakespeare. With the latter indeed he had not the
smallest pretensions to be compared, except in having sometimes writ absolute
nonsense. Johnson translated the ancients, Shakespeare transfused their very
soul into his writings.

Another person who seems to have born much resentment to Jones was Philip Earl
of Pembroke; R. Symondes calls him, the bawling coward.
in the Harleian library was an edition of Stone-henge which formerly belonged
to that Earl, and the margins of which were full of strange notes writ by him,
not on the work, but on the author or any thing else. I have such another
commonplace book, if one may call it so, of Earl Philip, the life of Sir
Thomas More. In the Stonehenge are memorandums, jokes, witticisms and abuse on
several persons, particularly on Cromwell and his daughters, and on Inigo, whom
his Lordship calls, Iniquity Jones; and says, he had 16000 l. a year for
keeping the King's houses in repair. This might be exaggerated, but a little
supplies the want I have mentioned of any record of the rewards bestowed on so
great a man. It is observable that the Earl who does not spare reflections on
his architect, never objects to him his having been maintained in Italy by Earl
William; nor does Webb in his preface to the Stone-henge, though he speaks of
Inigo's being in Italy, say a word of any patron that sent him thither. Earl
Philip's resentment to Jones was probably occasioned by some disagreement while
the latter was employed at Wilton. There he built that noble front, and a
grotto at the end of the water. Wilton is one of the principal objects in a
history of the arts, and Belles Lettres. Sir Philip Sidney wrote his Arcadia
there for his sister; Vandyck drew many of the race, Holbein and Inigo Jones
imagined the buildings, Earl Thomas completed the collection of pictures and
assembled that throng of statues, and the last Earl Henry has shown by a bridge
designed by himself, that had Jones never lived, Wilton might yet have been a
villa worthy of ancient Rome.

The works of Inigo are not scarce, though some that bear his name were
productions of his scholars: some indeed neither of the one nor the other.
Albins in Essex, I should attribute to the last class, though always ascribed
to Inigo. If he had any hand in it, it must have been during his first
profession, and before he had seen any good buildings. The house is handsome,
has large rooms and rich cielings, but all entirely of the King James's Gothic.
Pishiobury in Hertfordshire is said to have been built by him for Sir Walter
Mildmay. At Woburn is a grotto-chamber, and some other small parts by him, as
there is of his hand at Thorney-abbey, and a summer house at Lord Barrington's
in Berkshire. The middle part of each end of the quadrangle at St. John's
Oxford is ascribed to him. The supporters of the royal arms are strangly
crowded in over the niches; but I have seen instances of his over-doing
ornament. Charlton-house in Kent is another of his supposed works; but some
critics have thought that only the great gate at the entrance and the colonades
may be of his hand. The cabinet at Whitehall for the King's pictures was built
by him, but we have no drawing of it. At St. James's he designed the Queen's
chapel. Surgeon's-hall is one of his best works; and of the most admired, the
arcade of Covent Garden and the church; two structures, of which I want taste
to see the beauties: In the arcade there is nothing remarkable; the pilasters,
are as errant and homely stripes as any plaisterer would make. The barn-roof
over the portico of the church strikes my eyes with as little idea of dignity
or beauty In justice to Inigo one must own, that the defect is not in the
architect but in the order -- who ever saw a beautiful Tuscan building? would
the Romans have chosen that order for a temple? Mr. Onslow, the late speaker,
told me an anecdote that corroborates my opinion of this building. When the
Earl of Bedsord sent for Inigo, he told him he wanted a chapel for the
parishioners of Covent Garden, but added, he would not go to any considerable
expense; in short, said he, I would not have it much better than a barn --
well! then, replied Jones, you shall have the handsomest barn in England.
as it could do if it covered nothing but a barn. The expense of building that
church was 4500 l. Ambresbury in Wiltshire was designed by him, but executed by
his scholar Webb, who married a cousin-german of Jones. Chevening is another
house ascribed to him, but doubtful; Gunnersbury near Brentford was certainly
his; the portico is too large, and engrosses the whole front except a single
window at each end. The staircase and salon are noble, but destroy the rest of
the house; the other chambers are small, and crowded by vast chimney-pieces,
placed with an Italian negligence in any corner of the room. Lindsey-house
Jones was one of the first that observed the same gradual diminution of
pilasters as in pillars. Lindsey-house owes it is chief grace to this
singularity.
in Lincoln's-inn-fields has a chaster front, but is not better disposed for
the apartments. In 1618 a special commission was issued to the Lord Chancellor,
the Earls of Worcester, Pembroke, Arundel, and others, to plant, and reduce to
uniformity Lincoln's inn-fields, That square is laid out with a regard to so
trifling a circumstance, as to be of the exact dimensions of one of the
pyramids. This would have been admired in those ages, when the keep at
Kenelworth-castle was erected in the form of a horse-fetter, and the Escurial
in the shape of St. Laurence's gridiron.
as it shall be drawn by way of map or ground-plot, by Inigo Jones, surveyor
general of the works. Coleshill, in Berkshire, the seat of Sir Matthew
Pleydell, built in 1650, and Cobham-hall in Kent, were his; He was employed to
rebuild Castle-Ashby, and finished one front, but the civil war interrupted his
progress, there and at Stoke-park in Northamptonshire. Shaftsbury-house, now
the London-lying-in hospital, on the east side of Aldersgate Street, is a
beautiful front; at Wing, seven miles from his present seat at Ethorp, in
Buckinghamshire, Sir William Stanhope pulled down a house built by Inigo. The
front to the garden of Hinton St. George in Somersetshire, the seat of Earl
Poulet; and the front of Brympton, formerly the mansion of Sir Philip Sydenham,
were from designs of Jones; as Chilham-castle, and the tower of the church at
Stains, where Inigo sometime lived, are said to be. So is a very curious work,
if really by him, as I know no other performance of his in that kind, a bridge
at Gwydder in Wales, on the estate of the Duke of Ancaster. Some alterations
and additions he made at Sion. At Oatlands remains a gate of the old palace,
but removed to a little distance, and repaired, with the addition of an
inscription, by the present Earl of Lincoln. The Grange, the seat of the Lord
Chancellor Henley in Hampshire, is entirely of this master. It is not a large
house, but by far one of the best proofs of his taste. The hall which opens to
a small vestibule with a cupola, and the staircase adjoining, are beautiful
models of the purest and most classic antiquity. The gate of Beaufort-garden at
Chelsea, designed by Jones, was purchased by Lord Burlington and transported to
Chiswick, where in a temple are some wooden seats with lions and other animals
for arms, not of his most delicate imagination, brought from Tart-hall. He drew
a plan for a palace at Newmarket, but not that wretched hovel that stands there
at present. The last, and one of the most beautiful of his works, that I shall
mention, is the Queen's house at Greenwich. The first idea of the hospital is
said to have been taken by Webb from his papers. The rest of his designs, and
his smaller works, as chimnies and cielings, etc. may be seen in the editions
of Kent, Ware, Vardy, and Campbell.

Dr. Clarke of Oxford had Jones's Palladio with his own notes and observations
in Italian, which the doctor bequeathed to Worcester college. The Duke of
Devonshire has another with the notes in Latin. Lord Burlington had a Vitruvius
noted by him in the same manner. The same Lord had his head by Dobson. At
Houghton, it is by Vandyck. Hollar engraved one of them. Villamena made a print
of him while he was in Italy. Among the Strassord papers there is a letter from
Lord Cottington to the Lord deputy sending him a memorial from Inigo, relating
to the procurement of marble from Ireland.

Inigo tasted early of the misfortunes of his master: He was not only a
favorite In Vanderdort's catalogue is mention of a picture of Stenwyck bought
by Inigo for the King, p. 15, and of a waxen picture of Henry VIII. and a
drawing of Prince Henry presented by him, p. 75.
but a Roman catholic. In 1646 he paid 545 l. for his delinquency and
sequestration. Whether it was before or after this fine I know not, that he and
Stone buried their joint stock of ready money in Scotland-yard; but an order
being published to encourage the informers of such concealments, and four
persons being privy to the spot where the money was hid, it was taken up and
reburied in Lambeth-marsh.

Grief, misfortunes. and age, terminated his life. He died at Somerset House
July 21, 1651, and on the 26th of the same month was buried in the church of
St. Bennet's Paul's-wharf, where a monument The (...) on the frame of his
picture, when bought by Sir Robert Walpole, (...) ermine and ermine, a lion
rampant, or, within a border (...) of the same.
erected to his memory was destroyed in the fire of London.

I here conclude this long chapter on the reign of King Charles. The admirers
of that Prince will not think, I hope, that I have stinted them in anecdotes of
their favorite monarch.

The next scarce deserves the name of a chapter; it contains the few names we
find of

Major General Lambert
A.Bannerman Sculp.



ANECDOTES of PAINTING, etc.
CHAP. III.
ARTISTS during the INTERREGNUM.
OF these the first in rank, if not in merit, was

GENERAL LAMBERT,

who, we are told by the author of the English School, was a great encourager
of painting and a good performer in flowers; some of his works were at the Duke
of Leeds's at Wimbleton; and it was supposed that he received instructions from
Baptist Gaspars, whom he retained in his service. The General's son John
Lambert painted portraits. There is a medal of the General by Simon.

ROBERT WALKER,

a portrait-painter, cotemporary with Vandyck, but most remarkable for being
the principal painter employed by There is a capital half length of General
Moncke at the Countess of Montrath's Twickenham park. I do not know the
painter, but probably it was Walker.
Cromwell, whose picture he drew more than once. One of those portraits
represented him with a gold chain about his neck, to which was appendent a gold
medal with three crowns, the arms of Sweden and a pearl; sent to him by
Christina in return for his picture by Cooper, on which Milton wrote a Latin
epigram. This head by Walker is in the possession of Lord Mountford at Horseth
in Cambridgeshire, and was given to the late Lord by Mr. Commissary Greaves,
who found it in an Inn in that County. Another is at the Earl of Essex's at
Cashiobury.
Another piece contained Cromwell and Lambert together: This was in Lord
Bradford's collection. A third was purchased for the Great Duke, whose agent
having orders to procure one, and meeting with this in the hands of a female
relation of the protector, offered to purchase it; but being refused, and
continuing his solicitation, to put him off, she asked 500 l. -- and was paid
it. It was on one of these portraits that Elsum wrote his epigram, which is no
better than the rest. By lines o'th face and language of the eye,
We find him thoughtfull, resolute and fly.


From one of R. Symondes's pocket books in which he has set down many
directions in painting that had been communicated to him by various artists, he
mentions some from Walker, and says, the latter received ten pounds for the
portrait of Mr. Thomas Knight's wife to the knees; that she sat thrice to him,
four or five hours at a time. That for two half lengths of philosophers, which
he drew from poor old men, he had ten pounds each in 1652; that he paid twenty
five pounds for the Venus putting on her smock (by Titian) which was the
King's, and valued it at sixty-pounds, as he was told by Mrs. Boardman, ROBERT
WALKER.
T.Chambars sculp

who copied it; a paintress of whom I find no other He names too Loveday and
Wray, equally unknown.
mention; and that Walker copied Titian's famous Venus, which was purchased by
the Spanish Ambassador, and for which the King had been offered 2500 l. He
adds, Walker cries up De Critz for the best painter in London.

Walker had for some time an apartment in Arundel-house and died a little
before the restoration; his own There is a good print of Walker, holding a
drawing, by Lombart.
portrait is at Leicester-house, and in the picture-gallery at Oxford. Mr.
Onslow has a fine whole length, sitting in a chair, of Keble keeper of the
great seal in 1650 by this painter.

EDWARD MASCALL

drew another portrait of Cromwell, which the Duke of Chandos bought of one
Clark, then of the age of 106, but hearty and strong, who had been summoned to
London on a cause of Lord Coningsby. This man had formerly been servant of
Mascall and had married his widow, and was at that time possessed of 300 l. a
year at Trewellin in Herefordshire. He had several pictures painted by Mascall.
Of the latter there is an indifferent print, inscribed, Effigies Edwardi
Mascall, pictoris, sculpta ab exemplari propria manu depicto. James Gammon
sculpsit.

(...) HEYWOOD

Of this person I find no mention but that in 1650 he drew the portrait of
General Fairfax, which was in the possession of Mr. Brian Fairfax. A draught
from this by one James Hulet was produced to the society of Antiquaries by Mr.
Peck in 1739.

PETER BLONDEAU, AND THOMAS VIOLET,

were employed by the commonwealth to coin their money, of whom and their
contests see Virtue's account in his history of the works of Thomas Simon p.
17. Blondeau, after the restoration, November 3, 1662, received letters of
denization, and a grant for being engineer of the mint in the tower of London,
and for using his new invention for coining gold and silver with the mill and
press; with the fee of 100 l. per ann.

FRANCIS CARTER,

was chief clerk of the works under Inigo Jones: There is an entry in an
office-book of a payment to him of 66 l. -- 13 s. -- 4 d. He lived in
Covent Garden, and during the commonwealth was a justice of peace, and made
surveyor of the Works, in which post he was continued by Oliver. He died soon
after the restoration.

At the Protector's funeral among others walked the following persons, his
officers, The master carpenter, Mr. Davenport, master joyner, Mr. Kingwood,
master carver, Mr. Philips, master malon, Mr. Thomas Simon, chief graver of the
mint.


END OF VOLUME THE SECOND.
APPENDIX.
Rymer's Foedera vol. xviii. p. 111.
De Concessione Officii Danieli Mittens.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, etc.
To all whom these presents shall come, Greeting;
Know ye that we, having experience of the faculty and skill of Daniel
Mittens in the art of picture draweing, of our especial grace, certain
knowledge and mere motion, have given and granted, and by these presents,
for us our heirs and successors, do give and grant unto the said Daniel
Mittens the office or place of one of our picture drawers of our chamber in
ordinary, and him the said Daniel Mittens, one of our picture drawers of the
chamber of us our heirs and successors, do appointe constitute and ordain by
these presents, To have, houlde, occupy and enjoy the said office or place
unto the said Daniel Mittens for and dureing his natural life;

And further, of our more especial grace and certain knowledge and mere
motion, we have given and granted, and, by these presents for us our heirs
and successors, do give and grant unto the said Daniel Mittens for the
exercising of the said office or place, the yearlie fee and allowance of
twenty pounds of lawful money of England by the year, to have and to hold
receive and enjoy the said fee and allowance of twenty pounds by the year, to
the said Daniel Mittens and his assigns, for and dureing the natural life of
the said Daniel Mittens, out of the treasure of us our heirs and successors,
at the receipte of the exchequer of us our heirs and successors, by the hands
of the Treasurer and Chamberlaines of us our heirs and successors there for
the time being, at the four usual feasts of the year, that is to say, at
the feasts of the Nativitie of Saint John Baptist, St. Michaell the Archangell,
the Birth of our Lord God, and the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary by
even portions to be paid, the first payment thereof to begin from the feast of
the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary last past before the date hereof,
together with all and all manner of other fees profitts, advantages, rights,
liberties, commodities and emoluments whatsoever to the said office or place
belonginge or of right appertayneing, or which hereafter may any way be due
belonging or apperteyneing;

Wherefore our will and pleasure is, and we do by these presents, for us
our heirs and successors, command and authorize the said Treasurer,
Chauncellor, Undertreasurer and Barons of the said Exchequer for the time
being, and all other the officers and ministers of the said court, and of the
receipte there for the time being, that they, and every of them, to whom itt
does or shall appertain, do not only upon sight of these our letters
pattents, or the inrollment of them, from time to time pay and deliver, or
cause to be paid and delivered unto the said Daniel Mittens and his assigns,
the said yearlie fee and allowance of twenty pounds as the same shall grow
due, but do also give allowance thereof according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents: And these our letters pattents, or the inrollment
thereof, shall be yearlie and from time to time, as well to the Treasurer and
Chamberlaines of our said exchequer, as to all other the officers and ministers
of us our heirs and successors, to whom it shall apperteine, a sufficient
warrant and dischardge in this behalf:

Although express mention, etc.
In Witness, etc.
Witness our self at Westminster, the fowerth day of June.
Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.
Pro Daniele Myttens.
REX, quarto die Junii, concessit Danieli Myttens the office of one of the
picture drawers of the King's chamber during his lyff.

P. S.
Rymer. vol. xviii. p. 60.
De concessione speciali Francisco Crane Militi.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, etc.
To the Treasorer, Chancellor, Undertreasorer, Chamberlaines and Barons of the
Exchequer, of us, our heirs and successors now being, To the Receavor
General of us, our heirs and successors of our Duchy of Cornwall for the
time being, and to all other the officers and ministers of us, our heirs and
successors, to whom itt shall appertain, and to everye of them, Greeting.
Whereas upon our bargain heretofore made by ourself, with our trusty and
wellbeloved servant Sir Francis Crane Knight, for three suits of gould
tapistries by him delivered to our use, we stand indebted to the said Sir
Francis Crane in the sum of six thousand pounds of lawful money of England,
for satisfaction of which sum we are well pleased to give unto him an
annuitie or yeerelie pension or allowance of one thousand pounds for ten years,
or reasonable recompense or allowance for the forbearance of the said debte of
six thousand pounds, if we shall find cause at any time to pay in the
same; and whereas we are graciously pleased to contribute one thousand pounds
a year toward the furtherance, upholding and maintenance of the work of
tapestries, lately brought into this our kingdom by the said Sir Francis
Crane, and now by him or his workmen practiced and put in use at Mortlake in
our county of Surrey;

Know ye that we, as well in satisfaction of the said debte or sum of six
thousand pounds, so as aforesaid mentioned to be by us oweing unto the said Sir
Francis Crane, as in performance of our royal intention, pleasure and purpose
in the payment of the said contribution for the better maintenance of the said
work of tapestries, of our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, have given and granted, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and
successors, do give and grant unto the said Sir Francis Crane one annuitie
or yearly pension of two thousand pounds of lawful money of England by the
year,

To have, houlde, perceive, receive and take the said annuitie or yearly
pension of two thousand pounds of lawful money of England by the year, to the
said Sir Francis Crane, his executors or assigns, from the feast of the Birth
of our Lord God last paste before the date hereof, for and dureing the term,
and until the full end and term of ten years from thence next ensueing,
fully to be complete and ended, To be perceived, had and taken at and from
the hands of the Receivor General of us, our heirs and successors for the
time being of our said Duchy of Cornwall, out of the rentes, sum and sommes
of money reserved, due and payable, or hereafter to be due and payable unto us,
our heirs and successors, for or in respect of the preemption of tynne within
the counties of Cornwall and Devon, and which shall from time to time be paid
unto and be remaining in the hands of the said receivor for the time being, or
at the receipt of the Exchequer of us, our heirs and successors, by the hands
of the Treasorer, Undertreasorer and Chamberlaines of the said Exchequer for
the time being or some of them, out of the treasure of us, our heirs and
successors from time to time remayneing in their or any of their hands, at the
feasts of the Nativitie of St. John Baptiste, and the Birth of our Lord God,
by even and equal portions to be paid, the first paymente thereof to be made
at the feast of the Nativitie of St. John Baptiste next ensueing the date of
these presents; Wherefore our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby for us,
our heirs and successors straightly charge and command, the Receivor
General of us, our heirs and successors of the said Duchy of Cornwall for
the time being, and also the Treasorer, Undertreasorer and Chamberlaynes of the
Exchequer of us, our heirs and successors for the time being, that they or
some of them, upon sight of these our letters pattents, or the inroolment of
them, do from time to time pay and deliver, or cause to be paid and
delivered unto the said Sir Francis Crane, his executors or assigns, the
foresaid annuitie or yeerlie pension of two thousand pounds of laufull money
of England before by these presents given and granted, according to the
tenor, effect and true intent and meaning of these our letters pattents.

And our further will and pleasure is, and we do hereby, for us, our heirs
and successors, give full power and authority unto, and also require and
command, the Treasorer, Chancellor, Undertreasorer and Barons of the said
Exchequer of us, our heirs and successors for the time being, or any other our
officers to whom it shall or may appertain, that they and every of them do
from time to time make and give allowance and defalcation unto the said
Receiver General for the time being, of his account and accounts to be made
for the revenue within his chardge, and receipte of and for all such payments,
sum and sommes of money as the said Receivor shall from time to time pay and
deliver to the said Sir Francis Crane, his executors or assigns out of the
rents, sum and sommes of money, payable or to be payable unto us, our heirs
or successors, for or in respect of the said preemption of tynne, according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents, and these presents or the
inrollment thereof shall be as well unto the said Receivor for the time being a
sufficient warrant and discharge for the deliverie and payment thereof, as
also to the said Treasorer, Chancellor, Undertreasorer, Chamberlaines and
Barons of the Exchequer, or any other our officers to whom itt may
appertain, for the allowance thereof accordingly, and shall be likewise a
sufficient warrant and discharge to the said Treasorer, Undertreasorer and
Chamberlains of the said Exchequer for the time being, without any further or
other warrant or declaration of the pleasure of us, our heirs or successors,
in that behalf to be had, procured or obtained; Provided always, and our
intent and meaning is, That if we, our heirs or successors, shall at any time
or times hereafter, dureing or within the said term of ten years, pay or
cause to be paid to the said Sir Francis Crane, his executors or assigns, at
one entire payment, so much lawful money of England as, together with such
sommes of money, which the said Sir Francis Crane, his executors or assigns
shall in the mean time receive in liewe of one thousand pounds per annum,
parcel of the said annuitie of two thousand pounds per annum, intended to the
said Sir Francis Crane for satisfaction of his said debte, shall make upp the
full sum of six thousand pounds for the aforesaid debte, and so much more
as the interest thereof, to be accounted after the rate of eight pounds for a
hundred by the year shall amounte unto in the mean time from the date hereof,
That then and from thenceforth, all further payments of the said one thousand
pounds, intended for satisfaction of the aforesaid debte and all arrearages
thereof then incurred, shall cease and determyne, but the other one thousand
pounds, parcel of the said two thousand pounds, shall continue and remain
in force, to be ymployed for and toward the maintenance and supportation of
the said work, according to our gracious intention in that behalf, any
thing in these presents contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And lastly, our will and pleasure is, that these our letters pattents, or the
inrollment of them, shall be sufficient and of validity, according to the true
meaning of the same.

Although express mention, etc.
In Witness, etc.
Witness our self at Westminster, the tenth day of May.
Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.
Rymer. vol. xviii. p. 143.
De concessione dimissionis Francisce Ducisse Richmond et Lenox et Francisco
Crane.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, etc.
To all to whom these presents shall come Greeting,
Whereas, our most dear and royal father, King James, of blessed memory,
having been, diverse years since, informed of the great prejudice and daily
loss which his loveing subjects did sustain, by the use of private and
unwarranted farthing tokens of lead, brass and other mettale, which diverse
vintners, victuallers, tapsters, chaundlers, bakers and other inferior
tradesmen, were then wont to obtrude and putt upon their chapmen and customers
in the buying and selling of small commodities; And finding in his royal
wisdom that, besides the inconvenience and loss that these tokens brought with
them to the poorer sort of people, the use of them was not without some wrong
to his royal prerogative, which ought not only to authorize all sorts of
coin, but whatsoever else in the nature of coin should serve as the measure
of buying and selling; Out of these considerations, which were for the
preservation of his Majesty's own honor and the good and benefitt of his
loveing subjects, itt pleased his Majesty thereupon to appoint and ordeyne, by
lettres patents under his great seal of England, that a convenient quantity of
one uniforme sort of farthinge tokens should be exactly and artificially made
in copper, with his Majesty's name and title thereupon, to be stamped, to be
publicly used, and to pass between man and man for farthings, and did
settle and establish a rechange of them into money, whereby the poorer sort of
people might buy and sell with more conveniencie, and the subject in general
receive ease without loss;

Now,

For that itt is found by experience had of the laudable use and constant
rechange of those farthing tokens of copper into money, so made by authority
as aforesaid, that they are grown acceptable and pleaseing to all our
subjects, and of very necessary and daily use instead of single money, both for
charity to the poor and for the more easy tradeing in petty commodities,

We have thought fit to continue and establishe the use thereof by like
letters patents, for the residue of the term which our said royal father was
pleased to grant in that behalf, in such manner as is hereafter specified.

Know ye therefore that we, as well in consideration of the premises, as for
diverse other good causes and considerations us hereunto especially moveinge, of
our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, and of our
prerogative royal, have given and granted, and by these presents, for us our
heirs and successors, do give and grant unto, our right trusty and
welbeloved cosen, the Lady Frances Duchess Dowager of Richmond and Lenox, and
to our welbeloved servant, Sir Francis Crane Knight, their executors,
administrators and assigns, full free and absolute license, power and
authority that they the said Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis
Crane, their executors, administrators and assigns, by themselves or any of
them, or by their or any of their deputies, workmen or servants, shall and may,
dureing the terms of years hereafter in these presents mentioned, make, in
some convenient place at their or any of their pleasure or appointment, such a
competent quantety of farthing tokens of copper as may be conveniently by them,
or any of them issued amongst the loving subjects of us our heirs and
successors, within our realms of England and Ireland, and the domynion of
Wales, or any of them, within the terms of years hereafter mencyoned, and the
same, so made, to utter, dispose, disperse and issue within the said realms
and domynion or any of them, according to the true meaning of these presents,
at any time within the said terms of years hereafter in these presents
mentioned;

And our will and pleasure is, that the said farthinge tokens shall be made
exactly and arteficially of copper, by engines or instruments, having on the
one side two scepters crossing under one diadem, and on the other side a harp
crowned with our title Carolus Dei Gratia Magne Brittannie, Francie et Hibernie
Rex, weighing six grains a-piece or more, at the discretion of the said
Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, their executors,
administrators, deputies or assigns, with a privy mark from time to time to
be set upon them, at the coining or stamping of them, to discover the
counterfeiting of any such like tokens by any others, which farthinge tokens
we do hereby, for us our heirs and successors, will and ordeyne to pass and
to be generally used, between man and man, as tokens for the value of
farthings, within our said realms and domynion, in such manner and form as in
and by the said former letters patents is expressed.

And further of our more ample grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, and
for the considerations aforesaid, and to the intent that the said Duchess of
Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, their executors, administrators and
assigns, shall and may have and enjoy the full benefitt and profitt intended
unto them as by this our grant, we do by these presents, for us our heirs
and successors, straightly prohibit and forbid all and every person and
persons whatsoever (other than the said Duchess Dowager of Richmond and Lenox
and Sir Francis Crane, their executors, administrators and assigns, by
themselves or their servants or deputies) to make or counterfeite such our
farthinge tokens of copper, or any engines or instruments in resemblance of
them, or any other tokens whatsoever, or to use or utter any other farthinge
tokens or other tokens whatsoever, either made or counterfeited within our said
realms or domynion, or beyond the seas, or elsewhere, at any time after the
commencement of these our letters pattents, upon pain of forfeiture of all
such farthinge tokens or other tokens, and of all such engines or instruments
as shall be made, used, uttered or found, contrary to the true meaning of these
presents, And upon such further pains, penalties and imprisonments, as by the
laws and statutes of these our realms of England or Ireland respectively, or
by our prerogative royal can or may be inflicted upon them for their contempt
and breach of our royal commaundment in this behalf, the one moiety of all
such forfeitures to be to us our heirs and successors, and the other moiety
thereof we do, for us our heirs and successors, give and grant unto the said
Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane their executors,
administrators and assigns, without any account to be given or rendered to us
our heirs or successors for the same;

And further also, for the better execution of this our grant, We do by
these our letters patents, for us our heirs and successors, give and grant
unto the said Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, their
executors, administrators and assigns, that they, by themselves, their
deputies, servants or factors, or any of them, at all times and from time to
time dureing the terms of years hereby granted, taking a constable or other
officer with them, shall and may enter into any shipp, bottom, vessel, boat,
shopp, house, warehouse, or any other place whatsoever, where they, or any of
them, shall have cause to make search within any of our said realms and
domynions by water or land, as well within liberties as without, and there to
search and try by all ways and means for all such counterfeit farthinge
tokens, or other tokens, engynes and instruments made for the making of the
said tokens, as shall be brought in from the parts beyond the seas, or found to
be made within any of our said realms and domynion contrary to the true intent
and meaning and purport of these presents; And finding any such tokens,
instruments or engynes, to arrest, seize, carry away and deteyne the same to
the use in these letters patents before mentioned and expressed;

To have and to hold, perceive, use, exercise and enjoye all and singular the
aforesaid powers, liberties, privileges, licenses, graunts, authorities and
other the premises, unto the said Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir
Francis Crane, their executors, administrators and assigns, from the day of
the date hereof, unto the first day of August next comeing, and from
thenceforth for and dureing the whole term and time of seventeene years then
next ensueing and fully to be complete and ended;

Yielding and paying, and the said Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir
Francis Crane, for themselves, their executors and administrators, do
covenant, promise and grant, to and with us our heirs and successors, to yield
and pay therefore yearly, unto us our heirs and successors, the yearly rent or
sum of one hundred marks of lawful money of England, into the receipt of the
exchequer of us our heirs and successors at Westminster, at the feasts of the
Nativity of St. John Baptist, and the Birth of our Lord God, or within twenty
eight days next after the said feasts by even and equal portions yearly to be
paid dureing the terms aforesaid, the first payment thereof to begin at the
feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, in the year of our Lord God one
thousand six hundred twenty-five, or within twenty eight days after the said
feasts;

Provided always that if itt shall happen the said yearly rent of one hundred
marks, or any part thereof, to be behind and unpaid by the space of twenty
eight days next after either of the said feasts wherein the same ought to be
paid as aforesaid, that then and from thenceforth this our present grant shall
cease, be void and of none effect, any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary notwithstanding:

And further, of our more especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion,
and for the considerations aforesaid, we have given and granted, and by these
presents, for us our heirs and successors, do give and grant unto the said
Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, their executors,
administrators and assigns, all such profitts, gains, benefitts and
advantages as shall be, from time to time dureing the terms of years
aforesaid, made, gotten, raised and obtained by the making, issueing or
exchangeing of all such farthing tokens of copper in manner and form
aforesaid; To have, perceive, receive and take the said profitt, gain and
benefitt, to be raised and made as aforesaid, to the said Duchess of Richmond
and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, their executors, administrators and assigns,
to their own proper use for ever, without any account or other thing to be
given or rendered to us our heirs and successors for the same, other than the
yearly rent in and by these presents reserved, and the moiety or one half of
the forfeitures which shall happen dureing the said terms as aforesaid;

And for the better distributing and dispersing of the said farthing tokens the
said Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, for themselves their
executors, administrators and assigns, do covenant, promise and grant to and
with us our heirs and successors by these presents, that they the said
Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, their executors,
administrators and assigns, shall not only be content and ready, dureing all
the time hereby granted, to deliver forth the rate of one and twenty shillings
in farthing tokens for every twenty shillings in sterling money, which any our
loveing subjects shall be willing to give or disburse for the same, but also,
during the said terms, to deliver unto any our loveing subjects that shall
find themselves surcharged with more of the farthing tokens heretofore made, by
the authority of the letters patents of our said dear father, as hereafter to
be made by virtue of these presents, than he can conveniently utter for his use
and occasions, the sum of twenty shillings in sterling and current moneys for
every twenty one shillings in farthing tokens, as well of such as have been
heretofore made by the authority aforesaid, as of such as shall be made by
virtue of these presents, and so after that rate for all greater or lesser
sommes, at the hands of all tradesmen, in all such place and places where the
said Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, their executors,
administrators or assigns shall issue or utter our said farthing tokens; And
to the intent the said tokens may be brought to a more frequent and general
use for the good of our loving subjects without any inconvenience, according to
our gracious intention: our will and pleasure is, that there be from time to
time a convenient quantety of the said farthing tokens sent, and we do hereby
command and authorize the said Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis
Crane, their executors, deputies and assigns, from time to time, to send such
a convenient quantety of them into as many cities, buroughs corporate and
markett towns within our said realms and domynion, as they or any of them
shall conceive may be fit for the necessary use of the said several places,
and the same to be left in the hands of some discreet person or persons,
together with sufficient means for the rechange of the tokens to be uttered to
the citizens or inhabitants of the said cities, buroughs corporate and
markett towns and other places, and such other as shall be there resiant or
resort thither, if cause shall require; And our pleasure and command is that
the chief officers and governors, with the ministers and constables of such
cities, borroughs corporate and markett towns, do endeavor that the said
tokens may be there dispersed and freely pass betwixt man and man for the
value of farthings as before is expressed:

And further we do hereby straightly charge and command all and singular
majors, sheriffs, constables, head-borroughs, comptrollers, customers,
searchers, waiters, and all other officers and ministers to whom it shall or
may apperteyne, to be aiding and assisting in all lawful and convenient manner
unto the said Duchess of Richmond and Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, their
executors administrators and assigns, and their and every of their deputies,
factors and servants, in the due execution of these our letters patents upon
pain of our high displeasure, and such pains, punishments and imprisonments
as by the laws and statutes of this our realm of England and Ireland, or by
our prerogative royal, may or can be inflicted upon them for their contempts
in this behalf:

And our further will and pleasure is, and we do hereby declare our intent
and meaning to be, that all the farthing tokens of copper heretofore made, by
virtue of the said letters patents of our said dear father, shall still pass
and be issued amongst our loveing subjects, within our said realms of England
and Ireland and dominion of Wales, for the value of farthings in such manner
and form as the same dureing the force of the said letters patents did pass
and were issued, notwithstanding the surrender and determination of the said
letters patents, under such privileges, powers, provisions, cautions,
forfeitures, punishments and restraints, as before in these presents we have
limited and appointed for such farthen tokens hereafter to be made and issued
by virtue of these presents.

Although express mention, etc.
In witness, etc.
Witness our self at Westminster, the eleventh day of July.
Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.
Pro Francisco Crane.
REX, vicesimo primo die Julii, concessit Francisco Crane militi officium
cancellarii ordinis garterii infra castrum de Windsor in comitatu Berks, una
cum custodia sigillorum ejusdem ordinis durante vita.

P. S.
A Grant of the Office of Master-Mason and Architect. Rymer, vol. xviii. p. 675.

CHARLES, by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all whom these presents shall come, Greeting.
Know ye that we, of our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, and for diverse other good causes and considerations us at this present
moveing, have given and granted, and, by these presents, for us our heirs and
successors, do give and grant to our trusty and welbeloved servaunt Nicholas
Stone the office and place of our Master Mason and Architeckt for all our
buildings and reparations within our honor and castle of Windsor, and him the
said Nicholas Stone, our said Master Mason and Architeckt for all our said
buildings and reparations within our honor and castle of Windsor aforesaid,
we do make, ordain constitute and appointe by these presents.

To have hold execute and enjoy the said office and place of our Master Mason
and Architeckt for all our buildings and reparations within our honor and
castle of Windsor aforesaid, to the said Nicholas Stone, by himself, or his
sufficient deputy and deputies, for and dureing the term of his natural life;

And further, of our more ample grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, we
have given and granted, and by these presents, for us our heirs and
successors, we do give and grant to the said Nicholas Stone for the
executeing of the said office and place, the wages and fee of twelve pence of
lawful money of England by the day, in as large and ample manner as William
Suthis, or any other person or persons heretofore, having executed and enjoyed
the said office and place, has had or ought to have had and enjoyed; to have
and yearly to receive the said wages and fee of twelve pence by the day, to
the said Nicholas Stone and his assigns, from the day of the date of these
presents, for and dureing the natural life of him the said Nicholas Stone, out
of the treasure of us our heirs and successors, by the hands of the treasorer
and chamberlaines of us our heirs and successors there for the time being, at
the four usual feasts or terms of the year, that is to say, at the feasts
of the Nativitie of Saint John Baptist, Saint Michael the Archangell, the Birth
of our Lord God, and the Annuntiation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, by even and
equal portions yearlie to be paid, together with all other profitts
commodities and allowances to the same office and place due, incident or in
any wise appertayneing, in as lardge and ample manner as the said William
Suthis or any other person or persons heretofore having executed and enjoyed
the said office has had, or ought to have had and enjoyed.

Although express mention, etc.
In witness whereof, etc.
Witness our self at Westminster, the one and twentieth day of April.
Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.
Pro Nicholao Stone.
THE King, the twenty first day of April, grants to Nicholas Stone the
office and place of Master Mason of all the King's buildings and reparations
within the honor and castle of Windsor during his life.

P. S.
De concessione officii Abrahamo Vanderdoort. Rymer, vol. xviii. p. 73.

CHARLES, by the grace of God, etc.
To all to whom, etc. Greeting.
Whereas our welbeloved Abraham Vanderdoort Esquire has, by many chardgeable
tyralls and long practice, attained to the art, mystery, science and skill of
imbossing and making of medales, great or small, molded or pressed, or in any
other manner in gould, silver or brass, which the former emperors and
monarchs of the world have heretofore been wont to leave as monuments of
antiquity to their posterities, and are now also grown in use amongst many
of the princes of Christendom.

Know ye therefore that we, being willing to appropriate to our self the
service and employment of the said Abraham Vanderdort in that art, mystery,
science and profession, have of our especial grace, certain knowledge and
mere motion, given and granted, and by these presents, for us our heirs and
successors do give and grant unto the said Abraham Vanderdoort, the office or
place of master imbosser and maker of the medales of us our heirs and
successors of all sizes and quantities to be wrought in gould, silver or
brass, molded or pressed, or in other matter whatsoever, And to have the
overseeing and keeping of the same, for the service of us our heirs and
successors, And him the said Abraham Vanderdoort we do by these presents, sor
us our heirs and successors, constitute, appointe and ordain to be the
Master Imbosser and maker of the medales of us our heirs and successors, of
all sizes and quantities to be wrought in gould, silver or brass, molded or
pressed, or in other manner whatsoever, and to have the overseeing and keeping
of the same, for the service of us our heirs and successors;

To have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said office or place unto the said
Abraham Vanderdoort and his assigns, for and dureing the natural life of him
the said Abraham Vanderdoorte.

And further, of our especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion we
have given and granted, and, by these presents for us our heirs and
successors, do give and grant unto the said Abraham Vanderdoorte, for the
exerciseing of the said office or place, the yearlie fee and allowance of
forty pounds of lawful money of England by the year, to have, hold,
receive and enjoy the said fee and allowance of forty pounds by the year to
the said Abraham Vanderdoorte, out of the treasure of us our heirs and
successors, at the receipte of the exchequer of us our heirs and successors,
by the hands of the treasorer and chamberlaynes of us our heirs and successors
there for the time being, at the four usual feasts of the year, that is to
say, at the feast of the Nativitie of Saint John Baptiste, Saint Michaell
the Archangell, the Birth of our Lord and the Annuntiation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, by even portions to be paid, The first payment thereof to begin
at the feast of Saint John Baptist next comeing after the date hereof,
together with all and all manner of other fees, profitts, advantages, rightes,
liberties, commodities and emoluments whatsoever to the said office or place
belonging or of right apperteyning, or which hereafter may any way be due
belong or apperteyne; wherefore our will and pleasure is, And we do, by these
presents, for us our heirs and successors command and authorize the said
treasorer, chancellor, undertreasorer and barons of the said exchequer for the
time being, and all other the officers and ministers of the said court, and of
the receyte there for the time being, that they and every of them, to whom itt
does or shall apperteyne, do not only upon sight of these our lettres
patents or the inrollment of them from time to time, pay and deliver, or cause
to be paid and delivered unto the said Abraham Vanderdoorte and his assigns
the said yearly fee and allowance of forty pounds as the same shall grow
due, but do also give allowance thereof according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, and these our letters patents or the inrollment
thereof, shall be yearlie and from time to time, as well to the said treasorer
and chamberlaines of our said exchequer, as to all other the officers and
ministers of us our heirs and successors, to whom it shall apperteine, a
sufficient warrant and dischardge in this behalf:

Although express mention, etc.
In witness, etc.
Witness our self at Westmynster, the fourteenth day of May.
Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.
Rymer, vol. xviii. p. 100.
De concessione ad vitam Abrahamo Vanderdoort.
CHARLES by the grace of God, etc.
To all whom, etc. Greeting.
Whereas we have appointed our servant Abraham Vanderdoort Esquire to oversee
and take care of all our pictures which are at Whitehall and other our houses
of resort, to prevent and keep them (so much as in him lies) from being
spoiled or defaced, to order mark and number them, and to keep a register of
them, to receive and deliver them, and likewise to take order for the making
and coppying of pictures as we or the Lord Chamberlain of our household shall
direct, And to this end are pleased that he shall have access at convenient
times into our galleries chambers and other rooms where our pictures are;

Know ye that we, in consideration of the good and acceptable service done
and to be done unto us by our said servaunt Abraham Vanderdoort in manner as
aforesaid, of our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, have
given and granted, and by these presents for us, our heirs and successors,
do give and grant unto the said Abraham Vanderdoort the office or place of
overseer of all the pictures of us, our heirs and successors, And him the said
Abraham Vanderdoort we do by these presents, for us, our heirs and
successors, constitute, ordain and appointe to be the overseer of all the
pictures of us, our heirs and successors, to have, hold, occupy and enjoy the
said office or place unto the said Abraham Vanderdoort and his assigns, for
and dureing the natural life of him the said Abraham Vanderdoort.

And further, of our especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion, We
have given and granted, and by these presents for us, our heirs and
successors, do give and grant unto the said Abraham Vanderdoort, for the
exerciseing of the said office or place, the yearlie fee or allowance of forty
pounds of lawful money of England by the year, to have, hold, receive and
enjoy the said fee and allowance of forty pounds by the year unto the said
Abraham Vanderdoort and his assigns, for and dureing the natural life of the
said Abraham Vanderdoort, out of the treasure of us, our heirs and successors,
out of the receipte of the exchequer of us, our heirs and successors, by the
hands of the treasorer and chamberlaynes of us our heirs and successors there
for the time being, at the four usual feasts of the year, that is to say,
at the feasts of the Nativitye of Saint John Baptist, Saint Michaell the
Archangell, the Birth of our Lord God, and the Annunciation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, by even portions to be paid; the first paymente to begin at the
feast of the nativitie of St. John Baptiste next comeing after the date hereof;

Wherefore our will and pleasure is, and we do by these presents for us our
heirs and successors, command and authorize the said treasorer, chauncellor,
undertreasorer and barons of the said exchequer for the time being, that they
and every of them, to whom it does or shall apperteyne, do not only upon
sight of these our lettres patents or the inrollment of them from time to time,
pay and deliver, or cause to be paid and delivered unto the said Abraham
Vanderdoorte and his assigns the said yearly fee and allowance of forty
pounds, as the same shall grow due, but do also give full allowance thereof
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, and these our
letters patents or the inrollment thereof, shall be yearly and from time to time,
as well to the said treasorer and chamberlaines of our said exchequer, as to all
other the officers and ministers of us our heirs and successors, to whom it
shall or may apperteyne, a sufficient warrant and discharge in this behalf;
Although express mention, etc.

In witness, etc.
Witness our self at Westmynster, the thirtith day of May.
Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.
De Warranto speciali pro Georgio Duci Buckingham et aliis. Rymer, vol. xviii.
p. 236.

CHARLES, by the grace of God, etc.
To our right trusty and right entirely beloved Cosen and Counselor George
Duke of Buckingham our High Admiral of England, To our right trusty and right
welbeloved Cosen and Councellor Henry Earl of Holland, To our right trusty and
right welbeloved Councellor Edward Lord Conway one of our Principal
Secretaries of State, And to our trusty and right welbeloved Spencer Lord
Compton And To our trusty and welbeloved servants Sir Henry Mildmay Knight,
Master of our jewel house And Endymion Porter one of the grooms of our
bedchamber, and to all other our officers ministers and loveing subjects whom
ytt may any way concern, Greetinge.
Whereas we have lately ymployed the said Duke of Buckingham and Earl of
Holland as our Ambassadors Extraordinary to the States of the United Provinces,
and for our special service have commanded the said Lord Compton to deliver
into the hands of the said Lord Conwey the several jewels, hereafter
particularly mentioned, being at that time in his custody (that is to say)

A great rich jewel of goulde, called the Mirror of Great Britain, having
twoe fair table diamonds, twoe other large diamonds cut lozen wise, garnished
with small dyamonds and a pendant of a fair dyamond cut in faucetts without
foil,

A fair jewel in fashion like a fether of goulde, having in the midst one
great dyamond and thirty other dyamonds of several bigness, and five small
dyamonds in a cross:

A fair flower of goulde with three great ballasses in the midst, a great
poynted dyamond and three great pearls sixte with a fair pearl pendant,
called The Brethren:

A great poynted dymond with the collett taken from a collar of goulde,
wherein yet remains eignte great rock rubies and twenty great pearls set
in twoes, with a long pearl pendant:

A broken collar of goulde of thirty pieces, whereof fifteen are roses and
fifteen crowned ciphers of the late King and Queens names, wherein are now
remaining eleaven poynted dyamonds and nine table dyamonds:

A jewel of goulde of the letter I, having one long fair table dyamond and
twoe lesser square table triangled dyamonds, and a rose dyamond, and a great
ovall pearl pendant:

The great collar of ballast rubies, conteyninge twenty pieces of goulde,
whereof tenn are set with great ballas rubies, and ten with sixteen round
pearls in eiche piece:

One great sapphire cut in fossetts, one pendant sapphire cut in fossetts, one
ballast ruby with a long pearl pendant, one ballast ruby without foil in a
collett of goulde enamelled:

A great amatist in a collet of goulde.

All which jewels the said Lord Compton according to our commaundment did
deliver unto the said Lord Conwey, and the said Lord Conwey by our
commaundment did deliver them upon or near about the eighte day of November
now last past unto the said Endymion Porter to be carried beyond the seas
into Holland, and there to be delivered unto the said Duke of Buckingham and
Earl of Holland by them twoe to be disposed of as we have specially directed
them for our service.

And whereas the said Sir Henry Mildmay the master of our jewel house, by our
like especial commaundment upon or about the six and twentieth day of
October now last past, did deliver out of his custody and charge unto the
said Duke and Earl, or their servaunts for them, these several parcells of
rich plate and jewels hereafter particularly mentioned in these presents,

That is to say,

Inprimis, one basin of goulde, in the bottom there are set two fair
dyamonds, twoe fair rubies, twoe emeraulds, and seaventeene fair pearls, and
the brymme of the same garnished with four fair dyamonds, four fair rubies,
four fair emeraulds, and forty eighte clusters of pearls, there being four
fair pearls in every cluster, of the waighte of one hundred and thirteen
ounces.

Item, one very fair layer of mother of perle, being a shell crazed in sundry
places and simited again, garnished with goulde, the foot thereof cut eighte
square, in the lower part whereof is one dyamond without a foil, four rock
rubies, twoe fair emraulds, and one sapphire, and upon the upper part of the
same square is one very fair dyamond without foil, one fair rock ruby, and
twoe fair emraulds, the shanke thereof garnished with twoe very fair rubies,
twoe very fair emraulds, and three very fair pearls pendant, the body thereof
garnished with twoe very fair rubies, twoe fair emraulds, two fair dyamonds
and six pearls, the handle being an antique man of goulde garnished with six
rubies, one emrauld, one sapphire, and one pearl pendant, layinge his one hand
upon a goodly ballaee, and the other hand upon a goodly ruby, and from the
body to the same shell, garnished with twoe dyamonds, four rubies and twoe
very fair rubies, with twoe pearls pendant in twoe women's hands, houldinge
between the other twoe hands a goodly ballace like a heart, the garniture of
the same shell above the brymme and spoute downwards to the body with five
dyamonds, twoe of them being great, seven rubies, four emraulds, one emrauld
pendent, one blewe sapphire, and three pearls pendent, with two several pearls
set, and a long pearl set in the topp over the said heart of ballace,
weighinge one hundred and threescore ounces:

Item, one basin and layer of goulde, the basin enamelled about the bushel and
brymme, and the layer suitable, having forty eighte small dyamonds in the
basin, and thirty three small dyamonds, thirty rubies, and twelve great
saphires in the layer, weighing twoe hundred and twoe ounces:

Item, a basin and ewer of goulde, set with dyamonds rubies and emraulds, and
one great ballace ruby in the midst of the ewer the arms of Denmark in the
basin with Anna Regina, weighing one hundred threescore five ounces and a half:

Item, a fair boll of goulde, with a cover garnished with dyamonds rubies and
emraulds, in the topp a wild man with a ruby pendent in his hand, and Anna
Regina within the cover, weighing fifty one ounces and half a quarter:

Item, a standing cupp of gould, with a cover garnished with dyamonds rubies
and emraulds all perfect, having the arms of Denmark within the cover,
weighing fifty ounces scante:

Item, one cupp of goulde, with a cover graven on the body, with an alter and
an inscription over itt (nil nisi vota), and the similitude of a temple graven
with a peramides on the topp of the cover, and a harnised man on the topp
thereof holding an antique shield in his left hand, weighing two hundred ounces
and a half:

Item, one basin and layer of goulde plain, weighing one hundred fowerscore
and sixteen ounces:

Item, a pair of fair bolls and covers of goulde raised with talbotts on the
sides, weighing one hundred and twenty ounces.

Item, a fair standing cupp of gould, garnished about the cover with eleaven
dyamonds, and two poynted dyamonds about the cupp, seaventeene table dyamonds
and one pearl pendent upon the cupp, with these words bound to obey and
serve, and H. and I. knitt together; in the topp of the cover the Queens
arms, and Queen Janes arms houlden by twoe boys under a crown imperial,
weighing threescore and five ounces and a half:

Item, a cupp of goulde with a cover garnished with redd roses and full set,
and garnished with course ballaces or rubies and saphires, and one and twenty
troches of pearls, three pearls in every troche, weighing fifty six ounces
scante:

Item, a high salt of gould in the form of a ship, with a strikeing clock
in the cover garnished with dyamonds, rubies, saphires, emraulds, jacints,
amatists, ballaces and perles, weighing one hundred threescore twoe ounces and
a half:

Item, one salt of goulde, called the Morris Dance, having the foot
garnished with six great saphires and fifteen course dyamonds, thirty
seven course rubies, forty twoe small garnishing perles, having upon the
shanke three great course saphires and three great course perles, upon the
border about the shanke twelve course dyamonds, eighteen course rubies, and
fifty twoe garnishing perles, and standinge about that five morris dauncers
and a taberer, having amongst the morris dauncers and taberer thirteen small
garnishinge perles and one ruby, the lady houlding the salt having upon her
garment from her foot to her face fiftye garnishing perles and eighteen
course rubies, the foot of the same salt having four course rubies and
four course dyamonds, the border about the middle of the same salt having
four course dyamonds, seven rubies and eighte perles, and upon the topp of
the said saulte four dyamonds, four rubies and three great pearls, having
upon the tire of her head tenn course rubies, twelve course dyamonds and
twenty nine course garnishinge perles, weighinge one hundred fifty one ounces
and a half and half a quarter:

Item, one cupp of goulde called the Dream of Paris, having upon the cover
thereof the image of Paris, Jupiter, Venus, Pallas and Juno, and Paris horse
upon the cover, garnished with eighteen dyamonds great and small, and in the
five borders of the same cover thirty twoe great rubies, Jupiter garnished
with tenn small rubies, and Paris helmett garnished with twoe small rubies,
Venus and Pallas either of them having one small rubie upon their breast, Juno
wanting her chaplett, the horse of Paris having eighte small rubies, also
upon the sive borders of the same sortie one great perles, Jupiter having his
garment garnished with thirty two small perles, Paris having one small perle
upon the topp of his cap, Venus having twoe perles hanging down from her
chaplett, Juno having upon her chaplett hanging down twoe small perles, and
upon her buttocks twoe small perles, the horse garnished with twenty seven
perles great and small, the cupp having upon the foot and shanke twenty six
rubies great and small, ten dyamonds of diverse sorts, four saphires, and
thirty eighte perles great and small, weighing one hundred twenty and one
ounces:

Item, a trencher salt of gold in form of a castle, garnished with dyamonds,
rubies, emraulds and perles, weighing one and twentye ounces and a quarter:

Item, one cupp and cover of gold, weighing thirty ounces;

Item, one cupp of gold the cover and foot enamelled with eighte course
dyamonds, four on the cover, and four lesser on the foot, and in the topp of
the cover a fair pointed emraulde and another knobb of goulde enameled like
the emraulde, weighing twenty eighte ounces and a quarter:

Item, one high salt of goulde with a cover of goulde, in the cover twelve
ballace rubies, nine saphires, three dyamonds, and on the topp a woman having
a rose dyamond in one hand, and in the other an arrowe with a dyamond at the
end garnished with perles fixed and pendant, wanting six perles, nyneteene
small dyamonds in the coronett, the cover weighing threescore ounces, the salt
set with forty five ballace rubies, thirty six saphires, seven small
dyamonds, and garnished with perles fixed and pendant, wanting diverse perles,
weighing twoe hundred thirty four ounces scante, weighing in toto twoe
hundred fowerscore six ounces and a quarter:

Item, one cupp of goulde, the cover and foot enamelled with eighte course
dyamonds, four on the cover, and four lesser on the foot, and in the topp of
the cover a fair pointed emrauld, and another knobb of gould enamelled like an
emrauld, weighing twenty eight ounces and a quarter:

Item, one cupp, the boll thereof agett ovall fashion, called the Constables
Cupp, with an aggett in the foot, all garnished with gould enamelled, set
with rubies and dyamonds, with a cover of goulde likewise enamelled and
garnished with rubies and dyamonds, set about with four antique heads of
aggetts, in the inside one agett cut with twoe faces garnished with dyamonds,
weighing fifty seven ounces three quarters:

Item, one cupp and cover of goulde with dropps and a branch of flowers in the
topp enamelled like dayseys, weighing thirty six ounces.

Item, one layer of goulde chased with long dropps, the spoute being a
serpente garnished with rubies, perles and flowers enamelled with white and
redd, wanting a ruby in the topp of the cover, weighing forty ounces scante:

Item, eighte great dishes of goulde with arms, weighing one hundred
fowerscore four ounces and a quarter;

Item, six trencher plates of goulde with arms, weighing threescore and
fowerteene ounces one quarter and half a quarter:

Item, twelve fruit dishes of gould with the arms of Denmark, weighing one
hundred and fowerscore five ounces and a quarter:

Item, a posnett of goulde with a cover, weighing twenty ounces and a quarter
scante:

Item a boll and cover of goulde with roses and crowns, and a crown with a
cross on the topp of the cover, weighing threescore nine ounces and half a
quarter:

Item, one pair of goulde cupps with covers, haveinge blewe snake rings in the
topp of their covers, weighing thirty ounces and a half:

Item, twoe trencher plates of gould standinge upon pillars, weighing one
hundred and ten ounces one quarter and a half:

Item, one porringer and cover of goulde, weighing twenty seven ounces three
quarters and a half:

Item, one cupp and cover of goulde, weighing thirty one ounces and half a
quarter:

Item, one cupp and cover of goulde, weighing twenty five ounces one quarter
and a half:

Item, one cupp and cover of goulde, weighing twenty three ounces three
quarters and a half:

Item, a collar of goulde, containing seaventeene roses and seaventeene knotts,
weighing twenty nine ounces and three quarters:

Item, a basin and ewer of goulde ovall fashion, weighing threescore eleaven
ounces and a half:

Item, a gridiron of goulde, weighing twenty twoe ounces a quarter and a half:

Item, a cupp of aggott, with a cover garnished with gould and full of
emraulds, turquesses, dyamonds, roses of dyamonds, rubies and perles, with a
sapphire on the topp, with a boy houldinge a spear, weighinge fifty three
ounces and half a quarter:

Item, a lookinge glass set in goulde, garnished on the one side with twoe
saphires, four rubies and one emraulde, and on the other side with four
saphires and four rubies, the steel of Aggott, twoe little boys, one of them
houldinge a pearl and five perles hanginge, on the other part of the body is
a man on horseback, the body being a clock within a crystal garnished with
four dyamonds and fifty five rubies, with four antique boys enammelled
white, twoe of them beareing in either hand a perle, and the other twoe, the
one haveinge twoe perles and the other has one perle in their hands,
wantinge four perles in the said antique boys, the base or foot standinge
upon four round cristalls garnished with ten rubies, and four naked women
of goulde standing at every corner one, and a man in the topp being naked,
weighing fowerscore and seaventeene ounces three quarters and a half:

Item, one plate of goulde, graven on the one side with astronomy, and on the
other side with a ship, called the Tryumphe, with a case of murrey velvet,
weighinge threescore and thirteen ounces:

Item, one layer, the foot body and handle of aggott, the body crased,
garnished with gould and set with dyamonds, rubies and amathists, one emraulde
and one sapphire, the foot having a border of small rubies round about itt,
weighing twenty eighte ounces and half a quarter:

Item, a cupp of aggott with a cover of goulde like a tent, haveinge a morris
dance in the cover, set with twenty saphires, nine small dyamonds and
seaventeene ballace rubies, garnished with pearls fixed, and pearls and beads
of gould pendant, weighinge threescore and eighte ounces:

All which jewels and plate have been received by the said Duke and Earl,
to be disposed of by them for our especial service according as we have given
unto them private directions:

Now forasmuch as the said jewels and plate are of great value, and many of
them have long continued as itt were in a continual descent for many years
together with the crown of England, and therefore it may not be safe for the
said Lord Compton, Lord Conwey, Sir Henry Mildmay and Endymion Porter, or any
of them, to deliver them out of their several charges, nor for the said Duke
and Earl to receive the same and transporte the same beyond the seas, and
there to dispose them without special warrant from us for the doeinge thereof,
which in time to come might be perrillous unto them, unles we should by
some public instrument declare that all this was done by our especial
commaundment and for our especial service:

Know all men therefore that we, for many weighty and important reasons and
causes, much concerning us our honor and state, have authorized and commanded
the said Lord Compton, Lord Conwey and Sir Henry Mildmay and Endymion Porter,
to deliver these several jewels and plate, before severally mentioned in
manner as aforesaid, unto the said Duke and Earl or such of their servants
as they should appointe to keep the same;

And that we did likewise authorize and command the said Duke and Earl to
order and dispose of the said jewels and plate to such purposes, and in such
manner as we our self have in private to them particulerly directed, and we
do by these presents declare and avowe the same, and that nothing therein is
done but by our own ymmediate command and for our own ymmediate service;
And our will and pleasure is, and we do by these presents, for us our heirs
and successors, grant that they the said Duke of Buckingham, Earl of
Holland, Lord Conwey, Lord Compton, Sir Henry Mildmay and Endymion Porter and
every of them their heirs, executors and administrators, and their and
every of their lands, goods and chattells, be for ever freed as against us
our heirs and successors for the doeinge and performeing of our will and
pleasure touching the premises, and that they and every of them, be only
accomptable to us in our own person for the disposeing of the said jewels
and plate, and to none other nor in any other manner;

And these presents, or the inrollment thereof, shall be unto them and every of
them, and to all our officers and mynisters whom yt may any way concern, a
full and sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf.

In witness, etc.
Witness our self at Hampton Court the seventh day of December.
Per ipsum Regem.
A Monsieur le Compte D'Hollande.
MONSEIGNEUR,
MONS. L' Abe de Scaglia m'a commend de vous fair ceste despesche pour la
necessite qu'il y a que les affairs soient advancees et pousses comme il did
dens le grand chemain. Il y a un mois que j'ay envoye une despesche a Mons. le
Duc pour render compte de ce qu'il m'avoist encharge et de ce que Mons. de
Scaglia avoist a dire, la dicte despesche estant arivee trois jours appres le
despart de Monseigneur le Duc. Sa Maj. a pleu la lire et m'honnorer de ces
commends par une lettre que Mons. de Montagu m'a apportee du secretaire Canvue.
En m'a precedente lettre j'ay faict recitt de ce que ce pouvoist apprendre issi
des plus fraiches nouvelles de France, et de ce que Mons. L' Abe de Scaglia
avoit appris a Brusselles, Estant le sommaire une tres remarquable disposition
qu' avoist L' Infant et le Marquis Spignola a un accomodement, luy aiant
demand sils se pouvoient asseurer que L' Engleterre leur donneroist bien deux
mois de temps, pour receveoir les ordres requis d'Espagne, Or est il qu'en
suitte de la derniere lettre de Rubens, par la quelle il desiroist un entreveve
de luy et de moye en Hollande, ie luy procuray un passeport du Prince d'
Oranges, Il ce transporta de Brusselles a Breda, d'ou il mescript qu'il avoist
order de ces maistres de ne passer plus oultre que Zenenberghen, plasse neutre,
et ou autrefois ceux qui firent les premieres ouvertures de la France
sentrevoioient, m'asseurant par sa lettre qu'il me feroist veoir clairement que
ceste punctualite estoist fondee sur des raisons justes, equitables et
tendantes a l'advancement de l'affaire, mais aiant en singuliere recommendation
d'acompagner les ordres que Mons. le Duc m'a donnee, avecq les sircumstansses
requises a la reputation da sa Maj. ie montray la lettre a Mons. Carleton et
luy dis que ie nestois nullement d'avis de bouger de la Hay ou des environs,
et fis response au dict Sr. Rubens que ie luy avois envoye un passeport a sa
requisition, en virtue duquel il pouvoist sans auqune difficulte ce transporter
luy et ses valets, en tell plasse de la Hollande qu'il luy plaisait, que s'il
faisoit difficulte de venir a la Hay, ie lirois trouver a Delf, ou Rotterdam
comme appert par les copies des lettres issi enclosses, Il me fist response, et
scaveoir quil partoit promtement pour Brusselles pour receveoir aultres ordres,
estant tres sensible de quelque ombrage que ie pourois prende, comme appert par
cest lettre incluse quil escript a Mons. L' Abe de Scaglia, protestant que
ceste resolution avoist este prise pour le bien de l'affaire, ce qu'il m'eust
tres particulierement faict entendre. Quelque jours appres il arriva a Delf qui
etoist le 11/21 du mois de Juillet, ou il m'a represente que si Don Diego
Messiah qui est encore a Paris n'eust tarde si long temps il n'eust pasdesire
de me veoir avaunt son arrivee parce que L' Infant attandant par luy tout order
ne scavoit que dire, mais craignant que l' Engleterre prinst quelque ombrage de
la longeur d'Espagne, elle lavoist envoye pour m'asseurer de son integritte de
son Zelle, et sincere intention. En un mot pour fair cognoistre que les ordres
eussent estes plustost envoyes si l'Espagne n'eust pris c'este resolution
d'envoyer Don Diego Messia lequel a ce quil did a faict tell diligence qu'il
est party le lendemain de ces fiancailles, le dict Don Diego aiant aussi tarde
plus long temps par les chemains pour raison d'une fievure tierce laquelle le
tient encore a Paris. la second raison pourquoy ils avoyent envoye le Sr.
Rubens estoist, pour entendre si l'on avoist advance pour procur^r a la
concurence des estats, et si l'on avoist meditte sur les expedients
necessaires, pour facilliter les affairs, ou les plus grandes difficultes et
obstacles ce rencontreroient en celles de Hollande, Que l'Espagne avoist
escript en ces terms. Vous continuerez de traitter avec Gerbier jusques a ce
que Don Diego vienne, non seulement d'un acomodement enter l'Espagne et
l'Engletere, mais aussi pour l'Alesmagne et l'Hollande. Que l'Empereur mesme
avoist escript tres exactement a l'Infante que si auquun traitte passoit par
ces mains quil seroist tres contant que les affairs d'Alesmagne
s'acommodassent et qu'il tesmoigneroist d'estre un Prince Chrestien. Le dict
Rubens faisant des grandes instances pour scaveoir a quel expediants l'on
avoist pensez, Je luy fis responsse que par l'escript qu' avoist este envoye le
9. de mars, pour responsse de ceux que j'avois apportee de la part de
l'Infante, la Balle (comme dire) estoist mise a leur pietz, que c'estoist a eux
de parler, que le temps ne permet pas puis que nous ne voions encore aultre
certittude de leur part que parolles, de fair auquune ouverture, que bien
estoist vray que Mons. Carleton se devoist disposer a fair tout debvoir, mais
qu'il nestoist possible d'avancer l'affaire sens que de la part d'Espagne, l'on
ne vist des tesmoignages eficatieux, sur quoy il me dict que la serenissime
Infant scavoit bien quil ne se pouvoist rien fair sans les ordres requis et
si long temps attendus, mais que son voyage tendant a nous asseurer de la bonne
intention, et nous lever de toutte doubt. seroist acompagne de quelque
advancement si en attendant la venue de Don diego Messiah il ce pouvoist
trouver quelques expediants pour donner lumiere a l'acheminement du traitte, et
quainssi il retourneroit avecque quelque fruict. Je luy dis que pour
corespondre aus asseurances qu'il apportoist de la bonne intention de
l'Infante. Que ie le pouvois asseurer de celle de sa Maj. Et puis qu'il avoist
maintenant license de ce promener par les villes de Hollande, que j'avrois
loisir de veoir Mons. Carleton lequel pouroist dire son sentiment sur quelques
expedians, de la part duquel ie luy ay dict a son despart, qu'il sesvertuera
tant que sera possible, a meditter sur les expediants necessaires et quen
attandant qu'il avoist pense a deux, estant toutesfois dict par maniere de
discourse, scaveoir si pour l'Electorat il se pouvoist adjouster une voix
davantage au colege, et que le survivant des deux succederoist, le second que
dens lacommodement affin d'interesser le Prince, se rendasse la ville de Breda.
Quand aux plus difficiles comme se qui regard ce mot de p'ays libre, et
lestroitte confederation ratifiee il y a deux ans, qu'il esperoist de trouver
jour, estant son intention de la proposer au roy a mon retour, lors que le dict
Sr. Rubens feroist veoir ce que Don Diego Messiah apporteroist. Il a promis
qu'il feroist toutte diligence, et sur ce ay este oblige d'attendre de ces
premieres nouvelles, par advis de Mons. Carleton. J'ay faict entendre au dict
Rub. la ligue que le roy de France pretend de fair avecq les Princes
catholics d'Alesmagne. L'argent quelle a promis de fournir aux estats sur les
premieres nouvelles quelle aura que l'armes des estats aura assiegee quelque
plasse, de sortte que Mons. Rubens avecq plusieurs aultres discourse qu'avons eu
ensemble sur la raison d'Estast que le roy d'Espagne devroit plustost aveoir de
souffeir un Prince de la relision en Alesmagne, sen est all avecq la puce a
l'Oreille esperant a la venue de Don Diego Messiah, comme a un Messie. Les
protestations qu'ils font, et la necessite qui les semble presser done de
l'aparence, si ce nest que l'Espagne trompe mesme l'Infante. ce que ce
cognoistra bien tossed, car Rubens a promis que s'il s'apercevoit de tell chose
il en adverteroist promtement.

J'avois faict mention en ma premiere lettre, que l'on pouvoist aisement
remarquer que plusieurs de ca pa'ys panchoient du cost de la France, et que la
plus grand part avoyent une tres grande aprehention de ceste rupture enter la
France et l'Engleterre. Je m'estois advise denploier mon temps a fair quelque
recoevil des mesmoires que j'ay des affairs passees, et le communiquant avec
Mons. L' Abe de Scaglia, Il a adioutte ce qu'il a creu estre convenable et
utille, L'aiant reduit en une fasson de Lunettes d'Hollande pour fair veoir la
veritte et la form des affairs. Je luy escript en langue Francoise pour la
traduire appres en flamang aveeq intention de le destribuer par escript parmy
ceux qui ont le plus de pouvoir et de sentiment en ce pa'ys si tell estoist la
volonte de sa Maj. c'est pourquoy ie l'envoye icy jointe, vous suppliant den
dire vostre sentiment.

L'Ambass. de Savoye m'a dict que les desputes des estats ont estes invistez et
porttez escripre en France, touchant l'interest qu'ils ont de la mauvaise
inteligence de ces deux couronnes. Que pourtant ils prient sa Maj. doublier les
offenses receves et de vouloir suspendre les acts d'hostillite contre
l'Engleterre, representant particulierement que ce desordre portte la ruinne de
cest estats. Laquelle lettre a este faictte par l'artifice du Cardinal de
Richelieu pour la fair inprimer a Paris, affin que ceux de la relision de
France voient que les actions d'Engleterre sont mesmes odieuses a ces amiss,
affin qu'ils croient qu'il y a mesme de la desunion avecque ces estats, et
fair paroistre qu'il a eu raison de portter le roy son maistre a des
animosites contre l'Engleterre, puis que les estrangers mesmes cognoissent que
la France par elle a este offencee.

Nonobstant ceste ditte lettre que l'on croist estre solicittee par Artsen
lequel s'est faict cognoistre du tout Francois en ceste conjuncture; Les estats
cognoisent bien que l'Engleterre ne peut pour ces interets, n'y pour sa
reputation permettre la pertte de la Rochelle, comme aussi que la France aye
grandes forces en Mer, et destre pour les mesmes repects aussi bien interessez
que l'Engleterre, qui done assez de subject de croire quil y a de la necessite
de les pousser, n'y ayant pas de doutte, quils suivroit tout a faict
l'Engleterre en ce quelle vousdroit traitter d'une paix d'Espagne, estants horse
de toutte sortte despoir d'assistance de la France, et font bien veoir le
sentiment qu'ils en ont s'aiant la province d'Hollande esvertuee de fournir
deux millions de livres, plus que par le pass pour suppleter a ce que la
France manque. Le Sr. Rubens a veu lettres escriptes de France a l'Infante et
Marquis Spignola lesquelles sont dressees par le Cardinal de Richelieu, disant
lors que Mons. de Montagu parloit au Duc de Savoye touchant les affairs de la
France, et l'Engleterre, que l'Ambassadeur de France la resident estoist cache
derriere la tapisserie pour ovir tout ce que ce disoit, ceste fourbe estant
controuvee pour fair croire que la France est recherchee par l'Engleterre et
que mesmes la France est si esloignee de vouloir acommodement que ces ministres
ne veulent pas paroistre ou sont ceux d'Engleterre, pour traitter avecques eux.

Le Cardinal de Richelieu aiant ombrage du voyage de Messiah, se disant en
France que c'est pour traitter avecq l'Engleterre, il a faict promtement
escripre une lettre a Artsen, si tossed que l'armee des estats assiegeroient une
plasse de l'ennemy que la France leur fera tenir cinq cents mill livres,
esperant par ce moien et par les 60/m livres qu'ils ont fourny au roy de
Dennemarque d'apportter lenpeschement a l'acommodement des affairs enter
l'Espagne et l'Engleterre, cest un argument que la France ne faict rien de bon
que par crainte et quand elle est forcee. Le bien qu' a desia aportte le bruict
de quelque traitte avecque l'Espagne, maxim certain que l'entretien en est bon.

Les Lettres de Paris du 25 font mention d'une soulevation qu'il y a eu dens
Bourdeaux n'aiants voulu accepter les nouveux edits. Ceux de Bourdeaux n'ont
aussi voulu publier la desfence du commerce avecque l'Engleterre. Mons. L' Abe
de Scaglia m'a induit descrire qu'il seroist d'avis en ceste disposition de
leur fair scaveoir de les vouloir traitter en amiss, a condition qu'ils soient
obliger d'assister ce que le roy de la grand Bretagne entreprendra a leur
advantage. Monsieur de Rohan a faict responsse au roy par son agent que le roy
luy avoit envoye pour tirer promise de luy qu'il n'eust pas a ce remuer, Il a
respondu qu'il se fera recognoistre bon serviteur du roy pourveu que la
Rochelle soit remise en toutte sortte de libertte, ce que faict cognoistre au
roy que la deliberation des arms que Mons. de Rohan prend, est avecque le
consentment des Eglises de France. Il a fait retirer Madame de Rohan a Geneve,
et sen va en Italy affin que person ne soupsonne quelle sollicette le roy
pour son mary.

La Rochelle avoist faict pendre quelques uns qui avoient voulu persuader le
peuple de s'unir avecque le roy.

Mons. de Guise est tres mal satisfaict pour le commendement done a Mons.
d'Angoulesme. Il estoist party verse Poittou environ quattre ou cinq mill
hommes et doibt estre la a la fin du mois de Juillet. Je ne puis obmettre de
fair recitt de la bonne repartie que Mons. L'Abe de Scaglia a faict a
l'Embassadeur de France et celuy de Venise issi resident, lesquelles pressoient
fort qu'il ce devoist entremettre en un acommodement, qu'il falloit procurer
que la France vint a une suspention d'armes, sur quoy L' Abe de Scaglia demende
si la France avoist des piques longues de Calais a Douure, car pour d'aultres
arms il n'en cognoissoit pas.

Jay represente a Mons. de Scaglia ce que Mons. Canoue m'a command de la part
du roy, le dict Scaglia m'a faict veoir en mesme temps ce quil escrivoit a son
Altetze touchant les affairs, pour le tenir tousiours dispose au dessain de sa
Maj. et die engager ces amiss, ce qu'il avoit recommende avecque toute l'ardeur
que l'on pouvoist sonhaister. Pour ce que regard le voyage du Baron de Puseol,
il attend responsse d'un jour a aultre, de tout ce que l'on peut desirer de sa
negotiation, estant party d'icy avecque touttes les instructions et mesmoires
necessaires, il ne doutte quil n'aye bien servy. Pour les affairs de Geneve il
a dict a Mons. de Montagu en ma presence comme il poura asseurer son Altesse de
tout ce que le roy luy a ordonne et de plus que sa Maj. est authourdhuy au
point de render si grand servisse a ceux de son party en France qu'il luy
donnera tant plus d'advantage et d'authoritte parmy ceux de Geneve et ailleurs
que l'on pouvoist attendre quelque bon succes. L'Abe de Scaglia s'asseurant que
son Maistre le trouvera bon, Monsieur de Montagu s'en va bien instruit de ce
qu'il aura a saire avecq Soissons, particullierement sur l'ocasion de la
Malady du roy, laquelle enpirant pouroist bien changer beaucoup de chooses,
aultrement s'il tomb en fievure cartte comme l'on dict desia, cela fortifiera
les mal contents de France, et donnera toutte sortte d'advantage a ceux qui en
scavront profitter, et quelque sortte de minne qu'ils fassent ils sont a
present bien enpeschez, car indubitablement, ill y aura beaucoup de brouilliers
dens touttes le provinces de la France qui les rendront inutilles au roy pour
le secours qu'il en pouvoist aveoir tire, jusques a tant que l'on soit en
estast de fair d'avantage, comme Mons. de Scaglia croit que sera si les
affairs de Savoye et de Genes sachevent.

L'Abe de Scaglia avroist desire de passer au plustost en Engleterre verse sa
Maj. mais est en ce point qu'il attend quelque responsse de Madame de Soissons,
il desire de pouvoir conclure avecq Mons. de Candalle qui luy a promis de
s'unir avecq Mons. le Compte de Soissons, lequel n'attend qu'une responsse pour
establir ceste affair la, mais il espere de partir dicy, au plus tard en
quinse jours, ou trois semaines, et desire que le vaisseau revienne envers le
dict temps.

L'Ambass. de France a fort desire de pouvoir escripre quelque chose du retour
de Mons. de Montagu, il s'est adresse a Mons. de Scaglia lequel luy a faict des
responses assez ridicules, en particulier luy a propose de demander a Mons.
Carleton, passeport pour asseurer les vaisseaux du roy de France qu'il
voisdroit bien fair partir de ces ports.

J'avois touch en m'a precedente lettre comme l'Ambass. de Venice et l'Agent
de Florence residant en Engleterre sont persons qui interprettent en mal tout
ce qui ce faisoit en Engleterre, donnent les advis aux ennemis de la couronne,
et estoient persons dangereuses, en aiant souvent ouy des estranges raports.
Mons. de Scaglia dict sur cela, qu'il faut veoir de mettre l'affaire tout
bellement en tell estast que l'on aye a parler sens portter prejudice a
l'Ambass. de Venice qui est en France parce que les principalles chooses que
Mons. L'Abe de Scaglia a scu, il les a de celuy de Paris, lequel est maintenant
suspect a celuy d'Engleterre.

Mais touchant cest agent de Florence qui est a Londres, Le Sr. Vertselin m'a
souvent done des advis pour les dire a Mons. le Duc. ne pouvant le dict
Vertselin souffrir les malices lesquelles il faisoist paroistre. Et j'ay
remarque selon les paroles que le dict Vertselin m'a dittes que sens doubt
cest agent de Florence a faict ce petit livret intittulle la cronique des
favorits, et dedie a Mons. le Duc de Buckingham, dens lequel ie trouve les
mesmes terms que le Vertselin m'a raconte. Mons. de Scaglia m'a faict tenir le
livret que japortteray quand et moy, sa Maj. m'aiant faict l'honneur de me
commander par le secretaire Canove d'en fair raport, a qui j'ay aussi escript
un peu plus briefvement et pour ne manquer a mon deveoir ie n'ay voullu faillir
de vous en donner la cognoissance.

Authourdhuy sont venues les lettres de France vielles de 10 jours. Le roy est
encore a Villeroy fort mal. sa fievure est double tierce, avecque laccident de
la dissanterie le rend en tres mauvais estast, les astrologues disant sa fin,
toutes les affairs cessent et plusieurs tant dehors que dedans sont aux
atentes; il fust dict au roy que le Cardinal de Richelieu lavoit servy avecque
beaucoup de passion, il dict ces mots, il est vray ie le scay bien, mais le
peuple se plaint fort.

Ils ont tache dacepter le gouvernement de Grandmont, mais il la refuse. Mons.
D'Espernon c'est retire a Bergerac, disant puis qu'il ne peut enpesscher la
soulevation du peuple, qu' aussi ne veust il estre present si quelque mal
arivoit.

Monsieur d'Angoulesme a este commend de s'arester a Nior qui est a 10 lieves
de la Rochelle. ils ont leve toutte les garnisons tant de Boulogne et quartiers
sircomvoisins pour les envoyer a Mons. d'Angoulesme. Madame la Contesse de
Soissons a mande que le marriage luv plaist mais dict a Mons. de Scaglia quelle
ne peut resoudre que jusques a ce que ceste malady du roy prenne fin.

L'Ambassadeur de Savoye a escript par homme expres la necessite qu'il y a que
Mons. le Compte se desclare et prenne resolution principallement durant la
malady du roy.

Don Diego Messiah est fort malade a Paris d'une fievre tierce, Je crains fort
un prolonguement aux affairs, par ceste malady.

Monsieur de Crecy aiant mande un courier pour fair scaveoir au roy de
l'armement de Mons. de Savoye et l'ombrage que l'on devoit prendre de Mons. de
Soissons, le roy a mande a Mons. de Crecy de ne bouger des frontierres et qu'il
luy envoieroit le regiment du Prince de Phalsbourgh, le fills du Cardinal de
Guise qui fust tue a Blois, quil les reduiroit a trois mill. le regiment du
cheu. de Sault a deux mill, et si cela ne suffit, quil luy done order d'en
fair encore cinq mill et cinq cents cheuaus.

Mons. de Louvieres estant mis en prison a la Bastille en l'ocasion de Chalais
a demand a parler au Cardinal Richelieu, le mesme jour a este mean a la
Conciergerie, ou l'on faict son process, ce dict qu'il doibt aveoir nomme
plusieurs persons et en particulier Mons. le grand prieur et Vandome.

Mons. Del Beuff solicitte pour le gouvernement de la Picardie.

Le roy a este saigne quatre fois, la fievre tierce redoublee, ne bouge pas du
lict.

Le Cardinal ce paigne de rage les cheveux et la barbe avecque les ongles, ne
permet que person aproche du roy, mesme la royne.

Cest issi le sommaire de ce que les dernieres lettres disent.

Jespere que Vost. Exc. pardonnera a ma longue escripture partant du Zelle

De Monseigneur Vostre tres humble tres obeisant et tres oblige serviteur B.
GERBIER.
ce 6 d'Aoust 1627, Hay.
Rymer, vol. xviii. p. 728.
De Concessione ad vitam Nicholao Laniere et aliis.
CHARLES by the grace of God, etc.
To the treasurer and undertreasurer of our Exchequer now being, and that
hereafter for the time shall be, Greeting,
Whereas we have been graciously pleased, in consideration of service done,
and to be done unto us by sundry of our musicians, to grant unto them the
several annuities and yearly pensions hereafter following, (that is to say) to
Nicholas Laniere master of our music two hundred pounds yearly for his wages,
to Thomas Foord fourscore pounds yearly for his wages, that is, for the place
which he formerly held, forty pounds yearly, and for the place which John
Ballard late deceased held, and now bestowed upon him the said Thomas Foord
forty pouudes yearly, to Robert Johnson yearly for his wages forty pounds
and for stringes twenty pounds by the year, to Thomas Day yearly for his
wages forty pounds and for keeping a boy twenty four pounds by the year,
also to Alfonso Ferabosco, Thomas Lupo, John Laurence, John Kelly, John
Coggeshall, Robert Tailor, Richard Deering, John Drew, John Lanier, Edward
Wormall, Angelo Notary and Jonas Wrench, to every of them forty pounds a
piece yearly for their wages, and to Alfonso Bales and Robert Marshe, to each
of them twenty pounds a piece yearly for their wages.

These are therefore to will and command you, out of our treasure in the
receipt of our exchequer, to cause payment to be made to our said musicians
above mentioned, and to every of them severally and respectively, the said
several annuities and allowances, as well presently upon the sight hereof for
one whole year ended at the feast of the annunciation of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, last past before the date hereof, as also from the feast hitherto, and
so from time to time hereafter at the four usual feasts or terms of the
year, (that is to say) at the feast of the Nativitie of St. John Baptist, St.
Michaell the Archangell, the Birth of our Lord God, and the Annunciation of the
blessed Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions, during their natural lives,
and the lives of every of them respectively, together with all fees, profitts,
commodities, allowances and advantages whatsoever to the said places incident
and belonging, in as large and ample manner as any our musicians in the same
places heretofore have had and enjoyed the same; and these presents, or the
inrollment thereof, shall be your sufficient warrant and dischardge in this
behalf.

In witness, etc.
Witness our self at Westminster the eleaventh day of July.
Per Breve de Privato Sigillo, etc.
De Concessione Denizationis Francisco Cleyne et Philippo de Maecht. Rymer,
vol. xviii. p. 96.

REX
omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem.
Sciatis quod nos, de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia et mero motu
nostris, concessimus, ac per presents pro nobis, heredibus et successoribus
nostris, concedimus Francisco Cleyne et Philippo de Maecht in partibus
transmarinis oriundis seu quibus aliis nominibus vel cognominibus vocentur seu
censeantur, ves quocunque alio nomine vel cognomine aut additione nominis vel
cognominis eorum alter vocetur seu censeatur, quod ipsi posthac durantibus
vitis suis sint indigene ac ligei nostri, ac heredum et successorum nostrorum
regni nostri Angliae, ac in omnibus teneantur reputentur tractentur habeantur
et gubernentur et eorum alter teneatur reputetur tractetur habeatur et
gubernetur, tanquam fidelis ligeus noster heredum et successorum nostrorum
infra hoc regnum nostrum Anglie oriundus, et non aliter nec alio modo;

Ac quod ipsi omnes et omnimodas actiones sectas et querelas cujuscunque sint
generis, in quibuscunque curiis locis et jurisdictionibus nostris heredum et
successorum nostrorum habere exercere, eisque uti et gaudere, ac eis et in
eisdem placitare et implacitare, respondere et responderi, defendere et defendi
possint et valiant, et eorum alter possit et valeat, in omnibus et per omnia,
sicut aliquis fidelis ligeus noster vel aliqui fideles ligei nostri in dicto
regno nostro Anglie oriundi;

Et insuper quod iidem Franciscus Cleyne et Philippus de Maecht terras
tenementa reversiones et servitia, ac alia hereditamenta quecunque infra dictum
regnum nostrum Anglie et alia dominia nostra perquirere recipere habere tenere
emere et possidere, ac eis uti et gaudere, caque dare vendere alienare et
legare cuicunque person sive quibuscunque personis sibi placuerit ad libitum
suum possint et valiant, et eorum alter possit et valeat licite et impune, adeo
plene quiet libere integre et pacifice, sicut aliquis ligeus noster vel aliqui
ligei nostri infra dictum regnum nostrum Anglie nati;

Ac etiam quod iidem Franciscus Cleyne et Philippus de Maecht omnes et
omnimodas libertates Franchesias et privilegia hujus regni nostri libere quiet
et pacifice habere et possidere, eisque uti et gaudere possint tanquam ligei
nostri, et eorum alter possit tanquam ligeus noster, infra dictum regnum
nostrum Anglie oriundi, absque perturbatione impedimento molestia vexatione
calumpnia seu gravamine nostri heredum et successorum nostrorum vel aliquorum
aliorum quorumcunque; Aliquo statuto actu ordinatione seu provisione in
contrarium inde, antehac editis factis ordinatis seu provisis, aut aliqua alia
re causa vel materia quacunque, in aliquo non obstante:

Proviso semper quod iidem Franciscus Cleyne et Philippus de Maecht homagium
ligeum nobis faciant, ac Lot et Scott, prout alii ligei nostri faciunt et
contribuunt, solvant et contribuant, et eorum alter solvat et contribuat ut est
justum, solvantque iidem Franciscus et Philippus nobis heredibus et
successoribus nostris custumas et subsidia pro bonis et marchandizis suis,
prout alienigene solvant et solvere consueverunt,

Proviso etiam semper quod iidem Franciscus et Philippus ad omnes et singulas
ordinationes actus statuta et proclamationes hujus regni nostri, tam edita quam
imposterum edenda, teneantur et obedientes sint, et eorum alter teneatur et
obediens sit, juxta formam statuti in ea part nuper editi et provisi.

In cujus rei, etc.
Test rege apud Westmonasterium vicesimo octavo die Maii.
Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.
Rymer, vol. xviii. p. 112.
De Concessione ad Vitam Francisco Cleyne.
CHARLES by the grace of God, etc.
To all, to whom these presents shall come, Greeting:
Know ye that we, for certain good causes and considerations us hereunto
moving, of our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, have given
and granted, and by these presents for us our heirs and successors, do give
and grant unto our trusty and welbeloved Francis Cleyne, a certain annuitie
or pension of one hundred pounds by the year, to have hold and enjoy the said
annuitie or pension of one hundred pounds of lawful money of England by the
year, to the said Francis Cleyne, from the feast of the blessed Virgin last
past before the date hereof, for and during the term of his natural life, to
be perceived and received by him the said Francis Cleyne or his assigns, out
of the treasure of us our heirs and successors, at the receipt of the
exchequer of us our heirs and successors, by the hands of the treasurer,
undertreasurer and chamberlaynes of us our heirs and successors there from
time to time being, at the four usual feasts or terms of the year, that is
to say, at the feasts of the Nativitie of St. John Baptist, St. Michaell the
Archangell, the Birth of our Lord God, and the annunciation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions to be paid,

Although express mention, etc.
In witness, etc.
Witness our self at Westminster the fourth day of June.
Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.
INDEX OF NAMES of ARTISTS IN THIS VOLUME Ranged according to the Times in
which they lived.
In the Reign of JAMES I.
PAUL Vansomer, p. 3. Cornelius Jansen, 5. Theodore Russel, 7. Daniel Mytens,
8. Christopher Roncalli, 12. Sir Robert Peake, ib. Peter Oliver, 13.
GLASS-PAINTERS.
Isaac Oliver, 16. Bernard Van Linge, 17. Baptista Sutton, 18. Henry Giles, ib.
William Price, ib. William Price, jun. ib.
OTHER ARTISTS.
Edward Norgate, 19. Solomon de Cause, 21. Sir Francis Crane, 23.
STATUARIES.
Maximilian Colte, 25. Epiphanius Evesham, ib. Nicholas Stone, ib. Henry Stone,
33. John Stone, ib. Nicholas Stone, jun. 33.
ARCHITECTS.
Bernard Jansen, 36. Gerard Chrismas, 38. John Smithson 38. (...) Butler, 39.
Stephen Harrison, 40.
MEDALLISTS.
Charles Antony, 42. Thomas Antony, 43. Thomas Bushel, ib. Nicholas Briot, ib.

CHARLES I.
Abraham Vanderdort, 51. Sir Balthazar Gerbier, 60. Henry Vanderborcht, 81. Sir
Peter Paul Rubens, 86. Abraham Diepenbeck, 95. Sir Antony Vandyck, 96. David
Beck, 109. George Geldorp, 110. Isaac Sailmaker, ib. (...) Bradshaw, 111. B.
Van Bassen, ib. Cornelius Polenburg, 112. Henry Steenwyck, 113. John
Torrentius, 114. J. C. Keirinex, 115. John Priwitzer, ib. George Jamesone, 116.
William Dobson, 120. Gerard Honthorst, 125. John Van Belcamp, 127. Horatio
Gentileschi, 129. Artemisia Gentileschi, 130. Nicholas Laniere, 131. Francis
Wouters, 133. (...) Weesop, ib. John De Critz, 134. Adrian Hanneman, 136.
Cornelius Neve, 138. K. Coker, ib. Matthew Goodricke, ib. (...) Stalband, ib.
(...) Portman, ib. (...) Greenbury, ib. Horatio Paulin, ib. (...) Povey, 139.
(...) Hamilton, ib. Edward Bower, ib. (...) Holderness, ib. T. Johnson, ib.
(...) Reurie, ib. Francis Barlow, 140. Sir Toby Matthews, 141. Sir James
Palmer, 142. Samuel Butler, 143. Francis Cleyn, 144. John Hoskins, 147.
Alexander Cooper, 149. Anne Carlisle, ib. John Petitot, 150. P. Bordier, ib.
STATUARIES and CARVERS.
Andrew Kearne, 156. John Schurman, ib. Edward Pierce, sen. ib. Edward Pierce,
jun. ib. Hubert Le Soeur, 158. Enoch Wyat, 159. Zachary Tailor, 159. John
Osborn, 160.
SEAL-CUTTERS.
Martin Johnson, 160. (...) Green, 160. Christian Van Vianen, chaser, 161.
Francis Fanelli, sculptor, 162. Theodore Rogiers, chaser, 163.
MEDALLISTS.
Thomas Rawlins, 164. John Varin, 165.
ARCHITECT.
Inigo Jones, 166.


INTERREGNUM.
General Lambert, 179. Robert Walker, ib. Edward Moscall, 181. (...) Heywood,
ib.
MEDALLISTS.
Peter Blondeau, 182. Thomas Violet, ib. Francis Carter, architect, ib.

INDEX OF NAMES of ARTISTS Ranged alphabetically.
A.
ANTONY, Charles, 42. Antony, Thomas, 43.
B.
Barlow, Francis, 140. Bassen, B. Van, 111. Beck, David, 109. Belcamp, John
Van, 127. Blondeau, Peter, 182. Bordier, P. 150. Bower, Edward, 139. Bradshaw,
(...), 111. Briot, Nicholas 43. Bushel, Thomas, ib. Butler, Samuel, 143.
Butler, (...), 39.
C.
Carlisle, Anne, 149. Carter, Francis, 182. Cause, Solomon de, 21. Chrismas,
Gerard, 38. Cleyn, Francis, 144. Coker, K. 138. Colte, Maximilian, 25. Cooper,
Alexander, 149. Crane, Sir Francis, 23. Critz, John de, 134.
D.
Diepenbeck, Abraham, 95. Dobson, William, 120.
E.
Evesham, Epiphanius, 25.
F.
Fanelli, Francis, 162.
G.
Geldorp, George, 110. Gentileschi, Artemisia, 130. Gentileschi, Horatio, 129.
Gerbier, Sir, Balthazar, 60. Giles, Henry, 18. Goodricke, Matthew, 138. Green,
(...), 160. Greenbury, (...), 138.
H.
Hamilton, (...), 139. Hanneman, Adrian, 136. Harrison, Stephen, 40. Heywood,
(...), 181. Holderness, (...), 139. Honthorst, Gerard, 125. Hoskins, John, 147.
I.
Jamesone, George, 116. Jansen, Bernard, 36. Jansen, Cornelius, 5. Johnson,
Martin, 160. Johnson, T. 139. Jones, Inigo, 166.
K.
Kearne, Andrew, 156, Keirincx, J. C. 115.
L.
Lambert, General, 179. Laniere, Nicholas, 131. Le Soeur, Hubert, 158. Linge,
Bernard Van, 17.
M.
Mascall, Edward, 181. Matthews, Sir Toby, 141. Mytens, Daniel, 8.
N.
Neve, Cornelius, 138. Norgate, Edward, 19.
O.
Oliver, Isaac, 16. Oliver, Peter, 13. Osborn, John, 160.
P.
Palmer, Sir James, 142. Paulin, Horatio, 138. Peake, Sir Robert, 12. Petitot,
John, 150. Pierce, Edward, 156. Pierce, Edward, jun. 156. Polenburg, Cornelius,
103. Portman, 138. Povey, (...), 139. Price, William, 18, Price, William, jun.
ib. Priwitzer, John, 115.
R.
Rawlins, Thomas, 164. Reurie, (...), 139. Rogiers, Theodere, 163. Roncalli,
Christopher, 12. Rubens, Sir Peter Paul, 86. Russel, Theodore, 7.
S.
Sailmaker, Isaac, 110. Schurman, John, 156. Smithson, John, 38. Stalband,
(...), 138. Steenwyck, Henry, 113. Stone, Henry, 33. Stone, John, 33. Stone,
Nicholas, 25. Stone, Nicholas, jun. 33. Sutton, Baptista, 18.
T.
Tailor, Zachary, 159. Torrentius, John, 114.
V.
Vanderborcht, Henry, 81. Vanderdort, Abraham, 51. Vandyck, Sir Anthony, 96.
Vansomer, Paul, 3. Varin, John, 165. Vianen, Christian Van, 161. Violet,
Thomas, 182.
W.
Walker, Robert, 179. Weesop, (...), 133. Wouters, Francis, 133. Wyat, Enoch,
159.
FINIS.

