A Further Search INTO THE CONDUCT OF THE ALLIES, AND THE Late Ministry, AS TO
Peace and War.

Containing also A Reply to the several LETTERS and MEMORIALS of the
States General.

WITH A Vindication of the British Parliament in their late Resolves and
Address relating to the Deficiencies of the DUTCH.

LONDON: Printed for John Morphew, near Stationers' Hall. 1712.

A Further Search INTO THE CONDUCT OF THE ALLIES, etc.
THE Reception a former Work of this Kind has met with in the World, and the
little which has been said against it, as to Matters of Fact, must be
acknowledged to be all owing to the Truth, coming with an irresistible Force
upon the Minds of Men, and which always carries its own Evidence along with it;
when we have met with the Enemy descanting upon it, we have heard them, even in
the midst of a Thousand Curses, and hard Names, which they cast upon the
Author, yet at every Pause cry out, Damn the Circumstance, I doubt there is too
much Truth in it, though I hate the Design of making it Public. This makes it
clear, which has often, and upon many other Occasions, been said, that our late
People had a kind of Popery in their Politics, ( viz.) that much of their
Success consisted in keeping the People Blind and Ignorant in the Main and most
Essential Points of their Affairs, and which it was most necessary for them to
know; that they were so far from knowing what Usage they had received Abroad
from their Allies, that when they came to be a little rightly informed, they
could not Frame Idea's of so much Knavery in their Heads, or think it possible
that any People, who called themselves Allies, could at the same time carry
themselves in such a Manner, to those for whom they had made the least
Professions of any Respect, or for whose common Safety they had the least
Concern.

As the Truth of what has been thus spoken, is hereby acknowledged and confessed
by the Enemy, which is the best kind of Evidence; so the Seasonableness of
making that Truth Public in the Manner it has been by the former Tract, and
as it shall or may be in this, is justified and cleared beyond all Possibility
of Objection, by the late Public Resolutions of the Honorable House of
Commons, where it comes into the World with the Sanction and Authority of the
great Representative of the Nation; it is true, the Particulars in the Votes
amount to a most excessive Height; and though it was known and believed by many
to be very great, yet I must confess few imagined them to be so surprising, the
Account so large, and the Particulars so many, as they appear to be; also one
Thing is obtained by this Report of the House of Commons, which the Credit of a
single Author was by no Means sufficient for, ( viz.) that the Dutch had any
Share in the Deficiency, and in the Injuries which this Nation has suffered
under the Weight of this Confederacy; many would be brought by the Power of
Reasoning, and the Force of Demonstrations, which are Things all People are not
equally furnished to resist; they would, I say, be brought to confess, that
there might have been Defects in general, and that those Defects appeared in
the Affairs of the Empire, the Portuguese, and such like, any Thing but the
Dutch; but such an Ascendant had the Influence of the Politics, and the
Confederacy of the late Administration with the Parties concerned, obtained
over the People, that though any thing would go down with them against other
People, yet if the Dear Dutch came into the Dispute, nothing could be born
with, but all the rest was the pure Effect of Jacobitism, and the French.

How fatal this has been to us I may hereafter have Leisure to examine, and
every Day is like to discover more and more of it to us; indeed Things were
mounted to such a violent Prepossession upon us in Favor of the Dutch, that we
began to think even our own Constitution stood in need of further Security from
them, and politickly brought the Dutch into our National Concerns; thus making
ourselves beholden to them for a Guarantee, or Safety to the Succession of
Hannover, that this might be a Handle to our doing other Things for them, so
exorbitant in their own Nature, as that no Nation, but such as depended upon
them for something very weighty and significant, would ever consent to, or
could upon any other Pretense be persuaded into; yet this was not all, for when
we had brought our People to stoop to so mean a Thought, as that our
Succession, Ratified by both Kingdoms, and Incorporated by both the Parliaments
of England and Scotland, in the late Solemn Treaty of Union, could receive any
Addition of Strength from Abroad, more than that of the Interest and Alliance
of so powerful a Prince, as his Electoral Highness of Hannover, and his Allies;
that we stood in Need of that incoherent Article of a Dutch Guarantee; when I
say we had stooped so low, as to level our Constitution to the Common Notion of
Leagues and Treaties between other and differing Nations, and that it should
receive a farther Sanction thereby, it was not hard then to fill the Heads of
the poor People with a Belief, that whoever made the least Objection against
any Thing hereafter, which either the Dutch might do by us, or which we might
do by them, acted therein against the Protestant Succession: This was a Point
so well gained by the Dutch, that on the Faith of a Man, if they gained it for
nothing, it was the best Bargain they made during the whole War; and if our
late Managers granted it so also, they must either have given up their Senses
to the Dutch, or had most despicable Thoughts of the Strength of Great Britain,
and of our being able to support our own Settlement; or which I speak most
unwillingly, there must have been some private Bargain driven, of which I shall
venture to say no more, but that I hope no Englishman could be found that would
be guilty of it.

To wave therefore a Reflection so unwelcome, let us go back to the Observation
before, viz. this Threefold End we have seen it answer to the Dutch; what End
it will ever answer to us remains a Mystery, and will in all Probability remain
so for many Years to come, if not for ever; the Ends which I say it answered
for the Dutch were Three.

1. The Barrier Treaty, which with the separate Article, was joined as the
Advance Money of a Loan, by Way of what our People call Prompt-Payment, and
which the Dutch had the Confidence to Paum upon us as a small Matter, and a
Thing due to them for the great Kindness done for us by them, in taking upon
them to secure our Succession. I am not ignorant of that weak and foolish Use
which the Enemies of Peace made of that Objection spoken of in the other
forementioned Tract, p. 21. viz. "That it may not be right in Point of Policy,
or good Sense, that a Foreign Power should be called in to confirm our
Succession, by Way of Guarantee, but only to acknoledge it; otherwise we put it
out of the Power of our own Legislature to change our Succession without the
Consent of that Prince or State who is Guarantee. However, our Posterity may
hereafter, by the Tyranny and Oppression of any succeeding Princes, be reduced
to the Fatal Necessity of breaking in upon the Excellent and Happy Settlement
now in Force."

This by all Means they will have as an Aim taken for the Pretender, as if,
because we ought not to put it out of the Power of our Legislature to limit the
Succession, whatever Necessity may happen; even when this Race may be all in
their Graves; that therefore we have an immediate Alteration of the Succession
in our View; these People who contend thus, forget the mighty Noise we have had
from them about Parliamentary Limitations, a Word the Whigs have made so
Sacred, that it has been like the Magna Charta of their Liberties, and with
which they run down the Hereditary Right of their Princes, as if there had been
nothing at all in it but Tyranny, and Arbitrary Government, till at Length it
was happily discovered, that they were very well consistent together; and that
they who best understood Hereditary Right, had proved it to be agreeable to
Parliamentary Limitation, and then all was well again. But after all this
Bustle, was it to be imagined that the same People could so easily give up the
Parliaments Right of limiting the Succession to a Foreign Nation; and by making
a League of Guarantee for the Succession, legitimate the Impertinence of
Strangers, who may hereafter intermeddle with our Constitution, and may tell a
British Parliament, they have no Power to alter or meddle with the Settlement
of the Crown, for that it is already Settled, and they are Guarantees of it?
What has been, may be; and what may be, may be supposed to be; if then any of
the Family of Hannover should Tyrannize or Abdicate, or the same, or like
Circumstances should happen, as have happened before, the Parliament would be
disabled from declaring the Throne vacant, and filling up the same with such
other of the Family as they find convenient; which according to all the Whig
Principles which we have so often heard of, is inseparable from the
Constitution, and much more Sacred than any Thing which has been Hereditary in
the World. I do not incline to concern these Papers with the popular Disputes
which have troubled the World so much and so long, about the Difference between
Hereditary and Parliamentary Right; how far they are the same, or which is best
furnished with Authorities, and Originals, whether of Divine or Civil Right; it
is enough to take hold here of the Whigs own Argument, and allowing all they
have said on this Head to be Orthodox, whether it really be so or no; it must
necessarily follow, that this Parliamentary Right cannot, or ought not, to be
given out of our Hinds, and put, by a Treaty, into the Hands of Foreigners; so
that it shall be in their Power to put their Negative into our next Limitation
of the Crown. If this be not to give away our Liberties, I would be glad to
know what it is to keep them; if there be any Choice of Tyrants, and if it
weighs any Thing, when our Privileges are given up, who is it they should be
given up to? I confess myself more willing to be a Slave at Home than Abroad,
and to be tyrannized on by a Prince of our own, than by a Foreign Nation; and
if there were no other Reason for that than this, it would be sufficient to
justify the Choice, ( viz.) that there are more Ways to avoid the Mischief of
it, that an oppressing Prince has some times changed his Measures, or he may be
restrained, or may die, and thereby a Nation may be delivered; but such a
Convention as this, made with a Foreign Nation, engages that whole Nation upon
all Occasions to embark itself, and its whole Strength, in Defense of the
Capitulation agreed on; and thus by this Method the Power of Parliament in
future Limitations of the Crown seems to be effectually given up: How the Whigs
would have liked this Doctrine if it had come from any one but themselves, may
be best guessed at by the Warmth they showed about the League said to be made
by the late King James and the King of France; which put this whole Nation into
a Flame, and Reason good so far as that League appeared; for what was it, or
what could we imagine it to be, but a Treaty of Guarantee with the French for
the securing the Succession of Popery in England? Whereas the Settling the
Religion and Liberties of this Nation was the undoubted Right of the People in
Parliament, and so by the same Rule must the Succession of our Princes be. The
Sum of all this is, that by the Whigs own Arguments, and by their own
Principles, which they have always professed, and adhered to, and by the same
Rule from which they acted in the Revolution, the accepting a Guarantee, for
the securing the Succession of the Crown of this Kingdom to any Family, or
Branch of a Family, Race, or Line whatsoever, is no less than giving up the
Privileges of the People, and divesting the Parliament of the Power of limiting
the Succession to the Crown.

It may be remembered, that in the late Treaty of Union with Scotland, some
Secret Overtures were made, to have engaged the Dutch to be Guarantees of that
Treaty; and though that Proposal seemed to come from such Hands, as gave Reason
to believe it was rather a Design to destroy, than secure the said Treaty, the
Dutch having at that Time discovered Willingness enough to have prevented the
Conclusion of that Treaty, yet those that knew any Thing of the Resentment
expressed at that Time here against that Proposal, as dishonorable to England,
and destructive of the Constitution of both Kingdoms, would wonder that ever
the same Ministry should so far change their Notions, as to admit the same
Guarantee in so Nice an Affair, as the Succession to their own Crown, which
they rejected with Contempt in a Treaty with the Neighboring Nation.

Secondly, Another End answered by this Treaty of Guarantee, was giving an
Opportunity to the Dutch to play their own Game with us, with Respect to other
Treaties, Quota's, Proportions of Payments, Ships, Troops, and the like; of
this so much has been said already, and is yet like to be said farther in
Public, that I shall need say the less to it here, my Design being rather to
justify the Resentment all honest Men entertain, at the mean Politics and
Submissions of our People here, and to show the Necessity of taking wiser for
the future, than to Animate People against any of our Confederates. I am as
forward as any to agree, that the Advantages of a strict Union among the
Confederates are very great; and that, as Her Majesty expressed it, the Interest
of the States of Holland be looked upon as our own; but this by no means
hinders us from desiring that the Dutch should use us well, should show a
Reciprocal Kindness, and should act with a mutual Concern for the General
Confederated Interest; and that we should not be willing to see them impose
upon us in any of those Particulars, or be easy, and submit quietly to it when
they do; and this is so much Justice, that none can object against; and what is
the best, if not the only Way, to cultivate and maintain that Friendship, and
good Understanding, on both Sides, which is so much the Interest of the
Confederacy in General, and of the Dutch themselves in Particular. They who
contend, that the enquiring into these Things seems to show a Disregard to the
Confederacy in General, or to the several Parties concerned in Particular, seem
to make severer Satyrs upon the Dutch than they are aware of. The Deficiencies
of the Performance they cannot deny, the want of a due Regard then to the
Confederacy must certainly lie rather in those that have been the Cause of
those Deficiencies, than those that have not; for who are most justly to be
charged with slighting and disregarding the mutual Interest of the Consederacy,
they that have failed in the Performance of the Condititions, or they that
complain of it, in order to have them performed? Britain has all along shown,
by a Zeal Fatal to herself, her Willingness to push on the War with all
imaginable Vigor; in order to which, when Her deficient Allies, having less
Concern for the general Good, have run the Venture of Miscarriage, to shorten
their Expense; Britain, as if the whole Charge of the War had been her Due to
pay, has zealously supplied both their Quota's, and her own: While she was
willing to do thus, her Confederates daily increased their Deficiencies, and
her Expense, as they might very well do, finding her so easy; and while she
was willing to sit still, and see herself, thus used, it was very remarkable
how Augmentations, and Increase of Forces, was every Year proposed by the
Confederates, as well in Flanders, as in Spain, and none so forward as the
Emperor himself to increase the Quota's of the Troops, and the Charges of the
War, upon the rest of his Confederates; quietly waiting for their supplying
Additional Troops, and taking Care to have very few of his own.

While we submitted to all these Things, the War went quietly on, but whether
so successfully, or no, as it might have done, if the Allies had answered what
we had Reason to expect from them, is left for them to Answer. At last, the
British Court entering into a more narrow Inspection of Things, have not
thought fit so calmly to suffer the Weight of the War to lie heavier upon one
Shoulder than another; and though equally willing to bear their Share of the
Burden, yet not forward to carry that Load, which ought to lie upon other
Shoulders. They are now calling upon their Confederates, to consider a little
the Justice of their several Treaties, and to look back, and see what they are
obliged to do, if they expect the War should be carried on any farther; if they
are diffident of the Success of these Remonstrances from their Experience, how
fruitless the like have been before, and have therefore at the same Time
embraced the Occasion that has offered, toward putting an End to the War, by
an Honorable Peace; they will be justified in it before all the World, both
now, and for ever; when it shall be at the same Time understood, in what
Manner, and for how many Years, this War has been carried on; nor can the
Artifices of an Adverse Party among us delude many in their suggesting to the
World, that the Government here is in the Interest of France, since they can
have no other Reason to back that Suggestion, than that they were not willing
to carry on a War upon unequal Terms, and in a Confederacy with Allies, who
would not perform their own Conditions, and in which those, who expected the
greatest Advantages from it, paid the least Part of the Expense toward it.

Thirdly, the Third End which this general Complaint against a Peace has been
Calculated to Answer, and which the Party has taken Care to make as popular as
they can, is a general Notion, that those who are for a Peace, do it with a
Design, by the Assistance of France, to introduce the Pretender; however weak
and inconsistent such a Consequence may be, nothing is more certain, than that
many innocent, and well-meaning People, have been prevailed upon to believe it;
and though the Improbilities of the Thing in its own Nature, and the steady Zeal
of the Persons who they charge with it, and who have all along, in a Course of
many Years, testified their Abhorrence of that Interest, and taken such Steps
against it, as have been most effectual to the cutting off all Hope, both from
him and his Party, might suffice to any reasonable People; yet this seems to be
one of those Difficulties which can be solved only by a little Patience and
Time: To those who will be convinced by Argument, it seems sufficient, that our
putting a stop to a War, which we carried on at so much Disadvantage, and which
had in View rather an utter Empoverishing the Nation, than a timely Reducing
our Enemies to Reason, however, was not only necessary on many other Accounts,
but greatly our Advantage on this Account, in especial Manner; that thereby we
might be left in a Condition to defend our Constitution, and to preserve Power
to maintain our Succession, as our Parliament had thought fit to limit it,
without the Help of the Dutch, and without being put to so weak, so scandalous,
and so dishonorable a Shift, as to accept of the Guarantee of Foreign States,
to preseve our own Acts of Parliament.

When I look farther into this scandalous Thing, called a Guarantee for our
Succession, methinks it represents to me our People on their Knees to the Dutch
for the Mighty Favor of taking us into their High and Mighty Protection; and
indeed, when this is compared with the Manner with which the States of Holland
carried on the Geentruydenbergh Treay, wherein the making a Peace for us was
also left wholly to, or engrossed by, the States of Holland, the Thing seems
very much of a Piece. The Barrier Treaty also has much of the same Manner in
it, which being handled at large by itself, I say no more to here. I have
observed, that at the Time when we began to talk here of Peace, and when the
French Articles began to appear, we were mightily amused with the Dutch making
Offers, that they would take away the Excuse from us of want of Money, or
Credit, and the Dutch would advance to us Four Millions Sterling, to encourage
us to carry on the War. That the Dutch made such an Offer Publicly in Form is
known to be a Mistake; but that the Dutch might be willing to lend, or to give
as much as that amounts to, to have the Sole Direction of making the Peace,
that so their particular Interest, which they never forget, might be
principally provided for, this there can be no great Question of; and the Dutch
are not without Cunning enough to make it so well worth their while, as that
such a Sum of Money should not be ill laid out. But those People should do well
to consider Two or Three Things which lie hid in this Notion, of the Dutch
lending us so much Money, and which by Way of Corollary, may be of great Use to
us, in the understanding of other Parts of Management on that Side. (1.) That
if the States of Holland for the carrying on the War, could spare us so much
Money to encourage us that we might not make a Peace without them, though that
has not yet been thought of, them however, all they thought fit to say in
former Times, of their being impoverished, and exhausted, and not in a
Condition to pay their Quota's, must be a manifest Fraud and Cheat, and must be
with Design to put upon us the Necessity of carrying it on upon unequal
Conditions; and this they could not have entertained a Thought of, without
first being sensible that they had us at so much Advantage, as that they knew,
whenever they thought fit to ease their own Charge, they might-put the Hardship
upon us. (2.) Since it was obtained by the Arts of their other Conduct, that
the Dutch had the Sole Direction of the Peace, it followed then, that we were
under an Obligation to carry on the War at their bidding; from whence it was
most natural to believe, they were not dark-sighted enough not to make their
other Advantages. (3.) These Things make it no longer a Mystery, why the Dutch
would advance any Sum of Money for the encouraging us to carry on the War,
because it followed, that we should carry it on under the same Inequalities and
Disadvantages which we did before; but now these Things are detected, and if we
should come to a Necessity of carrying on the War, which God forbid, yet that
it should be more than probable we may not only demand that they begin upon a
new Foot, and make up all their Quota's for the Time to come, but also may call
upon them for what is past; also it is more than probable, that they may then
plead Poverty with us, as they did before, and talk no more of the great Sums
they would lend us. (4.) There is yet another Remark to be made upon this Head,
viz. of the Dutch advancing such great Sums of Money to us; we have never found
but these Sums were to be all lent upon good Parliamentary Security and on the
Interest current in England; and we might not be thought ungrateful to the
Lenders, if we asked them, where was the Advantage of all that? Was it to us,
or to themselves? They must not know the Dutch so well as we have Reason to
know them, who expect to find them ever forgetful of their own Interest in any
Proposal they may make. It is true, we have complained of our being
impoverislsed and exhausted, and not in a Condition to carry on the War,
especially at the rate which it has been carried on at, without great
Inconveniences, and Involving, Mortgaging, and Anticipating for us, and our
Posterity, at a Rate, which neither are like to see the End of; but what is our
Defect? We do not want Lenders, but Funds to borrow upon; we have Usurers
enough among us to devour us, we want no Help from the Dutch; we are not
without a Sort of Men among us, who having little or no Interest in the
Freehold, have amassed infinite Sums of Money in Cash, with which they Trade
upon the rest, and live upon the Blood and Vitals of the Government; these,
like the Eagles where the Carcass falls, gather together; and if the Parliament
can but find Funds, though they boast of having the Power of Credit in
themselves, and often think of making themselves Formidable, by threatening the
Government that they will lend no Money, and that they can ruin the Public
Credit, by refusing to advance their Money, yet they can no more forbear, than
a Vulture can forbear his Prey; the Funds are the Carcass they feed on; they
are as Hungry for them, as a Lion that has been Hunting, and found no Food; and
in spite of their Faith, often Pledged to their Party and Friends, to run down
Credit, and lend no Money, let but the Ministry find a Fund, and the Parliament
establish a Lottery, or Subscription, or Loan, and they are ready to trample
one another to Death to get in their Money. So that after all that has been
said of the Dutch lending us Money, we see nothing to be said to it, but what
was said in Answer to some Bantering Lines in the Time of King Charles II. made
upon the King, which his Majesty by Repartee answered himself thus. " Charles
at this Time having no Need,
" Thanks you as much as if he did.


It is apparent in our Case we want no Lenders; we have been devoured with
Harpies already, who think, as no doubt the Dutch would also think, and perhaps
say too, that the Borrower is Servant to the Lender. But we must acknowledge we
want Funds to borrow, and where to find them, such excepted as will plunge us
yet farther and farther into a Gulf, whence no less than a Hundred Years can
redeem us, is past the Skill of the best Advocates for a War to find out;
indeed I cannot but wonder, that in all the Noise the Faction have made at
these Things, they have not descended to one Argument against the Difficulty of
raising Funds; they have indeed told us Great Things, a la Gasconade, that
there are Funds enough, that England is vastly rich, that there is Money
enough, that we can with Ease carry on the War this Seven Years, and such
Rhodomontade, that they have Surfeited the People with it for some Time; but we
do not see one of them that offers any Scheme how, and upon what destructive
ruinous Fund, this Money may be raised, that the People may judge whether what
is alleged be true, yea, or no; and whether those Funds they shall so propose,
shall not be as fatal to the general Good, as those that have gone before; with
such fallacious Ways have the People been managed, till they have led them on
to the brink of inevitable Ruin; and now, as if it were not enough, that the
Nation has for so many Years been oppressed by the War, through the Negligence
or Knavery of our Consederates, we are modestly desired to proceed in the War
upon the same Foot. I confess, this among our own People is a Sign of some
National Stupidity and Blindness, which one would hardly think possible; but
for our Neighbors, whether the States General, or others, to desire in, seems
to smell of something we want a Word for in our Tongue, and may be better
expressed in French by Marveillieux Surprenant, and the like. I must needs say
I have not yet met with any Man so weak, but what begins to feel the Force of
this Argument enter into his Soul, if the Allies have not performed according
to their Agreement, they should be reminded of it; and if we cannot prevail
with them to make up former Defects, we ought at least to be careful that they
comply punctually for the Time to come. Can any People be so besotted to a
Party, as to expect or desire that a Nation, already impoverished by the unfair
Impositions of Her Allies, and not able to carry on the War on the Terms she
has done for some Time, should not insist upon more Justice for the future,
that she may be able to hold it out?

Neither is this an unnecessary Argument at this Time, for if we can carry on
this War at the Expense of Three Millions and Half Yearly, instead of Seven,
then we are better able to go on Two Years upon the Square with our Allies,
than One Year upon the unequal Foundation we have gone upon all along; so that
to bring our Allies to do us Justice, and to exert themselves to the uttermost,
in carrying on the War, is the truest and best Step toward the main Point, (
viz.) of carrying it on, if we are assured we shall no more be imposed upon; if
we see the full Quota's of Troops in the Field, the full Numbers of Ships in
the Mediterranean, and all Things in Readiness in Time, and fit for Action; if
any Thing will revive the drooping Spirits of the Nation it must be this; it
must be that they have some Hopes of not being cheated again, and that the
powerful Assistance of the Allies will be a Means of putting a happy and speedy
End to the War, that a safe Peace may follow; and it is easy to find that
nothing but this will do it; nothing else can persuade an exhausted Nation to
bleed anew, but some Assurance that they shall not be suffered by their Allies
to bleed to Death, that there shall be some End of their Sorrows and Miseries,
and that every Hand is fairly engaged in bringing Things to a happy End.

But these Things seem to call for no further Remark from us, they are so
natural and plain in themselves, that every Child in these Affairs may
understand them; for if we must carry on the War; it must be needful that we
suffer ourselves to be no more abused by our Allies; if we are not to expect
Justice from our Allies, then we must be unaccountably besotted if we carry on
the War; nay, though a worse Peace were to follow than Her Majesty has good
Reason to expect from the Negotiations now on Foot.

But it may not be amiss to enquire here what Prospect there appears of these
Things, and what Hopes our Allies do put us in, of expecting for the future
better Treatment; and that in the Pursuit of the War they will go on upon a
different Foot from that which they have hitherto gone upon; for if there was
but some Appearance of an Amendment for the future, it might be some
Encouragement to us to think of prosecuting the ensuing Campaigns with more
Comfort; but instead of this, all we yet see amounts to little that Way, for at
Home all the Fruit of the Discovery shows only a kind of Regret that it is made
public, an inward fretting that the Fact is too obvious, so that they cannot
contradict it, and an envious Warmth at the Justice done their own Country in
it, because it touches upon the States General, as if to touch them were fatal
to us all; and perhaps it may indeed be fatal to some Projects the Party had
ser on Foot here, destructive enough to the Liberty of their Country, and of
which a little Time may give us a farther View: This is clear, in that all the
Reply we have here to the detecting the hard Usage we have met with from our
Allies, issues in Exclamations at our exposing the Dutch, and falling upon the
Dutch, spreading Reports that we design to fall out with the Dutch, and that we
are for a Peace with France, and a War with the Dutch; as if we must refrain a
due Inspection into our own Affairs, for fear of the Effects it will or may
have upon the Hollanders; it is no less the Duty of every. Faithful
Representative to enquire how other Nations may impose upon the People, and
waste and destroy us, than it is how we are embezzelled at Home, for every
Breach of Treaty is in this kind a Depredation upon the People; and it is most
reasonable, that when they have thus discovered the Fraud, and by who, as well
as by what Means, the Nation is exhausted and worn out, they should so far
expose the Matters of Fact, and the Persons, that the People may know by what
Means they are impoverished; this has been the constant Method and Usage of
Parliaments, and the Members of Parliament could not have discharged the Trust
they have committed to them by the People they Represent, it they had omitted
it. Nor can this be called exposing the Dutch; they lay open the Truth, if that
exposes the Dutch, or any other Persons or States, the Misfortune is their own
to be liable to such a Charge; but let such People answer what they would have
had the House of Commons have done, when upon Enquiry into the State of the
War, they found that we had not been fairly used by the Confederates; if they
had held their Peace, had they not been Criminally Silent? Had they not
betrayed their Country? Had they not been Accessory to all the Frauds of the
like Kind which should have happened for the Future? And what would the
Language of Posterity have been, when they should have seen that the House of
Commons knew these Things, but took no Notice of them, or any Care to have the
Nation informed of them? Must it not have been a just Reproach upon them, as it
is now upon those who knew it before, and yet took no. Notice of it, or made
any Application to former Parliaments to have it redressed? But it is evident
these People, who make now such loud Complaints of the Reflections cast upon
our Allies, appear more concerned that the Matter is made Public, than that it
is true; and are so far from desiring any Cure for the Disease, that they spend
all their Heat and Resentment at the Discoveries of it; and it is to be
observed from their Conduct, that they make Ten Reflections upon the House of
Commons, and the Present Ministry, for the Industry and Pains taken in finding
out how, and by whom, the Nation has been abused, for One just Remark upon the
Integrity and Zeal in the War of those Allies, who have used us in such a
Manner: Whence such a Spirit can proceed, and what Reason can be given for it,
is not so hard to find out, as it is melancholy to reflect, that so it should
be.

I might go forward in this Observation to expose the Foundation from whence
all this proceeds, and by which we should soon see for what Uses and Purposes
some People are so desirous of pushing on the War; and how to do it they care
not, upon what Disadvantages, and unequal Conditions, they did it; being
willing to bear any part of the Burden, nay, all the Burden, so the beloved
War were but to be pursued; the Enquiry into this will open many Scenes of
private Treachery, not yet brought to Light, and for that I purpose to do it in
a Tract by itself; I shall leave it to a fit Occasion.

It falls next in View to Interrogate the Ministers at Vtrecht, how they
proceed, and see thereby what Measures the Dutch take to convince us, that we
shall have a better, and more equal, Balance kept up among us, in case the War
is to be continued. But here you shall find Measures calculated rather to
compel the Queen of Great Britain to carry on the War, than to invite Her
Majesty to it by Assurances of performing Treaties better than in the Times
past. This is a Temper so different from what might be expected from a People,
who had so treated their Allies, to us who complain of being so treated, that
it is as before, Marvellieux; or to put it plainer, a kind of throwing off the
Mask; as if we were obliged to submit to be cheated, after we had first
discovered that it was so; and that what before was done covertly, and under
the Appearance of a Treaty, was now to be done more effectually, openly,
avowedly, and in the Teeth of the rest of the Allies.

This appeared upon the first Conference after the French Plenipotentiaries had
delivered in their Paper of Explanation, as they called it, on the Proposals of
the Peace, which they had formerly given in. It came then to the Turn of the
Allies to consider in what manner to deliver in their Answer to the French
Proposals; this it was resolved should be by the Confederate Ministers
delivering in their Demands, or the several Pretensions of their respective
Principles, without taking any Notice of the Project contained in the Paper
given in by the Ministers of France; it should have been noted here in the
first Place, that after all the Dutch had said, and after all that had been
said to them, in order to come to this Treaty, prepared to preserve a good
Understanding among the Allies, and to bring the Treaty to the desired
Conclusion, viz. a good Peace: The Dutch Ministers appeared there without any
Character, having neither Powers as Plenipotentiaries, or as Ambassadors, or
any Thing more than mere Commissioners, Empowered only to hear what was said,
make Report to their Masters the States, and give back their Answers, which one
of the Queen's common Messengers may as well do on our Side. Nor were the
Persons, the Equipages, or the Sallaries allowed to their said Commissioners,
any more than what was suitable to common Messengers, whose Business it was to
carry a Message, and return with an Answer; so that in the Conferences, either
General or Particular, there was no debating Things with them, only just giving
in what any one had to say, and all the Answer these Men could give, was that
they would Report it to their High-Mightinesses the States General, and would
bring their Answer. The French Plenipotentiaries presently objected against
these Powers, as not sufficient to admit the Dutch Ministers into the
Conferences. The British Plenipotentiaries, though they were sensible of the
Affront offered in it to their Royal Mistress, after such Assurances on Her
Majesty's Part, of Her sincere Intention to make the Interest of all Her Allies
to be as Her own, yet willing to wave every Thing that might give an
Obstruction to the happy Issue of the Peace, did not insist on this; though
they could not but complain that it greatly obstructed that happy Concert of
Measures, which they hoped might have been the constant Fruit of the private
Conferences of the Confederate Ministers, which the Dutch having no Powers that
extended any farther than barely to Hear, and Report, and bring back a
Resolution; was for want of those Powers quite disappointed; so that the Dutch
Ministers might as justly be deemed and termed Porters, as Plenipotentiaries.
Well, notwithstanding all this, the British Plenipotentiaries, willing to
promote the great End for which they assembled, which, as the Lord Bishop of
Bristol expressed it, was in the Name of God, to bring the Wars to a happy
Conclusion, in an Equitable and Honorable Peace, all these Obstructions were
past over on their Side, and they labored to have the Powers of the Dutch
Ministers accepted, as at last they were, with some Difficulty; and thus they
proceed to the Affair of the Demands, as above, which were to be delivered in
as the 5th of March. The Dutch Ministers concealing the Resolution taken at the
Hague, to give in no Demands, but the very immediate Copy of the Preliminaries
last treated on, insisted that all the Confederates Demands should be formed
into one Instrument, and be given in jointly by all the Plenipotentiaries, as
the general Demands of the whole Alliance. This, though something surprising in
itself, yet was the less so, when it was more known that this was, in order to
execute the Measures above noted, ( viz.) of bringing in the Preliminaries of
Geertruydenbergh, as the Summary Demands of the Allies. But the British
Plenipotentiaries taking Notice of it, insisted, that this seemed to be
destructive of the Treaty itself, that France had Twice ventured to carry on
the War, rather than agree to those Preliminaries. That they had been declared
Impracticable, and could not be treated on here; and to insist on the very
literal Form of those Preliminiaries now, and prescribe the Plenipotentiaries
to treat on them, was to declare against a Treaty at all. That this Meeting was
understood by all Parties, to be not a Treaty of Preliminaries in order to a
Treaty of Peace, but a General Treaty of Peace itself, wherein the Specific
Demands of every Ally were to be heard, debated, and finally discussed,
adjusted, and answered, to their Satisfaction, which could by no Means be done
by Preliminary Articles, which had in them several References to a farther
Treaty, and some suggested Demands left to be farther discussed at another
Time; whereas they were now met to make a final and general Conclusion of all
Demands and Pretensions whatsoever, that there might be no more Blood shed in
the Christian World, that an End might be put to the Miseries of Europe; it was
also alleged, that the said Preliminaries had not been concerted with a due
Regard to the Interest of all the Allies; in especial Manner it was asked, what
Article there was to be found in them which regarded the Interest of Her
Britannick Majejesty, farther than what merely respected Her Title to the
Crown, and the Banishment of the Pretender; whereas there seemed a great deal
of Reason for admitting farther Demands for the Security, and enlarging the
Commerce and Possessions of Her Majesty, and Her Subjects; for this Reason, as
well as in Behalf of the rest of the Confederates, the said British
Plenipotentiaries insisted upon giving in the Instrument of their Demands in
particular, every Ally by themselves.

It must be something astonishing to such true Lovers of their Country, who
can look back on these Things with unprejudiced Judgments, to reflect on the
Temper reigning in this Part of Europe at the Time of the Treaty aforesaid,
when in all the numerous Articles adjusted at the Hague, and afterward debated
again at Geertruydenberg by the Dutch and French, the former left out nothing
which concerned their own Interest, Security or Advantage; nay, engaged the
British Court to concern and engage themselves for their particular Security
and Advantages, but not one Word. Clause, Article, or Debate, was ever thought
of for the English, either as to the Security of their Commerce, as it then
stood, or the Increase of it for the future. On the other Hand, all the Stress
on the British Side, and for which we were to think ourselves infinitely
obliged to the Dutch, was to engage their Assistance to keep out the Pretender,
and secure the Succession of the Crown of Great Britain to his Electoral
Highness of Hannover; a Thing which is so the Universal Resolution of all the
People and Parties in Britain, and to which they think all the Opposition that
can be made from either French, or any else, is so trifling and insignificant,
that they cannot be sensible of the exceeding Obligation on that Behalf to
their Confederates, or of the great Danger which they were in of the Pretender,
although no Foreign Assistance had been engaged on that Behalf, esteeming the
Favorers of the Pretender in Britain, not withstanding their great Clamours of
a Party among us, to be so sew, and so inconsiderable, as that there is nothing
to be seared from them; but supposing there had been more Danger of this
Clause, ( viz.) the Succession, then we are willing to hope there is Ground to
apprehend it cannot but be reminded, that it is as much the Interest of the
States General to secure that Succession in the Illustrious House of Hannover,
as it is even of GreatBritain itself, and much more than it can be supposed to
be to Britain to secure to them the Barrier of Flanders; for should the
Dominions of her Britannick Majesty ever fall into the Hands of a Popish or
French Interest, or into the Hands of a Prince, who is or may be in the
Interest of France, the Territories of the States General being stripped of the
Powerful Assistance of the British Troops by Land, and Fleets by Sea, must
inevitably be exposed to the Powerful Invasion of French and British Fleets
united, and their Trade in particular eaten up and destroyed, as was verified
by woeful Experience to the said States in the Year 1672, when, if the English
Court had not broken off from the said French Alliance, the States General had
inevitably sunk under the Power of France, and their Government been dissolved
and destroyed; so that upon the whole it is manifest there was no need on our
Part to engage the Dutch to appear for the Security of our Succession to the
House of Hannover; for that the Sovereign Law of their own Preservation will
always put them under a Necessity of doing it, the contrary being most sure to
be a great Step in their Injury, if not their evident Destruction: It may be
argued, that in Rules of Government we are not to depend upon this or that
State being obliged by their own Interest to assist us, but we are to regard
what Necessity, either for Security of Trade, common Safety of Government, or
other Political Inteterest, we are in, or may be in, of the Assistance of the
Powers we are treating with, and if that Necessity appears it is a sufficient
Reason for us to secure that Assistance; and this we have frequent Examples of,
as of the Dutch themselves treating with us in 1676, when notwithstanding it
was the undoubted Interest of England not to let Holland upon any Terms
whatever fall into the Hands of France; and if ever the French do again make
that Attempt, we ought to assist the Dutch with all our Troops and Power; and
that not so much from any Care and Kindness to them as a Nation, but for our
own Interest and Preservation; yet the Dutch knowing the Eyes of a Nation are
not always open to their own Interest, thought fit to tie us to assist them in
that Case, and even Articled with us for the Proportion, viz. the Number of Ten
Thousand Men. This is brought for a Reason why, not withstanding its being so
much the Interest of the States of Holland to preserve the Succession of the
House of Hannover to the Crown of Great Britain, we ought also to bind them to
it by Treaty: But though we were to grant all this, it will not follow that this
Treaty should have such a Price put upon it, that the Dutch should demand of us
all they want for this little Equivalent; and the Reasons above, though they
should not be allowed to subsist against the Treaty of Guarantee itself, will
certainly take off much of that High Price which the Dutch have put upon it, as
if we were under such Infinite Obligations to them to secure it for us, as that
we were quite out of Condition to defend it ourselves, or as if they had no
Concern, or were to receive no Security, Benefit, or Advantage, at all by it to
themselves: Again, it might pass for some Argument in this Case, that if any
Power in Europe ought to have sought this Guarantee from the States General, it
should have been the Elector himself, who on his Part might probably have some
more Occasion to secure his Passage over to England, and the March of any
Troops which his Highness might find necessary to bring with him, to assist his
Faithful People of Britain to place him on the Throne, in Case a French or
Popish Interest should make Opposition. Here indeed the States General might be
very useful Allies, and his Electoral Highness would have thought very well of
such a Guarantee of the States; but it cannot be conceived that Britain can be
under like Necessity of such a Security: The Succession, which is their own Act
and Deed, being universally approved by the whole Nation, a few People
excepted, who are contemptible either for their Number or Interest; so that on
all these Accounts it seems however a Treaty of Guarantee may be useful enough
for our Succession, and no Harm in it; yet it cannot be a Thing of that Weight
as to have so great a Value set upon it, and that Britain should suffer herself
so much to be imposed upon for it, as it is apparent to all the World she has
been on that Account.

We return now to the Manner of the carrying on of the Treaty of Peace at
Vtrecht: The British Plenipotentiaries having, as I said above, insisted upon
the giving in the Demands of the Allies in a separate Manner, have by this
Means an Occasion of securing for the Subjects of Her Majesty some other
Advantages than by the former Treaty was thought of; and the People of Britain
may now see, not only on what Disadvantage for us the former Treaty was
negotiated, when we were to have our Markets made for us by our Dutch
Neighbors; but they may see that all the Noise that has been made of the
Present Ministry; and of the present Managers being in the Interest of France,
amounts only to this, That whereas the other gave up all our Interest to the
Dutch and the Emperor, these Men are careful that Britain may reap some
Advantages by the Treaty as well as the rest of the Confederates.

Indeed it has been something wonderful in the common Discourse of the People
on these Subjects to find the Generality poisoned by these self-denying
Notions, viz. that all which can be obtained from France must be given to the
Emperor, and the Dutch, and the King of Portugal, but nothing to the Queen of
Great Britain; as if our Strength were no Acquisition, or our Power any Safety,
to the Alliance; nay, rather, as if it were dangerous to the Confederacy to
entrust any Part of that we have fought so long for, and bought so dear, to the
Queen of Great Britain: One would think the Dutch themselves went on that
Notion, when, as was apparent, they appeared uneasy and jealous at the
Preparations made by Her Majesty to send a Fleet and Forces to Canada; while
not knowing the Design, they apprehended it to be for the taking Possession of
some Place or other in the Spanish America, although by the ^th Article of the
Grand Alliance it was agreed that Her Majesty might lawfully have done so if
she had thought fit. These Things, however of no other Consequence, yet serve
to let us see how different, as respecting us, the Manner of the Allies has
been in all the Transactions of this War, and how different their Views have
been in all their Steps toward a Peace, from our constant Behavior in the
same Heads as they respected them; and that in all these Occasions it has been
the constant Maxim of our Confederates, that we were to have no Share in any
Thing, but that the Dutch, under a Notion of a Barrier and Security to their
Frontiers, should make large Acquisitions, both to their Territory and their
Commerce, both which have been consented to from hence; whether it be to the
Honor or to the Infamy of those who have given in to these Measures is left to
the Impartial Part of Mankind to determine: It is evident that at length the
Just Representations of the British Ministers took Place, and the Dutch after
much Difficulty have yielded that the Demands of the Allies be given in to the
French, although in one and the same Instrument, yet in separate Heads; and the
British Plenipotentiaries agree and propose to add at the End of every Head
this General and Satisfaction of all the rest of the Allies, a Clause
sufficient to remove the Scandal and Reproach early cast upon the Present
Management, ( viz.) That they designed to make a Separate Peace, and had
actually concluded the Conditions there of with France before the Congress was
to begin; I must crave Pardon if I make these several Instances of the Usage of
Her Majesty has met with from Her Allies, Rank in with their other Conduct
relating to Forces and Quota's, which have already been made Public, and all
together to come under the Title of Deficiencies; for if there had been a more
disinterested Conjunction of Counsel and Assistance of Measures in the
Proceedings of the Allies, to and with Her Britannick Majesty, and Her
Ministers, no Question this Treaty had been with more Ease brought on, with
more Mutual Assistance to, and Confidence in one another entered into, and
perhaps the Success might have been more promising also.

There seems to be no Occasion here of Entering into the Clauses which the Dutch
have obtained in any of their Treaties and Agreements with us, by which they
have gained Advantages in Commerce, particularly to our Prejudice, because even
the Dutch themselves acknowledge them in their late Letter to Her Majesty; only
declaring. That they do not design to take the Advantage of those Articles. I
am very willing to believe the States General, especially while a good
Understanding among the Allies, and particularly between Them and Us, is so
necessary to them, would not make Use of the Advantages which were given them
by that Treaty; but this does by no Means deny, nay, it not Tacitly only, but
even Explicitly, as it seems to Indifferent Judgments, grants that such
Advantages are given to the Dutch by that Treaty. See the Declaration of the
Dutch on this Head more particularly, as follows.

'For having learnt that the Principal Exceptions taken to the said Treaty
were, that it might prove Prejudicial to the Commerce of Her Majesty's Subjects
in the Spanish Netherlands; and that some had entertained an ill-grounded and
erroneous Opinion, that the States might design to take Advantage by it to make
themselves Masters of the said Spanish Netherlands, their High Mightinesses did
declare postively, and by this Letter do voluntarily repeat it, that it never
was their Intention, nor ever will be, to make use of the said Treaty, or of
their Garrisons in the Fortified Places of the Country, to prejudice in any
Manner the Commerce of Her Majesty's Subjects; but that their Opinion is, That
whatever relates to Navigation and Commerce there, ought to be settled on an
entire Equality, that so Her Majesty's Subjects may not be charged with higher
Duties of Importation or Exportation than theirs, to the end Commerce may be
carried on there by both Nations on an equal Foot.'

Here the States General acknowledge, That whatever relates to Navigation and
Commerce in the Spanish Netherlands ought to be settled on an entire Equality:
This is owning what Her Majesty has since claimed to be Just, and yet that it
has not been so is apparent also; and in the same Letter they acknowledge it
again, by adding. 'That if there be some Articles of the said Treaty which
without affecting the Essentials of it, may be thought to want Explanation, Her
Majesty shall find them willing and ready to treat thereupon, with all the
Facility and Condescension that can reasonable be required of them.'

Now however Satisfactory such an Offer is from the Dutch, who indeed cannot be
supposed to be Ignorant of the Justice of Her Majesty's Demands in this Case,
as not to come to a farther Explanation on these Heads; yet all this adds to,
and confirms, the Complaint against the Conduct, at least of those employed
from hence, who in behalf of their own Country could pass such a Treaty, and
sign such a Convention, by which it appears, were not the Dutch willing to
explain themselves upon it, there was Effectually given up to them both the
Sovereignty and the Commerce of the Spanish Netherlands, the last being
Exclusive of the English. There is no doubt to me that this was evident at that
Time, and therefore it is that I cannot place it to the Account of Ignorance or
Inadvertency; for the Duke of Marlborough saw into it, and therefore how
willing soever in other Cases to oblige the Dutch, he had not so little Concern
for his own Safety, as not to know a British Parliament would certainly one
Time or other call a Treaty so Dishonorable and Prejudicial to Britain in
question, and therefore no doubt whatever other Reasons his Grace might have
also, he thought fit not to be drawn in to set his Hand to it, but refused to
be a Party to it, though at that Time a Plenipotentiary from hence; but another
Hand and other Management effected it; and now the Dutch are willing to explain
these Things to our Satisfaction, which would admit of many Remarks as to the
former Part of it, which I omit, because Satisfaction will be now obtain^d:
Only this cannot in Justice to the Present Ministry and Parliament be omitted,
viz. That if this Enquiry into these Things had not been begun, those
Explanations had never been obtained, and the Dutch had been left in a Capacity
when they thought fit to exclude the Subjects of Britain from all Trade and
Commerce in the Spanish Netherlands; and had been enabled, whenever their
Occasions made it for their Purpose, to have seized upon the Spanish
Netherlands, and have made themselves entire Masters thereof; so that the
preventing these Things seems wholly owing to the Vigilance of the Present
Ministry, and to the vigorous Resolutions of the Present Parliament.

There seems indeed one Clause in the said Letter, which some People are very
forward here to take hold of; insinuating, That the Dutch complain of being
tricked in England into a Consent to a Negotiation of Peace, by being put in
Hopes, that after they should do so, the other Affair of the Barrier should be
adjusted to their Satisfaction; the Words are these, 'That however, having not
long since been informed, that in England some were of Opinion, that the said
Treaty in some Articles might be prejudicial to Her Majesty's Subjects, the
Commissioned M. Buys, their Envoy Extraordinary then going to England to
inquire what those Points were that might be thought Grievances, and authorized
to treat about them with Her Majesty's Ministers, and to remove, it possible,
the Difficulties by all the Explanations that should appear necessary; which
they were put in Hopes would not be very hard to do, when once they should have
consented to concur with Her Majesty, as they did, to procure a Congress for
the Negotiation of a General Peace. But that the Misfortune was, that the said
M. Buys, during his Residence in England, was not able to finish that Affair to
reciprocal Satisfaction; and that it having been remitted to the Hague, no Way
has hitherto been found to terminate it there neither; though their High
Mightinesses think they have shown all the Readiness to comply with any Just
Expedient that could reasonably be expected from them.'

This seems to be very ill turned by a Party among ourselves, and implies, as
they pretend, as if the British Court had made Light of the Matter, and
promised to adjust it if the Dutch would do so and so; but that after the Dutch
had complied and concurred with Her Majesty to procure a Congress for the
Negotiation of a General Peace, they could never obtain the promised Condition,
although they had shown 'all the Readiness to comply with any just Expedient that
could reasonably be expected from them.'

This is a Black Charge, and had not the Dutch with much more Integrity than
these People, anticipated this Calumny, and given the true Reason for their
said Concurring with Her Majesty, to be their Disposition and Persuasion of the
Absolute Necessity there was in the present Conjuncture, for the Cultivating
and Maintaining a good Friendship, Perfect Confidence and Union, between their
said States and Her Majesty, which for the better Authority, I give you also
from their own Letter, 'That during the whole Course of Her Majesty's Glorious
Reign they have had nothing more at Heart than to cultivate and maintain with
Her a Good Friendship, Perfect Confidence and Union, and to corroborate them
the most they possibly could; having always judged them absolutely Necessary,
and especially in the present Conjuncture. That they likewise judged they could
not give a better Proof of this their Disposition and Persuasion, than that
which they lately gave in agreeing to the Proposition which Her Majesty had
caused to be made to them, to begin the Negotiation of a General Peace with the
Enemy, and in concurring with Her Majesty to facilitate the bringing together
of the Ministers of all the High Allies to the Congress at Vtrecht.'

This effectually Contradicts what as before is suggested, viz. That they were
induced ' to concur with Her Majesty, as they did, to procure a Congress for
the Negotiation of a General Peace.' Upon their being put in Hopes that it
would not be very hard to do after they had consented so to concur with Her
Majesty; I say, this is so contradicted by what is said before, that I was
tempted to doubt both the said Paragraphs could not be in one and the same
Letter; and indeed it seems shocking to any Reader, that their High
Mightinesses should say in one Part of their Letter, that they concurred with
Her Majesty, to give the best Proof of their Disposition to cultivate a good
Friendship, Perfect Confidence and Union with Her Majesty, and in another Part
of the same Letter to say, that they concurred ' with Her Majesty, as they did,
to procure a Congress for the Negotiation of a General Peace.'

These Considerations being too hard for my Understanding, are left to the
Logical Discussion of the Party here, whole Talent so eminently lies in
Equivocation and Insignificant Railery; who when they have chewed it, and
mumbled it, like an Ass upon Thistles, will bring it out the same thorny
crabbed Inconsistency that they found it.

But while we are leaving them to this difficult Work, it may be needful to
look farther, for we have yet much more Work cut out from Holland than in the
foregoing Piece; the States General having received a new Brush from the
British Parliament, are very solicitous to wash their Negro Skin as clean as
they can from the Imputations which have lain so plainly against them; but now
they find it more difficult than they did before; for till now they had only
Pamphlets and general Clamours to answer, such as the Suspicions of the People,
and the Information of a Few had made loud; and which began to make them
uneasy, these were treated with some Contempt by the States, and more by their
Friends here.

But the Parliament finding more Truth in these Things than perhaps they
expected, and much more than the Faction pretended, thought it required an
Extraordinary Sanction to make them less disputed, and thought it Just to make
them Public with an undisputed authority, that the People ought to be
undeceived, and that the Quarrels about the Truth of Fact ought to cease among
the People; for this Reason, having caused all the Particulars to be exactly
and faithfully laid before them, by the Report of the Commissioners of the
Admiralty, and other proper Officers, and those Particulars to be critically
examined, they deduced from thence the Matters of Fact as they really were, and
making all the Cases plain in which the Government had been imposed upon by
their Allies, and the Dutch Deficient among others; they came to several
Resolves about the same, and drawing those Resolves up into General Heads,
referring to the Particulars for their Demonstration, they Humbly represented
all in an Address to Her Majesty, and caused both the said Resolves and the
Address to be Printed, for the Conviction of all Her Majesty's good Subjects,
and to confute and silence a Party, who, as abovesaid, had made it their
Business to ridicule all that had been said of these Matters as false and empty
Notions infused into Peoples Heads, to raise ill Blood and create Prejudices
against the Dutch. If these Things coming forth with such an undisputed
Authority did a little surprise the World, and consequently open the Eyes of
the People, much more would they surprise the States General, whose Interest it
had so long been to have the People of Britain kept as ignorant as possible of
these Matters; and finding it absolutely Necessary that something should be
said to puzzle the Cause a little, and to furnish their Friends with Arguments
for their Defense, they issue a Paper, Entitled, as follows. A Memorial,
serving to prove that the States General of the United Netherlands are unjustly
charged by the Resolutions or Votes of the House of Commons of the Parliament
of Great Britain, and by the Subsequent Address of the said House of Commons
thereupon presented to Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain, with having been
deficient in diverse Respects during the present War, in furnishing what
according to their Quota or Contingent they stood engaged for, toward carrying
on the said War.

This is the Paper which I come now to examine, and in which if I should
discover that the States General have really been so far from clearing
themselves of the Charge so positively laid upon them in Parliament, that in
every Part they either directly or tacitly acknowledge it, then there will
remain little Force in the rest of their Paper.

In considering this New and Great Affair of the Dutch Memorial, it seems very
proper to make as few Circumlocutions as possible, and come directly to the
Point. Our Introduction therefore shall consist rather of laying down a List of
the Particulars which we shall leave out, than of what we shall put into the
following Tract; what shall be dropped as foreign to the Case in Hand, and not
worth either the Author's while to Note, or the Readers to be concerned about.
As First, It shall take up little of our Time to animadvert on the Insolence
Unparalleled, of a Scandalous Mercenary, who in Defiance of a British
Parliament, and while that Parliament was actually sitting, should have the
Face to publish the Answer or Defense of a Foreign Nation against his own
Country.

If a Man have received an Affront from another, and meets one of his Servants,
and says to him, you Jack, or you Thomas, pray tell your Master I say he is a
Villain and a Rascal; will not the Servant if he have any Manners or Sense of
his Duty say to him, Sir, let him be what he will, he is my Master, and it is
not fit for me to tell him so, pray employ Somebody else? On the other Hand, if
the Ignorant. Fellow should have so little Wit or Manners as to carry this
Message to his Master, would not the Master say to him, let the Man be what he
will, you are an Unmannerly Rascal for bringing me such a Message, since you
were my Servant, and not his? And would he not very justly cane him, and turn
him out of his Service for his Impudence.

This Case, as it is unprecedented, unless in the same Person who did the like
once before, so it will be doubly unprecedented in the Public Justice, if he
is uncorrected for it. Nay, by how much more the Party glory in and boast of
having insulted the Parliament and the Government in this Publication, by so
much the more Necessity they bring upon the said Parliament to vindicate
themselves, and punish the Persons with their utmost Rigor: But this is Humbly
left and submitted to the Parliament, who no doubt will do themselves and their
Defender Justice in this Case.

Next it shall take up no Part of this Discourse to enquire whether the Dutch
have ordered these Sheets to be thus published in England, or no. We are not
ignorant how many Ways of Late the Foreign Powers concerned in this War have
privately endeavored to make themselves and their Actings with Her Majesty
Popular here, appealing at it were from Her Majesty to her Subjects; but we
shall not suppose however that they are yet arrived to such a Contempt of their
Alliances with Her Britannick Majesty, as to appear in an Action which
derogates so much from the usual Civilities due from one Ally to another, as
that they should openly and avowedly make an Attempt of this Nature.

This Leads us to consider how prudently the Parliament of Britain has acted in
this Case, in which perhaps the Dutch, as subtle a Nation as they are, and how
good soever their Politics have been in other Cases, will be put to it, how to
behave themselves between the Two Extremes of Owning or Disowning this
Publication of their Memorial.

The Parliament have first stigmatized the Paper itself as a False and
Scandalous Libel, but in this Censure they do not call it the Memorial of the
States General, but a Pretended Memorial: Now as the Lie is here given by the
whole British Nation, and that most justly also, it remains for the Dutch to
show us how they please to take it; if they own the Paper and the Publication
of it here, they take the Lie aforesaid to themselves, and are obliged to fall
under the Charge, hush it up, and thereby own in Just, or resent it, which we
suppose they will consider of, before they go about it. On the other Side, if
they take upon them to mention, answer, or vindicate this Paper, they own not
the Paper only, but the mean Step of Causing it to be published in England in
especial Insult to Her Majesty, and to the Parliament of Britain then sitting,
and what evil Consequences may follow such a Thing must lie at their Doors. It
is true, that as the Parliament has not thought fit to take it but as a
spurious and pretended Paper, we might very well do so also; but as we see it
published in all Parts of Europe, as allowed in those Prints in Holland, who
are said to write cum Privilegio; and as it is in these Countries styled, The
Answer of the States, etc. we cannot but treat it as such, or at least as an
Answer for the States, if not, The Answer of the States. And that this may be
justified by good Evidence, the Reader may observe, that our Prints after the
Resentment of the Parliament of Britain had made it too dangerous for our
Newsmen to go on with the Printing it, gave this Account, April 4th. Hague
April 17. All our Public Prints, Published by Authority, have been and
continue full of the States Reply to the Resolutions of the Commons of Britain,
in Vindication of their Conduct.

This we cannot but think gives sufficient Authority to a Writer, whether the
States General are concerned in the Publication at London or no, to suppose
them to be the real Authors of the Paper itself, and that it is really the
States Reply, as above, and as such we shall therefore consider it.

The First Thing meet for Observation in it, is what we ought not by any Means
to pass over, viz. That the States General confess the Charge, acknowledging
the Fact, directly, viz. That the Quota's for Sea Service were not supplied, or
as the Resolution of the House of Commons express it, viz. That the
States General have been desicient in their Quota's for Sea Service in
Proportion to the Numbers of Ships provided by Her Majesty, etc.

To this the States in their Memorial, after a very long Introduction, answer
Two Things; First, That the Quota the British Court proposed to fit out,
particularly in the Years 1704 and 1705, were too many, or more than was
needful for the Service; viz. More than was needed to make the Confederates
Superior to the French in the Mediterranean, and that therefore they the States
did not think themselves obliged to furnish so many. That whereas we should
have Seventy-four Ships the Year 1704, and Seventy-nine the Year 1705, they
thought the Rate of Twenty-four Ships of their State a Proportion against Sixty
of Her Majesty's, and that they concerted it so with Admiral Mitchel. So that
it is plain here from this very Memorial, that the States do no Manner of Way
deny the Deficiency itself, but evade the Force of the Charge by Disputing the
Proportions; and explaining what they understood by the Two Fifths to Three
Fifths, so insisted on by the Parliament, and how they ought to be understood
by others. Again, they would patch up the Deficiency aforesaid, by bringing in
the Number of their Men of War employed in the North Seas to make up their
Quota, and they express this very Subtly, as a Thing which they think ought
to be set against the Number of Ships employed by the British in the Narrow
Seas; this may be considered immediately in their own Terms; but First, it is
fit to Note, that both these Arguments confess the Charge in Fact, only offer
these Explanations or Extenuations: So that the Truth of what the Parliament
has published in their Representation and Address stand fast, is acknowledged
and confessed by the States, and needs no farther Defense. But it comes next of
Course to see what Force this Allegation of the Dutch as to their Ships in the
North Seas ought to have in this Argument; and if it appears that these are
not, and ought not to be reckoned in the Proportion above, and that they were
not reckoned in the First Proportion stated and agreed with the States General,
then all the Consequences drawn from those Proportions will stand the States in
no Stead, as to any Defense to be made by them against the Charge. In the
Examination of this, we meet with this Clause in the State of Proportions laid
before the House; by the Lords of the Admiralty, which stands Diametrically
Opposite to what the States allege in their Memorial, in these Words, viz.
That by the Treaties between the Queen of Great Britain and the States General,
their Proportion of the Ships of the Line of Battle, to act in Conjunction with
those of this Kingdom in the Channel, and in and about the Mediterranean, ought
to be Three to our Five. The First Observation meet to be made here, is, that
the Treaties between the Queen of Great Britain and the States, have expressly
settled their Respective Proportions, which indeed the Memorial seems to evade,
by alleging, that in the Grand Alliance the Respective Parties were to assist
with all their Forces; then Complimenting Britain (I do not say Flattering)
with being more Powerful than the States, they thence deduce the Reasonableness
of the Forces of one being more than the other. But the States General would
think themselves but ill answered if this Way of Argument was made use of with
them, for what is all this to the Equality of Proportions? Have not the Dutch
always, as the Memorial acknowledges, treated every Year with the Queen upon
the just Proportions of every Year's Service? And has not the Queen sent
Admiral Mitchel always to settle that Point? Now the present Question is not
whether Nation is most Powerful, or whether we are to send more Troops than the
States General, or more Ships; but whether the Proportions being settled
Annually by Agreement, the States General have supplied the Numbers agreed on
by those Treaties, and sent as many as they agreed to send or no; if they have
done this, then it is true, the First settled Proportions are of no Weight. On
the other Hand, if they have not the General Treaty of Empolying all their
Forces, or any other are Equally of no Force.

Now it is apparent that the States General have not supplied their Quota of
Ships for the Services for which they agreed to supply them, and therefore we
on our Side justly Complain, and the Account as it was laid before the House by
the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and by Her Majesty Command, is very
plain in the Case, admitting of no Dispute; wherefore we have for a further and
more effectual Convincing the Advocates for the States General in this Case,
caused it to be annexed at large, and is as follows. By the Lords Commissioners
for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of Great Britain, Ireland, etc.
of all Her Majesty's Plantatious.

HER Majesty's Pleasure having been signified to Us by Mr Secretary St. John,
that we should in Pursuance of an Address from the House of Commons) prepare an
Account of the Quota's of Her Majesty's Ships and those of Her Allies during
this present War, and what Agreements and Conventions have been made for the
said Quota's, and how the same have been observd, We do in Obedience to Her
Majesty Command Humbly Report.

That by the Treaties between the Queen of Great Britain and the
States General, their Proportion of the Line of Battle to act in Conjunction
with those of this Kingdom in the Channel and in and about the Mediterranean,
ought to be Three to our Five.

That since the Commencement of this War, not only Sir David Mitchel but Sir
James Wishart have been appointed by Her Majesty's Command to go to Holland,
and adjust with the States General or their Deputies, the Quota's of their
Ships of War to act in Conjunction with those of Her Majesty's, as aforesaid,
and what was done in Pursuance of those Treaties was sent to Her Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State, to which we Humbly refer.

And as to the Number of Ships in the Line of Battle which the States General
each Year during the War have join^d to Her Majesty's on the forementioned
Services, the same will appear by the following Account, which has been
computed with as much Exactness as the Nature of the Things will bear, viz. In
the Year 1702, Her Majesty had Forty four Ships employed in the Channel and
Soundings of the Line of Battle, and Thirty in and about the Mediterranean,
making in the whole Seventy-four, and they were joined with no more than
Thirty-three of the States General, whereas they should have been Forty-four.

1703, Seventy-nine of Her Majesty's Ships were employed in the aforesaid
Services, and but Twenty-two of the States General, which should have been
Fortyseven.

1704, There was Seventy-four of the Queen's Ships and Eighteen Dutch, which
should have been Forty-four.

1705, Seventy-nine of Her Majesty's Ships and Twenty-eight Dutch, which should
have been Forty-seven.

1706, There were but Fifteen Ships of the Dutch acted in Conjunction with
Seventy-eight of the Queen's Ships, whereas they should have been Forty-six.

1707, To Seventy-two of Her Majesty's, they were no more than Twenty-seven of
the States General, instead of Forty-three.

1708, The States General joined Twentyfive Ships of the Line to Sixty-nine of
Her Majesty's, instead of Forty-two.

1709, No more than Eleven Ships of the States were joined to Sixty-seven of
the Queen's, instead of Forty-three.

1710, Her Majesty had Sixty-two employed in the aforesaid Service, and the
States General appointed no more than Thirteen to act in Conjunction with them,
instead of Thirty-seven.

1711, There was no more than Twelve Dutch Ships instead of Thirty-five
appointed to act with Fifty-nine of the Queen's Ships, which as well as those
in the Preceding Year were employed in the Mediterranean, and not so much as
one allotted by the States General to act in Concert with those of Her Majesty
against the Enemies Ships at Dunkirk and in the Channel.

Here seems a most convincing Proof of the Matter of Fact. Now let us see
what Dutch Cunning will bring them off of this, for it is a home Charge, and
they will not easily parry the Thrust. The Memorial in Truth does not attempt
it, and therefore the Matter of Fact as I said before stands granted. But they
plead then that we have not treated them fairly, for say they, 'Secondly, It
must be observed, that in the aforesaid Account Notice is taken only of the
Ships of this State, which in Conjunction with those of Her Majesty were
employed in the Mediterr anean and the Channel, and that the North Sea, which
this State, during the War, has generally had the Care of, is wholly omitted:
Which Mention of those Ships only of this State which have acted in Conjunction
with those of Her Majesty, and the Omission of the North Sea, make so great a
Difference between the Number of Ships reckoned by the foresaid Account to have
been furnished by Great Britain, and that said in the same Account to be
furnished by this State, that probably this Difference gave Occasion to the
forming the foresaid prejudicial Resolution or Vote of the Lower House, which
possibly would not have been formed, might this State have first been heard
upon it.'

This Plea needs no farther Examination than to look back to the Second
Paragraph of the Admiralty's Report above, where it is affirmed, 'That by the
Treaties between the Queen of Great Britain and the States General, their
Proportion of Ships of the Line of Battle to act in Conjunction with those of
this Kingdom in the Channel and in about the Mediterranean, ought to be Three
to our Five.'

It must be surprising to all that read the Memorial of the States, to hear
them insist with so many Introductory Paragraphs, and lay so much stress upon
their Employing Ships in the North Seas, when it is thus proved that the North
Seas are quite left out of the Question, and the Treaties they had made were
only for Ships to be employed in the Channel in and about the Mediterranean.
Now if they have furnished their Quota as agreed upon with us for the Channel
and the Mediterranean, though they had sent no Ships to the North Seas, we
conceive the Commons had made no Representation; nor had they any Reason, for
there was no mention of it in the Agreements of Treaties aforesaid; but if they
have not furnished their Quota's for the Channel, although they had sent an
Hundred Sail to the North Seas, it had been nothing to the Case any more than
their sending Ships to Batavia, for the same Reason as above; the North Sea
Guard being not mentioned in the said Treaties and Annual Agreements. To what
Purpose then is all the long Description of the Necessity of the sending Ships
to the North Seas? And what can be more surprising than to find their High
Mightinesses arguing what is, or was their Sentiments, against what is and was
at that very Time concerted and adjusted by them, with the Persons actually
sent over by the Queen of Great Britain for that Purpose; and which in the very
same Paragraph they acknowledge was so concerted and adjusted. For the more
ready assisting the Reader to make a Full and Free Judgment hereof, the long
pretended Defense on that Head is here copied out of the said Memorial, and is
as follows, viz. 'It must be observed, That by the Seventh Article of the
Treaty of the Ninth of June 1703, by which that Agreement was renewed, It Is
provided, that the Number of Ships of War to be furnished by each for their
whole Quota according to the said Agreement, should be regulated every Year,
and that the Rendezvous, as well as the Places where the Ships should be
employed, should likewise be agreed upon every Year; accordingly this has been
concerted Yearly, Her Majesty having to that Purpose for several Years sent
over one of Her Admirals, at which Times Two Things principally were taken into
Deliberation, namely, the Number of Shipping and the Places where they should
be employed; upon which the Projects on the Part of Her Majesty proposed
commonly the employing a greater Number than was proposed by this State, and
also more Regard was had to the Channel than to the North Sea, of which North
Sea not the least Mention is made in the aforesaid Account of the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, from which Omission it partly comes that they
reckon so low what this State has furnished to the Sea-service. The Sentiment
of this State upon this Subject has always been, that the Number of Ships to be
sent Yearly to Sea ought to be regulated according to the Force which it might
reasonably be judged the Enemy could Yearly bring into the Mediterranean, the
Channel, and the North Sea, so that Men might be morally sure that the Fleets
and Squadrons which on the Part of Great Britain and this State should act in
Conjunction or Seperately, would be superior to those of the Enemy. The Term,
in Conjunction or Separately, was used, because it was ever the Opinion of this
State, that Her Majesty's Ships, and those of this State, sent to Portugal and
the Mediterranean, ought to act in Conjunction; and that the Security of the
Channel ought to be left to the Care of Her Majesty, and that of the North Sea
to the Care of this State, because the Channel is best situate for
Great Britain with respect to its Countries, Harbors, and Commerce, and the
North Sea for this State with respect to its Countries, Harbors and Commerce;
yet so, that if unexpectedly the Enemy should bring any Fleet or considerable
Squadrons into the Channel, or into the North Sea, then the Squadrons on both
Sides, in Whole or in Part, according to the Circumstances of Affairs, might
join each other.'

It is observed here, the States General First acknowledge in this Paragraph of
their Memorial, That both the Number of Ships to be furnished by each Party,
and the Places where those Ships should be employed, was concerted Yearly, Her
Majesty having to that Purpose for several Years sent over one of Her Admirals:
Nay, they repeat it again, viz. At which Times Two Things principally were
taken into Deliberation, viz. The Number of Shipping, and the Places where they
should be employed. We can have no Occasion to make Answer to this in any other
Manner than by Appeal to the StatesGeneral themselves, and Enquiring then
whether in the Quota's of Ships at those Times agreed on, and the Place where
they should be employed, any Place but the Channel and in and about the
Mediterranean was ever included or incerted: If it were, then we must give it
against the Representation of the House of Commons, and acquit the
States General: But if not, what means all the Preamble and Circumlocution of
this long Memorial? And to what Purpose is it said this or that was the
Sentiments of the States General? The Representation and Address of the
Commons, and the Report of the British Admiralty, can say nothing to what was,
or was not, the Sentiments of the States General. But to what was their
Agreement, and what was concerted Yearly between the Queen of Great Britain and
the States, that they may enquire about, and that they do represent Fairly and
Faithfully, viz. That the Dutch have not furnished the Quota's which they were
obliged by Treaty to do, for the Service of the Consederates in the Channel,
and in or about the Mediterranean; what they did in the North Seas as being no
Part of the said Agreement, the said Representation has no Ground to meddle
with it, nor does it take the least Notice of it as is supposed for that Reason.

It may not be foreign to this Case to enquire a little here into the Reason
and Equity also of this Argument about the North S as Service, in doing
whereof, if it shall be found that this Service ought not to be thought of in
Establishing the said Quota's of Ships, as being wholly and solely a Work of
Interest, Protecting their own Commerce Fishing, etc in which the Allies have
no Concern, and that the English had at the same Time several Squadrons in
those Seas which were never esteemed Part of the said Quota on the British
Side, and therefore that the like ought not to be insisted on on the Part of
the States General, then all the Argument drawn from these Things will fall to
the Ground, and the Impressions which those Resolutions of the House of Commons
have made on the People must necessarily remain.

It is not questioned at all, nor does it seem material to this Case, but that
in the several Alliances made between England and the States General they were
Mutually obliged to assist each other with all their Forces. But this is so far
from taking off the Edge of the Complaint, that it rather fixes and confirms
the same; for that we allege that the Dutch have not assisted with all their
Forces, and to determine the Signification of the said Term, and how the same
is to be understood, we are to observe, that lest it should create hereafter
any Misunderstanding among the Allies, the several Quota's or Proportions of
the Allies were settled between every the particular Nations Annually. Now the
Parliament's Complaint is clear in this, nor does the Memorial of the States
offer one Word of Answer to it; they do not complain in general, that the
States have not supplied their whole Forces, but that they have not supplied
those several Proportions by which their whole Forces were by virtue of their
Subsequent Agreement to be understood; and this appears from the very Memorial
itself, where their High Mightinesses acknowledge it, and better Proof cannot
be desired. See their own Words.

'By the Seventh Article of the Treaty of the Ninth of June 1703, by which that
Agreement was renewed, it is provided, that the Number of Ships of War to be
furnished by each for their whole Quota according to the said Agreement should
be regulated every Year, and that the Rendezvous, as well as the Places where
the Ships should be employed, should likewise be agreed upon every Year;
accordingly this has been concerted Yearly, Her Majesty having to that Purpose
for several Years sent over one of Her Admirals, at which Times Two Things
principally were taken into Deliberation, namely, the Number of Shipping and
the Places where they should be employed.'

Here it is acknowledged by the States that the Quota's were adjusted between
us and them, both as to Number of Ships, and where to be employed. There are
but Two Objections which the Memorial pretends to make after this, the First
is, Whether the Ships which the States furnished for the Guard of the North
Seas should not be esteemed Part of their Quota, and Secondly, Whether the
Number of Ships mentioned to be employed by Her Majesty in the Channel and in
the Mediterranean were necessary; these are also their own Words, to which may
be briefly answered, First, That after they had acknowledged, as above is said,
That the Number of Ships and Places where the same should be employed were
every Year concerted, it can no more be asked whether they were necessary; the
Question rather lies fairly, Whether the Numbers concerted were respectively
supplied, if there had appeared any subsequent Alteration in the Face of the
War. So that if it had seemed to the States less necessary to send so large a
Number of Ships as was agreed, it must have been reasonable that a new Concert
between the Allies should have been made, and some mutual Agreement offered for
lessening the said Number on both Sides. But to agree First that such a Number
on both Sides should be supplied, and then shortning that Number on their Side,
without signifying to the British Court that they thought fewer Ships enough,
so that the British should be left to send their full Quota as agreed, and the
States only make an Abatement, this can be no Fair Treatment of the British,
nor is it esteemed fair Dealing in our Country, whatever it may be in Holland;
therefore the Complaint of the Commons in this Case seems very just, and is not
at all answered by this Memorial, for that the States General did not supply
the Number of Ships which by their Annual Agreement was concerted between them
and Her Majesty; Secondly, But say the States, we did supply a great Squadron
in the North Seas, which ought to be esteemed a Part of our Proportion, and all
the Reasons given for this Way of acting are, that such were the Sentiments of
the StatesGeneral; yet in another Part of the said Memorial it is owned, and in
the Report of the Commissioners of the Admiralty it is expressly said, those
Quota's were settled only for such Ships as were to act Conjunctly or
Separately in the Channel and the Mediterranean. But because this Argument is
of too much Value to have it depend upon the dubious Construction of Terms, it
may be observed, First, That there is no Parity or Equality in this Argument,
for that the Concert of Proportions of Ships to be supplied by us and the
States respected only the particular Seas, in which the Power of the French was
particularly Formidable, and where their main Fleets were to be expected, as in
the Streights, and the Channel, or on the Coasts of Portugal and Spain. And
that the British Nation have kept great Squadrons and Fleets out in sundry
other Parts of the World, as the Dutch have done in the North Sea, without
reckoning any such Ships into the Quota or Proportions of the Fleets to be
furnished as before, for the Carrying on the War, such have been the Fleets and
Ships constantly sent to the West Indies, to St. Helena, to the Canaries, etc.
by which it appears, that whatever the Sentiments of the States of Holland have
been, as above, the Sentiments of the British Court have always been, that each
Ally ought to have supplied their full Quota of such Ships as were concerted
for the Service of the War in the Channel and in the Mediterranean, without
esteeming such Ships as Part thereof which they respectively were obliged to
furnish for the Protection of their Commerce in any other Part of the World;
and that this was the real Sentiments of the States General as well as of Her
Majesty, appears for that in all the Ships sent by either of the Powers into
other Parts of the World, as into the North Seas, the Baltic, the West Indies,
St. Helena, and the like, they very seldom acted in Conjunction, but sent their
respective Squadrons separately, as the Necessity of their Affairs required.
Nor did those Ships act in Conjunction on any Occasion, save only as they found
it necessary to take the Ships of each other Nation under Convoy, or in their
Protection, and made use of the Harbors of each Confederate as there might be
Occasion. This is manifest, in that notwithstanding the great Fleets which the
States General have upon all Occasions sent to the North Seas, as is alleged,
the British Court have been obliged also to send Annual Squadrons to those Seas
for the Safety of their Trade, as well to Russia as to the East-Country, the
Elbe and the Weser, as also for the Defense of the Coast of Scotland and
Ireland; which Ships, though equal, if not superior, to the Numbers sent into
those Seas by the States General, have not been accounted by Her Majesty as any
Part of the Proportion of Ships concerted as abovesaid with the States.

This therefore can never be the Reason of the Report of the Commissioners of
the Admiralty; and it is surprising to all those who know the State of those
Things, to hear the Memorial say, the States General had the Care of the North
Seas, as they do when they sum up that Part of their Case as follows, viz. 'It
must be observed, that in the aforesaid Account Notice is taken only of the
Ships of this State, which in Conjunction with those of Her Majesty were
employed in the Mediterranean and the Channel; and that the North Sea, which
this State, during the War, has generally had the Care of, is wholly omitted:
Which Two Things, namely, the Mention of those Ships only of this State which
have acted in Conjunction with those of Her Majesty, and the Omission of the
North Sea, make so great a Difference between the Number of Ships reckoned by
the foresaid Account to have been furnished by this State, that probably this
Difference gave Occasion to the forming the foresaid prejudicial Resolution or
Vote of the Lower House, which possibly would not have been formed might this
State have first been heard upon it.'

It should seem Needful here to enter into an Enquiry what Number of Ships Her
Majesty has from Time to Time sent into the North Seas, and how the
States General may be said to have had the Care of the North Seas, when it is
well known the British Trade, nay, and even often the Dutch to Archangel, have
been Convoyed Out and Home by Her Majesty's Ships; and the Coast of Scotland,
the Mouth of the Baltic, and the Elbe, have been constantly Guarded by the
British Ships.

Thus by the plainest Reasoning in the World the Memorial is fallacious, for
that the Desiciencies complained of remain consest by the States themselves,
the Reasons pretended to justify themselves are directly contrary to the
concerted Proportions and Treaties made between the said States General and the
Queen's Majesty; and this is exactly agreeable to the Report of the
Commissioners of the Admiralty, and the Resolutions of the House of Commons.

The like fallacious Way of Arguing appears in the Case of the Landforces or
Troops, in which still their High Mightinesses do not deny the Matter of Fact
alleged in the said Address, but excuse and extenuate the same by their
Efforts otherways, as particularly, they allege an Article of their Raising
Troops before us, and this they say deserves some Compensation; that is, that
they having raised Fifty Thousand Men before us, they should be therefore
allowed to maintain Fewer than they agreed for afterward; or to speak plainly,
that because they were obliged to a quicker Armament than the British,
therefore they were to have leave to break in upon future Concert, and fail in
the Numbers they were to bring in afterward: This seems no unfair Construction
of the First Clause of the Memorial relating to the Troops, which is as follows.

'In the First Place, it must not be omitted to observe on the said Estimate,
that in the general Charge for the Year 1701, the Forty-four Thousand Nine
Hundred Ninety-two Men which the Vnited-Netherlands kept up after the Peace of
Ryswick, are mixed with the Thirty-four Thousand Eight Hundred Sixty-six Men
which were taken into Service immediately after the Death of Charles the Second
King of Spain; and that for the Year 1702, not only the Troops which this State
took into Service that Year, but those hired the Beginning of the foregoing
Year, are reckoned all together; which if put down more distinctly would have
shown, that this State had reinforced their I roops with above Fifty Thousand
Men a considerable Time before Great Britain came to make any particular
Augmentation; which earlier Arming, to the excessive Expense of this State,
well deserved to be allowed for by some kind of Compensation.'

What can the Words deserve some Compensation be supposed to signify, but that
the States General concluded from thence that their future Deficiency was to be
allowed because of their more Arming than the English? Which any one that
remembers the Occasion may find other Reasons to give for, and which the
States General themselves seem to acknowledge, or at least to hint at, which
was in short, that the Parliament and People of England did not come into the
Measures for the last War, or perhaps believe it so necessary at first as the
States did, and therefore did not Vote such large Sums for their Proportion as
the States General required, and this they now allege should be made up
afterward. This is gathered from the following Words in the Memorial.

'This State were obliged to be content with Great-Britain's furnishing in the
Beginning of the War no more than Forty Thousand Men in the Netherlands, in so
great a Disproportion with respect to this State; not because there was any
Convention or Agreement made about it, or that it was at all reasonable, but
because no more was consented to by the Parliament, the Reasons of which are
probable fresh still in the Remembrance of many; and at that Time the only
Course this State could take, was to burden itself with so great a
Disproportion, and to wait till in the Continuance of the War it should be made
good to them'

This may imply that the States General desired to have this Disproportion made
good to them afterward by the English, but does not prove that it ought to
have been made good, or that the Queen of Great-Britian had agreed to make it
good much less did it signify that they were thereby Entitled to make it good
to themselves by a Deficiency in such Quota's and Proportions as they should
agree afterward to bring into the Field.

Upon the whole then it seems the Sum of the Case is this, that the Dutch have
really been Deficient in the said Quota's, but that according to their own
Sentiments they might lawfully be so, notwithstanding express Treaties and
Conventions to the contrary; and that these Sentiments arise from their
thinking fit to make Reprizal or Stoppage upon England, for the Dutch coming
into the War a Year before us; and because we did not think fit to come into
the Alliance sooner, they are making us pay for our standing out.

More or less than this cannot be made of their long Memorial, and as to the
Justice and Equity of this the World is left to judge of that Affair.

The Author of this had resolved to add here some Remarks about the Pretense of
carrying on the War with all their Forces; and the States saying that Britain
is more Powerful, and therefore must bring in more Forces, making themselves
Judges of who is, or is not, most Powerful; but Her Majesty's Answer to the
States, since published, has made this so clear, and pressed it so close upon the
Dutch, that it seems needless to say any more to that Point.

FINIS.

