THE ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY VARNISH. VOL. II.

THE ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY VARNISH; OR, A PEEP AT THE MANNERS OF SOCIETY. BY AN
ADEPT.

Parva res est voluptatum in vita, prae quam quod molestum est. IN THREE
VOLUMES. VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM LANE, LEADENHALL-STREET. M.DCC.LXXXVI.

THE ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY VARNISH.
CHAPTER XVI.
Description of the family. -- The soldier gives an account of his life. -- He
endeavors to prove that honor is a sufficient substitute for happiness. -- I
retire to bed. -- Join the soldier and his family. -- More ways of living than
one. -- The soldier's stratagems to eke out a scanty pittance. -- Their success.

AS soon as we had all retired within the cabin, our company was reinforced by
the arrival of the farmer's daughter, who had just returned from a neighboring
fair, where she had been to sell some spun-yarn, in which employment her father
and she passed the greatest part of their time, in order to make a small
addition, by their industry, to that pittance, to which it had pleased heaven
to reduce them.

When we had assembled round the hearth, the loquacious soldier, taking some
tobacco from a leather pouch, which he carried in his pocket, between his
finger and thumb, and depositing it in his lower jaw, between his lip and his
teeth, began to inform us who he was, and the reasons that had induced him to
pay a visit to that part of the country. -- "When I first took it in my head to
enter the army as a private," says the soldier, "I was about the age and size
of this here lad," at the same time giving me a violent pat on the head. -- I
remember the time just as well as if it was but yesterday, though, may hap, I
haven't made many a hard campaign since that time; -- but no matter for that,
every man is not born with a silver spoon in his mouth; and, if so be as how
I Have done my duty, why an't I as good as another? hey, father!" says he,
addressing himself to the host; -- "but, damme, what signifies? -- it will be
all the same a hundred years hence, as Corporal Crab used to say. -- Well, as I
was saying, when I listed in the army, it was in the month of June, at Clonmel,
in the county of Tiperary, and a fine body of men our regiment were, damme, as
ever faced an enemy in the field of battle. -- But this will not do, by G -- d! --
ram me into a ginshop (as our corporal used to say) but I Am growing
confoundedly dry; I Am none of your fellows, damme, not I, that can talk without
drinking; -- here," said the talkative son of Mars, holding out the mug, "take
this and fill it full of the righteous! -- I cannot do without it, by the lord
Harry; -- I must wet the whistle; -- I Am just as dull, if I want drink, as a
Mounseer without soup meagre. -- Aye, that is a brave girl!" says he, taking the
mug from the young woman, "come, "my lass," putting the vessel to his mouth,
here is long life to you if you die tomorrow, as our corporal used to say. --
What was I saying when I left off? -- Oh! I recollect. -- Why, we were ordered
to Cork, that we might be in readiness to meet the transports, which were
coming round there, from the Channel, to take us, and five more regiments, to
North America, to fight the rebels. -- We got got into the boats at three in
the morning, and fell down the river to the ships that were moored off Kinsale,
and a brave set of boys there was, do you see, as ever the sun shone upon. -- We
mustered, I remember, near four thousand, though, I believe, four hundred never
lived to return; but no matter for that, we must all die some time or other;
and is not better to die in battle, with a bullet through your head, fighting
for your king and country, (as our corporal used to say,) than to sneak into
the other world with a 'potecary's shop in your guts? -- Damme, I Am no
flincher; -- here is your good health, daddy," says the soldier, drinking. -- I
remember," continues this son of gunpowder, "we had a quick passage. We crossed
the Atlantic, and arrived at New York just forty days after the time of our
embarkation. -- I recollect too that our general would scarcely give us time to
refresh ourselves after the voyage, when he ordered us up into the country,
where we marched and countermarched after the enemy; but I don't know how it
was, but, damme, we always arrived a day too late; -- but no matter for that,
-- here is success to the army," says he, drinking, and afterward giving me the
mug; -- "come, you dog," says he, why don't you drink? -- why, your'e down in
the mouth; -- damme, you will never grow tall if you don't drink. In compliance
with his solicitations I took another draught; while I was performing of which
he kept crying, Take a good pull; -- by G -- d it is better for you than
mother's milk. -- Well, as I was saying, our arms were idle, for want of use,
till we were ordered to force the trenches of the rebels at Bunker's-hill. --

At the mention of Bunker's-hill, I perceived the tears, trickling from the
eyes of the venerable old landlord, chase one another "In big, round, drops,
adown his furrowed face." "Why, what is the matter, father?" says the soldier.
-- Ah!" replies the host, "I lost a son in that engagement, who, had he been
living, would have solaced and relieved me in my old days." -- "What was his
name?" says the soldier. -- "John Foster," says the other. -- "Jack Foster!"
says the knight of the brown musket; -- "by G -- d I knew him as well as my own
brother; -- he belonged to our grenadiers, and as clever a fellow he was as
ever stood in shoe-leather. -- I remember he was shot through the heart as he
was leaping into the Yankees trenches. -- Why, man, he and I were comrades, and
were quartered together at Peg Brown's, who kept a huckster's shop in Boston."
-- At this part of the story the old man's faculties forsook him, and, overcome
by grief, with the assistance of his daughter, after wishing us a good night's
rest, he retired to bed. --

"It was in Boston," continues the soldier, "that I picked up my wife, and a
clever b -- tch she is as ever pillaged a field of battle. -- She was formerly
married to a sergeant of our regiment, but, having his head shot off by a
cannon-ball, why, damme, the next day she married me; -- didn't you Moll?" says
he, looking round for his companion, who had stole away to bed with her child
in the beginning of the soldier's story; -- why, what the devil is she gone to
bed already! -- never out of her road by G -- d! -- but, as for that matter,
Moll's an old campaigner, and, if ever she wants any thing for asking for, why,
she ought to be damned, as our corporal says; -- so here is my service to you,
my lad, says the facetious narrator, drinking again. --

Well, how should you like to be a soldier? continues my companion, addressing
himself to me. -- I frankly replied, "Not at all:" at which he testified a
great deal of surprise, and said, "Why, damme, have you no ambition, you dog."
-- "Why no," I replied, "not to lose my limbs as you have done," the soldier
having but one arm. -- "Oh! damn, this is a trifle," says he, lifting up the
remaining stump; "besides, I should not have lost this but for a mere
accident." Upon my inquiring into the nature of it, he informed me that he lost
his precious arm at the springing of a mine, where nine-tenths of the party he
belonged to were blown to pieces in the air: upon which I told him, without any
equivocation, that I had determined never to be a soldier, as I had a
particular veneration for peace, health, and a whole skin. -- "I am sorry, my
lad," says this modern Belisarius, that you have so pitiful a way of thinking;
-- by the Lord, you have no more idea of glory than a captain in the city
militia, nor no more spirit than a tailor. -- Now, look at me; -- you see me
here a poor fellow, wading through the world with one of my wings lopped off;
-- but no matter for that, that is nothing more than the fortune of war, as our
corporal used to say, and is many a brave man's lot as well as mine, do you see;
but, if so be as how that had not been the case, why, damme, by this time, I
should have been a greater man than ever. -- But I Will say nothing, for boasting
is the language of poltroons, and beneath a gentleman-soldier to make use of;
so, my little hero, here is to ye you," putting the mug to his mouth; -- "oh! oh!
damme," says he, turning the mug bottom upwards, "we are all aground by G --
d!" --

By this time the young woman had returned from attending upon her father; and,
intimating to the story-telling soldier that it was high time to think of going
to bed, he thought proper to take the hint, and, asking the girl to show him
the hammock where his wife had turned in, he took up his sword and knapsack,
and, taking me by the hand, went out of the room, scratching his head, and
shaking himself all the way, to solace his yoke fellow, and give his tongue a
respite until morning.

As soon as the beams of Phoebus penetrated through a little window, and
informed the tenants of the cabin that it was time to rise, we all got up, and,
having adjusted our traveling baggage, began to march, taking the readiest way
to come into the high road that leads to the metropolis, and, the soldier and
his wife having the same place of destination, we made a pleasant party of
three, and agreed to bear each other company.

As we walked along, the soldier took frequent opportunities of sounding me
upon the strength of my purse, which when he learned was almost exhausted,
having only a crooked sixpence and a few halfpence left, his looks became
gloomy and thoughtful; and we were laying our heads together, to concert a plan
for the procuring a comfortable breakfast, when we espied a carriage coming
toward us, followed by three servants on horseback; at the sight of which my
companion's countenance began to wear a pleasant aspect, and, bidding me make
what haste I could behind a hedge, he told me that he would soon procure some
loose cash from the quality in the coach, which was approaching us now very
fast. I immediately obeyed his orders, and got with great precipitation on the
other side of the ditch, whence I resolved to watch his motions narrowly, not
knowing rightly what construction to put upon his words; but I was soon
released from my perplexity by observing my fellow-traveller, who had so
contrived to twist his left leg and the remaining arm, that he appeared, when
limping, (which he did to admiration,) like a poor dislocated wretch, who had
not the power of putting his hand to his head, or helping himself in any manner
whatever; and, in this woe-begone state, he placed himself in the middle of the
road, to be ready, at all points, to encounter the coach, and to lay warm siege
to the hearts of the company within.

As soon as the carriage arrived within a few paces of the soldier, we all
perceived with joy that the majority of the company were females, there being
three young beauties within, accompanied by an elderly gentleman, whom we
guessed to be their father. But my senses were now occupied in observing the
artful maneuvering of the jocund son of Mars; for, limping up to the side of
the carriage, to all appearance with infinite labor on his part, and, pulling
off his hat, he accosted them in the following pitiable strain: -- "Ah! my
sweet young ladies, long life to you all; -- and, cannot you find, in your fair
bosoms, one spark of pity for a poor maimed soldier, with a wife and six small
children?" -- "Yes, my good gentlewomen," cries his faithful help-mate, "this
boy, in my arms, is one of them; -- we left the other five, in the last town,
behind us, as a pledge for nineteen-pence halfpenny." All true, upon my
honor," says the soldier; "and, unless you, or some other well-disposed
Christians, contribute to our relief, we must perish for hunger." -- "How came
you by those wounds, friend?" says the gentleman in the coach. -- "I lost this
precious limb," replies the soldier, exhibiting his stump, in the defense of an
officer's wife, who was a passenger on board our transport, whom the Spaniards
wanted to make a prisoner of, off Cape Finistere, because, why, my sweet
madam," says he to one of the young ladies, who had put her head out of the
coach to look at the young child, "she was like yourself, heaven bless you, as
beautiful as Wenus." -- "Ah! poor man," says the lady, evidently the more
interested in his success by the soldier's last well-timed remark upon her
person. -- "I and nine more of my comrades," continued the military impostor,
"were taken prisoners as we boarded the Spanish frigate sword in hand, my good
master, when we were put in irons till the ship bore away for Barcelona; then
they hauled us ashore, and we lay fifteen months, a fortnight, and three days,
on the damp floor of a Spanish prison, with no other covering than an old
blanket, full of varmint; and no food but stale onions, black bread, and
stinking water, your honor."

As the female heart is generally susceptible of the soft pangs of sympathy,
when listening to the misfortunes of the brave, and the Irish ladies being
equal to any upon earth in gentleness, generosity, and compassion, it is no
wonder that the young gentlewomen in the carriage should unite to lift the
supposed burden of care and want from the shoulders of the gallant veteran; --
indeed he had no sooner finished the relation of this well-wove catalogue of
woe than they joined in concert to implore the old gentleman to give him a
shilling. Upon his expressing an opinion that he thought it too much, they
pulled out their purses, as in unison, and, gathering six pence a piece, threw
it to the soldier's wife, who picked it from the road, while he exhibited, in
silent gesture, as if overpowered with their bounty, some well-conceived
attitudes, expressive of pantomimic gratitude, as the coach drove away from
this accidental farce, which was performed so much to the honor of the ladies,
and, in my opinion, the degradation of the soldier.

My companion had the grace to watch until the carriage, by descending a hill,
got entirely eclipsed from our view, when calling to me to come forth, by the
well-known summons of Fox, come out of your hole! I leaped into the path, on
the side of the highway, while he replaced his knapsack, (which he had taken
off for the more convenient performance of the part he meant to play,) and,
after buckling it in proper order, we set off on our peregrinations once more,
having no object now that could so materially affect our contemplation as the
fight of an alehouse, for which we all looked out, with as much ardour as
mariners do for land, when their water and provisions are exhausted.

CHAPTER XVII.
A proof of my credulity. -- My inquiries are followed by a family quarrel. --
A familiar dialogue in low life. -- Arrive at a public house. -- Diamond cut
diamond, or the soldier too much for the Israelite. -- Arrive at a farm house.
-- Another proof of the soldier's address in thieving.

WE were all three pacing along the middle of the high road, to the tune of the
Grenadier's March, which the soldier was whistling, in quick time, while his
eyes glistened with pleasure at the success which had attended his last
maneuver: and every now and then he cast them toward me with a leer, as much
as to say, Don't you think me a damned clever fellow? when I interrupted the
progress of the tune, by observing, that I was a little surprised how any
person could retain so great a share of animal spirits, who had experienced so
many, and such reiterated, hardships. -- What, you mean the Spanish prison, and
the stinking water? says my companion. Upon my replying, "Yes," he burst out
into a fit of immoderate laughter, which he repeated, looking in my face, two
or three times successively. At last, the violent part of his merriment
subsiding, he asked me, with a grave countenance, if I believed it. -- I told
him, to be sure; the circumstances appeared to me so natural that I could think
of nothing else upon which he undeceived me, by telling me, very heartily, that
the whole, from beginning to end, was neither more or less than a confounded
lie. -- "What, have you no children in pledge neither?" said I. -- "Not one,
upon my soul," said he, "nor a brat in the world except this young bastard at
my wife's back; and, if any one has a mind to take him into pledge, why, all
that I say to the matter is, that I Will be damned if I Would take the trouble to
redeem him in a hurry." -- "How dare you call my child a bastard, you lob-lolly
son of a whore," cries the enraged wife. -- "No abuse, Moll," replies the
other, holding up the remaining arm in a threatening position, "because why,
do you see, if you do, I Will bring you to the halberd, by G -- d; so, mind me
that, if you have a guard for your bones, my girl." -- You and your halberd may go
to hell together, you lousy, scabberoon, rascal!" says the irritated trull,
with her cheeks as red as scarlet with indignation, was it for this I left Jack
Furlow, to take up with such a lying, thieving, pimping, must-be-hanged, dog as
you? -- you know, you scoundrel, that I have it in my power to bring you to the
gallows, you leering hound!"

At this last intimation the soldier thought proper to appease his comrade with
all the soothing in his power: -- "Come, come, Moll," says he, "why are you in
such a damned passion? -- you know I was but in jest." -- "Take care to crack
your jests in proper time, then," replies she; -- "how does this youth know who
or what I am?" -- "Nay, nay, Moll," rejoins the soldier, "there is enough said;
if I I have affronted you, why, damme, I Am sorry for it." -- "Bastard indeed!"
mutters the lady. -- "Why, set in case as how I did call Bob a bastard, Moll,"
replied the knight of the brown musket, "you know the thing's natural enough."

I now took an opportunity of putting an end to this polite colloquy between
the soldier and his trull, by pointing to a public house that awaited our
entrance, at a small distance from the place of disputation. Here we found the
landlord and a Jew pedlar in a warm contest about the origin of Christianity,
and they contended the matter with so much heat, that, although I knew but very
little of the subject, I readily concluded they were both in the wrong. The
landlord was so engaged in his argument, that he took no sort of notice of our
entering the kitchen until my comrade, by touching him upon the shoulder, put
him in mind of his duty; upon which he started up, and, begging pardon for his
inattention, placed us a long stool by the fireside, when we took our feats
without any farther ceremony. -- "What have you to drink, landlord?" says the
soldier. -- Every thing," replies the other. -- Have you any good whiskey? if
you have, bring us a naggen apiece," says the dealer in gunpowder. -- "I think,
without vanity, I may say, that I have the very best whiskey in the country,"
rejoins Boniface, "I am sure I ought, brother soldier, for I pays ready money
for every drop that comes into my house; -- no trust for me; -- it was always a
saying of mine, Never trust but when needs must." -- "Oh! damn your palaver,
landlord," cries the thirsty soldier, "bring but the sort, do you see, and leave
us to praise it;" upon which delicate suggestion the host instantly
disappeared. --

"I suppose, gentleman's, you have quite tired the gentlewomans," says the Jew,
for she looks monshtrously jaded." -- Oh! by G -- d, friend," says her
helpmate, "it is not so easy a matter, as you may imagine, to knock Moll up." --
"I only shust spoke," says the Jew, "I hope no offensh." -- "Oh! not at all,"
says the other; -- "damme, I like you; -- give your hand, my honest Israelite;
-- we must be better acquainted." -- "Witch all my heart," says the Jew. --
"Will you join in our mess? we are only taking a sup of the righteous this
morning to warm our stomachs, man; -- here, take a taste," says the soldier,
giving the pewter measure to the Jew; which upon putting to his lips, he
exclaimed, "I vow to God it ish raw spirits!" -- "Raw!" replies the other,
"aye, to be sure; damme, I hate to spoil a good thing by mixing it; -- but what
have you got, Mordecai, in that there box by your side?" -- "Oh! a choich
collection of knives, shishhors, and rashors; -- perhaps your lady would like a
pair of shishhors; I can show her a pair thatsh fit for any lady in the land;
-- and, besides, heresh a nice pair of earrings; they are washed, to be shure,
but what shignifies that? they look as well as gold." Both of which articles
the soldier's trull accepted from the Jew with looks of great complacency, and
would of the whole contents of his box had he offered them for sale. -- "For
the shishhors I shall charge you, becaush you're a friend, only" -- Oh! damn
the price," cries the soldier, interrupting him, "we'll talk of that by and by;
-- here, my honest fellow, take another sup; I desired the landlord to make it
weaker for your palate." -- "You're vashly kind, sir, upon my verashity," says
the other, drinking; -- "your good healsh, sir, and yoursh, madam, and yoursh,
my fine boy." -- "Which road do you take?" says the soldier to the pedlar. -- "I
am going up towarsh town," says the other. -- "That Is lucky," says the soldier,
"then we'll travel together; I have a cousin that lives in a village, about
twelve miles distant, which we must pass through; -- he is a great brewer, very
rich, and has a particular regard for me; and, because I have taken a liking to
you, damme, I Will carry you with me to his house, and I Will be bound that he
shall purchase three parts of your cargo." -- "I am exshtremely obliged to
you," says the other. -- "Oh! damme, don't talk of that; I Am but a poor soldier
myself, it is true, but then what signifies that? I have the heart of a general,
by G -- d, as our corporal says. -- Come, then, as we are to travel together,
why, it is time we thought of marching," cries the consumer of salt petre; at
the same time bracing on his knapsack. -- "Your liquor comes to two and twenty
pence," says the landlord. -- "Oh! oh! damme, I forgot that," says the soldier,
"but, however, the Jew will discharge it; I Have got no change at present, and
I Will repay him at the next place we come to:" upon which the itinerant
hardwareman, with some manifest signs of repugnance to the business, pulled out
the money and paid the amount; which being accomplished, we all set forward in
the pursuit of our several occupations.

As we journied along the soldier entertained the Jew with an account of his
rescuing a brother Israelite in America from the hands of some Cataban Indians,
who had seized him as he was crossing a swamp, in order to furnish a detachment
of light horse with trinkets, and other necessaries, who were quartered within
a league of Albany. -- "That wash very good, upon my wordsh," says the Jew,
"and you will be rewarded hereafter for protecting one of our peoplesh." --
Oh!" says the other, "a good action rewards itself; besides, my heart has
always warmed to a Jew, do you see, ever since one of your tribe, one Moses
Manasses, gave some old clothes to relieve a comrade of mine that was sick in
Cork," says the soldier, at the same time winking his eye at me. -- "Oh! I dare
shay as how I knows the man," replies the Jew, "it musht be a relation of
little Solomon Manashes, the pomatum-merchant, in Duke's Place." -- "Oh! damme,
the very same," says the other; "I have heard him mention Solomon's name a
hundred times; he was his uncle by the mother's side, and a devilish clever
fellow he was, my little Girgashite," replies he, looking at me, and thrusting
his tongue in his cheek with a grin. -- "Oh! devilish clever," says the Jew,
"he was the best maker of Dutch sealing-wax in all Hounsditch."

By this time we were overtaken by two empty cars, which were returning to the
next town, after having carried some straw to a gentleman's seat up the
country; and, being all of us a little inclined to be lazy, we procured a seat
upon the cars, through the mediation of the lame soldier, for the promise of a
quart of ale to the driver on our arrival at the next alehouse. Accordingly we
all mounted upon the vehicle, and, having had but an indifferent night's rest,
I presently fell asleep, and did not awake till I was pulled by the legs by my
companion, who informed me that the cars would go no farther.

When I alighted from the carriage, I perceived the Jew and the soldier's trull
had got a considerable way before us; and, upon my expressing some
astonishment, my military companion told me, that they were resolved to push on
smartly, to be able to reach the next town before dark, which place had been
previously settled by all parties as a general rendezvous.

As we trudged along, the merry-hearted soldier did not fail to entertain me
with stories of sieges and battles, and hair-breadth escapes, interlarded with
witticisms, which he delivered in a manner and dialect peculiar to himself. --
"Some people," says he, "in my situation, would be damnably down in the mouth,
without any money in my pocket, except a couple of crooked sixpences, and not
an ounce of provision, of any kind, in my knapsack, for Moll and me to travel
upwards of forty miles; but that does not affect me, for, when one expedient
fails, do you see, why, I try another. -- I am resolved to get money when I want
it; why, if I can get it honestly, do you see me, so much the better, but at any
rate I Will get it; -- I Am none of your mealy-mouthed rascals that want to be
asked twice to what is good. -- But stop! what have we here! -- some quality on
horseback, by all that is lucky!" -- and, after bidding me get out of the way,
he took a piece of soap from his pocket, and, placing it under his tongue, he
watched till they were come pretty near, when he fell flat upon his back, and
began to beat the ground with his head and hands, and presently foamed at his
mouth prodigiously.

As the seeming violence of his distress could not fail to attract their
notice, they all rode up, while he acted the part of a man sorely afflicted
with the epilepsy, or falling sickness. The company, (which consisted of two
ladies on horseback, attended by a young gentleman, about sixteen years of age,
and an officer in his uniform, with two servants in livery,) seeing the
supposed melancholy condition of my comrade, ordered their servants to assist
the poor soldier. As the bait had sufficiently taken, and the company were
viewing him with strong marks of commiseration, he thought proper to grow
better, and, sitting up, affected to stare about him, as not knowing where he
was, which was attributed, by the pitying circle, to the convulsions which he
had undergone.

After being questioned as to his name, regiment, the cause of his disorder,
and other corresponding circumstances, he told them, with a look, in which he
counterfeited all the wildness of extreme despair, the same account, word for
word, that I heard him relate, on the same morning, to the company in the
carriage, of the Spanish prison, and its evils, and which, he afterward
assured me, was a circumstantial falsehood: but the man was right in one sense;
for he told his tale of misery with such an artless affectation of truth and
sincerity, that they threw him, in silver and halfpence, to the tune of
seventeen pence. After he had fervently prayed to heaven to bless them for
their charity and benevolence, they rode off; and he stooped with alacrity to
gather the misapplied offerings of their deluded liberality.

By the time he had pocketed the donations of the generous and humane
travelers, who, doubtless, thought that they were doing an action peculiarly
grateful to heaven, I jumped from the ditch, where I had lain hid during the
soldier's masterly operation, and joined him company; when, giving me a
tremendous slap upon the shoulder, he burst into a loud laugh, and asked me
what I thought of the last maneuver. Upon my face denoting wonder and
amazement, he cried out, with great exultation, Oh! you dog, if you keep me
company, I Will teach you how to live; -- it is not done by working; no, damme,
let the foolish part of the world work, and them that are fond of it, say I;
for my part of the story, I never was in love with work in my life, and, what is
more, by G -- d, I don't believe I ever shall.

By the succession of artifices which my conscientious fellow-traveller had put
in practice, to delude the generous and benevolent, since I had the good
fortune to associate with him, I could not avoid looking upon him with a kind
of horror and antipathy; inasmuch as a knowledge of the infamous means he made
use of, to awaken the sentiments of pity in the hearts of the good and worthy,
would effectually steel them in future against the supplications of real
misery, whenever they might have the pain to encounter it: however, I had
resolved to disguise my ideas of his character as much as possible, and, by
affecting a compliance with his humors, endeavored to glean some wholesome
experience, without endangering either my manners or my morals.

As we paced along to overtake our companions, who, by this time, had got the
start of us by at least a mile, we came within sight of a farm-house, to which
the one-armed veteran proposed going, for the purpose of asking a ruddy-faced
damsel, who stood at the door, the hour of the day. Upon his asking the
question, she replied, with great civility, that she would go and see. The
moment that the girl had turned her back, I observed my colleague looking about
the yard with the eyes of Argus. At last, espying a well-fed duck, that came
waddling toward us, his chops watered with desire; and, bidding me wait at the
door, he stepped on one side, and, with an admirable alertness, struck the duck
on the head with a thick oak sapling, which he carried with him by way of
walking-stick, and, ere I had well time to contemplate the transaction, he had
it deposited in his knapsack; when the young girl returned, and informed us it
was almost six o'clock. The soldier, finding that the evening was so far
advanced, told me that we must stir our stumps, for that we had a good three
miles to go over before we should enjoy the comforts of either bub or grub; by
which polite epithets I had been already taught to distinguish the difference
between meat and drink.

CHAPTER XVIII.
We overtake the Jew. -- He is affronted by the landlord. -- A battle. -- The
bloody consequences. -- We enjoy the fruits of my companion's dexterity. --
Make the Israelite drunk. -- He is charged with committing a robbery. -- The
puhlican enraged, and drawn into a scrape by the mal-practices of the soldier.

PHOEBUS had just descended to the enjoyment of his beloved Thetis when we
arrived at the town of --, and found Isaac (for that was the Jew's name)
watching for us at the door of a house, dedicated for the purpose of
entertaining the weary sojourner.

Upon the soldier's making an inquiry after his female messmate, the Jew told
him that she was smoking her pipe by the kitchen-fire, whither we all repaired
immediately; and, as the demon, hunger, had caused strange commotions in the
intestines of us all, it was proposed by the Jew that we should get something
to allay it; upon which the publican told our friend Isaac that he could give
him as delicious a slice of bacon as ever was broiled on a turf-sire. -- A
slice of vat! cries the enraged child of circumcision, who took this proposal
of the landlord as a direct insult. -- "Why, a slice of bacon," cries the
other. -- Gives me leave to tell you, sir," replies the descendent of Moses,
"that you are a very impertinent short of a fellow." -- "Why, I Will tell you
what, friend," says the host, "'it is true, I Am obliged to every gentleman for
their custom; but what then? why, I will not receive uncivil language from the
best man in the county; and, if you repeat such language again, friend, damme,
I Will shave your face for you with an oaken razor," alluding to the Jew's beard,
which ornamented his lower jaw from ear to ear, as black and bristly as a hog's
back. -- "Whatch that you shay?" says the Jew, rising from his seat, "you will
shave me! may I never enter the synagogue alive, but if you touch a hair of my
beard, but I Will" -- "What will you do?" cries the landlord, strutting up to
him. -- "Well done, Isaac," cries the soldier, slapping him on the back, and
pushing him forward, never mind; by G -- d, I Will stand by you: which assurance
of support spirited the Israelite so far, that, going up to the landlord, with
his arms enfolded, he repeats, Now, shir, I shay you are an impertinent fellow,
and, moreoverish, I have a great mind -- Here the Jew's sentence, like the
story in Hudibras, was abruptly broke off in the middle by the incivility of
the publican, who, on hearing the word impertinent a second time, grappled a
three-legged stool that stood in his way, with an intent to knock the Israelite
on the head; which Isaac perceiving, dropped instantly upon his knees, and was
looking most piteously up to the soldier for relief, when he received such a
terrible kick in the mouth from his adversary, as fairly drove him four yards
backward into the fire, where he lay, to all appearance, bereft of life, with
the blood gushing from his ears, mouth, and nostrils, and his head leaning
against an iron pot, which hung over the fire with some potatoes boiling for
the family.

When I perceived the dreadful issue of this adventure, I got hold of one of
poor Isaac's arms, and the soldier taking hold of the other, we drew him out of
the fire; but, he still remaining motionless, we deposited him upon some straw,
and then left him to recover his senses at leisure. -- Meanwhile the soldier,
pulling the dead duck from his knapsack, gave it to the host to get dressed,
which office he set about with wondrous alacrity; when the maimed warrior cast
his eye upon Isaac's box, which, taking to the window, he opened without
ceremony, and made free with a japanned tobacco-box, and a case of razors.

We were surrounding the fire, listening to the remarks of the laughter-loving
veteran, which were all made at the expense of poor Isaac, when the landlord
informed us that supper was ready. We all obeyed the word of command
instantaneously, and, entering into a small white-washed room, scarcely high
enough for any of us to stand upright, found the duck smoking on the table,
encircled with a great quantity of potatoes, and accompanied with two quarts of
fine ale, that mantled in the glass like genuine Burgundy.

As we were proceeding to an instant demolition of the purloined fowl, we heard
Isaac calling out vociferously, Were ish my boxsh? were ish my boxsh? upon
which the soldier went out, and, having washed the Israelite's face with a wet
towel, prevailed upon him to come in, and sup upon a fine duck, which, he
assured him, upon his honor, his cousin, the brewer, had sent him as a
present, when he heard he was in town.

Upon the strength of this importunity, Isaac consented to make one at the
mess, and, having taken his seat at the festive board, every man began to play
his part; and, indeed, we did it so dexterously, that, in less than ten
minutes, we had entirely cleared the table, not only of the duck, but of, at
least, a stone weight of potatoes, which accompanied the delicious morsel by
way of a damper.

I observed, with attention, the cadaverous visage of the Jew, whenever the
landlord entered the room, which changed from its natural hue very much,
resembling yellow oker, to that of a deadly pale; his lips quivered, and his
little black eyes, (shadowed with a monstrous pair of overgrown eyebrows,)
which appeared to be more than half buried in his scull, were inflamed with
malice and revenge; and indeed his whole frame seemed to undergo an agitation
that sufficiently denoted the anguish and perturbation of his mind. Every time
that the brawny host left the room, (a circumstance which the Jew attended to
with great watchfulness,) he did not fail to utter the severest denunciations
of vengeance; and, upon the soldier's telling him that it was a great
misfortune that he was not born a Christian, the Jew replied with heat, "And,
praysh, my good friend, what bettersh should I have been if Ish had been born a
Christian?" -- "Why, you would not retain all this animosity against the
landlord," says the soldier, "because, if so be, that you're struck on one
cheek, it commands you for to turn the other." -- "Oh! it dosh, dosh it?"
rejoins the other, "why, then, give me leavesh to tell you, Master Soldier, you
Christians don't appear to me, by your practish, to be mush the better for your
education." -- " Aye, how do you make that out, Mosy?" says the soldier. -- Why,
don't they hang the peoplesh from our shinagog in London without merchy,"
replied the pedlar, "and all, so shall Got shave me, merely because they buy a
little plate and jewelsh by way of a bargainsh." -- "Aye, aye, you mean, Mosy,"
says the soldier, "because they buy stolen goods, and so you complain, do you
see, because they hang the Jews for being consarned in a robbery; -- why, if it
was not for that, how would you, for instance, be able to travel about in
safety?" -- "Why, thatsh very true, upon my soul; -- heresh your healsh, my
good friend," says the Jew, drinking to the military disputant, whom he
regarded now as a miracle of discernment and integrity; -- "by the Got of my
fatheresh," added he, "if it was not for the happinesh of your shochiety, I
would not stay another hour under the roof of this bloody-minded publicansh."

In this jocund manner did the Jew and the soldier pass their time, in an
agreeable tete-a-tete, until one in the morning, by which hour the Israelite's
rational faculties were all dormant, or, in other words, he was made completely
drunk, having sacrificed to Bacchus so powerfully, that all those ideas which
usually swam uppermost in his understanding, such as extortion, deception,
malice, and a variety of other passions, of the same amiable complexion, were
now totally obliterated from the tablet of his memory, and lay drowned, not in
the Lethean lake, so famed by Ovid, yet full as effectually in home-brewed ale.
In this beastly state of negative existence did his bosom-friend, the wily
destroyer of gunpowder, drag him to bed, with his feet trailing along the
ground, as insensible of motion as if he had been a dead body actually drawn
from the field of battle.

After the soldier had properly disposed of the body of this circumcised
acquaintance, he returned for his box of pedlary wares, and, taking it with him
under his arm, wished us a good night, when we all retired to our several
apartments to rest.

Having drunk a much greater quantity of liquor than usual, I was obliged to
rise in the middle of the night, to grope about for a convenience, when I was
diverted from my purpose by a terrible outcry of Thieves! thieves! murder!
here is a villain wanting to ravish me! When my terrors had a little subsided, I
perceived the landlord making toward me in his shirt, with a candle in his
hand, inquiring where the noise came from; which we quickly ascertained by the
same outcries being repeated, and, breaking open the door of the room in which
the soldier, his trull, and the Jew, were contained, we saw the former leaning
over the bed, in the act of pinioning down the unfortunate Jew, who lay there
half awake, muttering Hebrew, which we conceived, by his attitudes and the
rolling of his eyes, to be prayers, while the trull was exclaiming, Ah! you
villain; what! want to ruin me, you impudent thief, while my dear husband was
here too, you dog; but, by the blessing of the Holy, you eternal vagabond, I Will
make you know your Lord G -- d from Tom Bell: at the end of which pious
denunciation she laid hold of Isaac's beard, and pulled it with such vigor,
that, before the miserable devil could disentangle himself from her gripe, she
had torn a handful of the bristly ornament of his chin away by the roots.

She had no sooner quitted her hold, than her precious helpmate, seizing him by
the shirt, in attempting to drag him out of bed, tore it to the bottom; but,
failing in that endeavor, he pulled down the bed-clothes, (which Isaac held
between his remaining teeth as long as he was able,) and, wielding his stick,
began to beat the mahogany carcass of the Jew without an idea of compassion;
but Isaac, not relishing that kind of exercise, leaped out of bed with the
celerity of a do, and, before his assailant could well turn round, had
secreted himself in the chimney, where he remained, uttering yells and
lamentations more dismal than were ever made by Nebuchadnezzar during his
residence in the wilderness.

From the knowledge I had of my companion's artifices, and the extraordinary
methods by which he seemed to eke out a subsistence, I had no doubt but that
this attempt on the chastity of his lady, which was imputed to the Jew, was no
other than a preconcerted scheme between this amiable pair to bring the
Israelite into trouble, and take advantage of his consternation; and, in the
sequel, I found that my suspicions were but too well founded.

Upon the reiterated promises of the landlord, that his person should be
unmolested, the grief-laden descendent of Mordecai ventured to leave his
unsavory retreat, and made his appearance, covered and defiled with foot, and
trembling with the several impulses of feat and cold like an aspen-leaf.

After inquiring for his clothes, he dressed himself in the best manner he was
able, and, at intervals, was talking to himself in a language that we could not
comprehend, when the landlord taxed him with the crime that was laid to his
charge, and was painting the heniousness of the offense, and that the laws of
the land would even justify the soldier in taking away his life in such a
situation: when the mortified Isaac fell upon his knees, and protested that he
was innocent of the crime of having attempted to debauch any man's wife; and,
striking his breast with great emotion, he swore, Dat ish Cot's truth, so shall
Cot save me, so shall Cot damn me.

The Jew, finding himself environed now with enemies on all sides, determined
to get out of the house as fast as possible, and set about it with as much
industry as was ever exercised by Ulysses, or any of his companions, to make
their escape from the dangerous cave of Polyphemus. After scrambling for his
tattered vestments, the next grand object that engrossed his imagination was
the box, which contained all his portable merchandise, and by the help of
which, under the management of an infinite deal of cunning, did he fondly hope
to be one day able to sit down, blessed with wealth, (gleaned from the
uncircumcised,) among his brethren of the synagogue, who eat and drink, in
filth and abomination, agreeable to the law of Moses.

But, alas! the hours that he had unluckily spent in the company of my
exemplary fellow-traveller, the soldier, were doomed by fate to be unpropitious
to poor Isaac; and indeed it was predestined that he should suffer so much,
that I ardently wish the evils that attended him, on that memorable day, may be
considered as sufficiently expiatory for his former mal-practices.

When, after a search of one hour, he had recovered his box, he opened it with
great trepidation and avidity, to see if every thing was safe, when, lo! to his
unspeakable mortification, he missed full three-fourths of its contents. He had
no sooner made the discovery than the roof echoed with his cries and
execrations; -- Oh! by the Cot of my fatheresh, but I am robbed of all my
propertish! cries the miserable Isaac; and, feeling in his pocket at the same
time, he found his purse had decamped also; when he added, in heart-rending
notes of deep-toned woe, -- and my monish! my monish! so help me Cot, Ish lost
my monish!

During the whole of this transaction, the soldier was employed in telling the
landlord that he knew Isaac's pranks of old, and that he was sure, instead of
being robbed himself, as he was complaining, that he had actually purloined
something belonging to the publican, and, in order to escape that and paying
his reckoning, he had raised this artificial outcry about a loss which he had
never experienced. -- "Fate and trot," says the landlord, "your story is very
likely, and I Am much obliged to you for the hint; for, though I never had a Jew
lodge with me before, by my soul I always heard they were a set of damned
rogues."

Isaac, still continuing obstinate to the text he first set out upon, and
making a terrible outery about his losses, threatened to have the landlord
before a justice of the peace in the morning, and, by certain nods, winks, and
insinuations, gave us to understand, that he verily believed he had a hand in
the business; which so nettled the host, that he instantly collared the
terrified Israelite without ceremony, and swore he would search him instantly,
for he believed, that, instead of being robbed of the articles he was making
such a hideous yell about, he had secreted some of his property; and swore, for
the slurs he had thrown upon his character, that, if he found any thing
belonging to him concealed about his person, of the value of tenpence, he would
hang him like a dog at the next assizes.

With the assistance of his other guests he threw the Jew upon the floor, and,
putting his hand in his coat-pocket, pulled out a tremendous slice of fat pork,
in weight, moderately speaking, about five pounds, which the soldier had
previously conveyed into his pockets, while he was bustling about his losses.

Upon this incontestible proof of his guilt, the landlord seized the Jew as his
prisoner, and, tying his arms behind him with a strong cord, forced him into
the cellar, where he remained a close captive until the morning, when they took
him from his dungeon, to carry him before a justice of the peace, with a face
as rueful as ever was exhibited.

The story of the robbery had by this time gained so much ground, that a great
number of boys had gathered round the door, waiting, with anxious expectation,
for the appearance of the persecuted Israelite; who was no sooner conducted
into the street than they set up a roar of exultation, and continued to torment
the poor wretch with the bitterest sarcasms upon his religion and the nature of
the theft, as the bacon was carried before him, elevated on a pole, amidst the
shouts of the surrounding multitude; all which indignities Isaac bore in
silence, "with a patient shrug," until they arrived at the magistrate's.

When they were proceeding to the examination of the culprit, it was discovered
that the principal evidence was wanting; -- in short, the soldier, having a
natural repugnance to the smell of justice, had taken an opportunity, during
the bustle occasioned by the progress of so comical a cavalcade, to decamp a la
sourdine; or, in other words, he moved off without beat of drum, and left the
deluded publican to make the best of the circumstance, and to depend for his
escape, from the perplexities that then surrounded him, on his own talents and
ingenuity.

CHAPTER XIX.
My arrival at Dublin. -- Astonishment at the magnificence of the buildings. --
Accosted by a sea-officer. -- Enter into his service. -- My master is arrested.
-- I am charged with a commission, which I execute with dexterity. -- My master
is enlarged by the good offices of a friend. -- New way of manning the navy.

HAVING conceived a most insuperable aversion to my military companion, in
consequence of the viciousness of his disposition, which had been manifested on
so many occasions in the short time that I had the honor of his acquaintance,
I secretly rejoiced at his retreat, and determined for the future to be more
guarded and circumspect in the choice of my associates.

Being now within a few miles of the capital, I set forward with all possible
haste, in order to reach it before the evening, which I should have found a
difficulty in effecting, if I had not rode upon a car, that was carrying corn
to the Dublin market, for at least six miles of the road.

When I first entered the city, every thing around me struck me with amazement.
Having been used, from my infancy, to see the societies of mankind comprised
within the narrow compass of a country town, I had no idea of all that bustle,
noise, and confusion, which characterises the metropolis of a commercial
kingdom; -- the streets, carriages, and public buildings, appeared like so many
objects raised by the power of enchantment.

I had strolled through several streets, totally ignorant of the best method to
pursue, and wrapped up in contemplation and wonder, when the wind in my bowels
and the gnawing in my stomach put me in mind that it was absolutely necessary I
should eat; and this suggestion called forth a hundred others, equally
disagreeable; for the reader will recollect, that I had before lost every
farthing I was worth in the wide world.

I remained for some minutes absorbed in reflection, when, not knowing whither
to direct my weary steps in search of either a meal to eat or a lodging to
sleep in, I burst into a flood of tears, and was actually standing in the
middle of the street a public spectacle of want and wretchedness, when I
received a familiar slap upon the shoulder, accompanied with Damn ye, Jack,
what do you snivel for, you dog? Upon my turning round, I perceived a
gentleman, about thirty years of age, with a good-humoured countenance, well
dressed, an oak sapling under his arm, and a cockade in his hat. He inquired
into the cause of my sorrow with a degree of attention and curiosity, that
sufficiently assured me his heart was influenced by the soft dictates of
humanity, though his language and his manners savoured somewhat of roughness.

When he was acquainted with the particulars of my life, he told me that I had
been obliged to weather some hard gales, to be sure, considering I was little
better than a cock-boat at present, and not much ballast on-board; -- "but what
of that, my lad," says the generous stranger; "who knows but you may be the
better for it as long as you live? -- come, give me your hand; -- if you have a
mind to live with me, do you see, as my servant, why, you shall be welcome, and
enter into present pay and good quarters: -- what do you say, you dog?" -- is it
a match?"

I thanked him for his friendship, and told him, if he pleased, that I would
follow him throughout the wide world; and indeed, at the instant I spoke, my
heart accorded perfectly with my professions, as I was much attached to his
interest from the open and sincere manner in which he accosted me.

After following my new master for near a mile, we stopped at a genteel house,
in the neighborhood of College-green, which I soon found was his place of
residence, when he informed his landlady that he had hired me as his servant;
at the same time ordering me to get my supper and go to bed, as he had no doubt
but I was greatly fatigued; and that he should have occasion for me early in
the morning. Indeed, there required but little pressing, on his part, to oblige
me to execute so agreeable an order, for, what with fasting and exercise, my
guts were actually in a state of open rebellion: however, the next morning I
entered upon my new state of servitude, and felt the most eager desire for my
master's rising, under whose banners I proposed living, for the future, with
the utmost degree of ease and tranquillity.

The servants of the house, with whom I had supped the preceding evening, gave
him the most amiable character imaginable, and I learnt from them that the name
of my benefactor was O'Driscol, and lieutenant of a man of war, who had
obtained leave of his captain, who then lay at Portsmouth, to pay a visit to
his relations in Ireland. They farther informed me, that I might expect to be
very comfortable in my new situation, as Mr. O'Driscol possessed every virtue
under heaven but one, which was economy; to which necessary ingredient in the
human composition he was so utter a stranger, that he very frequently supplied
the wants of the necessitous and importunate, and left himself without a
shilling.

It was near eleven before I was summoned by the bell to prepare my master's
breakfast, which I understood, from the servants of the family, was generally
cold beef and grog, which is a beverage peculiarly palatable to seamen, made of
rum, water, and sugar. When I entered my master's chamber, he accosted me with,
Well, Tony, you dog, how did you sleep? -- was the hammock convenient? -- but I
suppose as how, that, what with traveling, and the cargo of fresh provisions
you stowed in your hold last night, you would have slept at the main topmast head
of a man of war in the Bay of Biscay: -- but, come, have they told you what
sort of a breakfast I eat? -- When I answered in the affirmative, and informed
him that I had laid it for him in the dining room, he sallied out in his
nightgown and slippers, and, sitting down at the table, attacked the beef and
bread with the appetite of an alderman. After he had demolished about two
pounds of solid beef, and drunk a quart of grog, he ordered me to take away the
things, and get my own breakfast. -- I hope you don't want tea, says my master.
-- I assured him that I should always think myself extremely happy with a piece
of beef and bread for my breakfast. -- "Aye, you dog, that is right," says the
lieutenant, "I turned off my servant a day or two ago, because he could not do
without tea, and be damned to him; -- for my part, Tony, I detest tea; I think
it a weed that has already done a damned deal of mischief to old England, and I
believe, in my heart, can never possibly do any good either to the body politic
or natural."

My master was proceeding in vehement exclamations against the pernicious
tendency of tea, when his discourse was interrupted by the arrival of a
brother-officer. After the mutual exchange of a few salutations, which appeared
much higher tinctured with sincerity than refinement, he dressed; and, giving
me a few general orders, these sons of Neptune went forth arm in arm.

I had now leisure to reflect upon the comforts that I enjoyed in my new
employment, which, contrasting with my former situation with Calomel, and the
subsequent miseries I had experienced, made me as completely blessed in
imagination as I believe it possible for a human creature to be.

At length the hour arrived that it was usual for my master to come home to
dinner, when, not seeing him, it was conjectured by the family that he had met
with some engagement accidentally, which had prevented him: however, the
evening came, and we heard nothing of the lieutenant, which created some alarms
upon his account in the breasts of all the people of the house, to whom he had
particularly endeared himself by the goodness of his heart and the affability
of his manners.

At last night approached, and yet we heard no tidings of my master. Now every
one appeared interested for his welfare. The mistress of the house, knowing the
warmth of his disposition, entertained an idea that he might have got into some
ugly affray, which had ended in a duel, and he, perhaps, poor, sweet,
gentleman, (as she phrased it,) had lost his life.

But our fears, on that score, all subsided about eleven o'clock, when a man
with a stern and forbidding aspect knocked at the door, and asked for
Lieutenant O'Driscol's servant; at the same time informing the family that my
master was arrested for a bond of two hundred pounds, and now lay in
confinement at a spunging-house in Thomas-street.

The horror which I felt, and indeed every person in the house, on hearing the
above intelligence, may be more easily conceived than described; however,
recollecting the orders of my master, I followed the grim-looking conductor to
the officer's house who had arrested him.

When I came to that dreary abode of misery, I passed through two doors,
covered over with plates of iron, the keys of which were kept by a tall,
rawboned, man, whose countenance was so terrific, in my idea, that I trembled
with apprehension as I passed by him to my master, whom I found in a small,
filthy, room, sitting by the fireside, leaning upon a greasy oak table, with
his head reclined upon his hand, and discoursing with an ill-looking fellow,
who sat opposite, (whom I afterward found to be the bailiff himself,) with the
most perfect composure and familiarity.

When I entered the room, the lieutenant ordered me to sit down; and, calling
for pen, ink, and paper, he wrote a letter, which having sealed up, he
privately informed me of the place where the person lived to whom he had
directed it; at the same time assuring the officer, that his friend would
satisfy him for the debt the instant he should arrive; to which this human
harpy replied, I am very glad to hear it, master; for why, now, should I wish
to keep a good-natured gentleman, as you seem to be, do you see, locked up here?
-- to be sure I get a trifle by the wine, but what signifies all that? -- But I
perceive, as how, that our bottle's out; -- here, you Bet! cries the bailiff;
-- upon which the fellow who had conducted me to the house told his employer,
that his wife was below stairs, cooking the gentleman's supper. -- Here, then,"
says the ferocious chief, take this here bottle down to the bitch, and tell her
to send another full of claret; -- bid her to send the right sort; -- do you
hear, Peter? -- you understand me, says the bailiff; at the same time tipping
his understrapper a wink. -- "Aye, aye," says the other, and instantly
disappeared; when the bailiff, resuming the thread of his conversation,
proceeded, -- As I was saying, master, suppose I do get a trifle by the wine,
it is all nothing, do you see me, because why, the taxes eat us up. -- Here his
elegant apology was interrupted; for, by this time, my master, having sealed
and directed the letter, gave me positive orders to deliver it into none but
the gentleman's own hands, and to return to him with all possible haste.

When I read the superscription, I found it directed to a Captain Pennant, who
lived at one of the quays, leading down to the waterside. I literally obeyed
my master's injunctions, and, by good luck, got a man to show me to the
captain's house. I knocked at the door, and inquired if such a person lodged
there, and if he was at home; upon which I was showed up stairs, and found the
lieutenant's friend, with five or six more gentlemen of the navy, sacrificing
warmly to Bacchus, and drowning the sorrows of the day in a capacious bowl of
rum-punch.

When I had delivered my letter, which the captain read with signs of evident
emotion, he showed it to his companions, who, upon perusing it, started from
their seats, and proposed an instantaneous visit to my master, but, being
opposed in this project by the interposition of their chief, they desisted; the
captain at the same time ordering me to go back to the lieutenant immediately,
and inform him that he would follow me with a wet sail, and procure his
release, in less than an hour.

As I conceived these to be the tidings of joy, I hurried back to the
spunging-house as fast as my legs could carry me, and informed my master of the
issue of my errand; upon which he ordered more wine, and treated the bailiff
and his people with as much as they could drink, till at last the principal
himself fell asleep in his chair, and the rest of his infernal group began to
reel under the influence of the purple god.

I had not returned above half an hour, when we heard a bustle at the outer
door, which increased to that violence at last as roused the attention of the
bailiff, who had by this time fallen asleep. Presently in rushes Captain
Pennant, followed by seven or eight stout seamen, who instantly secured the
grim member of the law and two of his people. The third, who stood sentinel at
the door, foreseeing the nature of the captain's visit, (who was no other than
the commander of a press-gang, at that time stationed in Dublin, for the
purpose of procuring recruits to man the navy,) flew up stairs, followed by two
sailors, who touched the skirt of his coat just as he got out upon the leads of
the house; and, in endeavoring to leap over to the top of the opposite
mansion, he made a false step, and fell down from an eminence, four story high,
into a blind alley, which separated the two houses, and, pitching plump upon
his head, fractured his scull, and died upon the spot.

As for the bailiff and his followers, the sailors, after stripping and tying
them together, forced them into a hackney-coach, which happened to be passing
by; and, making the coachman get up behind, the sailors mounted on the box and
roof, and drove the carriage down to the waterside, where a boat was waiting,
into which they forced the unfortunate bailiff and his adherents, and lodged
them safe in the hold of a tender, that lay in Dublin bay, at the silent hour
of two in the morning; my master, the captain, and myself, going to the house
of a friend in his neighborhood, where it was proposed that he should remain
until an opportunity offered of his going on-board the first packet that sailed
for England; his remaining any longer in Dublin, after that adventure, being
considered by his friends as a measure attended with too much danger.

CHAPTER XX.
We go on-board a Liverpool packet. -- The effects that the novelty of my
situation had upon my mind. -- Description of the passengers. -- Dispute
between a fishmonger's lady and a Methodist preacher. -- The great benefit of
military men to the ladies in a mixed society. -- A dispute that proves the
necessity of travelers keeping their religious principles to themselves. --
The whole company alarmed with danger. -- The admonitions of the field-preacher
against swearing. -- A miserable catastrophe.

MY master having received notice that a Liverpool packet would sail in the
evening, we instantly set about a preparation for our watery expedition. The
lieutenant spent the remaining part of the day in taking leave of his friends,
among whom none had a warmer place in his esteem than Captain Pennant. I found,
from their discourse, that the intimacy had subsisted ever since they were at
school, and that they had both served together in the capacity of midshipmen
on-board the Dreadnought man of war; and likewise that the debt, for which my
master had been arrested, was not of his own contracting, but what he had
brought upon himself in consequence of his benevolence, having given his bond
to relieve the family of a friend in the deepest distress, upon the most solemn
assurances from the person relieved, that he never should be a sufferer by his
goodnature, as he should have the means of taking up the bond long before it
became due.

A sailor having been dispatched from the captain of the packet, to inform us
that the vessel would fall down the river on the turn of tide, which would
happen in half an hour, we were obliged to manage our affairs accordingly; the
lieutenant, to avoid the possibility of being known, having previously dressed
himself in a suit of women's apparel, which the captain had got from his
landlady for the purpose. -- A coach being called to the door, in stepped my
master, the captain, and another gentleman, with a large cargo of sea stores,
consisting of a cold boiled ham, a pair of fowls, bread, brandy, and claret.

When we arrived at the place of our destination, at George's quay, and were
putting our provisions in the boat, I felt the most unpleasing regret at the
idea of leaving my native land, perhaps for ever, and though not quite sixteen
years of age, so forcibly did the idea distress me, and so much did the love of
my country cling about my heart, that I actually wept with my distress; but,
turning my head round to look at the rest of the passengers, and observing that
they all appeared in a state of perfect indifference as to that event, I
thought the amiable emotions of patriotism were unmanly, and secretly wiped
away the tears that bedewed my cheeks, unnoticed by my master or the rest of
the company.

After indulging a silent reverie for a few minutes, my curiosity was
thoroughly roused by the novelty of the objects that surrounded me, and the
pleasures of my sight had completely dissipated the anxieties of thought. I
now, for the first time in my life, found myself sailing on the bosom of the
water, surrounded by a number of persons of all ages, conditions, and
descriptions. The boat which we were in appeared to me ready to sink with the
weight of its burden; and, when I inquired of one of the sailors how far we
were to proceed in that manner, and understood that the packet lay at the
distance of at least a league from the place of our embarkation, I felt a cold
sweat on all my limbs, and, notwithstanding the force of my curiosity, I could
not help wishing myself back a hundred times; however, after a safe and
agreeable sail, of about half an hour, down the Liffey, with the waters
beautifully illumined by the setting sun, the sheds of Clontarf forming a
charming back ground at a distance, and the horizon bounded by the purple
majesty of the hill of Howth, we arrived at the side of the packet as the
sailors on-board were busy in unbending the sails, preparatory to our voyage.

As the passengers rose from their seats, in order to embark on-board the
vessel, I had a fair opportunity of surveying their persons. The number in the
boat was nearly fifty, out of which I could easily distinguish about one-third
to be cabin-passengers. The rest were mostly Irish haymakers, or, what in that
country are called, spalpeens, who were going over to England to perform the
drudgeries of agriculture, and be ready against the ensuing harvest.

When the captain had got them all on-board, he made them immediately descend,
one by one, into the hold, or bottom of the vessel, where I understood they
were to remain until the packet arrived at Liverpool, in company with four
horses and a brood-mare, which were slung in the center, as their associates.
When they had all descended to their wooden couch, the mate of the packet
fastened down the hatch-way, and left them to shift for a bed below as well as
they were able.

The company in the cabin consisted now of seventeen persons, among whom was a
celebrated comedian, returning from his theatrical engagements in Dublin; a
Methodist preacher, who had been propagating the Gospel in Ireland, agreeable
to the doctrine of John Wesley; a Liverpool attorney; a Scotch physician; an
officer of horse; a young Connaught noviciate, who was going to study divinity
in the Irish college at Paris; a Quaker from Waterford, with his wife; a
custom-house officer; a fishwoman from George's-quay; a young gentleman, going
out as a cadet in the East India Company's service; with a pawnbroker's widow
and her two daughters; my master habited as a young lady, with a black bonnet
and cloak; and myself.

After a vast deal of altercation about priority, in regard to the beds in the
cabin, it was at last settled that the ladies should have the preference, and
the men shift for themselves; a determination that seemed perfectly agreeable
to all the company except the excise-man, who, grumbling at the decision,
observed, that it was but just, as they all paid equally for their
accommodation, that they should all fare alike. -- He was proceeding in his
remark with great bitterness, when the officer, approaching him with a stern
brow, told him, that the ladies had done him the honor to put themselves under
his protection, and, upon the strength of such authority, he requested them to
take possession of those beds which were most agreeable to themselves.

At this laconic intimation, the excise-man thought proper to drop the subject;
and, skulking into a corner by himself, the ladies proceeded to fix upon their
place of repose, which was an inner room, detached from the cabin by a glass
door, into which they all entered, my master included, and, getting into their
several beds, prepared themselves, in the best manner they were able, to
encounter that dreadful sickness, which a certain qualmishness in their
stomachs informed them was very rapidly approaching. -- As for the rest of the
tenants of the cabin, they betook themselves to their several quarters with the
utmost alacrity; and happy was he who could scud the fastest; for, having
weighed anchor, and the vessel being under way, she began to roll in the waves
from one side to the other, to the great annoyance of the squamish sons of
fresh water, with which the vessel was crowded.

Night began to spread her sable mantle over one half of this habitable globe,
when the captain, coming into the cabin, told his passengers that we had
cleared the light-house, at the entrance of the harbor, and were now going
right before the wind in the bay, with as fine a gale as heart could wish.

He had scarce made this declaration, when, in tacking about, the ship gave a
terrible plunge, which so alarmed the Methodist, that, putting his head out of
his birth, he asked the captain if he was sure we were all safe; if not, he
begged him, for the love of God, to tell him, that he might have time to say
his prayers, and intercede with the Almighty for the precious souls of the
children of sin on-board, who had never known the comforts of the new birth. --
"Oh! never mind trifles," replies the tarpawling, "I Will be damned but you're as
safe here as in your own bed." -- "Oh! don't swear, you monster of impiety,"
cries the preacher, when such wickedness, and profanation, is on-board, I
should not marvel if we all went to the bottom."

He had scarce uttered the last syllable, when the fish-woman, who slept in the
inner apartment, opened the door with her hand, and put out her head, which,
notwithstanding the assistance of a dirty woollen nightcap, appeared as
unamiable and hideous as the sign of the Saracen's, being covered with
carbuncles all over, which made her look at a distance somewhat like a fiery
meteor, or blazing countenance, with a pair of small gray eyes, that shone with
unusual fury upon this occasion; -- when this fish-dealing amazon had opened
the door, she accosted the captain of the packet in the following eloquent
admonition: -- "Here Is a pretty rig, blast my limbs, that I am to pay my
good-looking guinea for sleeping here, and be disturbed by that canting, lousy,
must-be-damned, scoundrel." -- "Out upon thee, thou vile daughter of Satan,"
cries the Methodist. -- "Out upon me, indeed!" cries the other, out upon
yourself, you dirty, cowardly, snivelling, hypocritical, rascal." -- I defy
thee, thou ungodly woman," replies the preacher, "and, if you don't turn aside
from the path of abominations, you will become as polluted as the whore of
Babylon."

At the mention of the word whore, the fishmonger's lady, losing all patience,
leaped from her bed with the agility of a greyhound, and, flying across the
cabin, would have left the poor Methodist no reason to pride himself upon his
admonitions, had not the captain, apprehensive of the consequences, interposed,
and assured her, that he was certain the gentleman in black did not mean to
offend her. -- "How dare he call me whore then?" replies the enraged female,
"I, to whose character no one dares say, black is the white of my eye." -- "I
did not mean to call you whore," says the other. -- "Who did you call whore
then?" says the oister-vender. -- "Why, the pope of Rome," cries the Methodist,
he is the great scarlet whore of iniquity, that, like a bottomless gulf,
swalloweth up the blind and the unwary." -- "And how dare such a fellow as you
treat his holiness with irreverence?" cries the young noviciate, touched to the
quick at the last declaration of the preacher's, by my conscience, friend, you
ought to have that tongue of yours cut out of your head, for making use of
expressions so disrespectful to the sublime head of the catholic religion, so
you ought.

This last acrimonious remark operated upon the mind of the Methodist like a
spark of fire upon a train of gunpowder, for, in his religious opinions, he
was inflexible as adamant, and would indeed have considered himself as a
blessed martyr to the faith that he professed, had he died in the act of
denying the pope's supremacy. Strengthened with this enthusiasm, he instantly
turned about to answer the young champion of his holiness, who lay in a
compartment immediately above him, there being three, one over the other,
erected on each side of the vessel, to contain beds for the accommodation of
the passengers.

As soon as the preacher had turned himself round, he began to inveigh most
bitterly against the encroachments of popery on the liberties of mankind, and
was actually proceeding, with all the vehemence he was able, to scandalize the
infallible father and his followers, when the excise-man, who slept in the
upper tier of beds, being seized with a sudden fit of sickness, and, to avoid
bemiring his own nest with the nauseous contents of his stomach, pops his head
over the side of the cabin, and instantly discharged, on the most moderate
calculation, at least a quart of foetid liquids plump into the face of the
angry Methodist, who lay upon his back, with his mouth wide open, railing, with
all the fury of a bigot, against the young priest in petto, who had offended
him, and was collecting all the force of his lungs to give a strong emphasis to
the words scarlet whore, which he had repeated before with uncommon energy,
when the excise-man unluckily disemboguing at that instant, the greatest part
of the solid matter falling into the saint's mouth, made the best of its way
down his throat, and, fairly choking up all the passages of speech, left the
miserable disciple of John Wesley an object of pity and abhorrence.

It was some minutes before he could make his case known to the cabin-boy, who
lay sleeping before the fire, which when he had effected at last with infinite
difficulty, the young retainer of Neptune, with great composure, lighted a
candle, and, seeing the forlorn state of the itinerant son of regeneration,
instantly went upon deck, and, in the twinkling of an eye, brought down a mop
and a bucket of salt water. With the former he rubbed off the filth from the
face of the unhappy wight, and completed the act of purification by dashing the
latter into his face, without either moderation or mercy; but, not performing
the last operation with all that adroitness and dexterity which it undoubtedly
required, a great part of the briny application running down his bosom into the
bed, left him as fairly deluged in salt water as if the ship had sunk to the
bottom of the Channel.

As soon as he had recovered the use of the organs of speech, he set up a
dreadful yell, that made the cabin ring, which the major part of the passengers
taking for a signal that the packet had met with some accident, and was
foundering at sea, leaped from their beds, half dead with fear and horror, and
ran after one another upon deck, like so many sheep through a broken fence, to
see their danger, and, if possible, swim for their lives. The man at the helm,
astonished at the unusual appearance of so many persons upon deck in their
shirts, in the middle of the night, took them for apparitions, and was so
appalled with fear, that, quitting his rudder, he made the best of his way up
the shrouds, and left the vessel to the mercy of the waves, till the captain,
who was sleeping in the steerage, hearing of the accident and outcry, ran up,
and, finding the helm deserted, was almost frantic with madness, and proceeded
to utter a volley of dreadful oaths; which the preacher no sooner heard than he
began to admonish him for his wickedness, and, though half dead himself with
cold, he could not resist so favorable an opportunity of reclaiming a sinner,
and bringing him once more into the paths of peace. For this pious purpose he
had mounted upon the hatch-way of the vessel, and began to exhort the ferocious
commander to think of the perils of his situation, and not risk the salvation
of his precious soul, in such an hour of danger, by expressions that were
fraught with sin and unholiness; and, lifting up his hands, with great
fervency, he was reminding them of the instability of their situation, and
uttering that quotation from holy writ, which runs thus, Now you see me, and in
a little time you shall not see me, when the vessel gave a violent heave, which
not only drove the preacher from his temporary rostrum, but unfortunately
pitched him head-foremost into the hold of the packet, where he alighted, with
prodigious alacrity, amidst a number of poor creatures from Munster, who lay
there huddled together on their passage to England for the purpose of making
hay, intermixed with the horses, who were so much offended with the rude and
unwelcome visit of the puritan, that one of them, who lay most convenient for
the occasion, gave him such a tremendous kick upon his posteriors, as fairly
drove him three yards distance against the side of the ship, where he lay,
uttering the most piteous yells that were ever heard to issue from the lungs of
a human being.

CHAPTER XXI.
The storm subsides. -- The discomfiture of the itinerant preacher. -- Unlucky
consequences of my master's disguise. -- A convivial party formed in the cabin.
-- An unfortunate disaster among the passengers. -- They continue to practice
upon the Methodist. -- A mistake occurs which throws new lights upon the
subject.

AS soon as the general consternation had a little subsided, and the company
had congratulated each other upon their supposed escape from imminent death, a
general inquiry was made as to the fate of the poor apostle, when, lo! he was
brought down to his birth in the cabin in such a lamentable state, that it was
the general opinion of the passengers that a final stop was put to his arduous
labors in future, and that his religious peregrinations, in this world, would
be no more; however, he was put to bed, with infinite caution, where he soon
fell asleep, and convinced us, by the inelegant tones of his snoring, that he
determined to remain among us some time longer.

The different parties were now courting a little rest, and endeavoring to
compose themselves as much as possible, when the demon of discord, determined
that our passage should be attended with little else than broils and battles,
thought proper, once more, to throw his flaming brands into the bosom of our
society; for, just as the different organs of the company were put in tune by
the somnific hand of Morpheus, and playing a great variety of cadences in
treble, tenor, and bass, a noise issued from the interior cabin, particularly
appropriated to the use of the ladies, that discomposed the nasonic band, and
instantly broke asunder all the delicate ties of harmony. Though we could not
exactly distinguish the immediate cause of the dispute, the words shocking,
indecent, and abominable, were easily to be distinguished, as they seemed to be
delivered with great heat and anger.

Upon the captain's making his appearance, and inquiring into the nature of the
disturbance, we found the cause to be exactly thus. -- The pawnbroker's widow,
who assumed an uncommon share of delicacy, in the whole tenor of her behavior,
since she came on shipboard, was situated, it seems, in the inner apartment,
just opposite to my master, who, passing for a woman, in consequence of his
apparel, was stationed among them; a place which he more eagerly embraced,
thinking, that, in such a disguise, and in so retired a situation, he should
run no possible risk of being discovered. However, fate so contrived it that it
happened otherwise; for the calls of nature, in some particulars irresistible,
forced my poor master to get out of his birth, to perform certain rites, which
it is wholly impossible can be done by proxy: and it was in one of these
critical situations that the delicate lady abovementioned happened to espy my
master; and she was no sooner convinced of the certainty of his being a man, by
perhaps a too curious observation on her part, than she immediately began to
reprobate his assurance, as she called it, in terms of the bitterest
malignancy; in which she was presently joined by the rest of the females, who
declared, one and all, that they would never set foot on-board the packet again.

At this moment the captain entered, and endeavored to pacify them as well as
he was able; and prevailed upon the lieutenant, after some entreaties, to give
up his birth, which in some measure restored tranquillity among us.

Upon the entrance of my master into our cabin in disguise, it gave rise to a
thousand jokes, which were circulated, with great freedom, at the expense of
the lady who had caused all this commotion.

The good humor, that seemed to prevail among three or four of the most
convivial of the passengers, induced them to a proposal of immediately getting
up, and, by clubbing their sea-stores, to make a party at eating and drinking,
in order to amuse the time until a prosperous gale should drive them to the
British shore. -- The lieutenant sang, the comedian repeated a variety of
speeches from our most celebrated plays, to the manifest diversion of the
company; the physician favored us with a discourse on the materia medica; and
the attorney informed us of a great cause he had obtained in Ireland for the
widow of a marine officer, whose husband was shot in the act of fighting for
his country, on-board a king's ship, in the Mediterranean; at the same time
assuring us, that the only motive he had for prosecuting the matter was a
desire to have justice done to the distressed; which last insinuation roused
the attention of the custom-house officer, who swore, if that really was the
case, the attorney must have altered his practice most cursedly, for that, to
his certain knowledge, there was not a practitioner in the kingdom who had a
keener eye to the profits of his profession.

This sarcastic remark of the excise-man seemed to call forth all the natural
choler of the attorney, who retorted the charge with interest, and told him, he
supposed, because he had been continually robbing the king, his master, of his
dues, and plundering his subjects, he imagined every other profession was
equally infamous and dishonorable. -- There was a spirit of rancour and truth
in this last observation, which worked upon the feelings of the excise-man so
far as to induce him to lift up a stool, that stood near him, to chastise the
aggressor, which, had the meditated blow taken place, would, in all human
probability, have deprived the law of one of its noble members; but he, quickly
perceiving the hostile intentions of the assailant, crept under the table, to
avoid the impending storm, with the agility of a monkey, and remained there
till the fury of the excise-man was appeased by the attorney's apology, which
he made, without hesitation, in terms of the most abject humiliation.

Just at this instant the cabin-boy came down among us, and exclaimed, with
great exultation, "land! land!" upon which the fish-woman, thrusting her head
out of her birth, roared out, Oh! for God's sake, don't talk to me of land, but
bring me the pot! upon which the boy, whose duty it was to administer that
necessary utensil, whenever the patients could not do it for themselves, made
haste to accommodate the fish-selling nymph, who, not thinking he had hurried
himself so fast in her service as he ought, was attempting to scold him in her
own language, and had actually got out the first syllable of the laconic word
scoundrel, when her sickness overpowered her eloquence, and she fairly deluged
the young master of the ceremonies with the foul contents of her overloaded
stomach.

When the poor boy, who had fallen down under the weight of the salute, got up
to shake himself, he looked like one of the naiads of Fleet-ditch, and, in all
probability, would have been stifled with the unsavory scent, had not one of
the sailors, with infinite dexterity, seized up a pail of water, which stood in
the cabin, and washed off the filthy ornaments from the young gentleman's head,
who was restored once more to a state of purification.

By this time the Methodist, whose situation had become extremely irksome to
him, got up and joined the company, who had met round the table, in hopes, by
listening to the spirit of their lively conversation, to forget his own
disgrace. His intention was no sooner manifested, than these sons of pleasantry
made way for his accommodation, and insisted, in spite of his entreaties to the
contrary, that he should sit at the head of the table, and give the company a
sermon for the good of their souls. This invitation, which the preacher
received in a literal sense, was highly grateful to his disposition, and
pleasing to him in a spiritual light; for he had long broiled in secret at the
impiety of their discourse, and would most willingly have corrected their
manners; but the recollection of the recent misfortunes he had experienced,
from his former endeavors to bring the captain of the packet into the road of
salvation, was still uppermost in his imagination, and he thought it the more
prudent step to conceal his disapprobation than venture the loss of his life a
second time.

They had scarcely fixed the wandering saint in his new situation, when his
health, and success to his mission, was proposed by all the company, except
himself, to be drunk in a full bumper; to partake of which token of good
fellowship he at last consented, with evident marks of repugnance.

During the time that was spent in persuading the preacher to take off his
glass, the attorney, who sat at his right hand, contrived to substitute a large
glass of brandy, instead of that which had been appropriated to his share,
which the poor itinerant swallowed completely before he found out his mistake;
but he had no sooner lodged it in the recesses of his stomach than he made many
wry faces, and complained bitterly of the imposition. But the noise of his
remonstrances was soon drowned by his associates, who, having by this time
sacrificed to Bacchus with the zeal of true votaries, had become
half-seas-over; and, so far were they from being disposed to listen to his
complaints, that they absolutely compelled him to drink glass for glass, with
this difference, that, while they were quaffing weak punch, the Methodist's
glass was continually strengthened by a large infusion of strong spirits, which
the conscientious attorney kept by him for that excellent purpose, till the
blinking of the preacher's eyes sufficiently informed the joyous circle that
they had overset his understanding, or, in other words, had fairly done his
business; nay, so much had the liquor thrown the good man off his guard, that
he actually proposed to sing a song, which being greedily acceded to by the
company, he gave them a ditty, which he learned in the days of sin, ere the
potent workings of the Spirit had effected his regeneration, and the efforts of
grace had entirely subdued the old man within him.

When he had finished his song, he received the applause and thanks of the
surrounding group, who now determined to crown him like a Bacchanal, and,
stripping off his wig, they contrived to make a sort of wreath for his head;
but the poor preacher, not used to receive such high tokens of honor, sunk
under the weight of them in his chair, and, falling fast asleep, lay with his
mouth wide open, snoring most tremendously. He had not enjoyed his slumber
above a quarter of an hour, when the company were informed the vessel was in
sight of Liverpool; and, upon a sailor's roaring out that he saw the new
lights, the sound instantly vibrated in the ears of the drunken Methodist, who
started from his sleep with the phrensy of a madman, and, reeling about the
cabin, asked, with great vociferation, who had any thing to say against the new
lights; if they had, he declared himself ready to defend them against all the
arguments that could be brought to their prejudice by any child of Satan
whatever, from Martin Luther down to Father O'Leary.

CHAPTER XXII.
The packet arrives at Liverpool. -- Take a place in the stage for London. --
Description of our fellow-travellers. -- An accident that happened on the road.
-- We stop at Coventry and quit the stage. -- Meet a sailor on his journey from
Plymouth.

WHEN we arrived in the harbor of Liverpool, my master made what haste he
could on-shore, giving me orders to follow him to the inn with his baggage. It
was late in the evening when we disembarked, and I was preparing to make the
most haste I could to obey the lieutenant's instructions, and thank my stars
that had once more brought me on terra firma, when a rude fellow saluted me
with great incivility, and demanded to know where I was going with my trunk. I
instantly told him, if he had a mind to know he must follow me; upon which he
informed me that such behavior might do in Dublin, but that he would teach me
better manners; and, immediately seizing my master's trunk, forced it from me;
at the same time honoring me with the familiar appellation of bog-trotting
idle scoundrel. This last piece of rudeness roused me to a state of
desperation, and I was preparing to chastise his insolence, when a countryman
of mine, who had overheard the whole business, informed me that it was my best
way to make it up in the best manner I could, for that my opponent was an
officer of the port, in the execution of his duty. I answered, if he was
performing his duty, he should at least do it without insulting his betters.
"Betters!" cried the enraged officer, and whose betters do you call yourself,
you Irish son of a whore; at the same time assuring the company that I was a
notorious smuggler, who wanted to run some prohibited goods, and offered a bet
of a guinea, to any of the standers-by, that my trunk was full of contraband
commodities. It was in vain that I assured him to the contrary; and, as I began
to find that I had acted wrong in the first instance, I wanted to repair it by
every submission in my power. But I mistook the road to the officer's favor,
for the more I humbled myself, the more insolent and insufferable was his
behavior; and I certainly should have stood for an hour longer, arguing with
him upon the honesty of my intentions, had not my countrymen whispered me in
the ear to give him a shilling. I instantly took the hint; and the moment he
felt the splendid coin touch his palm, his muscles relaxed into a good-humoured
smile, and he told me, with a loud laugh, that I and my box now might go to
hell together; -- that he had at first taken me for a smuggler, but upon a
closer acquaintance with me, why he had found his mistake; and, taking me by
the hand, told me, he believed I was a damned honest fellow, and, that if he
knew the house I was going to, he would come and drink a pot of beer to our
better acquaintance. I accepted his offer, told him the sign of the inn, and,
taking my trunk upon my shoulder, set forward to meet my master, who, I found,
had been waiting for me with great impatience, having taken a place in the
stage for himself, which was to set out for London in a few hours, and intended
that I should ride on the outside.

The first thing that occupied the lieutenant's attention was to shake off his
temporary metamorphosis, and once more to appear in his real character, which
he effected with great expedition; and I had the trunk adjusted and packed just
time enough for the coach, which had drove round to the front door to receive
its new tenants.

When we came to the machine, we found a violent contest for precedence had
taken place between an elderly gentlewoman, about fifty, who measured at least
three yards round the waist, and a diminutive woman, who, from the severity of
her aspect, bore strong credentials of being a neglected virgin: however, after
a number of tossings of the head, flirts with the fan, and a prodigious
interchange of ma'ams and misses, it was determined, by the master of the
coach, that the overgrown gentlewoman should have the preference, upon the
strength of her name being entered first on the books.

After them followed my master and the captain of a West-Indiaman, who had just
arrived at Liverpool with his cargo, and was going up to London to the ship's
owners.

While the inside passengers were regulating themselves, I mounted the roof of
the coach, where I was soon joined by a jocose sailor, an Irish weaver, a young
woman, who was going to town to her friends, and an old man, who was muffled up
close in a frieze great coat.

In this manner we set forward; and, as I felt my situation very precarious, I
took especial care to grasp fast hold of an iron which is nailed to the top of
the machine, for the advantage of those persons, who prefer the benefit of the
prospect to the ease of riding within.

We had not proceeded above nine miles, when an accident happened that
discomposed the economy of the whole stage system; for our coachman, who
wanted to show his dexterity, in turning the narrow corner of a village, missed
his aim most confoundedly; and, whether it was owing to his want of address in
the business, or the ungovernable spirit of the horses, I will not take upon me
to determine; but certain it is, that he completely overset the machine, in the
very worst part of the road that it could possibly have happened.

The violence of the shock luckily pitched me farther than my messmates, for I
alighted upon a dunghill, without receiving any considerable injury, except a
slight bruise. But fortune was not quite so complaisant to my companions, who
were plunged deep into a stinking slough, that a neighboring farmer had kept,
time immemorial, for the purpose of mixing the manure for his land. The sailor
and the weaver made shift to disengage themselves from the unsavory lake; but
it was far otherwise with the poor young woman, who had been thrown into the
thickest part of the composition, where she lay in a miserable condition, like
an amphibious monster, one half of her body being buried in the mud, from her
head to her hips, and the rest kicking in the vacant air, tacitly asking the
assistance of all well-disposed Christians to rescue her from a situation, in
which if she remained but a few minutes longer, all human aid would, alas! have
been ineffectual.

As for the old man, who had shared the same unhappy destiny, he made shift to
crawl out more like a rat three parts drowned than a human creature, not having
the smallest vestige left to ascertain the nature of the animal tribe he
belonged to, except that he walked erect, and made use of two legs instead of
four.

Nor was the consternation within the coach a whit less productive of
disasters; for the company there had been thrown by the accident all in a heap,
where they lay, intermingled in a rancorous state of enmity and discordance,
hissing and annoying each other, like so many vipers at the bottom of a glass
in a chymist's shop window.

The noise of this sudden catastrophe having reached the people of the village,
they poured forth in numbers to the assistance of the unfortunate travelers:
and the first step they took was to open the coach-window that lay uppermost,
from which aperture they endeavored to drag out the fat gentlewoman
beforementioned by the legs; but the poor fellow, who was most forward in the
service, had good reason to repent his zeal in her favor; for she, not knowing
the intention of the visit, no sooner felt a man attempt to get hold of those
delicate members, than she gave him a most villainous kick in the eye, which
stunned the poor devil so much that he fell senseless to his mother-earth: but,
the party being instantly reinforced, they renewed the attack, and brought out
the fusty amazon by main force, but not before she had secured the cap and
head-dress of the lady who remained within, with whom, it seems, she had been
maintaining a bloody quarrel, but had totally overcome her by dint of personal
prowess, and brought out these emblems of triumph in her hand, which she
brandished about, to the infinite diversion of the spectators.

After an hour's industry, on the part of the coachman, the affairs were
tolerably adjusted, and the company were once more preparing to enter the
vehicle, except Miss Tippet, for that I understood to be the lady's name, who
had been so mauled and defeated within-side the machine: -- she had determined
to return to Liverpool, where she kept a millener's shop, and to bring an
action of assault and battery against her opponent, whom we now found to be a
tallow-chandler's widow, who was her next door neighbor.

After this denunciation of vengeance from the enraged maker of caps, we set
forward once more, and, by the time we arrived at Coventry, from the scene of
our disgrace, (in the interval of which nothing material happened,) my master
was either so sickened with his companions, or fatigued with that mode of
conveyance, that he signified his intention to the coachman of proceeding no
farther; and, after bidding adieu to his fellow sufferers, and giving the
coachman a shilling, to reward him for not quite breaking our necks, we took
up our quarters at the principal inn in the city; at the entrance of which my
master perceived an old seaman sitting at the door, taking out some tobacco
from a leathern pouch. As the features of the man were familiar to the
lieutenant, he asked him where he came from last; to which the sailor replied,
from Plymouth, and that he was almost foundered on the journey. As the voice of
distress never touched his ear unnoticed, this was the best possible expedient
the old tar could have made use of to have his wants supplied; for he instantly
ordered the weary tarpawling to follow him into the parlour, where he made him
sit down, and partake of those refreshments which he had ordered for his own
particular accommodation.

CHAPTER XXIII.
The sailor gives a history of his adventures. -- The vicissitudes of a
seafaring life. -- An occurrence that proves many accidents happen between the
cup and the lip. -- The spirit of true philosophy to be found in all stations.
-- My master stops in Coventry. -- I obtain leave to see a play.

WHEN the spirits and strength of the seaman were recruited by the good cheer
he had enjoyed from the lieutenant's bounty, he gave the following account of
himself, at his particular instigation.

Why, master," says the grey-headed tar, "as for the matter of that, my life is
no great things; -- I have experienced, to be sure, I suppose, like most part
of the world, sometimes joy, and sometimes otherwise; -- I have been beaten
about in many a hard gale of distress, and, when I thought my hulk was near
foundering, why, a lucky breeze has sprung up, and drove me into the port of
happiness: -- as for instance; now, this morning, I was cold, hungry, and
tired, and I didn't know where to get a bit of bread in the varsal world; (that
is, do you mind me, between this and the Pay-Office, for there I hope to get
shiners enough;) and I knew it was no matter to be telling the people of these
parts that I was a seaman in distress, for they look upon a worn-out old sailor
as little better than a brute beast; -- but we cannot expect otherwise for the
matter of that; for how should they know what belongs either to good manners or
humanity, when they never were at sea? -- but we cannot make a silk purse of a
sow's ear, as the saying is, so we must take the world as it runs, sometimes
rough, sometimes smooth, ebb and flood, hey, master.

But, to come to the point, I have been to sea, man and boy, for the last forty
years of my life. -- I cannot say that I entered into the service, because why,
I was pressed on-board a tender, as I was going down one morning to carry some
victuals to my poor mother, who then lay ill, and lodged in an alley, near
Wapping, but she is dead now, and God rest her soul, I say.

Well, as I was saying, they stowed me in the hold of a tender, whence I was
put on-board a frigate that lay at the mouth of the river, and was under
sailing orders to cruise against the Spaniards, for we were then at war, you
must know, with the Mounseers.

Though I was a little down-hearted at first, my spirits soon began to revive;
for my comrades told me that they expected to take some rich prizes, and, if
that was the case, why, I should make my fortune. This was joyful news to me;
and, so far from being backward in the business, my heart beat with impatience
till an opportunity should offer of our coming to close quarters with the
enemy: -- and we were not long disappointed; for, the men at the mast-head
seeing a sail, we immediately cleared decks, and bore down upon the vessel.
After a run of two hours, we discovered her to be a ship of almost double our
force, and would have tacked about, but, as it was impossible to escape her
then, why, we resolved to give her as warm a reception as we were able, and,
damme, to it we went ding dong, and, after a battle of two hours, we obliged
the enemy to sheer off. We should have boarded her, indeed; but, half our crew
being killed, and the other half desperately wounded, we could not muster hands
enough to man the longboat, so we were forced to relinquish our prize in the
moment of victory; which was a damned hard case, master, considering as how she
was a Spanish galloon, deep laden with the riches of Peru. -- Our rigging and
ship were so tattered with the heavy cannon of the enemy, that we were obliged
to make the first convenient harbor to refit, which we luckily did in a day or
two.

I forgot to tell you that I received a shot, as I was standing at one of the
guns, which went clean through my shoulder, and so I was ordered among the
wounded to the hospital, where, after remaining three months, I was pretty well
recovered; and, as soon as I had sufficient strength to do my duty, was turned
over to a third-rate, which was to compose part of a fleet of observation.

I remained on-board six months, when we returned to Gosport; and, as our ship
was ordered to the East Indies, I was advised to give a will and power to some
friend in the town to receive my wages and prize-money, in case I should be
killed in an engagement, or die at sea. I accordingly followed their advice,
and left it with my landlord, Tom Handspike, who kept a gin-shop on
Portsmouth-Common.

When our ship was properly victualled we set sail; and, after being beat about
for upwards of two years, we once more paid a visit to Old England, where I
resolved to settle, on my arrival, for life, and with part of my wages to set
myself up in trade. But here I reckoned without my host; for my landlord turned
out to be a damned big villain; -- he had gone to the Pay-Office, hearing that
our vessel was daily expected, and, taking a forged letter, to prove that I was
killed on the coast of Brazil, received every penny of my money.

I was cursedly dispirited at this accident, not knowing where to get
sufficient to buy me a dinner, when I met with an old ship-mate, who, reading
the situation of my affairs in the lines of my face, lent me a guinea, with
which I went and regaled myself, and, at the same time, inquired after an old
sweetheart of mine, who lived in that neighborhood. I soon found her out, and
renewed our former courtship, and we were to have been married shortly after;
but, going one morning to buy the wedding-ring, I was hailed by a press-gang,
who hurried me away, a second time, in spite of my protection, which I had
procured for my security at Portsmouth. As for complaining, I soon found that
all was needless; so I bent my disposition to my fate as well as I could, and
we sailed for the West Indies, where I experienced more hurricanes in half a
year than I had before in my long voyage to the Indies.

A flux and fever breaking out, among the crew, carried off great numbers; and
the climate was found at last so destructive, and our ship's company so much
reduced, that we were ordered home by the admiral, and arrived in a dismal
state at Spithead, where the fever seized me in a most violent manner. I lay
for six weeks in such a condition that nobody expected me to live; but, by
God's help, I recovered at last, and had the mortification to find that the
expenses of my illness had reduced me to my last guinea; and I was the more
chagrined as I wanted to buy some clothes, to appear as decent as I could, as I
intended to make the best of my way to London to marry little Sall, and then to
settle for life: howsomever, I made a shift, with the little money I had, and
the credit I had procured at a slop-shop, to cut a tolerable figure.

When I was completely rigged I set out for Wapping, but, having no shiners
left, I was obliged to walk the greatest part of the way, and arrived there in
the evening; but, burn my old shoes, if the neighbors didn't tell me that
little Sall had married a journeyman-tailor the week before. I own I was
grieved to the soul at finding her false-hearted; but, nevertheless, I plucked
up a good heart, (damme, we should always have a good heart, you know, master,
let things go as they may,) and resolved never to think of matrimony again: --
no more I have, master; for, from that hour to this I have been tossed about
upon the wide seas, which, boisterous as they are, I sometimes think more
constant than a woman's mind.

As I now thought of nothing else than passing a sailor's life, why, I have
roamed about the world in all quarters, sometimes on-board a merchantman, and
sometimes fighting for my country; and what man, master, would not like to
fight for his country, if so be as how he could get any thanks for it when he is
done? -- Here am I just relieved from a French prison, where I was kept on a
damned short allowance for nine long months, till I was exchanged and brought
to Plymouth, from which place I have now been traveling, in hopes of getting
my wages in London. -- To be sure I have encountered some cursed hard rubs in
the way; but what of that? every thing must have an end, you know, master; it
will be all the same a hundred years hence; it is a long lane that has no
turning. -- Why, Lord help your honor, I knew you were a seaman when I first
clapped my two looking eyes upon you. -- There Is a certain generosity in the face
of an honest tar which is not to be found in the rest of mankind; -- damme, they
are all so envious of each other, that their passions destroy their feelings,
and they have no more notion of assisting a fellow creature than an attorney,
egad, has of going to heaven. -- Here the seaman having finished the account of
his life, my master gave him a guinea, to drink the king's health, which the
other accepted with warm tokens of gratitude, and took his leave.

The lieutenant expressing a strong curiosity to see the town, the master of
the inn offered to accompany him, which proposal he readily embraced; and out
they sallied for that purpose, having first given me permission to make what
use of my time I thought proper till his return.

As I was sauntering along the street, I saw a crowd gathered about a man with
a drum, who was holding forth to the multitude which surrounded him, with their
mouths wide open. As curiosity was ever one of my strongest passions, I made
what haste I could to learn the propensity of his eloquence. When I came to the
spot, he immediately sent a child to me with a play-bill, which announced the
performance of the evening to be Hamlet, Prince of Denmark. As I had always a
natural love for poetry of every denomination, I determined not to let slip so
favorable an opportunity of indulging that inclination, especially as I had
previously obtained my master's leave to make use of my time in any way most
agreeable to myself.

CHAPTER XXIV.
I go to a tragedy. -- A great nose more honored in a strolling company than
great abilities. -- Evil consequence of illiterate critics. -- The ghost proves
his materiality. -- A family quarrel. -- The melancholy issue of public
disputes.

ACCORDINGLY I suffered myself to be carried away by the invitation of the
dramatic herald, and, inquiring for the gallery, entered the theater, along
with many others, brimful of eager expectation, to see the performance. The
theater was constructed with great ingenuity out of an old stable, and the only
distinction made between the different places of boxes, pit, and galleries, was
by means of a board nailed across.

As the audience, which was composed of a motley assemblage of different
characters and ages, became riotous, an old man, with one eye, came into the
orchestra, which was made out of a large box, with the lid taken off. After he
had bowed respectfully to the company, he pulled from under his coat the
instrument of harmony, and played, with excellent discretion, the well-known
and celebrated tune of Buttered Peace; but, the audience growing particularly
clamorous for Roast Beef, this half-sighted musician complied with their
request. -- From his appearance and execution he called strongly to my mind the
old gentleman, whom I have formerly mentioned as the Orpheus that moved the
bear to dance a fandango, when I had the honor of being first introduced
behind the scenes of a traveling company in Ireland.

But the bell ringing from within indicated to the company that the play was
going to begin; and, agreeably to the summons, the curtain was drawn, and
discovered Francisco and Bernardo in close conversation. It was soon noticed,
by the noisy part of the audience, that Bernardo's nose was of an uncommon
size; and indeed it resembled more a protuberance of mulberries, which hung in
rich clusters, than a human feature. I soon found that this gentleman was the
most conspicuous personage of the drama; for he received more distinction, on
account of that amazing ornament, than all the rest of the actors put together.

When the ghost made his appearance, it had a visible effect on the majority of
my neighbors in the gallery, some of whom were almost petrified with awe at
the dreadful solemnity of the object; but, as our admiration is built upon
comparison of one thing with another, so did the ghastly appearance of the
royal Dane operate to make the succeeding scene more captivating; -- the reader
will easily conceive that I can mean no other than the brilliant court of
Denmark, which burst upon our sight with as much grandeur as the wardrobe could
furnish, assisted by all the credit that the company could procure in the town
for tinsel, tie-wigs, clean linen, and potlids.

As soon as young Hamlet came forward, all eyes were centered upon him, for he
had long been considered as the Roscius of Warwickshire. I observed he made
three solemn strides, then enfolded his arms and stood still; for which
uncommon excellence he received the loud applause of the audience. -- I was
going to inquire of a person, who sat next me, into the reason of their
applauding him so much above the rest, when my notice was riveted upon a
comical fellow, who sat near me, roaring out, "Here comes Nosey!" which
appellation I soon found to belong to my friend Polonius, who was the identical
being that had five minutes before personated Bernardo with so much honor.

The unexpected salute of my friend in the gallery so discomposed the muscles
of the whole court of Copenhagen, that, in spite of their best efforts to
appear grave, a simper became universal, and it was some time before her Danish
majesty could recover herself sufficiently to reprove the young prince for his
unseemly melancholy: however, every thing went on very smoothly until Hamlet
began his first soliloquy; but he had scarce uttered his wish, that "His too,
too, solid flesh would melt!" than a countryman, who sat in the pit, bawled
out, Noa, noa, friend, you needn't wish any more of thy flesh to melt; why,
mon, you're as thin as a whipping-post already: and, indeed, though the
observation was rather mal-a-propos in point of time, it was strictly
justifiable on the score of truth; for the poor fellow, who played the
character, had not flesh enough, upon his whole carcass, to give a cat a
breakfast. However, this interruption was warmly resented by the friends of the
performer, and a battle would have taken place in the pit, had it not been for
the interposition of the manager, who had condescended to perform the King
himself: he came round from the stage among the combatants; and, whether it was
by the persuasion of his tongue, or the influence of his dignity, I will not
determine; but he certainly restored peace to the theater, and the players were
ordered to proceed.

Every thing now went on in the proper routine of business, except in the scene
between Laertes and Ophelia, when it was very palpable that the young lady had
been imprudent enough to drink too much that afternoon; indeed she had hurt her
memory so much by the sacrifices she had been making to Bacchus, that she
scarcely remembered a single word of her part, and, in one particular passage,
when the prompter neglected to assist the fallibility of her memory, she forgot
her dignity so far as to damn him for a lazy son of a b -- h; however, the
indecorum was committed by a lady, and, consequently, permitted to pass without
censure.

But shortly she was relieved from that temporary embarrassment by the entrance
of old Polonius, the purple majesty of whose nose was a never-failing source of
mirth whenever he came forward. Three times did he attempt to give the
celebrated instructions to his son Laertes, and was as often obliged to desist,
from the roars of laughter that issued whenever he opened his mouth. At last
they were fairly obliged to conclude the scene without it, and poor Laertes was
dismissed to France without the benefit of those solid apophthegms of wisdom
and experience.

At the commencement of the second act, attention seemed to have resumed her
throne, and every thing jogged on tolerably quiet till the closet-scene between
Hamlet and his mother, when the Ghost made his enter with prodigious majesty. I
should have before observed, that the wardrobe of this company being rather
scanty, it was absolutely necessary to make a coat of mail for the spirit in
question, there being no suit in their cabinet of wearables. To effect this in
a hurry, they were obliged to sew a few pieces of pasteboard together, which,
when covered with old play-bills, made a very tolerable succedaneum for the
want of something more resembling the supposed habit of the departed Dane; and,
indeed, considering everything, the poor Ghost acquitted himself tolerably well
until the moment he was preparing to take his leave, when, unluckily, in facing
about to the queen, to enforce the directions to the young prince to persevere
in his conduct toward his mother, he was under the necessity of standing with
his breech to the audience. Now the point of good manners which might have been
invaded by this maneuver would have been overlooked with great good humor,
but the infringement on decency, that it occasioned, could not; for it must be
observed, that the ghastly shade wore a black pair of breeches, under his coat
of mail, which were rendered something the worse by the depredations of time;
indeed so much so, that, between the legs, there was a rent of most capacious
magnitude, out of which a remnant of the spirit's shirt hung in a most
ungraceful manner.

This breach in the galligaskins of the Ghost was no sooner perceived by the
motley audience than an universal uproar ensued, accompanied by incessant roars
of laughter. -- The poor fellow felt himself embarrassed; and, finding that his
person was the center of the joke, turned himself to the right and to the left,
but without the desired effect. At last, mustering up an unusual degree of
courage, he stepped forward, and attempted to address the audience, but was
most violently repelled with groans and hisses. At length, finding all his
endeavors ineffectual to learn the state of their wishes, he was preparing to
walk off; but had not got above a yard from the side-scene, when an unlucky
spark, who occupied one of the side-boxes, set a large pointer, which he had
with him, at the miserable remains of departed majesty, whom he caught hold of,
just as he was slipping off the stage, by the shirt, which hung out behind, and
which he shook, to the unspeakable diversion of the company, fairly dragging
the unfortunate spirit to the center of the stage before he quitted his hold.
Irritated to a degree of madness at this insult to his dignity, which was more
than flesh and blood could endure, and eager for revenge, he tore off his paper
armor in a twinkling, (which, indeed, was tantamount to his stripping in buff,
for, the little shirt that he had left, and which composed the whole stock of
linen that belonged to this calamitous son of Thespis, had been completely torn
away by the fangs of the animal that had annoyed him,) and, coming to the point
of the stage, offered to box the best man in the company for a gallon of beer:
but the Ghost's challenge not being readily accepted, he misinterpreted their
forbearance into a spirit of cowardice in the audience, and began to abuse them
in terms which sufficiently proved, that his godfathers and godmothers had
completely taught him the vulgar tongue, in the most extensive sense of the
phrase.

Before he had proceeded far in his passionate address to the spectators, he
was stopped by a domestic enemy, who, by her great zeal in endeavoring to
regulate his behavior, put a period to the dramatic entertainments of the
evening. This heroine was no other than the unfortunate Ghost's wife, who
personated her majesty of Denmark for that night; and, hearing of the
misbehaviour of her spouse, hurried to the scene of action, with a full
determination to punish her yoke fellow for this breach of decency, which, she
wisely apprehended, would be the ruin of her benefit, which was to have taken
place the next evening. The furious lady, totally regardless of the dignity of
the character she had assumed in the play, rushes on her ill-fated husband,
and, by a well-directed blow, which, unhappily alighting on his eye, levelled
the vaunting spirit with the stage. But, though it was evident that the
salutation had disconcerted, it by no means subdued, him; for, springing
immediately from the boards with great facility, he returned the compliment
with such address as made the blood royal of Denmark flow most copiously
through the apertures of her majesty's nose. Now the audience, beginning to
interfere warmly in the dispute, leaped upon the stage, and, dividing into
different factions, each supported the object they thought most aggrieved; but,
the majority turning eventually in favor of the lady, she gave her miserable
husband such a drubbing as almost deprived him of existence, for he lay
extended upon the scene of action sightless and forlorn, like one who was
shortly to pay a long visit to the Stygian shore.

But it was ordered, by the inflexible destinies, that the perils of that
evening should not end here; for, while the Amazonian queen was panting with
her victories, and receiving the applause of her surrounding admirers, the
manager of the company entered with two constables, and charged her majesty
with a breach of the peace, and instantly ordered her to the county-jail, to
remain there until time, chance, or circumstance, should enable her to satisfy
him for the robes of royalty she had utterly destroyed in the engagement, and
other properties, which he estimated at a very considerable amount.

It was at this instant that the misguided heroine began to perceive that she
had been acting a very unprofitable part: -- it was in vain for her to hope for
relief; for, those very persons, who had been most instrumental in extolling
her prowess as a bruiser, were now most forward in ridiculing her distresses.

As the husband, in the awful eye of the law, is considered as forming a
material part of his wife, the wretched Ghost was lifted from the ground to
accompany his lady to prison, as being responsible for her errors; to which
place they were conveyed amid the shouts of an unfeeling multitude, who
inevitably desert the objects that have delighted them, when their power to
amuse exists no more. -- The poor Queen, as she was hurried away, turned about,
and surveyed the scene of slaughter with such a piteous look as brought the
following lines to my recollection: "The tempest over, and the wild waves
allayed,
"The calm sea wonders at the wrecks it made."


CHAPTER XXV.
We arrive at the metropolis. -- I am discharged from the lieutenant's service.
-- Accosted in the street by a singular character. -- Dine at a flying
ordinary. -- Account of my new companion.

WHEN this theatric feud had subsided, I returned home, and found my master had
retired to bed, and left orders for me to be up early in the morning, as he
intended to set out for London by break of day. I obeyed his directions, and
about five o'clock the next day he hired a post-chaise, into which he took me
as a companion, and we set forward for the metropolis, where we arrived the
same night, after a journey of twelve hours, in the prosecution of which
nothing unaccountable happened.

We took up our first night's lodging at the inn, where we were conducted by
the boy who drove us, and I was awakened the next morning by a confusion of
voices in the street, that, in my opinion, put all comparison at defiance. I
lay, for some time, endeavoring to make out the sense of their cries; but that
I found totally impossible, as every syllable they delivered was to me as
unintelligible as if they had been spoken in Hebrew.

But, if my wonder was moved by the strange voices I heard, how much more was
it excited, when I got up, by the astonishing objects that I saw! -- At first
sight the whole world seemed to me to be concentered in that amazing city; for,
in no other manner could I account for the prodigious hurry of business that
was evidently carrying on in all corners of the town, and the swarms of people
that crowded upon each other in succession. -- The more I contemplated that
vast theater of regular confusion, the more was I inclined to liken it to an
extensive bee-hive, into which the industrious members brought their honey for
the advantage of the commonwealth.

The second morning that I had passed at the inn, my master called me into the
parlour, and gave me to understand that his private affairs would oblige him to
go to Chatham the next day, and, as he was not quite certain of the time that
he might return, he advised me to look about for another service; at the same
time paying me my wages up to that month, and making me a present of a handsome
compliment, over and above the amount, as a small reward, as he expressed it,
for my good behavior in his service; and, to prove that, even in the smallest
particulars, he was not unmindful of my welfare, he accompanied his favors
with a letter of recommendation to a relation of his, who lived in one of the
new streets in Westminster, that, in case he was delayed in the country, by
accident or otherwise, I might not want a friend to give me a good character.

At this last instance of his attention I could not avoid bursting into tears,
and I even offered to serve him for nothing, rather than be separated from a
master, to whose interest I was so firmly attached by the strongest ties of
duty and affection; but, as my application on this head was fruitless, I was
obliged to wander forth in search of a new employment, with a narrow purse and
a melancholy heart.

After walking up and down the streets of the metropolis for some hours, I
found myself in the neighborhood of a place, which, on inquiry, I learned to
be the Seven Dials. As my curiosity had been highly gratified by the numerous
novelties that had presented themselves to my observation in the perambulations
of the morning, I began to think of indulging another foolish propensity, which
was, briefly, that of eating; for I found that a rebellion was forming in my
intestines, and which, if not speedily overcome, would endanger the state, or,
in other words, I should be confoundedly sick.

As I stood gaping about, to find out a proper place to satisfy that
irresistible demon, called hunger, I was accosted very civilly by a person,
who, from his appearance altogether, struck me as an oddity. -- His dress
consisted of a frock that still bore the remnants of finery, but appeared to
have been originally made for the accommodation of another person; a dirty silk
waistcoat, with some tarnished lace; a pair of buckskin breeches, and boots;
his hair, which was rather scanty, and as gray as my grandmother's, was twisted
and turned up behind, under a round hat, the brims of which seemed to have been
narrowed by the niggard hand of economy, for the laudable purpose of making it
retain its black edge as long as possible. As he stood with his back toward me
at first sight, I guessed him to be a smart young buck, about twenty years of
age; but, when he faced about, to enter into conversation, I perceived him to
be verging on the borders of fifty, and that all his smiles and complaisance
(of which he possessed a great store) had not been able to defend him against
the inroads of time, for the different muscles of his visage were harrowed deep
with the fell lines of care, which intersected each other at right angles.

The polite address of this civil original at once surprised and pleased me;
for, upon my informing him that I was a stranger, and wanted to know a proper
place to eat in, he eagerly caught hold of my hand, and exclaimed with a laugh,
Curse me, but that is lucky for us both! for I have been meditating upon the
same thing this half hour; at the same time advising me to follow him. But we
had not proceeded many paces, when he suddenly turned about, and inquired, with
great earnestness, "if the captain was strong." As I did not understand the
nature of his question, I stared at him with a little surprise; when he told
me, with a smile, that he only wished to know how I stood for cash. I
immediately pulled out the sum total of my wages; upon eyeing which he
exclaimed, with the most lively transports, Oh! damme, you are strong, -- you
can afford to dine like an alderman, I see; -- come with me, and I Will introduce
you to a house, in the next street, where you shall eat like a prince, and
associate with none but gentlemen.

I would have answered this rapid address, being fearful that he meant to bring
me into too much expense; but he did not give me that opportunity; for, darting
along with the celerity of an arrow from a bow, he beckoned me to follow him,
and, in a few minutes, we arrived at a house where beef, mutton, and veal,
decorated the outside of the windows, and from the door of which issued such
savoury steams as made me anticipate in thought the delicious joints that
waited our disposal within.

Upon our entering this receptacle of the hungry, we were immediately ushered
into a back room, in the center of which was a large round wooden table, and on
its confines sat a number of persons, of all ages, countries, and complexions.
We had scarcely saluted the company, when a dozen tongues bellowed forth at
once, How are you, Count? and I should have been at a loss to know the person
to whom so dignified a title was addressed, in such a place, if I had not seen
my companion acknowledge himself as the person alluded to by various
significant bows and grins, which he exercised toward his inquiring friends in
a manner perfectly peculiar to himself, and unlike the rest of mankind.

As by this time our quota of beef was placed before us, with all the
appendages of salt, mustard, etc. my friend advised me to fall to, and follow
his example; but I, not doubting in the least that I had got into the society
of some nobleman in disguise, was in a manner petrified with fear, and sat
aukwardly, first surveying my plate and then my companion, my apprehensions
having quite taken away my appetite, for fear I should be guilty of some
impropriety before so respectable a personage. But it was far otherwise with my
associate; for, though he had been accommodated with a plate of much greater
magnitude than mine, and sat in a manner absolutely entrenched behind beef and
cabbage, yet, wonderful to tell! in the course of five or six minutes, he made
shift to demolish the whole with the most perfect ease and composure; and
afterward called for a slice of pudding, which he dispatched with the same
facility; then, taking up his hat, he winked to the company, and, pulling me on
one side, whispered, that he was going into the next square, where an aunt of
his lived, who, by the by, would leave him more thousands than he had fingers,
and that he should return immediately; but, in case that he met with a certain
nobleman, whom he expected to see, and should be detained longer than ordinary,
advised me to be under no sort of apprehension on that account, as he made it a
point to dine at that house whenever he was disengaged from the beau monde.

Though I could not well understand the nature of such an apology, from a man
of his seeming importance, to an humble being like me, yet I made one of my
best bows, and told him I should always think myself honored to be blessed
with his society. He appeared to take this declaration in good part, and,
squeezing my hand, wished the company a good day, and instantly vanished from
our sight.

He was scarcely out of the house, when I had the mortification to hear a
thousand remarks made upon my friend, the count. One observed, at the same time
looking at me with a significant leer, that the count was at home. -- "Aye,
damme," says a second, "tell me, did you ever know him out of his way?" --
"No," replies a third, unless he stumbles upon a sheriff's officer." -- "What,
has he a dislike to the servants of justice?" says a fourth. -- "Not absolutely
so," rejoins a fifth, "'it is only a sort of natural antipathy, peculiar to that
nobleman; -- every man has his objects of aversion, and it is well known the
count's dislike is chiefly levelled at tailors, attorneys, and bum-bailiffs."

Though I did not clearly comprehend the meaning of all their discourse, yet I
understood sufficiently to inform myself, that some of their expressions were
not quite so respectful as I thought a gentleman of his amiable manners was
entitled to; and I was actually preparing to leave the room, when one of the
persons, who sat opposite to me, asked, with great seeming concern, how long I
had had the honor of being enrolled among the count's friends; upon which I
related the adventure of our meeting in the next street, and the kind method
that he had taken to show me a house of entertainment to satisfy the cravings
of my stomach. -- "Aye, aye," replies the person who questioned me, "the count,
it must be allowed, is a very civil gentleman, but he generally thinks fit to
confine this essential part of his good breeding to strangers." -- "And
foreigners, you will allow," cries another. -- "Yes," rejoins the person who
spoke first, "but that gentleman is no foreigner." -- Done for a guinea he is,"
replies the other. -- "Done," says his antagonist; and immediately addressing
himself to me, with great earnestness, asked, with many apologies for his
impertinence, where I was born. I told him, without hesitation, in Ireland. --
"There, damme, gentlemen," roars the person who proposed the wager, "I knew I
was right, by G -- d." -- "Right!" says the other, "how can that be! -- we all
know that Ireland is but an extraneous part of England; -- is not it, sir?" says
he, looking me full in the face. -- "Yes, sir," replied I, half dead with
confusion. -- Upon which there was a general roar of applause, and each of the
opponents, taking me by the hand, (which they shook with great violence, in
token of their approbation,) declared, that I was a damned honest fellow, and
they should be proud to be better known to me. I received this condescension in
good part, and made them a low bow.

Here the discourse took another turn, in pursuing which they handled the
character of the count with so little mercy, that I began to entertain some
doubts of his quality. -- But all these ideas, which I began to form to his
disadvantage, vanished at the approach of the lady of the house, who informed
me that I owed her five-pence for my eatables, and eight-pence for the count's;
when I pulled out my scanty pittance, and discharged the reckoning, happy in
having an opportunity of dining with a person of such distinction at so cheap a
rate; for, as I heard the landlady mention his title, I had no longer any
mistrust relative to his character in life; and, assuming a little effrontery,
I asked the gentleman who sat next me if the count was a man of fortune. --
"Oh! prodigious!" answered the other. -- His estate is in England, I presume,
sir," says I. -- "No," says a queer-looking old man, whom I had not noticed
before, "it is neither here nor there, friend." I was calling all my
geographical learning to my aid, to find out that country, when another
observed, that, to his certain knowledge, he was in possession of some of the
finest lands in all Sclavonia. -- "Oh! then, I suppose he is a German nobleman,"
replied I. -- "He is," says the other, "and one of the most ancient in the
whole circle of the empire." -- Upon which I got up, took my hat, and saluted
the company; which mark of respect, on my part, they all returned with tenfold
interest; and then I issued forth from the house, highly gratified at the
honor of so distinguished an acquaintance, which I resolved to cultivate with
all the address in my power.

CHAPTER XXVI.
A grain of prudence more profitable than a pound of vanity. -- The curiosity
of the public is no proof of their sagacity. -- Popular rage more dreadful than
the sting of the law. -- A great man in distress. -- My reason blinded by my
ambition. -- Our reception at a porter-house.

ELATED with my success, and prodigiously vain of those abilities which had
been the primary cause, as I imagined, of attaching so great a man to my
interest, I began to form a thousand schemes for the improvement of my fortune;
and could not help reviving the memory of my poor father and mother, who had
taken such care of my education, that, should any of the count's friends think
proper to employ me in the capacity of a steward, or otherwise, I was entirely
fit for their service. -- I had strolled through several streets, so absolutely
wrapped up in my my reflections on my future greatness that I scarce heeded or
knew where, or on what purpose, I was going, till I came to the corner of a
lane, when an accident happened that broke asunder the texture of my reveries.

I was walking along, with my arms enfolded in each other, and my head
reclining on my breast, in deep contemplation, when I received a blow from the
end of a ladder, which two men were bringing round the corner, that not only
stunned, and deprived me, in an instant, of all powers of sensation, but, by
the force of the blow, drove me backwards, at least ten paces, when I unluckily
staggered against a tub that stood at the edge of the cellar of a public house,
where some draymen were starting porter, which, giving way, accompanied me in
the fall, which was at least six feet perpendicular, and I fell plump into an
empty butt, which stood ready to be drawn up.

The noise, which the tub and I had occasioned in our descent, drew together
all the people out of the alehouse to explore the cause; when, lo! poor Tony
was discovered lying motionless at the bottom of the vessel. Every means was
immediately put in practice to relieve me from so uncomfortable a situation;
and, having dragged me up the stairs once more into the regions of day, they
brought me into the middle of the tap-room, where a barber, who was present,
undertook to bleed me, while another poured a glass of brandy-hot down my
throat, in order to restore me to my strength and spirits.

Whether it was owing to the operations of nature, or the beneficial effects of
the prescriptions of my physicians, that I recovered, remains, to this hour,
undetermined; but certain it is that my spirits were re-established, and I was
again enabled to pursue those avocations in life which were eventually to lead
me into the temple of fortune. -- As I walked along, the pain in my head, which
my late disaster had occasioned, in a great measure reduced that felicity I
should otherwise have enjoyed, in consequence of the pleasurable notions I had
conjured up in my brain since my rencounter with the Sclavonian beau.

But I hardly knew to what point of the compass I was steering, when I arrived
at a large stone gate, through which an immense number of coaches and carts
were passing, without intermission; and my ears were dinned with a continual
noise and uproar, made up of the bawling of dustmen, the rattling of carriages,
and the oaths and execrations of coachmen and carmen contending, for priority
of place, with as much vehemence and bitterness as if the contest was the most
important circumstance of their lives.

As I stood contemplating that scene of blasphemy, I was surrounded by a number
of idle people, who were listening to the strains of a ballad-singer, the tenor
of whose song I perceived administered great pleasure to the auditory around
her. I had scarcely been attentive above two minutes, before I heard sufficient
to make me blush from ear to ear with confusion; and, skulking, unperceived,
from the crowd, I made the best of my way down the street, lamenting the
defects of a police that permitted such public incitements to debauchery,
wounding the morals of the rising generation, and annoying the ears of modesty,
to be sung about the greatest avenues of the capital with impunity.

Full of these reflections for the public good, I strayed along the path, till
my progress was interrupted by a collection of men, women, and children, who
were gaping, with their mouths wide open, at a wonderful piece of mechanism,
affixed against a church, where two automaton figures, they informed me, would
strike the quarters. I was wonderfully incited to be present at the operation,
and, placing myself in the center, just opposite the scene of action, waited
for the accomplishment of my desires with the most ardent curiosity. But, ere
that event took place, the whole assembly was thrown into confusion by the
detection of a pick-pocket, who had been making somewhat too free with the
purse of a lady that formed a part of the inquisitive group.

When the culprit was brought forward, his appearance was altogether such as
struck me with astonishment; for, conceive what my surprise must be, who had
always thought that a thief bore his credentials to roguery in his forehead, to
behold a slim young man, dressed, at all points, in the utmost extravagance of
the fashion, and who protested his innocence in terms of the most elegant
language, handled by a merciless mob as one of the fraternity of the lowest
order of human villains; nay, I was in my own mind so perfectly convinced of
the falsehood of the charge, that I felt myself frequently impelled to step
forward in his defense; and I actually should have done so, if a very
respectable gentleman had not declared that he was the most notorious
pick-pocket about town.

As I was eager to be present at the punishment of a delinquent, whom the laws
of the land seem tacitly to exclude from their protection, I followed the
tattered cavalcade, who proceeded with their prisoner, close guarded, to the
waterside; where, after taking him to some neighboring barges that were laden
with coals, they plunged him, unrestrained by a single emotion of pity, into
the sable stream, where he was forced to remain for upwards of twenty minutes,
floundering for his life amidst a congregation of filth, disembogued from all
corners of the metropolis, and interlarded with dead cats, drowned puppies,
stinking fish, and other offensive matter, more abhorrent to the sense of
smelling than all the essence of Pandora's cabinet. When he had undergone a
sufficient share of punishment for his mal-practices, a tenderhearted
waterman, "Touched with a generous sense of human woe," took the poor devil
into his boat, and rowed away with the fallen understrapper of Mercury amid the
discordant groans of the million that crowded the shores of old Thames.

As the evening was now approaching very fast, I thought it prudent to make the
best of my way back to the inn, being a stranger in town, and not knowing where
to procure a lodging immediately. I was on my way thither, resolving to get up
early the next morning to deliver my letter to my late master's friend in
Westminster, and afterward to meet the count, agreeable to appointment, at the
eating-house near the Seven Dials.

But, luckily, as I came to the foot of Blackfriers Bridge, I met my noble
acquaintance once more. The rencounter happened as follows. -- I saw a mob of
people collecting very fast, at a little distance from the place I was passing;
and, hearing some very high words pass, I walked up to inquire into the cause,
when I beheld a woman, of a very vulgar appearance, who had fastened one hand
in the collar of a gentleman, whom she was dragging along the pavement, while,
with the other, she was threatening to knock him down, if he made the least
resistance; and he, in the most piteous manner, was entreating the crowd to
take his part.

I was pushing the people on one side, to inquire more fully into the matter,
when I beheld, to my utter grief and surprise, that the unfortunate hero was no
other than the very individual count, who had behaved with such politeness to
me in the preceding part of the day. I was so enraged to see the only gentleman
I had met with since my landing in England, who, in my opinion, possessed
either tenderness or urbanity, treated in such a rude manner, that I
instantaneously lifted up my stick to strike the furious Amazon to the earth,
in order to liberate my friend; but I presently found my arms were pinioned
behind me by the mob, who reprobated my conduct, for endeavoring to rescue a
man who had refused to pay his lawful debts. This charge made me fire with such
rage that I could not avoid telling the fellow, who advanced it, that it was a
lie; for the gentleman was my friend, and not only a man of honor but likewise
of great fortune. This last expression roused the attention of the woman who
had him in custody, and she instantly retorted, "He a man of fortune! -- he be
damned, a poor, half-starved, would-be, gentleman; -- the devil take such
mungrels, I say; -- why don't he pay me my bill? -- answer me that." -- "And so
he will, I am sure," replied I, "if your demand is a just one." -- "Just!" says
the furious gentlewoman, "and who are you, pray, that take upon you to dispute
the justice of the matter, I should be glad to know? -- will you pay his bill
for him?" -- "Aye, my dear friend, do," said the count, "and I shall be for
ever devoted to your service; -- it is but a trifle, only nine shillings and
seven pence, upon my soul." -- Yes," says his persecutress, "and it has been
due these nine months for my hard labor." -- Here the count desired to speak
to me, and whispered in my ear that it was a trifling bill for washing, which
he had incurred just before his last remittance from abroad, and that ever
since it had slipped his memory; but he requested me, for the love of God, to
pay the money, if I had it about me, and not let him suffer such a public
disgrace any longer.

I felt my bowels of compassion incline very much to serve the disastrous
nobleman, and involuntarily pulled out all the cash I had left except one
guinea, which I had formerly sewed up in the waistband of my breeches, to stand
my friend in case of any sudden emergency. When the scarlet-faced laundress saw
me pull out my money, in obedience to the count's entreaties, she quitted her
prey, and I paid her the amount of her bill. When she had fingered the cash,
after looking in my face with a significant eye, she burst into a loud laugh,
and, taking her leave, wished me joy of my new acquaintance.

As this disagreeable business was now settled, and the count emancipated from
his fears, we thought of retiring to some house in the neighborhood, to settle
the plan of operations for the ensuing day. -- I was looking about me, in
search of a beer-drinking caravansera, when my facetious associate, taking me
under the arm, informed me that he would conduct me to a house, not very far
from us, where the porter was good and the company excellent.

As we proceeded along, I ventured to make my companion acquainted with the
reduced state of my finances, and the little hope I had of recruiting it until
I should get into some service. At the word service the count stared, and said,
he conceived it impossible that a person of my accomplishments could think of
subjecting himself to the whims and caprice of the first prince in Christendom;
besides, added he, your education, I perceive, is liberal, your manners polite,
and your person irresistible. -- "Damme," adds the count, putting a glass to
his eye, and surveying me from head to foot, "if I ever saw a prettier,
tighter, lighter, more genteel, bit of humanity in the three kingdoms. -- Oh!
zounds!" continues he, "you must put the notion of servitude entirely out of
your head, unless it is that of the ladies: -- why, man," says he, "I Will
introduce you to a circle of the first-rate toasts in the capital, all
prodigious fortunes, and there is no doubt but you may marry the first woman you
take a liking to."

Though I was charmed to ecstasy with the count's extravagant flattery of my
person and mental endowments, of which I conceived no very contemptible idea
myself, yet I could not resist pointing out to my companion some small
impediments, which I imagined fate would throw in my way to bar the progress of
my good fortune, namely, that of proper clothes to appear in. But I had
scarcely hinted my doubts, when he kindly informed me that his wardrobe was
entirely at my service, where I might pick and choose out of all the colors of
the rainbow; at the same time asking me what color I thought most advantageous
to my complexion; and, upon my answering I thought blue was as becoming as any,
he told me, with a face of deep concern, that he was cursedly mortified that
the blue could not be had, for he had given it away but the morning before to a
half-pay lieutenant, with a wife and seven children. -- "Oh! my dear sir,"
rejoined I, "don't trouble yourself, the scarlet will do very well." -- "The
scarlet, you said," says the count. -- "Yes," I replied, "if it was agreeable
to him." -- "Why, my dear friend," rejoins the beau, "it is perfectly
agreeable, but, damn it, at present it is totally impossible; for I lent that
very coat last week to a gentleman of my acquaintance to go to the opera; his
own tailor, you must know, having disappointed him, though the scoundrel knew
he was to be introduced that evening to a young beauty from Devonshire, with a
fortune of thirty thousand pounds." -- Well, well, sir, the first that comes to
hand, then, will satisfy me," added I. -- "Will it? -- damme, now, but that is
kind," says the count, squeezing my hand, "this is behaving like a true friend;
you shall certainly be welcome to the first fuit that comes to my hands, I
assure you."

The repeated excuses of my companion, added to a certain shabbiness of attire,
awakened some doubts in my mind relative to his quality, which I could not
entirely stifle, notwithstanding his apparent good-breeding and superabundant
complaisance; but, as my knowledge of the world was as yet very limited, and,
foolishly imagining that the language of the tongue could be coined in no other
mint but the heart, I did not know but the count's attachment to old clothes
was somewhat like mine to an old friend, because he could put them on and off
without much ceremony. However, coming at last to the corner of a narrow court,
badly paved and offensively dirty, we turned up it, and entered a public house
by a descent of three steps from the street. Here I found likewise that my
friend, to borrow a phrase of his own, was perfectly "at home;" for the whole
congregation, recognizing his person immediately, saluted him by the familiar
appellation of "Count, how are you?" I must own that the unbridled familiarity
of such a vulgar group, toward a person of his rank in life, gave an
additional wound to my faith relative to his quality and importance, and I
resolved to seize the first opportunity of satisfying my scruples upon that
head.

CHAPTER XXVII.
A proof of the ease with which great men can reconcile themselves to low
company. -- The pleasures of conviviality. -- My apprehensions of sleeping in
the street removed by the count's friendship. -- Amused with a tale of a tub.
-- Find myself made an egregious ass.

BY the smiles of the landlady toward my companion, I perceived that he was no
less than a warm favorite in her eye; for she came out of the bar, in which
she had hitherto been engaged, accommodating a tailor's lady with a pint of
geneva, and ushered us into a back room, the door of which was scarcely opened,
when there issued forth such abundant volumes of smoke as could hardly be
surpassed in the avenues of the infernal regions.

When we had taken our seats in this den of oblivion, (for the appellation of
room it certainly did not deserve,) the clouds began to dissipate, that had
made every object in the room impervious to my view, and I found myself flanked
on each side with a society of mirth-inspiring mortals, who, by the trifling
assistance of a pipe and a song, seemed to have totally excluded care from
their magic cavern. After I was formally introduced to the society by my
friend, as an honest fellow and a bon vivant, we took our seats round the table
of Anacreon; and the president of the evening commanded silence for a favorite
catch, which was delivered, in high style, by three of the members. After this
followed a sentiment, which, as it savoured infinitely more of wit than
decency, I shall forbear to repeat.

When it came to the count's turn to sing, he instantly gave them the
well-known ditty of "Death and the Lady" in character, and interlarded it with
such inimitable strokes of comic humor and expression of countenance, as made
me well nigh burst with laughter. At the conclusion of this effort of the
count's, the whole circle congratulated him upon the extensiveness of his
risible powers.

Now it came to my turn to make an offering at the shrine of Comus, and I was
requested by the president, in the name of the company, to favor them with a
song. I made every apology to excuse the performance which my ingenuity could
suggest, but found myself so hard pressed by the entreaties of my companions
that I must have complied, if a good-natured young man, who sat at my left
hand, and who perceived the embarrassment the request had thrown me into, had
not voluntarily offered, with my permission, to become my substitute. As this
proposal was backed by a few well-timed observations by the count, I was
excused, and the business of the evening went forward as usual.

When it grew late, and the company began to drop off one by one, I
communicated to my boon associate the necessity I was under of going to bed,
and likewise told him of the engagement I had to fulfill the next day; but he
comforted me, by the assurance that he would take care and find me a proper
night's lodging. With this declaration I remained satisfied, as I was convinced
that he must know the town much better than I possibly could, who had scarcely
breathed in it above twenty-four hours.

As the bowl of punch, over which we held this argument, was now demolished, it
was proposed to fill another, to which I offered some slight objections that
were instantly overruled by the count, who, wholly regardless of my remarks,
ordered it to be replenished, and then, whispering in my ear, informed me, that
he would introduce me to the friendship of the young fellow who kindly sang in
my room; who, he assured me, was a person well worth my acquaintance, and who
would prove of great service to me in the pursuits which he intended I should
follow, as soon as I had received a little of the polish, necessary to cut any
thing like a capital figure in life. I thanked him for this new instance of his
regard; and, agreeably to his word, he recommended me, in the most forcible
manner, to the protection of his friend; having previously whispered him, as I
supposed, to excuse the bashfulness of my demeanor.

Were I to set down one half of the compliments which were paid to the graces
of my person, by the count and my new ally, during the demolition of the punch,
you would naturally imagine that I was the vainest of all human beings; for,
while one was praising the ringlets of hair that flowed loosely down my back,
the other discovered that I had the best-turned ancle and the neatest leg he
ever saw; observations, to which I gave full credit, as I really had some cause
to value myself upon the symmetry of my limbs; and so much was I bewildered by
the excessive incense of their flattery, that I did not perceive what was going
forward till the landlady had absolutely made another bowl, and placed it on
the table before us. Now the apprehensions for my health overcame every other
consideration; for, not being accustomed to keep such late hours, and, besides,
finding that the fumes of the liquor had mounted into my upper story, or, in
other words, that my brain was affected, I made a motion for departing. But
this the count absolutely forbade, and painted the dangers so forcibly, which a
stranger to the manners of the town had to expect from walking, at such a late
hour of the night, alone, that I trembled in idea, and began to use every
persuasion to induce him to accompany me, which at last he promised to comply
with as soon as he had demolished the liquor which so invitingly courted his
embraces.

Here the count took an opportunity of informing our common friend to what
purpose he meant to dedicate my personal accomplishments, which was no other
than to have me introduced to the notice of some ladies of fortune and
distinction, of his acquaintance, and, by the aid of a little maneuvering,
enforced by the beauties of my person, to snap up some young tit of quality,
whose fortune would make me independent for life. I was so elated with this
uncommon zeal of the count for my happiness, that my eyes swam with tears of
gratitude and joy; -- I thanked him in the most extravagant and lively terms of
language, promising to obey his directions in every particular of my life; and
would have prostrated myself at his feet, and called upon Heaven to reward his
friendly heart, had he not absolutely insisted upon the contrary.

Now, the watchman giving us notice that it was between two and three o'clock
in the morning, it was judged expedient to pay our reckoning, and depart in
peace; and, upon the landlady's approach with her bill, I told her we would
settle as soon as our companion returned; for, upon our mentioning the word
payment, I had observed he took his hat and slipped out of the room. Here she
thought proper to set me right, by assuring me that the gentleman we alluded to
had been gone home above these ten minutes, and, probably, that she might not
set eyes upon him for three months to come, and if she never did again she
should not break her heart. Upon receiving this unwelcome intelligence, I asked
who was to pay his part; to which she replied, that was a matter we should have
settled among ourselves before he thought proper to decamp; -- that she should
look to me for the money, which I must pay her immediately, for she had a heavy
bill to make up for her distiller, whom she expected to call the next day, and
could not afford to lose her moderate profits in compliment to any vagabond
upon earth.

Finding no resource left but by paying the money, I asked for her bill, which
amounting to six shillings and nine-pence more than I had in my pocket, I
turned about to consult the count what measure we must follow in this miserable
dilemma, when, to my utter astonishment, I found he was gone also; however,
imagining that he would shortly return, I sat in the utmost impatience, meaning
that he should pass his word with the woman of the house for the remainder.
But, having sat a considerable time, and no count appearing, I told the woman
that I had not money sufficient to discharge the bill totally, but that I would
give her what I had, and that my friend should be answerable for the remainder.
-- "What friend, pray?" says the lady of the bar. -- "The count," answered I.
-- "The count!" replied she, in accents of disdain, yes, yes, he is a pretty
fellow, indeed, to pass his word! -- why, my good friend, I don't know whether
you're serious or not; but, give me leave to tell you, that I would not take his
word, no, nor his oath neither, for six farthings, much less for six shillings.
-- Here my choler rose, to hear my friend's character so villanously traduced;
and, assuming all the importance I was able, I told her, she ought to be
ashamed of mentioning the name of so accomplished a gentleman with disrespect.
-- "A gentleman, indeed!" replied the angry hostess, "a rascal, you mean! --
why, he is as poor as a half-pay officer, and does not eat a dinner above three
times a week, and that is at the expense of some credulous fool or another."

At this relation of the landlady's the blood forsook my cheeks, and an
universal panic seized my whole frame; for, comparing the positiveness of her
assertions with the apparent poverty of my companion and the shabbiness of his
habiliments, I could not help giving full credit to her tale, though it was at
the expense of my discernment as a man, and my dearest hopes for ever. The
woman, perceiving my situation, and the callow innocence of my mind, offered to
take what money I had about me, and a pledge for the remainder, until it should
be convenient for me to call to discharge the whole. I was happy to comply even
with this accommodation of the matter; and, after giving her all my cash, and
depositing my silver shoe-buckles for the rest, I took my leave, and wandered
forth in the streets of an unbounded and flagitious metropolis, to whose
customs I was almost an entire stranger, at the dismal hour of three in the
morning, without a penny in my pocket, or a friend to direct my steps; and
continually ruminating on the complicated vices of mankind, which I found were
hourly spread to delude the unthinking and unwary.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
I go to the assistance of a woman in distress. -- Pay an unseasonable visit to
the round-house. -- Almost frightened to death with the apprehensions of being
hanged. -- Another rencounter. -- Am carried before a justice, and relieved
from my troubles. -- Apostrophe on my last guinea.

AS I went along, musing on the iniquities of the world, my ears were assailed
with the cries of a female. I no sooner heard the voice of distress than my
feelings took the alarm, being always eager to remove the sorrows of any, but
particularly a woman's. When I came to the place of action, I found a poor
creature on the ground, struggling with a man, who struck at her several times;
but, the moment her eyes caught my approach, she prayed, for the love of Jesus,
that I would assist her. On such an occasion I never wanted any other monitor
than my humanity, and, guided by that impulse, I entered into her quarrel with
such zeal and activity, that, in less than ten minutes, I laid her oppressor
breathless at my feet.

The noise of our combat had attracted the notice of some watchmen, who,
gathering round us, made an inquiry into the nature of such a breach of the
peace at that dead hour of the night. I was going to inform them of the true
state of the matter, when the vanquished hero, who lay bleeding in the street,
charged the watch to take me into custody, as a villain who wanted to rob and
murder him. The words had scarcely escaped his lips, when I was secured by
these honest descendents of Time, who, tally regardless of all my protestations
to the contrary, conveyed me to the watch-house, accompanied by the wretch who
had accused me, with his face and clothes besmeared all over with blood. As for
the girl, in whose defense I had thus risked my life and liberty, she had
thought proper to decamp as fast as possible from the scene of the affray,
having solid reasons to dislike the society of a watchman, and a natural
antipathy to the inside of a house of correction.

When we had made our entrance into the watch-house, I was brought before the
constable of the night, whom we found in an inner room, enjoying himself with a
pot of porter and a pipe, and assisted in the duties of his holy office by a
drunken buck, who had taken up his night's lodging in the round-house, to see
life, and enjoy a bit of sun. When the fellow, whom I had beaten, had exhibited
his charge against me, in which he was supported by the watchmen, the
constable, assuming all the magisterial dignity he was able, turning to me,
said, Well, you dog, what have you to say in your defense? Frightened out of my
senses at being brought to a tribunal of justice, I confessed the whole matter,
from beginning to end, and had the consolation to understand, from the
inebriate gentleman who sat by the watch-house fire, and who perceived my
ignorance of the town, that I should certainly be hanged, for that there was
not a shadow of doubt but the man would die. If he had taken a pistol and shot
me through the head, it could not have more completely deprived me of the
powers of sensation: -- I stood, for some minutes, motionless as a statue; at
length my tears made way for my relief, and I wept, with the utmost contrition,
for the horror of an act that would not only take away the life of a
fellow creature, but involve my own in its dreadful consequences.

I had scarcely dried my eyes, when a man, of a very genteel aspect, entered
with a ragged prostitute, whom he charged with having privately robbed him of
his watch. It appeared, in the course of her examination, that she had conveyed
it to a watchman, who, it seemed, went shares in her profits, and who advised
her, in case the gentleman should return and claim his property, to charge him
as having attempted to use her ill, and by that means oblige him not only to
relinquish all farther claim to the trinket they had pilfered, but to purchase
his release at a very considerable amount. But the gentleman, who was a rigid
observer of the laws, was so far from being intimidated by the threats of the
woman, or the apprehensions of appearing publicly on such a business in a court
of justice, that he made it a point to have her secured, in spite of the
maneuvers of her friend and his fraternity. Upon her confessing the whole
affair, and giving up the watchman as her colleague, who restored the gentleman
his watch upon a previous promise of pardon, he consented to let her go;
declaring, at the same time, that he should have found an uncommon satisfaction
in bringing so infamous a villain, as the rascally retainer of time, to public
justice.

As the petty feuds of the night are not to be discussed in watch-houses
without some copious oblations to the shrine of Bacchus, the gentleman, in
conformity to so laudable and established a custom, ordered a bottle of wine,
over which the constable, the buck, and himself, sat discoursing for an hour,
to the great joy of all the disturbers of the night; for the presiding
magistrate was a man of such a convivial kidney as would not be called from the
enjoyment of his bottle to settle the claims of justice, if they were even
demanded by the first man in the kingdom.

After passing a most comfortless and horrid night, about nine in the morning I
was taken up to one of the rotation-offices, and examined relative to the
bloody charges exhibited against me: -- I trembled all the way, and went to
this mock-tribunal of legislative authority like a criminal under sentence of
death; for I verily believed the hour was now arrived when I should end all my
miseries by an ignominious death. But, fortunately, a circumstance took place
at the office that changed my apprehensions into transports. Previous to our
arrival, a gentleman, who had been robbed the week before on Hounslow Heath,
had attended the examination of two men, who were taken up on suspicion of
being guilty of the robbery; but, finding they were not the persons who had
committed the fact, he was coming down the steps of the door, on his departure,
when he met the whole troop, who were conducting me and my accuser before the
sitting magistrate. Anxious to learn the cause of a piece of business so
apparently dreadful, he turned back, and, just as I and the villain who had
charged me falsely were brought to the bar, the gentleman, pointing to my
prosecutor, exclaimed with a strong emphasis, like Nathan in holy writ, "Thou
art the man!" -- "What man?" replied the justice. -- "The man who committed the
robbery," says the gentleman. Upon the strength of his authority, the villain,
who was endeavoring to harrass me for exercising the feelings of a Christian,
was, in his turn, secured and examined; in the course of which he owned the
commission of the fact, and in the confusion of his mind acknowledged that I
had neither robbed or in any manner ill-used him, but ratified, in every
particular, the account I had previously delivered before the constable of the
night. In consequence of the happy issue of this woe-fraught adventure I was
immediately set at liberty, and the poor devil, whose bones I had so belabored
in the morning, was handcuffed and conveyed to prison, to await, in durance
vile, the awful sentence of the law.

When I found myself once more unrestrained, and in the middle of the street,
at liberty to follow which path I liked best, I thought my heart would have
leaped through my ribs for joy. My extacies were, indeed, somewhat allayed by
the recollection that I had not a sixpence in my purse, but yet not
sufficiently so to make me sad; for all ideas relative to money became now but
a secondary consideration in my scale of felicity, and that circumstance, which
would have made me wretched the day before, was now absorbed in the
self-congratulations of escape from so perilous a situation: -- so much does
the happiness of our lives, as well as the beauty of objects, depend upon
opposition.

As the perturbation of my spirits began to subside, a sense of the misfortunes
that still hovered round me began to operate with accumulated force. I knew not
whither to turn my steps to procure a dinner, much less all those comforts of
which I had been deprived by the silly expenditure of my money in the pursuit
of a shadow. In the bitterness of my anguish I cursed the hour that had first
made me acquainted with the count, whom I now considered as the primary cause
of all my woe, and vowed revenge, if ever time and opportunity brought him
within my reach.

As I was musing deeply on the hard rubs of fortune that I had experienced, I
luckily thought of the guinea which I had formerly sewed up in my waistband;
and, instantly ripping it open with a penknife, I seized the hidden treasure,
which I kissed with the rapture of a zealot; and, ere I put my resolutions in
practice, which were to buy a pair of cheap shoe-buckles, and a few other
indispensible personal necessaries, I could not help uttering the following
rhapsody to my last guinea: -- And shall I never see thee more, thou lovely
minister of all my pleasures? -- without thy powerful assistance the goodly
fruits, that issue from the womb of Nature, are tasteless, joyless, and
insipid; -- it is you alone can cheer the human heart, and raise it from
despondency; -- you visit us as the harbinger of delight, and all the graces
that adorn our state are crouding in thy train; -- thy influence, more potent
than the blandishments of beauty, can turn aside the stream of justice, shake
the monarch on his imperial throne, and, by thy strength of argument, confound
and destroy the long-prescribed distinctions, which equity and wisdom have
erected on the precincts of right and wrong. -- Alas! how ineffectual is merit,
if not supported by your smiles! like the floweret in the Arabian desert, it
blossoms unregarded and perishes unknown. -- The love of thee even supersedes
that of fame; for proud man would cease to be a hero, and the artist to be
immortalized by the labors of his pencil, if cut off from the genial hope of
thy embraces. -- If Providence, in her bounteous dispensations, meant you as a
blessing, why were you distributed with so unequal a hand? But, on the
contrary, my reason assures me, that you were sent us as a curse, to poison the
fountain of human excellence, to vitiate the heart, and shake the peace of
society. The force of reflection having dissipated my prejudices, I will lament
thy loss no more, but cheerfully resign thee, thou baneful minister of human
evil, to the insatiate hand of avarice and ambition, and, living obedient to
the dictates of morality, endeavor to be happy by the exercise of virtue.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

