THE ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY VARNISH.

VOL. III.

THE ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY VARNISH; OR, A PEEP AT THE MANNERS OF SOCIETY. BY AN
ADEPT.

Parva res est voluptatum in vita, prae quam quod molestum est. IN THREE
VOLUMES. VOL. III.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM LANE, LEADENHALL-STREET. M.DCC.LXXXVI.

THE ADVENTURES OF ANTHONY VARNISH.
CHAPTER XXIX.
Meet with a mortifying disappointment. -- An extraordinary character. -- He
gives some very important advice. -- I experience one of the ill consequences
of being too warm in an argument. -- Find the wisest men are subject to
particular weaknesses. -- Meet with a poet. -- He delivers an opinion not much
to the credit of human nature.

WHEN I had purchased the articles of dress that I stood in need of, I inquired
the nearest way to Westminster, where my late master's friend, the lieutenant,
lived, to whom I had a letter of recommendation; and, by the assistance of
various persons, who were kind enough to show me the way, I made a sort of a
zig-zag movement toward the place of destination. But, unfortunately for me,
when I came there I heard that the gentleman was gone in the country but the
day before; and an old woman, who was left as the guardian dragon of his
furniture in his absence, informed me, for my comfort, that she did not expect
him to return to town for at least two months. This intelligence was another
thunderbolt of fate that drove me still nearer to the cave of despair; however,
wishing her a good morning, I assumed new courage, and resolved to keep up my
spirits as well as I could, not doubting but that I should shortly arrive at
the end of all my inquietude.

Buoyed up by this idea, I continued whistling an old tune till I found myself
at a gate, which led into a row of trees, and this place, on inquiry, I found
to be St. James's Park. When I had sauntered about a considerable time, I sat
down on one of the benches in the Mall, and continued there for some minutes in
a state of insensibility, with my hands in my breeches-pockets, and my head
reclined against a tree. I was exactly in this position, when an odd sort of a
figure came and sat down on the same seat. He was a tall, athletic, man, with a
black visage, thick lips, and rather meanly attired; but, notwithstanding
which, there was an air of politeness in his demeanor, and such marks of
philanthropy in his countenance, that he attracted my respect by a sort of
involuntary impulse.

He had scarcely sat down three minutes before he entered into conversation
with me, by asking with a smile, which seemed equally to partake of good humor
and concern, What makes you look so serious, my lad? I told him, with a low
bow, that I was not well. -- "I am sorry for it," said the stranger; but tell
me now, without disguise, is the disease situated in your body or your mind? --
I answered him, with a deep sigh, that it lay entirely in my mind. -- "Does
it?" replied he, well, my lad, I Will be your physician on this occasion; but,
contrary to the general rules of practice, I shall administer without a fee,
and my medicines, though salutary, are not expensive. -- But, first, tell me
what religion you profess, for I perceive, by your tongue, that you are a
native of Ireland. When I informed him that I was educated agreeably to the
established church of that country, he took my hand with seeming rapture, and
professed himself, very warmly, my friend; then, taking a little book out of
his pocket, he presented it to me with these words: -- I give you this, my
young friend," said he, "to learn by heart, which I conjure you to do
immediately: -- you will find it contain some prayers that you must repeat in
the course of the day, according to the order in which they are set down. Do
that, and pray to God to bless you, and depend upon it all will go well. For,
the evils we experience in this life originate from two causes; the first is,
by neglecting our daily worship of the Almighty; and the second is, by not
knowing ourselves; for, if we knew ourselves, my young friend, we should have
no occasion for the rigorous exercise of those severities, which the wisdom of
men finds it necessary to put in force for the well-being of each other; but,
losing sight of those great beacons of our felicity, we suffer ourselves to be
driven about by the tempest of our passions, until we are eventually lost for
ever. -- I hope, my lad," continues he, "that my advice has made a proper
impression upon your heart: -- you look like a good-natured young man, and I
dare take upon me to assert that you will profit by my instructions.

The imposition of the pious pedlar, of whom mention is made in the former part
of this history, was still so fresh in my recollection, that I could scarcely
muster up words enough to tell him that I was obliged to him: (so much do the
actions of the unworthy part of human nature place us on our guard against the
professions of the best:) however, I promised him to read his book with
attention, which pleased him so much, that, seizing the button of my coat, he
began to give me a short history of his life, in which I was informed, that he
was a major in the army, on half-pay; and that the whole business of his life
was to succor the distressed, and take such poor wretches under his
protection, as, from their poverty, or other causes, were deprived of every
temporal comfort, and obliged to seek for happiness in the contemplation of
eternity.

He was proceeding to give me the history of a poor woman he had been to see
that very morning, who had been deprived of her senses as well as property by
the villainy of an attorney, when the narrative was interrupted by a gentleman,
who tapped the major on the shoulder with great familiarity; and, placing
himself on the bench, they entered into mutual inquiries about their private
affairs, to my great joy and satisfaction: for I should have remarked, that the
military reformer of manners labored under exactly the same impediment, in
point of delivery, as the celebrated Demosthenes, and was obliged to deposit
three or four large stones in his mouth before he could make himself
understood; and the good man, in the midst of his zeal for my happiness, talked
so fast and so vehemently, that the stones dropped one by one out of his mouth,
unperceived, and he was actually reduced to a dependence on a single pebble for
his powers of elocution when the person beforementioned came to my relief. And,
indeed, that circumstance was particularly fortunate to me; for the major had
first griped fast hold of my button, to prevent my escape from his admonitions,
(which, though very pious, were not extremely pleasant,) and then he put his
mouth close to my face, and so bespattered me with spittle, that, before he
would have got half through his story, I probably should not have had an eye
left, or been able to have distinguished an object at a yard distance.

But my attention was now engaged by a severe conflict between the major and
his acquaintance, which I could perceive derived its source from a difference
in political principles; the major being a strenuous advocate for the
privileges of the people, and the other equally as violent for the prerogative
of majesty. In the course of this debate I was somewhat concerned to find the
major lose sight of that equanimity of disposition, which I imagined was the
natural concomitant of a mind so well regulated as his. After a few polite
bickerings they both left their seats in great perturbation, and walked up the
Mall, to finish and adjust their political disputation.

They had scarcely left the bench, when the vacancy was filled by a meagre,
thin, man, in a threadbare black coat, who approached with one hand deposited
in his bosom, and the other in his waistcoat-pocket. He wore a small hat, which
partly covered a tie-wig without powder, that seemed, by the appearance of the
caul in various places, to have seen almost as many days as its master. He wore
likewise a black stock, which, by the careful manner in which he had buttoned
his coat to the top, gave me strong suspicion to imagine, that, from a rigid
principle of either prudence or poverty, he made it answer all the purposes of
a shirt; for I could not trace the smallest vestige of that necessary appendage
of a man's dress through any of those apertures which the iron hand of time had
made in his suit of sable. -- His beard was at once gristly and gray, and
appeared to have been unmolested by the razor for at least a week; which, added
to the pale aspect of his weather-beaten face, made him altogether no
indifferent representation of the figure of famine. When he had taken his seat,
he seemed to retire within himself with a sort of sullen dignity, and bore a
kind of noli-me-tangere on his forehead, that tacitly forbade all human
communication.

I don't know exactly to what motive to attribute it, but, certainly, I never
felt a stronger curiosity take place in my breast than did at that time to know
the history of this seeming original. Thrice I made advances to speak to him,
but was as often instantly frozen by the uncharitable contraction of his
muscles. At length an occasion offered of doing him an inconsiderable service,
which I did not suffer to pass unheeded. -- I observed that he had taken a
small bundle of papers from his bosom, which he looked at for some time with
great earnestness, till a silent tear, stealing from his eye, sullied his manly
cheek; but, eager to wipe away so frail a testimony of his weakness, he felt in
his pocket, with great trepidation, for a handkerchief, and, in his hurry,
dropped those papers, which had moved him to so public and expressive an
indication of his sorrow and chagrin. I immediately leaped from my seat, and,
taking up the bundle, delivered it to him with all that delicacy of address and
tenderness of manner, which should ever accompany our actions, when we mean to
pour the balm of consolation into the wounds of the unfortunate. He seemed
pleased with the respect I paid him, and, gently bowing toward me, so far
descended from the majesty of genius as to offer me a pinch of snuff, from a
paltry iron box, as a recompense for my civility, which I accepted with rapture
as an overture of friendship.

After a few mutual inquiries, the understrapper of Apollo opened his
circumstances as follows. -- "I am," said the wretched man, a poor, but
faithful, servant of the Muses, and have been wandering about the plains of
Parnassus for the last thirty years of my life, gathering laurels to adorn my
tomb, but have found the journey so painful, and the profit so scanty, that,
had I known the inconveniences before I set forward in the pursuit, I should
scarcely have had the hardiness to encounter such complicated perils of fatigue
to have acquired the reputation even of a Homer.

Emboldened by this free declaration on the part of the poet, I told him, that
I presumed those papers, which he held in his hand, were some children of his
brain, that he doubtless meant to favor the world with in due time. -- "Ah!"
replied this literary veteran, you guess right as to my intention, I do mean to
publish them; but of what importance is the possession of the most brilliant
talents, if you want friends to bring you into reputation? -- you may perish in
a garret with the abilities of an Otway. -- I told him, that I always conceived
a work of merit would sufficiently recommend itself. -- Aye, my dear friend,"
says the bard, that observation proves you to be a very young man indeed; when
you have acquired a little more experience, you will see, that, in nine
instances out of ten, the retinue of folly overcome the inheritors of genius.
If a noble lord, or a great man, has a fool in the family, who wishes to be
celebrated as a wit, it follows, as naturally as the night succeeds the day,
that he must be supported in his pretensions at the expense of reason and
justice: -- it matters not how absurd his productions may be, he will always
find the pen of venality ready to aggrandize his fame. -- Here I ventured to
interrupt his harangue by observing, that I thought bestowing of praise upon
performances, that were undeserving, only served to heighten their deformity by
making them more conspicuous, as dressing a cripple in finery served but to
render him the more remarkably ridiculous. -- That observation will hold good,"
says my companion, "in almost every other human concern but that of public
writing; for, in that particular province, where individuals, indeed, should be
most tenacious of their reason, they are least so, and tamely resign their
judgment, upon the literary essays of the times, to news-paper editors and
reviewers of periodical publications; who, independent of the facility with
which they are corrupted, are, in general, as little capable of discovering the
beauties of a work (and very often much less so) as the herd of asses who
listen to their determinations.

By these sarcastic opinions, I naturally conjectured that my new friend had
recently undergone the flagellations of criticism; but, as the asseverations of
the author opened a new field of knowledge to my view, I resolved to cultivate
his acquaintance with all the industry in my power.

CHAPTER XXX.
The poet and I resolve to dine together. -- Poor encouragement for authors. --
Dive for a dinner. -- The poets refectory. -- A proof of their antipathy to a
certain profession. -- Every mouth open, but none satisfied. -- An unfortunate
circumstance. -- The comforts of a thick head.

I OBSERVED a kind of ingenuous shame hang about the poet, which it was evident
arose from a consciousness of his poverty; and it, doubtless, would have
depressed him much more, if the lofty ideas I perceived he entertained of his
own abilities, as an author, did not step in to his assistance, and counteract,
by the ambition they suggested to his imagination, all the slights he might
hourly receive, from the gross bulk of mankind, on the score of his
wretchedness and want of money.

As we walked through the park, in an inattentive moment I asked my companion
where he proposed to dine that day; to which question he replied, with a
significant look, that bore strongly the tokens of surprise. Afraid lest I had
committed some gross impropriety, my cheeks reddened with a deep suffusion of
scarlet, and I remained silent; when the poet, reading the state of my
thoughts, relieved me from my embarrassment, by voluntarily informing me, that
there was a house, not very far distant, at which he usually satisfied the
craving demands of nature, unless he was engaged abroad, which, he observed,
happened but seldom; and, if I were inclined to accompany him, that I should be
exceedingly welcome to a share of his porridge. -- "It is true," says he, we
poor fellows, who have the misfortune to labor under that most incurable of
all diseases, the cacoethes scribendi, have seldom an opportunity of tasting
those elegancies, whose delicious flavours render life so desirable to the
animal part of humanity; -- no," continued this miserable child of the Muses,
"we are frequently obliged to walk over the thorny path of distress, and waste
our existence in the vale of misery.

Here he ended his remark with a deep-fetched sigh, at the same time clapping
his hand, as it were by instinct, to his purse; -- a combination of events that
very plainly evinced the weakness of his finances; for, however poets may be
elevated above the common classes of human nature in their ideas, I find the
visitations of misery can make them melancholy as well as other men.

In our way to the place of entertainment, the little author diverted me with
various anecdotes of the persons, in whose company we might, in all
probability, dine; and, if his penciling was to be depended upon, as conveying
the outlines of truth, a most egregious set of beings they were.

At last, after innumerable turnings and windings through by-streets and filthy
alleys, I was given to understand, by my conductor, that we had come to the
wished-for port; and I was looking with prodigious industry, but in vain, for a
sight of some of those insignia of good living, which hung pendant from the
windows of the house I had been introduced to the day before; and I began then
to imagine that the poet was out in his reckoning, or, in plain English, had
mistaken his way; when he removed my scruples by hailing me from a neighboring
cellar, into which he was descending with great precipitation, and had already
got so far, that nothing but his head remained above the surface of the earth.

I followed him into this subterranean cavern with infinite caution on my part,
which was was very necessary to observe; for, though the poet, from long
practice, could have run down them on a pressing occasion, yet a stranger must
have found the descent to be no easy passage, as several of the stairs were
wanting, and one false step might have been as detrimental to the safety of his
person as it is generally found to the reputation of a fair lady: but, thanks
to my prudence, I landed safe in this retreat of genius; for such it might be
called from the characters of the persons who retired there to eat in security.

The appearance of the place altogether was so unlike what I had ever seen
before, that, had I been conveyed thither in a sleep, I should have had no
doubts, on my awaking, of being an inhabitant of the other world. -- All the
light we were favored with proceeded from the glimmering of two dirty lamps,
which only served, as Milton has observed, to make darkness more visible; and,
by the aid of which, I could just discern a table, at one end of the apartment,
where the poet, taking me by the hand, introduced me as his particular friend,
and a man of genius.

Before the dinner was served up, a sort of general conversation took place, in
the course of which a human figure, who sat at one corner of the table, (whom I
took for an author, for he was still thinner, if possible, than my companion,)
accosted my friend with "Well, Mr. Crambo, have you heard the melancholy news
this morning?" -- No," replies the diminutive poet, Lord bless me! what is
that?" -- Only your competitor Balderdash in limbo! -- that is all," adds the
other. -- "I Am sorry for it," says my friend, shrugging his shoulders, "but
it is what we must all come to." -- "Aye, it was a damned unlucky accident for
poor Frederic," cries another, "for he had been appointed, that very morning,
editor to the Scandalous Chronicle." -- "That was a damned stroke of fate,
indeed," says a fourth; pray," continued he, "is it a fair question, Mr. Slang,
to ask the sum he is nabbed for?" -- "Oh! certainly," replies the other, "'it is
thirteen pounds and upwards." -- "Zounds! that is a sum indeed!" exclaims
another, "but, perhaps, it could be settled; -- as our friend is known to be
seedy, the creditor might be persuaded to compound for half the debt on good
security." -- "No," rejoins another, "that is impossible; for his creditor is as
inexorable as Dick Flint, the bailiff." -- "Why, then, he hasn't the proper
feelings of a man," cries my friend. -- "Oh! damme, we know that," replies the
other, "but the best of the joke is, he is not a man." -- "Not a man!" exclaims
the poet in amazement, "why, what the devil is he then?" -- "Why, if you must
know, he is a tailor," says the other. -- Oh! damn the tailors," echoed
instantly, and at the same moment, from every mouth in the cavern but mine;
from which circumstance I naturally concluded there was a little antipathy
existing between the two professions.

The farther discussion of that subject was now postponed by a summons from the
cook, who gave an additional edge to their appetites by the following polite
exordium: -- "Come, gemmen," says the lusty host, get ready, for I shall soon
be with you. -- Damme, here is a dish fit for his majesty, God bless him. -- You
may say what you please, gemmen, about your Hellishogabalus, but I Will be cursed
if he ever sat down to soup like this. -- Marrow and fat, my blades! -- I have
bought you the best meat in the market, and here it is, my masters, swimming in
an ocean of soup, like a fleet at Spithead. -- This will do your hearts good,
my boys! -- it is no wishy-washy stuff, such as they give the MOUNSEERS, made up
of cabbage and garlic; -- no, no, I knows what is fitting for you, -- you love
the solid thing; and, for the matter of that, do you see, you do credit to it; --
why, zounds! one of you authors will eat more in one meal than a French
grenadier could in three, and much good may do you with it, say I. -- Only
understand me rightly, my masters, you must come down today, by Ch -- t; for,
damme, I cannot stand it much longer if you go any more upon tick, do you see.

At the end of this polite and persuasive harangue, he took up a large earthen
dish, which smoked like a furnace or the tremendous crater of Mount Vesuvius,
and, bending under it, came waddling toward the table; but, whether it was his
over-eagerness to accommodate his half-famished guests, or that the heat of the
dish burnt him so much that he could not hold it any longer, I will not take
upon me to determine; but he certainly was too precipitate in the affair; for,
not looking rightly before him, and the place being exceedingly dark, instead
of placing the smoking viands immediately in the center of the table, he clapped
it down with such violence on the scull of a tragic poet, who lay sleeping on
the table, with his head resting on his hands, as split the dish into a hundred
fragments, to the great annoyance of the whole society, who were terribly
scalded by the soup, which was splashed around the table in copious streams,
like the bursting of a water-spout, or the falls of Niagara.

As for the lethargic servant of Melpomene, it was generally thought, that, so
far from being able to honor any more of his friends, by writing dying
speeches to immortalize their memory, he would behold the sweet face of the sun
no more, or, in other language, that his scull was fractured past relief. But,
in that conjecture, his brethren of the quill were fortunately deceived; for,
when a neighboring surgeon was sent for to examine the contusion, he gave them
the satisfaction of knowing that their friend's wound was very inconsiderable;
and likewise added, to their manifest comfort, that if a ton weight had fallen
upon the poet's cranium, instead of an earthen dish, it would not have done his
faculties the smallest injury, as nature had furnished him with a particular
thickness of bone in that part, that absolutely bade defiance to accident for
its demolition.

As this unlucky affair had destroyed the hopes of the company, relative to the
engagement of a hot dinner, they were obliged to call their philosophy to their
assistance, (a lady to whom they were frequently obliged to be indebted in
spite of their teeth,) and sit down to the miserable and cold remains of some
ox-cheek and neck of beef, which they presently devoured with such speed as
made me imagine, that a thousand such men in a country would cause a general
famine. Indeed, as for my part, my wonder had been so much excited by the
singular occurrences that took place in the cellar, that all my former ideas of
eating gave way to my astonishment, and I thought as little of satisfying the
cravings of my belly as an old maid on the eve of matrimony.

CHAPTER XXXI.
Crambo and I take a walk. -- Agree to see a play. -- A visit to a first-rate
comedian. -- He is jocular at the expense of the poet. -- Strong doubts of
Crambo's sanity of mind.

AFTER discharging the reckoning in the cellar, my friend Crambo and I proposed
taking a saunter into the fields; and, during our ramble, he asked me if I were
willing to go to the play that evening. Upon my replying in the affirmative,
and observing, that I could not indulge that propensity at present, on account
of the expense, he bade me make myself easy on that particular, as he knew one
of the principal comedians, for whom he constantly wrote puffs, and proposed
that I should call upon him with a note, which, if he were at home, he said he
would certainly honor; at the same time remarking, that he was sorry to give
me so much trouble, but would have called himself on the actor, if he had not
lodged, unfortunately, next door to a vile caitiff of a tailor, who had his
name upon the debtor-side of his ledger for a greater sum than he found it
convenient, or indeed even possible, to pay.

Being naturally fond of such exhibitions, I greedily seized so favorable an
opportunity of seeing a play on the London stage, imagining that to be the very
fountainhead of dramatic excellence; and, going into the first public house we
came to, the poet wrote a note, which he sealed up, and sent by me to the
player, resolving to wait for my return at the alehouse, and solace himself
with the comforts of a quid of tobacco, a pennyworth of porter, and a
belly-full of reflection.

Rapt in idea with the pleasures which were to accrue from this commission, I
hurried to the actor's house with all the haste imaginable, and, knocking at
the door of his august mansion, it was opened by a servant, in rich livery, who
appeared as much pampered with the good things of this world as an archbishop;
but, before he would condescend to answer me the plain question, whether his
master was at home or not, surveyed me from head to foot with a look of the
most mortifying contempt, and then answered, with a supercilious smile, --
Well, if he be, what the devil can you possibly want with him? -- I was so
provoked with the fellow's manner and incivility, that I had a great
inclination to knock him down; but, repressing my choler as well as I could,
told him, with some heat of resentment, that I came with a note from Mr.
Crambo. -- What, Crambo, the poet?" says the fellow, with a sneer, "well, I Will
take it in, but I Am cursedly afraid, my friend, that you will go without your
errand; for, to my knowledge, my master hasn't any cash to spare at present; --
he has had a bad run at hazard lately, and been tricked most infernally; -- he
is left without a single guinea, and as poor as a minority-member: then he
walked leisurely up stairs, after bidding me wait in the hall till his return.

From the observations of the impertinent footman, upon the state of his
master's purse, I conjectured that my associate, Crambo, had applied to him,
upon occasion, for other favors, infinitely more substantial, egad, than
orders.

After I had stood cooling my heels in the hall for above twenty minutes, the
jackanapes in livery returned with a message from Mr. Buskin, his master,
desiring me to walk up. I obeyed the mandate of the actor; and, following the
footman up an elegant staircase, I was shown into a superb room, decorated
with Titian's Loves of the Gods, and a couple of bawdy paintings, (which my
friend Crambo assured me afterward were the performance of a clergyman, and
presented to the player as a mark of his particular esteem,) I found Mr. Buskin
sitting at a table, like his redoubted highness the Great Mogul, demolishing a
gallon of claret with two prostitutes of high ton, and a noted bailiff from
Lincoln's End, who had conscientiously lent him fifty guineas that morning, in
hard specie, upon his simple bond and judgment, for a hundred, to be paid in
six months, and the cash was displayed with great ostentation before him. --
Turning to me with a contemptuous sneer, this consequential, self-swoln,
comedian, inquired, in an authoritative tone of voice, if I was the person who
brought the note from old Crambo. I answered, "Yes, sir," with a bow down to
the very carpet; which, by the by, I might as well have spared myself the
trouble of performing, as this haughty stage hero did not stoop from his
dignity so much as to observe even the humility of so poor a being as myself.
-- "Well," says the actor, having read the note, I don't know what to say to
this business; this Crambo is a cursed troublesome sort of a fellow; -- curse
me," says the player, "but it would be an act of charity to confine him in a
dark room, with clean straw, for a year or two." -- "Who is he? said one of the
ladies. -- "Who is he!" replied the king of shreds and patches, with a
half-stifled laugh, "why, damme, he is an author, and more plague to me than a
third-day ague; -- the animal is continually levying contributions upon my
purse, and, if I refuse him the supplies, I am sure to feel his sting the next
day in some of the daily papers, where he incessantly scribbles, with as little
regard to truth in his writing as he has to decency in his manners." -- "Why
do you indulge him in his beggarly requests?" rejoins the other lady. -- "For the
best reason in the world to an actor," cries the player, "because I Am afraid of
him, you strap of Beelzebub; so I Am obliged to throw a sop to Cerberus now and
then, to stop his growling; though, damme, I Have often a great inclination to
strangle the old dog, and get rid of him that way," continues the scenic chief,
"by anticipating the conclusion of public justice."

This joke, at the expense of my friend Crambo, set the table in a roar; but,
on its subsiding, the tender limb of the law, who flanked the left side of the
comedian, exclaimed vociferously, B -- st me, Master Buskin, why don't you do
him over? -- swear to any thing above ten pounds, and I Am your man; -- by the
Lord I Will muzzle the thief of the world in four and twenty hours; -- say it is a
match, and the thing's done, do you see me; so enough said. But, whether the
actor really held the philanthropic advice of his bosom-friend in abhorrence,
or that he was afraid of the consequences, I cannot tell; yet certain it is,
that he chose to turn a deaf ear to the charitable remonstrance of his
companion at that period; and, calling for pen, ink, and paper, immediately
wrote an order for two to the pit, which he delivered to me with as much
majesty as if he had been in the act of personating the eighth Harry.

As I had succeeded so well in my negotiation, I saluted the mimic hero with
the greatest marks of respect, in the performance of which he was pleased to
eye me with a kind of merry disdain; and, at last bursting forth into an
immoderate fit of laughter, roared out, Damme, what, I suppose you're a young
poet too, an't you? I instantly replied, "No, sir," with evident marks of
confusion. -- "Well, well," replied the mangler of heroics, I ask your pardon
most sincerely for the suspicion; I should have seen at first sight that you're
too sleek and well dressed to drink the waters of Helicon, and, if you are not
damnably dry indeed, my honest fellow," continues the actor, you never should:
-- take my word for it, it is a cursed dirty puddle, and, in some respects, may
be compared to bad gin; for, though it frequently intoxicates the ragged part
of my associates, may I be hissed the next time I immortalize Dionysius if it
ever fattened a single scoundrel of them all.

At the conclusion of this salutary admonition, one of the demireps politely
observed, that she wondered Mr. Buskin should waste his time, talking about
such shabby dogs. To which elegant observation the player thought proper to
reply, that, though he admitted the rhyme-weaving rascals were contemptible as
men, "yet," says the son of Melpomene, they are to be dreaded as enemies, and,
in some sort, are a kind of necessary appendage to the character of an actor,
and answer much the same purpose to us as a candlestick does to a taper; for,
though," continued Mr. Buskin, they haven't the power to increase our innate
flame of merit, yet we find it damned difficult to stand upright without their
assistance: -- so, mind, my friend," says the player, turning to me, "give my
respectful compliments to my worthy friend Mr. Crambo, and tell him not to
forget me in the next critique he writes for the stage; for he knows that I
both respect, admire, and regard, him," cries the insolent mummer, "as the
devil does holy water, turning his head to the bailiff, who sat in full
enjoyment of the fun, with his tongue thrust in his left cheek, by the way of a
tacit comment on the player's sincerity. -- The actor, giving me a nod that
seemed to say I might depart when I thought proper, I saluted the respectable
group, and instantly left the house.

On the way back to my companion, I could not avoid reflecting on the singular
behavior of the comedian: -- first, on the long and tedious interval that I
passed in his hall, which was an intolerable sacrifice, I understood
afterward, he made every poor devil pay to his vanity, whose quality, or
supposed rank in life, did not elevate him sufficiently to be treated as his
equal: -- secondly, the wanton freedom and uncharitable impertinence with which
he spoke of poor Crambo, who, from his education as well as his heart, could
properly claim an infinite pre-eminence, over this upstart ranter of heroics,
in the grand scale of society: -- and, lastly, at the general contempt he threw
upon authors, of all descriptions, by his illiberal remarks upon my dress and
condition; when he should have retreated within his own mind, and been thankful
to Fortune for his situation, which lifted him above the experience of those
calamities that are hourly endured by men of the most sublime merit, virtue,
and sensibility, and whose caprice of disposition could not be better, or more
strongly, evinced, than by her ridiculous dispensations in favor of so
worthless an individual.

When I came to the rendezvous, I found my friend Crambo sitting with his pot
before him, writing with a pencil in a book, which I learned afterward he
carried about with him, to enter such thoughts as arose in his imagination, and
which he imagined worth a record. As I perceived that he was deeply immerged in
thought, I was resolved not to disturb his ideas, but to remain where I was
until he should be disengaged, and descend, like another mortal, to interest
himself in the affairs of this sublunary world.

During this interval, the woman of the house came out of the bar, and desired
me to take my companion away as fast as possible, for she did not choose to
harbor madmen in her house. When I testified my surprise at this strange
account of my friend's intellects, she told me, that, since I left him, he had
started from his seat, and, running about the room with a book in his hand,
made such a noise, and uttered such unintelligible jargon, as frightened two
fish-women and a ticket-porter, who were drinking brandy in the same box. And
she farther informed me, that she had sent to a mad doctor's, who lived within
a few doors, for a straight waistcoat, to confine him, but, unfortunately, the
physician had left home about an hour before, on a visit to a celebrated lady,
who had gone out of her mind on the death of a favorite lap-dog. -- Here I
thought proper to remove the poor woman's apprehensions by informing her, that
Mr. Crambo was a poet, and that what she took for incoherent ravings, was
probably only the recital of some passages of a new poem which he had been
conceiving; -- that I would answer for it he was a very harmless character, and
entreated her to let him remain unmolested for a few minutes longer, as perhaps
disturbing him then might unhinge the best chain of ideas that were ever forged
in the human understanding, and stop his progress in the very moment that he
was galloping on his sublime Pegasus to the heights of immortality.

CHAPTER XXXII.
Discover Crambo in a poetical reverie. -- Go to the play. -- My friend and I
meet with a disaster. -- The applause of an audience not always consonant with
reason. -- More ways than one of acquiring fame. -- The poet's remarks on the
present state of the theaters. -- He disputes with a critic, and shows his
contempt of modern actors. -- My wishes are constrained to be obedient to
necessity.

PRESENTLY I observed that the poet's eyes began to glisten; and, my landlady
conjuring me to step on one side for the love of God, I followed her advice,
being willing to see what turn this affair would take: but my friend Crambo did
not leave me long in doubt; for, grasping the pewter pot in one hand, and his
commonplace book in the other, he strutted about the room, repeating the
following lines from Dryden with great energy: "Happy's the man, and happy he
alone,
"He who can call today his own;
"He who, secure within himself, can say,
"Tomorrow do thy worst, for I have lived today;
"Be fair or foul, or rain or shine,
"The joys I have possessed in spite of fate are mine;
"Not heaven itself upon the past has power,
"But what has been, has been, and I have had my hour."
At the conclusion of this elegant quotation, the little bard stalked across
the room with the port of an emperor; when, running up to him, I took my friend
by the hand, and informed him of the success of my embassy, taking care to
conceal the disagreeable expressions which the player had made use of so much
to Crambo's disadvantage.

As the clock struck five, my companion put me in mind that it was time we went
to the theater, if I wished to have a good seat, as the piece to be performed
that evening was a very attractive dish to the public, and considered by the
million as possessing merit, though, for his part, he thought otherwise.

Having paid the landlady, who seemed more than commonly rejoiced at my
friend's departure, we hurried to the scene of action, and got there just time
enough to squeeze in with the crowd, who had been waiting for the doors
opening. The pressure, on all sides of me, was so great, that I had not the
power to make use of my hands, but was carried forward by the mob, entirely at
their disposal, like an unnavigated boat in a strong current, and, by the time
I had got into the pit, I was almost reduced to the consistence of a jelly. As
for the little poet, he had been more scurvily used than myself; for, added to
the embraces his ribs had undergone, the outrageous behavior of the multitude
who surrounded him had fairly carried away his hat and wig, and he was obliged
to sit with his handkerchief tied round his head for the rest of the evening.
An orange-woman accosting me to buy some fruit, I attempted to put my hand in
my pocket, when, alas! I found they were turned inside out, and I was robbed of
every shilling that my rigid economy had preserved out of my last guinea. I
communicated this doleful piece of news to my neighbor Crambo, who, after
shrugging his shoulders a little, and pointing to the loss of his own hat and
wig, bade me be comforted. -- "You see," cries the poet, how that vixen,
Fortune, delights in persecuting us poor devils, and it matters not a whit, if
she means to plague the human heart, whether she effects her vile purposes by
the loss of a purse or the demolition of an empire; so, my friend," contitinued
the bard, "even let us assume that equality of temper which makes its possessor
easy under every difficulty, and defeat the malice of the gipsy's intentions,
by showing, in our conduct, that we despise her and all her works: -- the motto
of my existence has been always nil desperandum, which, let me tell you, is the
best charm we can make use of to extirpate the presence of care.

Notwithstanding this well-timed address of the poet, I could not chase away,
for the soul of me, the sorrow that I felt for the loss of my money; I was then
almost dead with fatigue and want of rest; -- the miseries that I had endured
the night before were still warm in my imagination, and the uncertainty of
knowing whether I should, or should not, have the felicity of paying a salutary
visit to Morpheus, on that night, loaded my heart with the most inexpressible
anxiety. But these fears were presently removed by the kindness of the
philanthropic author, who generously offered me the use of one half of his bed,
until Fate should enable me to procure one of my own.

Our conversation was now interrupted by the ringing of a bell behind the
curtain, which I understood was a signal that the performance was going to
begin. When I saw the people sit down around me, in preparation, my heart beat
high with expectation of the coming pleasure, and, at length, the moment of
gratification arrived. The curtain was drawn up, and a young man, of a genteel
aspect, stepped forward to speak the prologue. As I understood that he was a
dramatic novitiate, that had lately made his appearance with particular honor
to himself and advantage to the manager, I listened, with the greatest
attention, to his manner of delivery and to the language of the composition,
expecting to see and hear something, if not immediately perfection, at least
very near approaching to it. But, in this as well as many other instances of my
life, I was most cruelly deceived. As for the language of the composition,
(notwithstanding I was assured, by the persons around me, that it was written
by a man of fashion,) I was convinced it was the most absurd combination of
nonsense that ever disgraced the dramatic exhibition of a barn; and, as for the
actor who spoke it, he put me in mind of the Merry-Andrew to an itinerant
charlatan, by his gestures, rather than a first-rate comedian, who might be
presumed to have some latent regard for common sense, when strutting away his
ridiculous hour on the boards of so respectable a theater; for he skipped and
jumped about the stage like a mad dancing master in one of the wards of
Bedlam-Hospital.

When the disgusting business of prologue-speaking was over, the comedian
retired; but, instead of being attended, in his theatric exit, by those murmurs
of disapprobation, which I conceived must have always followed so vile a
martyrdom of propriety, he was loudly applauded by several people from the pit
and galleries. This extraordinary conduct in an audience, that I naturally
supposed enlightened, from the opportunity they had of contrasting real merit
with buffoonery, surprised me so much, that I asked Crambo what he thought of
their procedure. He smiled at my question, and told me a secret, well worth
knowing to all frequenters of theaters, namely, that the plaudits I had so
judiciously condemned were bestowed by the dependents and hired auxiliaries of
the player in question, to some of whom he gave orders for admission, and to
others money, to support him in his earnest and laudable endeavors to acquire
a great reputation as an actor, at the expense of every thing rational or
praiseworthy. -- As for the judgment, or reason, that is supposed to
predominate in a playhouse," says the poet, I would not give three farthings
for their influence; besides, I dare aver, that the small portions there may be
of either, among the audience of this evening, is confined to a few
individuals, who are too proud to enter into a contest with ignorance, and too
well bred to be violent in their displeasure; so that, unfortunately for common
sense," continues the bard, "folly and presumption defeat her and all her
influence, within these walls, in nine instances out of ten.

As the little man got heated, in his remarks upon the prostitution of public
praise, he spoke so loud that he was overheard by several people around us;
some of whom thought his observations very pertinent, and were so well pleased
at the grace and facility with which he delivered them, that they paid him a
particular attention during the rest of the entertainment; so much had the
beauties of his understanding overcome the prejudice that was at first
conceived against him from his grotesque and singular appearance.

At length the play began, and I kept a watchful eye, first on the performers
and then on the poet, being willing to perceive, by the emotions of his
countenance, (which, from his black eyes, heavy brows, and meagre muscles, was
finely calculated for expression,) how far his feelings corresponded with my
own. One of the most celebrated of the actresses making her appearance, such a
clapping of hands ensued as could not have been exceeded if Thalia herself had
personated the character; all which she received with a kind of indifferent
insolence of behavior, as tacitly implied, that she imagined it was doing them
a prodigious favor by deigning to appear at all; but, entering into the
business of the scene, she conducted her dialogue with such a smartness of
delivery as seemed to give general delight; and, at one or two passages, where
the poet had arisen a small degree above his usual dullness, she got through so
well, and did the author such justice, by adding to his wit a certain poignancy
peculiar to herself, that I observed the muscles of the grim bard (who was
leaning his chin most attentively upon an oaken stick) relaxing with a lazy
tendency toward a smile of approbation. I was the more pleased that my
friend's iron features were expanded at this happy essay of the actress, as her
management of the execution had made me extremely well pleased.

At the conclusion of the comedy, I heard the bard utter a loud groan, which
was an ample testimony to me that he had not been amused equal to his wishes;
and he was sitting in a kind of sullen discontent, when a gentleman observed,
that he had never seen a more excellent comedy, nor one better performed. This
public asseveration was, in the opinion of the poet, too great an insult to the
taste of the audience to pass unnoticed; and, rising accordingly from his seat,
with the importance of a Cicero, he challenged the person, who had passed such
an eulogium on the performance and performers, to point out where those
beauties lay, in the construction of the piece or the merit of the players,
that he had so warmly attributed to both.

My friend had scarcely thrown the gauntlet of defiance, when a circle was
formed, of every one within hearing, to listen to the criticisms of the author,
his former remarks having excited their attention. Upon my friend's opponent
making a few loose and desultory attempts to defend his assertion, the little
retainer of the muses answered him in the following manner. -- "The science of
acting," said the bard, "is a more difficult undertaking than is generally
imagined by the actors themselves, or by those weak persons who arrogate a
sufficient share of judgment to determine on its excellences, when, in
reality, they have frequently no requisite to make them competent to such a
situation but their presumption, and no ally to support so gross an usurpation
of knowledge but their impudence. Many young people, impelled by a bastard kind
of ambition," continued the slave of Parnassus, "rush upon the stage, foolishly
imagining themselves under the guidance of the muses, and prosecute their
intentions with as much industry and zeal as those hoodwinked wretches, who,
from a supposed call of the Spirit, run about the confines of these nations,
propagating religious bigotry at the expense of human happiness; yet they are
both too often mistaken in the cause, and, in general, made miserable by the
effect; -- but this is a free country," exclaimed the son of Apollo, with a
significant sneer, "and we have, thank heaven, a privilege to be ridiculous
whenever we think proper." --

Here the bard's adversary stopped the progress of his raillery by asking him,
if he did not admit that the present actors, taken in general, were equal to
those he remembered when some years younger; to which question my friend
replied, "No," with a strong emphasis, and supported his negative by the
ensuing remarks. -- The modern players," said the poet, "are governed by a
momentary caprice, and sacrifice the little understanding they have to please
the vitiated palate of the public, without the least concern at the outrages
they are doing to nature, or the unpleasantness of a labor where their reason
and their efforts must be continually at variance. The actors of the old
school, on the contrary, nobly stepped forward in the defense of insulted
wisdom, and rescued the stage from that barbarity, into which it had been
gradually sinking before for at least half a century: and their exertions did
them immortal honor; for they dared to oppose their judgments, as men,
against the ruinous prejudices which a false taste had implanted in the hearts
of their benefactors. At the head of this reformation stood the late inimitable
Garrick," vociferated Crambo, "who united as many qualifications for an actor
in his mind as the Almighty will perhaps admit a human being to possess; and
the want of which all men of discernment must lament in his successors, who are
seldom correct, but frequently intolerable. -- And who can expect otherwise,"
said the poet, from men who have not a common knowledge of punctuation, or the
absolute necessity that the gesture, voice, and eye, of the performer should
intimately correspond in the execution, or that the smallest deficiency, in the
conduct of either, renders the representation imperfect, in the same degree as
the want of the most inconsiderable feature in the human body will not only
take off from the beauty of the whole, but, in some cases, make it even
repulsive and disgusting?

By this time the usual summons was given for the commencement of a farce that
was to succeed the comedy, written by the favorite author of the day, which
the bard no sooner heard, than, taking me by the arm, he forced me out of the
theater, asserting, that he would rather attend a puppet-show at
Bartholomew-Fair than the performance of a modern farce, especially a dramatic
abortion, squeezed from the brain of an animal, who had scarcely knowledge
sufficient to declare whether a human being was a substantive or a preposition;
"for," continued the inspired Crambo, I have it in my power to apologize for
the laughable blunders of the one, but cannot for the monstrous absurdities of
the other; upon which he dragged me by main force out of the pit, though I was
repeatedly assured, that a great comedian was to support the principal
character in the after-piece.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
Arrive at the poet's lodgings. -- An argument that sometimes proves the
pleasure of living in a garret. -- An accident occurs which terminates in a
tragical manner. -- A convincing proof, that fatigue is a better opiate than
laudanum. -- A hasty sketch of the furniture of an author's study.

MY friend Crambo not being in a condition to go into a house of entertainment,
we scudded as fast as possible to his lodgings, where we cast anchor a little
before ten o'clock. They were situated at the bottom of an alley, in St.
Giles's, so narrow, that it would not admit two people to walk abreast, and so
long, that I thought we never should come to the bottom; for there the bard had
chosen his residence, in the garret of a building that had once been a house,
and whose attic story leaned for support against the mansions on the opposite
side of the alley. He made innumerable apologies to me, as we ascended to his
apartment, for taking me so high, and told me, that his predilection in favor
of a garret entirely arose from its being more detached from the world than any
other room in the house, besides the great advantages it afforded to a mind
devoted to study and contemplation.

As we had no candle, and the poet was extremely drowsy as well as myself, we
agreed to go to bed by moonlight; but, alas! I found, to my cost, when I had
laid myself down with an intention to sleep, that very few persons had reason
to envy my friend Crambo the possession of his couch; for the feathers it
contained were so scanty that my bones rubbed against the frame of the bed; nor
were they quite so soft in their quality as eider-down; for, a few having made
their way through the ticking, they annoyed my poor carcass worse than so many
crow-quills. However, I knew that my circumstances obliged me to make a virtue
of necessity; so, putting the best face I could upon the matter, I was
preparing to resign myself to the arms of Morpheus, whom I secretly implored to
shed his poppy over my brow, when an accident happened that removed all ideas
of sleep for some time. This was occasioned by the retainer of the muses
himself, who, in groping his way to the bed, stumbled over some bricks, which
he had artfully placed for its support at the foot, and which, falling down,
not only destroyed the whole economy of the poet's contrivance, but made such
a confounded noise as alarmed an old woman, who slept in the floor beneath, and
whose profession, I afterward found, was that of a fortune tellers, a secret
she had picked up in the neighborhood of Norwood, and, by following which, she
made more in a week than my friend Crambo did, by writing poetry, in a month.

The accident had not happened above five minutes, when the old sybil made
shift to crawl up to the poet's door, and bestowed such a volley of curses upon
him as made my hair stand on end; and, among the rest of her predictions, she
declared, without any ceremony, that Crambo would most assuredly come to be
hanged. But the little bard was so exasperated at the tenor of the last
assertion, that* collecting all the strength he was master of, he ran full-but
with his head against the stomach of the prophetess; but, using more force in
the business than was necessary, and she, at the same time, fastening her claws
an inch deep in his throat, they tumbled together down a perpendicular height
of at least twenty feet, where they continued to fight on their arrival with
prodigious ferocity, like two contending cats, till they were parted by some
people who lodged in the same house, and came out to their assistance.

However, in a few minutes after the affray, the poet returned to his
apartment, groaning and sobbing with the pain it had occasioned; but,
undressing himself, he at last came to bed also, uttering incoherent
ejaculations to the supreme Being, not to procure a sweet slumber, but to
punish the wretch who had been the primary cause of his bodily torture.

Yet, in spite of every disadvantage, I made shift to sleep tolerably sound,
until the bright beams of the sun had awakened my companion, who, shaking me
violently by the shoulder, broke the fetters of my repose, to inform me, that
it was time he should get up and procure another hat and wig, which he wished
to do as early as possible, that his deficiency, in that particular, might not
be seen by the neighborhood, which, he assured me, was not the least
scandalous within the bills of mortality; and, if I were willing to accompany
him on that occasion, he should be very glad; but if, on the contrary, I was
too much fatigued, he would leave me to my slumbers, and return in half an hour.

When I rubbed my eyes sufficiently to survey the apartment of poor Crambo, I
must own I felt so little inclination to be left behind, being struck with
amazement at the wretchedness of his retreat, that I immediately told him I
should be extremely happy to take a walk in so fine a morning. -- "Well," says
the bard, if that is your resolution, I will step down stairs, while you are
dressing yourself, and get something applied to my forehead, which is extremely
painful, and be with you directly. -- And, indeed, he had ample occasion for a
plaster; for the disaster of the preceding night with the old woman had been
attended with some very ugly effects; among the rest, a great lump upon his
forehead, about the bigness of a turkey's egg, was not the most insignificant.

When the bard had left the room, I took an accurate survey of the furniture of
his garret, which consisted of the miserable succedaneum for a bed, on which,
though it appeared next to an impossibility that any one could close their eyes
for half an hour, I found, from recent experience, that even Misery could drown
his feelings, in the soft bands of sleep, even on a couch of stone. There was
likewise a square deal table, with three legs remaining out of four, which it
appeared the cabinet-maker had formerly thought necessary for its support, on
which were some writings. Among the rest I discovered three cantos of a poem on
the inefficacy of wealth toward constituting human happiness, and a satirical
epistle to a justice of the peace, who, I understood afterward, had dealt with
such a degree of severity toward the poet, as the latter had thought
sufficient provocation to draw upon the head of the devoted magistrate the
bitterness of his redoubted pen. -- There was, moreover, a rebus for a
magazine, a list of bloody murders for one of the morning-papers, and some
loose paragraphs; in one of which a man was to have his jaw twisted, in the act
of taking some blasphemous oaths in Covent Garden; -- another was an outrageous
puff for a tragic actress, who was to appear at one of the theaters in the
course of the ensuing week, setting forth, that she was the great granddaughter
of a general-officer, and supported an aged mother and three sisters by
plain-work; -- the third was an account of a bankruptcy that was to take place
in a great house at Philadelphia; -- and the fourth a particular relation of
the plague, and its consequences, that was to break out at Grand Cairo in the
beginning of the following month, with a full account of the lethargy that was
to seize the Prussian monarch at Berlin, when the emperor was on a visit to the
Austrian Netherlands.

I probably should have discovered some valuable manuscripts in my researches,
had I not been disturbed in the pursuit by hearing the poet coming hastily up
the ladder which led to his room; upon which I replaced every thing in proper
order, and set myself down in a chair without a back, which, by the by, was the
only one in the room, and was very industriously reading a dying speech, that
was pasted against the wall, accompanied by a bawdy ballad and John the
Painter's effigy, when the servant of the Parnassian family entered his sublime
apartment, and told me he was ready to attend me.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
Disadvantages of living in a dirty neighborhood. -- The poet dips for a wig.
-- Pays a visit to a bookseller. -- A morning's lounge in Westminster-Abbey. --
Meet with an original. -- A summary discourse on the prostitution of epitaphs.
-- A man of an excellent understanding soured by misfortunes.

BY the time my friend Crambo and I had got out of the alley, we were both
almost out of breath, not with the distance of ground we had walked over, but
with the alertness we were forced to make use of to avoid some unsavory
salutes from the windows as we passed; for, by the number of offerings which
the chaste nymphs of that district discharged from their apartments, one would
naturally conclude, that sacrificing to Cloacina was the principal amusement of
their existence.

At last I found myself in the middle of a court, which was occupied by dealers
in almost every article of dress, such as clothes, boots, shoes, and, in short,
every appurtenance necessary to the completion of a fine gentleman; and, at
length, we arrived at a wig-warehouse, the windows of which were faced with
shambles, and ornamented with wigs for all ages, sexes, and complexions; which
the bard no sooner saw than he entered, beckoning me to follow him. The master
of the shop, perceiving the nature of his visit, inquired, with much
complaisance, if he wanted a tie-wig, a jasy, a bob, or a major; to which the
poet immediately replied, "A tie-wig." -- Will your honor make a choice or
take a dip? says the merchant. -- "Oh! a dip by all means," replies the bard.
-- Why, then, come into the back-shop, master," says the other, "and I Will fit
you for sixpence as well as any gemman in the land. We both followed his
directions; and, going into a little back room, he produced a canvass bag, at
the same time informing us, that it contained caxens of such delicate
workmanship as would not disgrace the forehead of a chief magistrate.

When the poet had deposited his sixpence, he stripped off his coat; and, the
master of the shop having opened the mouth of the repository, the little bard
put down his arm as far as he could reach, and, after groping about for some
minutes, pulled out an old brown wig, without powder, which, from its
complexion and disorder, seemed to me as if it had been in the hands of a
japanner of shoes, and literally not worth twopence. But the shopkeeper, it
appeared, thought otherwise; for, taking it from the hands of the poet, he told
him, with exultation, that he was in luck, for he had brought out a wig for
sixpence which was honestly worth a crown between man and man, and, placing it
alertly on a block, began to comb it; and indeed the ingenious wig-retailer
brought it, by dint of industry, into so respectable a form, that I could not
help congratulating my friend Crambo upon the additional graces it gave his
countenance.

The next concern being to procure a decent hat, and my companion not being
over nice in respect to the fashion, he got one in a neighboring shop upon
very moderate terms; and, being now equipped with the habiliments of a
gentleman, he took leave of me, having first exacted my promise to dine with
him, at the ordinary in the cellar, at the usual hour; after which he set off
for Paternoster Row, on a visit to a bookseller, with whom, I understood, he
had articled himself, under a heavy penalty, to furnish a history of the last
war for the moderate premium of half-a-crown a sheet.

Feeling myself in an awkward situation, destitute of a penny to buy the
necessaries of life, and deprived of the society of the ingenious author, whose
singularities of disposition in a great measure tended to divert my own
chagrin, I resolved to pay a visit to Westminster-Abbey, and endeavor, by
discoursing with the tombs of departed statesmen and heroes, to reconcile
myself to those wants and inconveniences which oppressed me, by learning, from
their posthumous declarations, how soon they would be no more. When I entered
the abbey, I felt an awful sensation pervade my whole frame; the Gothic
magnificence of the pile at once pleased and surprised me; I fancied myself
walking over the ashes of the good and great, whose names have shone so
conspicuous in the page of history; and trod with a kind of sacred apprehension
along the sculptured pavement, lest the levity of my actions should give
offense to the ennobled dust that slept around me.

I was reading, with particular delight, the epitaphs on the tombs of the
British poets, when a man of a genteel mein, but shabbily accoutred, and
apparently in greater misery than myself, accosted me, and requested, in terms
of the utmost politeness, that I would assist him in the translation of a Latin
epitaph in the corner, and at the same instant informed me, that his curiosity
was strongly excited to know if our forefathers were as ridiculous in their
monumental inscriptions as ourselves, and as willing to honor the memory of a
wealthy scoundrel as the present generation. The oddity of the remark, and the
solicitude of the man, conspired to awaken my desire to know who he was; which
I presently effected by asking him the following question: "Pray, sir," replied
I, do not you imagine, that the custom, all enlightened nations have adopted,
of paying a proper tribute to the merits of the dead, is not only laudable in
itself, as an exercise of the principle of gratitude for the services they have
rendered us, but eventually of benefit to the living, inasmuch as it holds
forth to their embraces a certain desirable reward, after death, for the
maintenance of virtue and propagation of knowledge while they remained members
of human society?" "Your idea of rewarding men of merit is erected upon a very
noble foundation," says the stranger; "and, if these rewards were confined
merely to persons of that denomination, I should have no possible dislike to
their continuance; but as, on the contrary, like splendid titles and other
human honors, they are lavished with as much, or more, profuseness on the
unprincipled knave, who dies amidst the execrations of his fellow creatures, as
on the scholar who has ornamented his country by his labors, or the soldier
who has defended it by his valor, I think they must be considered, by all men
who judge properly, as a living satire upon our vanity, and not a lasting
record of either our virtues or our wisdom. I told him, in reply, that, if the
abuses really existed which he had pointed out, I though that every man might
retire to the grave, contented with having done his duty, and be totally
indifferent whether a tomb was raised, to tell the world he had existed, or
not; and that, however false praise might be lavished, or rather prostituted,
on a bad man, it by no means tended to diminish the virtues of a good one; and,
though, in some few instances, the practice might be liable to ridicule, yet,
taken all together, the spirit of commemorating the actions of the deceased was
not only praiseworthy, but, in my humble opinion, strictly proper.

On the conclusion of my reply, the stranger said, I will pursue the subject no
farther, as I find I am not likely to make you my proselyte very readily. You
are but a young man, and have a much better opinion of mankind, I am afraid,
than they deserve; but, when you have lived as long in the world as I have, you
will perceive its vices and its follies, and most cordially despise them. I
told my new acquaintance, that I was very sorry every day's experience but too
fully proved the justice of his remarks upon the depravity of our species; --
"and, though a very young man," continued I, "I have discovered more vices, in
the small circle of persons with whom I have been connected, than I before
imagined to have existed in the whole world." "Oh ho! then," replies the
misanthropical stranger, evidently pleased at my condemnation of modern
manners, "you have bit at the bridle, you have found some difference between
their professions and their actions, have you?" "Indeed I have, most woefully,"
rejoined I. "I am glad of it," says the stranger; "give me your hand; the more
unpalatable the draught of life is in the beginning, the sweeter it will become
at the conclusion; and take the word of a soldier, young man, when he avers,
that you will be the better for it as long as you exist. Had I," continued the
stranger, "felt the rod of adversity in my youth, I should not have been left
destitute of the blessings of life at a period of my existence when I most
require them."

His last expression touched me to the soul by the manner in which he delivered
it. I sympathised with his misfortunes, and begged to know if I could serve
him, before that I recollected I had not even the power to assist myself.
However, he took my offer in my good part, and, perceiving my sensibility, told
me, as we walked through the ailes of the abbey, the principal circumstances
that had brought him to regard the world and its dependences with so inveterate
an antipathy.

CHAPTER XXXV.
The history of Captain Blisset.

I AM apprehensive, my young friend," (said the stranger,) that you will find
nothing sufficiently entertaining in my history to repay you for the trouble of
listening to a chain of occurrences that have made up the principal part of my
being, and which are tinctured with an infinitely greater proportion of sorrow
than of joy. However, as it appears to be your wish to hear it, I will be as
brief as possible.

I am descended from a reputable family in the north of Ireland. My name is
Blisset; and my father was one of those people who are distinguished, in that
kingdom, by the name of gentlemen-farmers; besides the profit that arose from a
large portion of land which he rented from a neighboring nobleman, he had a
small fortune that was left him by a distant relation. On the joint issue of
these he contrived to live in a state of comfort, enjoying all the diversions
of the country, such as hunting, fishing, and all those amusements which are
annexed to the life of a country gentleman. But, being one evening at a rural
ball, he danced with a beautiful lady, whose natural graces made such an
impression on his heart, that he could not quit the room without inquiring into
her name and circumstances; and the account he received was far from adding
fuel to his growing love; for he learned, that she was the only daughter of a
gentleman of considerable property in the adjoining county, and who intended
her as a wife for a young baronet of large estate, who was hourly expected to
return home from the continent, where he had been for some time for the
improvement of his education.

Though this account considerably diminished my father's hopes, it by no means
removed the flame that still continued to rage within his bosom. -- At last he
contrived to have an interview with my mother, (for so the lady proved in the
consequences, to my misfortune;) and they became so perfectly agreeable to each
other, that a private marriage was resolved on, to put it out of the power of
even Fate itself to divide their love. -- She took an opportunity, when her
father was gone to town upon business of the most serious importance, to convey
the principal part of her clothes and baggage to her lover's house, who met
her, in her father's park, with a trusty servant and a carriage, into which
they both got, and drove with all expedition until they arrived at the farm,
where a clergyman attended to unite them in the indissoluble bonds of matrimony.

When her father returned to the country, and found how his daughter had
disposed of herself in wedlock without his knowledge, he grew frantic with the
disappointment; but strove to forget her want of duty, and herself, by going to
reside in France, where he survived the event but a few years, and left all the
property he was able in large bequests to his friends and acquaintance, and the
rest so laden with mortgages and other disagreeable encumbrances, that my
father was half ruined in the endeavors to recover the remainder. -- However,
in spite of these draw-backs on their felicity, they contrived to live very
comfortably, my mother bearing him a child every year; and the first fruit of
their love was your humble servant.

The circumstance of my being a boy so pleased them both, that my parents
continued to caress me with the most extravagant tokens of parental fondness, a
mode of behavior which they pursued till I left my country and saw them no
more. As I grew up in strength and beauty, I was indulged in every wanton and
improper propensity, at the expense of my brothers and sisters. This partiality
in my favor was so glaring to every person that visited the family, that some,
who were on the most intimate footing with my father and mother, strove to
remove, or at least to reduce, a partiality which existed in preference to the
rest of the children, who were, in general, more amiable in the eyes of
strangers; for, the unlimited manner in which I experienced their ill-timed
kindnesses had worked me up to such a pitch of arrogance and ill nature, that
my humor became intolerable to all those whose senses were not hood-winked by
the unaccountable partiality of a parent; and various were the methods
practiced by the servants to mortify young master Frank, (for that is my name,)
while my brothers and sisters were treated with kindness by every one but their
parents: some would take an opportunity, while they were putting on my clothes,
to run a pin into my arm, as if by accident, and others would give me a sly
pinch, which made me roar for an hour. You may be sure I did not fail to make
the most of these abuses to my parents; but, at last, my complaints became so
frequent and so numerous, that they lost their credit; and, in the sequel, I
was pinched and pushed about by all the servants in the house, out of the sight
of my parents, without even the satisfaction of having my accounts believed. In
this manner was the earlier part of my life passed, till I arrived at nine
years of age, when it was thought proper to send me to an academy in the same
county; but I had not been long there before the same spirit broke out which
had rendered me so intolerable at home. But now the scene was changed; for my
humors were counteracted with a studious particularity, and my faults punished
by such severe applications of the birch to my ill-fated posteriors, that I
could not sit down, for whole days succeeding the punishment. At length, a
full, true, and particular, account reached the ears of my parents, who
instantly flew to the school, and charged the master, on pain of their
displeasure, not to whip me any more, but strive to make me learn my task by
persuasion, which they assured him was a sufficient incitement to make a boy do
his duty of so gentle and governable a disposition as mine.

Leaving the master of the seminary under that ridiculous restriction, they
returned home; and it was not long before I resorted to my old tricks; which
the master, endeavoring to curb by the methods prescribed by the wise authors
of my being, and finding them ineffectual, very fairly took the resolution of
sending me back to profit by their sage instructions; or, in other words,
turned me out of the school as an incorrigible young puppy, who was destined to
ruin, by possessing a perverse disposition, which he was forbidden to regulate
or alter by the silly determination of two weak people, who rather chose that
their offspring should shoot up to manhood, detested by every one but
themselves, than grow amiable, dutiful, and exemplary, at the expense of a sore
breech and a few salutary tears.

At my return home, my parents were filled with the most implacable resentment
against the schoolmaster, whom they honored with the terms of insolent
pedagogue, hard-hearted tyrant, and other phrases equally expressive of their
folly and malignity; but, at the same time, took a firm resolution that their
dear Frank should not be exposed to such merciless cruelty for the future,
which they were well assured I had not deserved, because, forsooth, I had told
them to the contrary; and, in consequence, I was permitted to pass my time,
until I approached a state of manhood, without receiving those advantages of
education which other young people enjoyed, for fear that discipline should
break my heart and too much study impair my constitution. But, one day, after
dinner, as the family were sitting in conversation, my mother told a story of a
circumstance in which I was materially concerned; but her manner of relating it
displeased me so much, that, when she came to a particular part of the
narrative, I very coolly gave her the lie direct; and, upon her offering to
remonstrate with me upon the impropriety of my behavior, I immediately spit in
her face. But this last was an outrage that not even their partiality could
overlook; I was threatened by my father with personal chastisement, which I
defied him to put in execution; and, at length, things grew to such a height of
animosity, that it was determined to purchase me a commission in the army, in
one of the regiments ordered abroad, for we were then at war. Accordingly the
whole business was immediately put en train, and I was consigned to the care of
a near relation of my father, in town, who was to provide every requisite
necessary for such an undertaking, and to give me such advice as would prove
beneficial to me in my conduct as an officer, he having retired from the army
but a few years, and in which he had served with an unsullied reputation ever
since he was the height of a regimental drum.

Agreeable to the desire of my parents, the sage veteran formed such rules for
my conduct, as he thought, from experience, would prove most serviceable; but,
in general, I turned such a deaf ear to his instructions as disgusted the old
gentleman exceedingly; and, after executing his commission with fidelity, he
gave me up to Fortune, as a perverse young man who would one day bleed severely
under the rod of her displeasure.

The morning before I took my leave of this worthy man, he seized me by the
hand, and, pressing it between his with a warmth which nothing but true
friendship could inspire, spoke to me, with the most engaging complacency, in
nearly the following manner: -- 'My dear Frank,' said the old gentleman,
'before you quit me entirely, I must entreat your particular attention to the
advice I am now going to give you. Do not shrink from it, my dear boy: it is
not the severe admonition of an old man, who looks with a jaundiced eye upon
mankind; it is the essence of all the knowledge I have gleaned in a long course
of service, during which I have endeavored not only to live in, but with, the
world; and I have learned, from a knowledge of my own weakness, to look with an
eye of charity upon all the frailties incident to our nature. I know the
passions of youth are difficult to be restrained within the circle of prudence;
but I have likewise discovered, my dear child, that, the more they are
restricted, the happier it is for ourselves. As a soldier, you should make your
passions observe the same degree of subordination to your reason as the duties
of your profession will teach you to observe to your commanding officer: let
each have its proper influence in the general system, but suffer none to be
licentious. Your own good sense will, I hope, inform you, that you have now
entered into a profession whose basis is virtue and honor; and that the utmost
circumspection of behavior is necessary on your part to preserve the character
you have assumed from violation. You are now a soldier, Frank,' said the old
gentleman with a particular strength of emphasis; 'and you must reflect, that
you are going to join an army, of which you must consider yourself an active
part, whose purpose is to crush the ambitious spirit of a perfidious enemy, and
furnish another action of British glory to be recorded for ever in the archives
of immortal Fame. There is,' continued the grey-headed veteran, 'an absolute
necessity for every man, who wishes to be respected, to observe a proper degree
of civility toward all ranks of people; and that mode of behavior is
particularly requisite in an officer. It should be your constant study to
deserve the commendations of your general, by strictly adhering to your duty;
to court the good will of your brother-officers by your complaisance; and to
insure the blessings of your inferiors by acts of kindness, rectitude, and
humanity: and take my word, that the pleasures you will experience, by
following this line of conduct, will amply repay you for the trouble of putting
it in practice; for, besides the advantage of establishing your own content, it
is the best possible method of aggrandising your fortune. To enforce this
observation more strongly, I will tell you an anecdote of two persons whom I
knew well, and the consequences of whose lives prove the necessity of paying a
proper deference to the opinion of others. -- There were two friends, William
and Frederic, who were educated together at the same university; the former
possessed a sweet and gentle disposition, the latter a strong understanding;
and, both happening to be under the care of the same guardian, (for they were
orphans,) they followed one course of study, and were intended for one
profession. When they arrived at man's estate, it was thought expedient, as
they had some very important connections in America, to send them over there to
settle as merchants. Accordingly they went to one of the principal colonies,
which was then subject to the British legislature, and carried over some strong
letters of recommendation to the principal people, but particularly the
governor. On their arrival on the continent, they received every token of
respect and friendship from the people; but, Frederic's temper being discovered
to be as bad and unaccommodating as William's was good and polite, the latter
naturally attracted the hearts of his acquaintance, while the former was
treated with a coldness bordering on incivility, which soured him to such a
degree, that he at last became intolerable even to his old companion and
colleague, William; and it was determined at length, for the mutual happiness
of both parties, to break up the partnership and reimbark for England. But,
previous to their departure, the governor invited William and Frederic to dine
with him; and, finding them both to be gentlemen of great information in regard
to the situation of the province, he thought it proper to send a letter by them
to the secretary of state, as two persons in every respect capable of pointing
out the necessity and advantages of a measure which government had then in
contemplation. When they arrived in England, they were both closeted with the
secretary, who began with asking Frederic's opinion, who gave a succinct and
clear account of the matter, but delivered his opinion in such a supercilious
and dogmatic manner as gave the minister more disgust by his manner than he had
satisfaction by his information; and he was dismissed with that kind of civil
and constrained coldness, which clearly proved that he had lost the favorable
opinion of the secretary, and sacrificed his fortune to the haughtiness of his
spirit. On the contrary, William gave his opinion with equal accuracy, but with
the utmost modesty; and, when the minister had heard every thing that he could
advance upon the subject, he condescended to show him a sketch of the intended
operations; and, after speaking for a considerable time in defense of his
proposed plan, he asked William what he thought of the undertaking; who
replied, with an air of the utmost gentleness and good-breeding, that he had
formerly conceived those measures would be most salutary and beneficial which
had been advised by his friend, Frederic, until he was convinced to the
contrary by his lordship's superior reasoning. He had scarcely uttered his
opinion, when the minister caught him in his arms, and told him, that he
perceived he was not only a gentleman of extensive knowledge in politics, but a
warm friend to his country, and that he might depend upon it he would mention
him to the king; and indeed he was as good as his word, and, by the force of
his interest, procured him a considerable post under government, which he has
enjoyed with particular honor ever since, and is enabled, in consequence, to
support the intemperate and proud Frederic, who is now reduced to the necessity
of being the object of his bounty. Now you see, my dear boy,' said the old
soldier, 'by the fate of these two gentlemen, what a prodigious superiority
that man has, with a good temper and moderate talents, over him with an
enlarged understanding, provided the latter is not regulated by good manners
and supported by modesty.

The old gentleman, having concluded his instructions for my well-being, took a
final leave of me, with tears in his eyes, after supplicating heaven to make me
prosperous and happy as a man, and honorable and magnanimous as a soldier.

CHAPTER XXXVI.
Conclusion of Captain Blisset's story.

THE next morning, (continued the gentleman,) I embarked with the regiment for
America, and arrived at Boston after a disagreeable and tedious passage of
upwards of two months. Not being used to fatigue, the inconveniences I suffered
in the voyage, added to the sickness I had continually while at sea, made me
curse the hour in which I consented to be a soldier; but, finding the die was
cast, and that I must submit to the stern decrees of Fate, I bore my fortune as
well as I could, and submitted my body to all the drudgeries and duties of war,
in direct opposition to the impulse of my spirit. Habituated as I had been to
have my own will obeyed from my childhood, I could but ill brook to be
commanded at the caprice of another, and ordered into situations which I
disliked, and upon services the most disagreeable; and my own dissatisfaction
was increased when I took a comparative view of my brother-officers, who seemed
to bear their worst hardships with a degree of pleasure and content, when the
most trivial of mine were rendered extremely miserable by the perverseness of
my disposition; for no spark of the amor patriae, or love of glory, irradiated
my breast; I considered myself as a slave, and was consequently unhappy. Full
often did I curse those indulgences which I had experienced from my father and
mother, and even hated them for giving me an existence, which was become
irksome and intolerable by their neglect of all the important parts of the
education of a child.

Not to trouble you too much with a recital of trivial accidents, let it
suffice when I acquaint you, that, after a service of something less than two
years, I got appointed to a company, and was ordered by the general to take the
command of a party that was sent to dislodge some Indians, who were sculking
about the woods, to the great annoyance of the rear of the army. A few months
previous to this expedition, I must inform you, that I had a quarrel with a
lieutenant who happened to be stationed under my command, and I resolved (so
diabolical was the complexion of my mind at that period) to take that
opportunity of getting him, if possible, out of the way, or, in other words, to
use some treacherous means of destroying his life. We had frequent skirmishes
with the Indians, in all which my particular enemy, or rather the object of my
hatred, came off unhurt, though I studiously placed him in the post of danger
for that purpose. As his sight became every day more hateful to me, I watched
all opportunities of punishing him for disobedience of orders; but in this too
he foiled me; for, knowing the implacability of my heart, and being a brave and
sober man, he was uncommonly punctual in the observance of his duty. It being
resolved, in council, to make a grand attack upon a post, which the Indians
possessed, the next morning at daybreak, I determined to place my enemy in the
hottest part of the fire; and, if he escaped his death then, I had made up my
mind to dispatch him myself, by shooting him through the head.

Early in the morning we began the attack, which lasted with unremitting fury
for some hours; at last I was unfortunately surrounded by some Indians, who
made me their prisoner, and carried me off in triumph. I had scarcely arrived
among their chiefs when I was ordered to be scalped, a punishment of all others
the most dreadful; and they had fastened their hands in my hair, to draw the
skin over my scull, which they were going to separate with a knife, when
Providence interfered in behalf of a wretch like me; and, to make my
humiliation the deeper, chose for its instrument the very lieutenant whose life
I intended to destroy. It seems that, hearing of my captivity, he got a handful
of men together, and, rushing through the thickest part of the enemy, arrived
at the spot just time enough to save me from the bloody catastrophe.

Overcome with joy at my delivery, I fell at the feet of my benefactor, and
asked him how he could think of venturing his life to save so unworthy a being?
to which he nobly replied, that he was not ignorant of the hatred I so unjustly
bore him; but that a knowledge of my infernal malice, though it might alarm his
feelings as a man, could not efface his duty as a Christian, which instructed
him to save the life even of his enemy, and, if possible, to return him good
for evil.

I was so awed by the majesty and benevolence of his conduct, that I took a
resolution, from that hour, of looking up to him as an example, and amend my
life by a recollection of the means by which it had been preserved.

Nothing remarkable occurred, after this adventure, till the campaign ended,
when, the regiment I belonged to being ordered home, I sold out, in order to
settle in America, having contracted a soft intimacy with a lady who resided
there, and whom I afterward married. We have lived ever since in the utmost
harmony; and, were it not for the intrusion of distress, which indeed" (added
the captain with a heavy sigh) has visited us, since our union, but too often,
we should be as happy a couple as any breathing under heaven. In short,"
(continued the stranger,) "I am afraid that the vices of the former part of my
life have drawn down a curse upon my innocent wife and children. Here the tears
started from his eyes; which so affected me, that I involuntarily wept too. But
the stranger, recovering himself, went on as follows:

I had not been long married, when I received a letter which informed me of the
death of my father, and that my mother had married a second husband; and, at
the time of my father's decease, his affairs were so embarrassed by the
lawsuits which he had been maintaining for years, that he had left his family
almost in a state of beggary.

Nor did my own private affairs turn out a whit better; for, having run out the
money which I got for my commission, and the principal half of my wife's
portion remaining in the hands of a capital merchant in London, who refused to
remit any part of it to the continent, we resolved to leave America, and get
that satisfaction in England which it was almost impossible to procure at so
great a distance. We accordingly sold off all our effects; and my wife and I,
with two children and a maid, embarked for the port of London.

When we arrived here, I took every prudent step, as I then thought, for the
recovery of my property; -- but, alas! there I was most woefully deceived. I
was ridiculous enough to build a certainty of success upon the justice of my
cause; but the event has proved that it was but a sorry foundation to erect my
hope upon; for, after two years spent in unnecessary protraction, in which time
I had expended not only my last guinea, but every valuable I had that could
raise one, the momentous affair came to a trial; and I had the mortification to
find, that my oppressor's being a richer man than myself was a certain sign
that he would prove victorious; and that the boasted laws of this country can
afford but little protection to the equitable claims of poverty and honor,
when their spirit and their intention can be so easily perverted by the
villainous ingenuity of professional man-eaters. In short, sir, I lost my cause
for want of sufficient money to fee the counsel, and the judge very gravely
decreed against me, because I had not an opportunity of telling him the reasons
why he should have done otherwise.

I shall never forget the situation of my wretched family when I returned to
inform them of the melancholy event, which had consigned them to all the
horrors of want and desperation. My poor Maria, after she had recovered her
senses a little, (for she fainted repeatedly in my arms on the first news of
our defeat,) and was assured that such an account could be real, she fell upon
her knees, surrounded by her half-famished children, and implored the
omnipotent Searcher of all hearts to reject the last claims of mercy, which
might be entreated, in his dying hour, by the unprincipled miscreant, who had
robbed her poor little ones of that bread, which justice should have given them
to satisfy the irresistible appeals of hunger. 'But pardon the presumption of a
maddening wretch,' (exclaimed my poor Maria, recollecting herself,) 'for I bow
my head in obedience to thy blessed dispensations, and must teach my heart no
other language in future but -- O Lord, thy will be done!

The noise, which the tender partner of my misfortunes had made in the wild
indulgence of her sorrows, attracted the notice of a person, who was in the
adjoining chamber, on a visit to an old couple, one of whom was bed-ridden,
and, having been turned out of the hospital as incurable, was obliged to
lengthen his woe-fraught being by the casual bounty of the good and charitable.
Hearing the moans of distress, he gave a gentle tap at the door; and, lifting
up the latch, he entered the room. But, good heavens! how was I amazed to
recognize in his person the individual lieutenant that had saved me from the
fury of the barbarous Indians! It was some time before I could make him believe
who I was, so much had the woes that I had endured, and the difficulties I had
experienced, altered my person since we took leave of each other: but, the
moment that he was convinced of my identity, he embraced me with all the warmth
of an old friend; and, sitting down with a little infant on each knee, asked
the particulars of my life, since we had parted, with all possible delicacy and
painful curiosity.

When he had been made acquainted with our story, he took my wife by one hand
and me by the other, and bade us not despair, but put our trust in God
Almighty, who would receive us, if deserving, into his benign bosom, and shield
our little family from the machinations of the wicked and the prostitution of
power.

After a present of some ginger-bread to the children, which I understood he
always carried about with him for that purpose, he took his leave, promising to
pay us another visit the following morning. And he was as good as his word; for
he not only came to make us happy by his advice, but to comfort us by his
assistance; and insisted, as Fortune had looked upon him with an eye of
kindness since he left America, by advancing him in the army, that I should
partake of that bounty, (as he expressed it,) which Providence only sent to the
rich that they might become faithful stewards to the poor, by distributing her
gifts, with the hand of circumspection and benevolence, among the most
necessitous of their fellow creatures.

Notwithstanding the number and weight of my distresses, I felt a great
consolation in the visits of this worthy officer; and indeed both I and my
family must have perished but for the generosity of his disposition. The
frequency, with which the remembrance of the malice I once exercised toward
him recurred to my mind, hurt my peace exceedingly; but I now strive to expiate
the heinousness of such transgressions by uniformly praying for his well-being.

CHAPTER XXXVII.
The stranger takes his leave. -- Reflections on the vicissitudes of life. --
Arrive at the cellar. -- A humourous account of a marriage-ceremony, in which
the intentions of Hymen are defeated by the influence of Bacchus.

HERE the officer took his leave, with the warmest wishes for my felicity; and,
the hour approaching that I was to meet my friend Crambo at the ordinary, I set
forward for that place, contemplating all the way on the vicissitudes of human
nature, and the inscrutable and unaccountable methods by which Providence
protects us from impending evil, and destroys our fairest hopes of prosperity.
These reflections tended to bring on a strong tincture of melancholy in my
mind; for, as I looked around me, I fancied that misery had taken up her abode
in almost every breast, and that the smiling countenances of many that passed
me in the street served but as a temporary veil to cover the real inquietude of
the heart within. -- The few examples of happiness I had seen, since I started
in the world, convinced me of the truth of an observation, I had often heard,
which asserts that we are born to suffer much more than to enjoy; but, finding
myself arrived at the mouth of the cellar where I was to meet the poet, the
fumes of the boiled and roast, that ascended from that receptacle of the sons
of Apollo, saluted my nostrils in gales of such delicious flavor, as drove
away, in an instant, every other consideration but that of eating and
voluptuousness.

As I descended into the quill-drivers refectory, I heard a loud laugh, which
indicated that mirth presided at the board. When I had got far enough into the
cellar to have a glimpse of the company, I perceived my friend Crambo as merry
as the best of them. I was particularly glad of that sign, as I imagined he had
been fortunate enough to touch his bookseller for some cash that morning; and I
found afterward that I was not out in my reckoning, for I had scarcely sat
down, when he whispered in my ear that he had been cursed lucky since he saw
me, and had absolutely persuaded his publisher, in Paternoster Row, to advance
him half a guinea; at the same time, slipping a couple of shillings into my
hand unperceived by the company, added, that he was always happy to have it in
his power to assist his friends. Now the poet was called to order by the rest
of the company, to listen to a story which Mr. M'Paste, the compiler of a
monthly magazine, was going to divert the company with. My friend bowed
obedience to the fiat, and I sat wrapped up in expectation of hearing something
excellent.

You must know, gentlemen," said the compiler, "that I have the honor of
lodging at a chandler's shop; and, being considered as an inmate of the family,
I was applied to to write an epithalamium on the approaching nuptials of my
landlady with an old tallow-chandler who lived opposite, which were to happen
in a few days; and, to have the thing done in a genteel style, it was resolved,
by both parties, that it should be celebrated on a Saturday evening. Well,
gentlemen, you must suppose every thing going on swimmingly; the bride-cake
made; the company invited; and the old yellow tabby, that had been mouldering
at the bottom of the bride's drawer, under the ravages of moths and time, for
at least twenty years, drawn forth, by the influence of that wanton rogue,
Cupid, and newly furbished and farthingaled by the ingenious hands of a modern
mantua-maker, to make it, if possible, look fashionable, as it was intended for
the gaudy vestment of the bride on that momentous occasion. -- Instead of a
system, to fasten on her cap, which she had imported but the day before from
Cranborn-alley, she wore an old wig of her former husband's, which was frizzled
and tortured into the shape necessary for the purpose; and, when fastened on
her head, her visage, by the aid of this modish ornament, bore no bad
resemblance to the forehead of a Newfoundland dog.

The company, invited on that memorable evening, consisted of a few select
neighbors: -- Mrs. Grogram, the old-clothes woman; a rich chimney-sweeper's
lady, and her two daughters; a pettifogging attorney; Mrs. Snatch'em, the
pawnbroker's widow, from the corner of the opposite alley; the
tallow-chandler's nephew; and your humble servant.

When the clock had struck four, this goodly group had assembled; and it was
plain, that the bridegroom had exhausted not only his purse, but his invention,
to dress himself out to the best advantage, and make his person as engaging and
irresistible as possible.

He had chosen a deep-coloured Prussian-blue coat, that would have been
considered as the pink of elegance about half a century ago, the cuffs being
large enough to make a modern waistcoat, with flaps down to his heels; and the
dark blue was finely relieved by a large row of brass buttons, which covered at
least one-fourth of that part of his habiliments. Added to this, he had on a
scarlet waistcoat of prodigious magnitude, a pair of buckskin breeches, and a
wig, without powder, in circumference as large as a moderate gooseberry-bush;
which, considering the intense heat of the weather, was a dress, taken all
together, that must naturally, as you will imagine, attract our notice, if not
our admiration.

After tea, the whole party was summoned to attend the hymeneal altar; and,
when we had got to the door, to step into the coaches that waited for our
reception, there was as great a crowd gathered in the street, to behold our
dress and equipage, as if the lord mayor of London were going to Westminster in
solemn procession on the ninth of November, or a show of wild beasts had just
arrived from the African deserts. When we were all secured within the coaches,
they moved, in awful grandeur, amidst the shouts of the populace, to the
parish church, where the high priest of Hymen, vulgarly ycleped a parson,
waited to unite these extraordinary originals in the solemn bands of holy
matrimony.

In the course of this tremendous service, a few mistakes happened, which
sometimes disconcerted the whole business; but you will not wonder at that,
when I inform you, that the bridegroom was as deaf as a mill-post; and the
priest, when he came to that part of the affair which requires him to ask the
bridegroom, if he is willing to take his blessed acquisition to be his true and
lawful wife, was forced to bawl as loud as the woman that cries Newcastle
salmon in the hundreds of Drury Lane, before he could make him understand the
nature of the question; but, however, the bridegroom made ample amends when he
did; for, as soon as his ear had caught the intent of the requisition, he
answered, with great precipitation, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. But this was not
all the impediment which took place; for another important mistake occurred,
which was no other than the bridegroom's putting the ring on the wrong finger
of his amiable spouse; and this unfortunate stroke of Fate caused an infinite
deal of trouble to the parties; for the hero of the evening, being a man of a
narrow and avaricious disposition, had purchased a second-hand ring for the
occasion, from his neighbor, the pawnbroker, which, unluckily, not being
measured to the lady's finger, proved too small; but the bridegroom, by dint of
personal strength, had absolutely forced it on the poor gentlewoman's middle
finger ere the mistake was found out; and then, the endeavor to pull it off
being found impossible, the ceremony was finished without it, and the blessing
perhaps conveyed with equal efficacy to the parties, notwithstanding so gross a
violation of prescribed order.

As we returned home, the bride expressed some doubts as to the validity of the
obligation they had mutually entered into, as she imagined the blunder of her
yoke fellow, in the wrong application of that important appendage to matrimony
on the finger of a lady, had in a great degree defeated the intention of that
sacred business; and she began to enlarge on the stupidity of some people with
such a tincture of bitterness, that we certainly should have had a matrimonial
duet, in proper character, before the consummation, if I had not luckily
observed, that the mistake was of no sort of consequence whatever, for that the
personal liberty of his majesty's liege subjects might be charmed away, with
equal force, by placing the ring on the wrong finger as well as on the right.
As my landlady paid a sort of deference to my opinion, I had the good fortune
to accommodate the matter before it arrived at what might be called a downright
dispute, but not without a few oblique hints, from the lady, which proved
pretty clearly to the company, that she was not perfectly satisfied with a
husband, who did not, upon all occasions, know what use to make of his wife's
ring.

But now, the cavalcade arriving at the bride's door, the betrothed couple were
handed out of the carriage, attended by the huzzas of three-fourths of the
vagabond-inhabitants of that enlightened and elegant quarter of the town. As
soon as the whole party was well housed, we sat down to a cold repast of boiled
beef, ham, pigs-cheek, and jellies, with plenty of Whitbread's best brown
stout, pipes and tobacco, and a bowl of punch almost capacious enough to swim a
fleet of West-Indiamen. Nor would I have you understand, gentlemen, that this
assemblage of dainties was provided in vain; on the contrary, the only spirit
of ambition, that seemed to reign among the guests, was, who should devour the
most: totally regardless of the use of knives and forks, which they thought
superfluous, as heaven had given them fingers, they began the attack with the
appetites of aldermen, and continued the siege with the industry of pigs; till,
at last, what with the punch and good living, the major part of the company
began to stagger about the room, the ladies not excepted; and the bride and
bridegroom made such direct overtures of fondness, before their guests, as
plainly evinced that they wished them all at the devil, that they might be at
full liberty to put the finishing stroke to a business which the church had so
recently sanctified with its infallible authority. But, alas! that grim
disposer of human events, vulgarly called Fate, doubtless envious of their
approaching raptures, cruelly determined that this should not be, and the
lovely bride panted in vain for those pleasures, which Destiny decreed should
exist only in her warm imagination.

To drop all metaphorical descriptions, and come to the point, I must inform
you, that some wags, who frequented a public house in the same street, entered
into a combination to put a trick upon the tallow-chandler, which should
deprive him of the sweet society of his bride for one night at least; and they
effected it in the following manner. One of them got a note conveyed to the
bridegroom, (who, by this time, was half-seas over,) requesting his immediate
attendance at a friend's house, upon some business of the most material
consequence to his peace, at the same time desiring him to steal away
unperceived by the company at his house, and promising that he should be
detained only a few minutes at farthest. The credulous maker of candles no
sooner received this mischievous epistle, than he stole away to the appointed
rendezvous, where a man was dressed up as a countryman, just arrived from
Lincolnshire with an account of his brother's death, and that he had left him a
great fortune; at the same time apologizing for the manner of communicating the
intelligence, as apprehensive of disordering the tender nerves of his lady if
he had gone directly to his house with such a dismal tale upon his wedding day.
'Dismal tale!' cries the tallow-chandler, interrupting him, half fuddled, 'why,
damme, it is the best story I have heard these seven years, and, damme, you are
the best friend I have seen these seven years. To be sure, do you see, as how I
ought to be sorry for the death of a relation; but, damme, never mind; --
though he was a cursed sort of a curmudgeon,' cries the bridegoom, 'I hope he
is gone to a better place; at any rate, do you see, my friend, if he is happy,
why I am contented.

During this exemplary dialogue, the pretended countryman plied the
tallow-chandler with large glasses of punch, half the ingredients of which were
strong brandy, until they had brought him to a proper pitch of insensibility,
when one of the party came running in to inform his associates in iniquity that
all was ready, which, it seems, was a watchword for bringing out the
bridegroom; -- and, each taking hold of an arm and a leg, they conveyed him to
the door, where a stage-coach was waiting for some passengers; and, taking him
to the rear of the carriage, they threw the poor tallow-chandler, by main
force, into the basket, like a stinking salmon into the Thames, in which
situation he lay, bent double, and snoring as loud as the hogs at Vauxhall,
until he was waked, the next morning, at Winchester, by the ostler's throwing
in a heavy portmanteau, which, alighting on the breast of the intoxicated
bridegroom, entirely broke the fetters of his repose, as well as three of his
false ribs; and he was instantly dragged out of his uncomfortable bedchamber,
roaring like a bull with agony, by the servants of the inn, who secured him as
a fellow who only feigned to be drunk, and had stolen into the basket with a
design of robbing the stage on the journey.

These particulars I have since learned from one of the conspirators. Thus was
the poor fellow, in the warm moments of fond expectation, like another
Tantalus, snatched from the enjoyment of bliss just as he got the cup of
happiness to his lip; while his poor lady at home, overcome by grief and anger
at the disappointment of her wishes, fell into hysterics for the remainder of
the night, and from which she was not entirely recovered until the next
morning, when some timely draughts of burnt brandy and nutmeg relieved her so
far, that she was enabled to sit up in her bed, and listen to the condolance of
her female friends, who had kindly assembled for that pious purpose; but the
poor woman was so woe-begone and dejected, that she could answer their
consolation and conjecture only with her tears.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
The poet gives me some salutary advice. -- He is attracted by my abilities. --
Consults me on his literary pursuits. -- I forfeit his friendship by the
exercise of my candor. -- A sarcastic colloquy between the host and the poet.
-- The latter's overthrow and discomfiture.

AFTER the company had applauded Mr. M'Paste for his story, which he assured
them he should work into a tale, and have inserted in the next month's
publication, we all sat down to dinner; at the conclusion of which my friend
Crambo and I retired to another part of the room, in order to discourse upon
our private affairs, and think of some expedient by which I might be enabled to
get a livelihood, without existing by the sale of the few articles of
wearing-apparel I had left. After ruminating upon a variety of projects, the
poet advised me to look into the daily papers, where I should be certain of
reading, among the list of the wanteds, something that would answer my purpose.
At the same time the generous son of Apollo made me an unlimited offer of his
purse and friendship, such as they were, upon all occasions; and, throwing the
former upon the table, emptied its contents, which consisted of two half-crown
pieces, a sixpence with a hole in it, a few halfpence, and a tobacco-stopper.

I was so much affected by this instance of his generosity, that I could not
refrain from getting up and hugging him in my arms, as the best and most
disinterested friend I had in the world; a compliment which he returned with
great ardour, and accompanied it with an observation even more pleasing than
his bounty, namely, that he had been attracted solely by the purity of my
judgment and my abilities as a scholar. Such an eulogium from any one would
have given me pleasure; but, when I considered it as coming from the mouth of
one of the greatest authors of the age, (for such I had conceived him to be
from his own broad insinuations,) I was transported by my vanity to a pitch of
the utmost extravagance, and did not fail to extol my panegyrist to the skies
in terms of unbounded flattery; all which, though but the incense of a novice
like me, he received with peculiar complaisance, and was pleased to declare
himself as happy in my commendation as if the Stagyrite himself had peeped from
his tomb to signify his approbation of the labors of his brain.

After swearing an eternal attachment to each other, he took a parcel of papers
from a pocket made within-side his waistcoat; and, spreading them upon the
table in particular order, addressed me as follows: "Mr. Varnish," said the
diminutive bard, "I am now going to give you an unquestionable proof of my
confidence, which no man in my circumstances would, if he were not previously
convinced of your experience and taste as a scholar, as well as of your
unshaken fidelity to my interest as an individual. In short, my dear sir,"
exclaimed the poet, squeezing my hand, "I am going to show you some hints, mere
literary atoms to be sure, but such, I flatter myself, as, when called into
form, will not only secure me the otium cum dignitate at present, but, what is
infinitely more dear to my imagination, will hand me down to posterity with a
laurel wreathed around my brow, so ample, that the very shadow of it shall hide
the weaknesses of my nature. Here, my dear friend, are the precious morsels,"
said the poet, holding up the papers, "upon which I must inevitably build my
fame and fortune. But, to return to the intent of this communication, let us
now commune a little upon the scheme I have in agitation; and I entreat you, as
my particular friend, to point out such parts as shall appear objectionable to
you; for the very best writers that ever existed have been obliged to the
assistance of their friends on these occasions, Mr. Varnish, you know: -- Pope
had his Bolingbroke, Prussia's monarch his Voltaire, and Moliere his old woman;
humanum est errare; but it is the lot of our nature; the most brilliant genius
that ever honored the blazing ages of antiquity was not perfect. No,"
continues my friend, Crambo, "absolute perfection is not to be found on this
earth, that is certain. But, a-propos, to business, or perhaps you may think
the exordium of more importance than the subject: the affair, that I mean to
consult you upon, my young Aristotle, is an epic poem; and the basis of it is,"
said the poet, leaning across the table, and whispering in my ear with a tone
of exultation, the siege of Gibraltar. -- Well," says the little author,
looking me full in the face, and rubbing his hands, "I hope you will admit, my
friend, that I have been tolerably lucky in my subject at least." "I think so
too, indeed," replied I; "for I know of no theme so proper, for the pen of an
Englishman, as the glorious achievements of his own countrymen."

"You charm me by the propriety of your observations," replies the poet; "I
protest you have an amazing deal of judgment, apt and comprehensive; and, what
is better, damme but you are a true patriot."

I bowed my acknowledgements for the favor of such compliments, when the bard
produced the argument of the first book for my consideration. -- When I had
perused it a little, I ventured to point out an inaccuracy in the poet's manner
of treating the story; to which he significantly replied, with a nod of the
head, Aye, aye, read on, my friend, if you please; the deeper you get into the
marrow, the more you will be ravished with the performance.

I proceeded, agreeably to his directions, to read farther, and carefully to
examine the matter as I went on. At last, coming, in my humble opinion, to a
manifest impropriety, I gave my opinion of it with all the freedom of a man who
felt himself interested in the reputation of his friend. But I found, that the
author was so far from taking it in this point of view, that he demurred
against my observation, and added, -- Pish! man, I perceive you are not
sufficiently acquainted with the subject.

I told him, in reply, that, though I did not pretend to be a poet, I could lay
some claim to a strong memory; and that informed me, the plot was ill managed;
and, if such a breach of propriety were admissible in an epic poem, it was not
to be reconciled to the laws of truth; and, to depart from truth, in such a
theme, were to dishonor the cause he meant to immortalise. But here I found
that I had overshot my mark; for the little bard, looking at me with a
countenance reddened high with ferocious indignation, snatched the manuscript
out of my hand with great violence, and told me, in direct terms, that he had
been grossly deceived in ranking me for a man of understanding, when I had not
discernment enough to discover a literary beauty, if it were even set down in
Roman capitals.

I now began to smell my error, and would willingly have retracted, but I found
it was too late; for, upon my attempting to open my mouth, he turned round to
the landlord of the place, and cried aloud, "Damme, landlord, here is a pretty
fellow pretends to judge of an epic poem, and he has not read enough to
distinguish between the excellence of the Iliad and the mummery and trash
contained in the life of Tom Hickathrift! Here, you Mr. Critic," cries the bard
to me, "be so good as to return me the two shillings, you dog, I lent you to
pay for your dinner." "What? you have lent him money, too!" says the landlord,
laughing heartily. "Yes," replies, the poet, "and he has made me a damned
grateful return for it." -- By Ch -- t," says the landlord, I am glad of it."
"Why are you glad?" replies the bard, bristling up to the host like an enraged
turkey-cock. "Why?" cries the other, "because you would sooner be giving your
money to any idle vagabond, like that, than pay your lawful debts." -- You tell
a damned lie," says the poet. I will let you know what it is to give a
gentleman the lie in his own house, and be damned to you," replies the other."
"Why, you poor dog, that is impossible," says the bard, "for you never kept
one, but have spent your life under ground, grubbing for an existence like a
mole in a meadow, until you have become as blind, to your own interest, as the
reptile you imitate." "Blind!" says the landlord, with all the dignity he could
assume. "Aye, I say blind," cries the follower of the muses, "or you would
never affront a man of genius, when he condescends to eat in your infernal
regions." "Condescend to eat, quotha!" replies the subterranean cook; --
"damme, you snivelling dog, you know you would have been starved long ago, if
it had not been for many a good slice from my surloin, which I suffered you to
take upon tick from a motive of charity; you know I did, you ungrateful
scoundrel." "Surloin!" cries the author, enraged to the summit of madness by
the foregoing remarks; -- "damme, you never had a surloin in your cellar."
"What had I then, you mongrel maker of verses?" rejoins the host. "Ox-cheek and
neck of beef," says the other. "And too good for you, and be damned to you,"
replies the landlord. "You lie, you scoundrel," cries the bard. Do I?" says the
other; "damme, I will teach you better manners;" -- and immediately threw the
remains of a shin of beef at the poet, which striking him on the side of his
head, he instantly measured his length upon the floor, and, growling, bit the
dust.

Now, hostilities on both sides beginning to cease, and finding that I had not
the most distant expectation of regaining my former post in the little author's
good opinion, I pulled out the two shillings; and, giving them to the landlord
for the poet, with a heart ready to burst with vexation, I walked up stairs, to
meditate at my leisure upon the instability of human friendship.

CHAPTER XXXIX.
Take a lodging. -- The symbols of an author. -- Reflections on the neglect of
genius. -- Walk out, and meet with an old acquaintance. -- My prejudice against
the count removed.

I HAD not proceeded far in the street before I recollected, that it was a step
absolutely necessary to provide myself with a lodging; and, as the evening was
advancing with rapid strides, and the enamoured charioteer of day was posting
to his Thetis on the wings of love, I thought it high time to be as industrious
in the settlement of that business as possible. I had scarcely taken the
resolution, when, passing by a mean sort of a house, I perceived a bill stuck
on the window, signifying that they had lodgings to let for single gentlemen.
-- Though I had but very slender pretensions to the character of a gentleman, I
resolved to try what sort of accommodation the house afforded; and,
accordingly, knocking at the door, a woman came, who first took an accurate
survey of my figure in so surly a manner as convinced me that she was not very
fond of my appearance, and then asked my business. I replied, that I wanted a
lodging, and, if any in her house suited me, I had no objection to take them.
-- She told me, I was an utter stranger to her, to be sure; but, as she
conceived something favorable from my countenance, if we could agree, why she
would as soon let me have a room in her house as another; that, to be sure, she
never had any thing but gentlemen lodge in her house; "but," says the old hag,
"we must not always judge from appearances; handsome is that handsome does; and
your money may be as good to me as another's."

After this preamble I had a strong inclination to go away, thinking the
lodgings might be too elegant for me, until she informed me that she had but
one room unoccupied, and the last gentleman that lived in it was a poet. "Oh
ho! my good landlady," says I, "show me the apartment directly, for I am sure,
if it was not too good for a poet, it will do very well for your humble
servant." So saying, I shut the door, and followed the poor woman, up four pair
of stairs, into a back garret. "Here," cries she, leaning upon an old table to
recover her breath, -- "this is the only place I have to spare at present, and
this has been empty but three weeks, only since poor Mr. Couplet left it."
"Aye, aye, my good woman," replied I, "I could have guessed at the last tenant
by the relies of his profession. These are the true symbols of genius," cried
I, taking up the stump of a pen, a washerwoman's bill, and a shoe without a
heel. "You are merry," said the old lady; "but I assure you Mr. Couplet was as
fine a spoken man as you would meet with in a summer's day." "And, pray,"
replied I, "how came you to lose so accomplished a lodger?" "Aye, poor
gentleman!" cries the landlady, wiping her eyes; "good lack! he was was
arrested one evening on a note of his printer's, and is now writing a parcel of
sermons, for a Norfolk clergyman, in the master's side of the Fleet prison."
"Yes, I thought it would come to that," replied I, when you mentioned his
profession; for there are only two things of which a man of genius may be said
to be certain in this world." "And, pray, what are they?" asked my landlady. "A
prison while he exists, and a grave when he is no more: he is consigned to the
first because he has more spirit than economy, and he is indebted for the
latter to the convenience of his neighbors; and, what is still more
melancholy, there are many persons, who will give a guinea for his works, bound
in Morocco, when he is dead, that would perhaps have denied him the loan of a
crown, when living, to have protracted his miserable existence." "Anon!" cried
the woman. "Oh! nothing," rejoined I: -- how much do you ask for this
apartment?" "Two shillings a week is the lowest that I can afford it at," cries
the other; "if you are willing to give that, you may take possession directly."
I nodded assent to her proposal, and the bargain was ratified.

The woman was retiring out of the room before I observed that my apartment was
totally deficient in one necessary, and even indispensable, article of
furniture, namely, a bed; and, upon my intimating this defect to the wrinkled
gentlewoman, she waddled over to an old chest of drawers, as I imagined, and,
unhinging the sides, let down a bedstead with all the apparatus, in the same
breath informing me, that there was one, at my service, good enough for the
best man in the land. Though I was not an entire convert to her method of
thinking in regard to the beauty of the affair, I was very well satisfied, as
it was full as elegant as I could wish in such a situation; so, wishing my
landlady safe down stairs, I sat upon one corner of my couch, with a heart
heavy laden with sorrow, and my arms enfolded, and broke out into the following
ejaculation: -- Hapless, miserable, man! how art thou subjected to the caprice
of Fortune! who, not satisfied with making thy wretched being groan under the
pressure of pain and hunger, and subject to the inclement elements, adds, to
aggravate thy calamities, the intolerable stings of mental pain. To what
purpose are we decreed to exist? if to prolong a series of days clouded with
misfortune, it were better that we were altogether extinct; for the continuance
of a life such as mine is not worth the solicitation. I am poor, and
consequently must be despised; and, being naturally unsuspicious, am hourly
liable to the subtle arts of hypocrisy and imposition.

After I had indulged myself in this reverie, I sat musing upon the most
probable means of raising a small supply of money. I revolved upon every
expedient that my fancy could suggest to my despair; but found them all either
unproductive as to the desired end, or impossible to be put in execution. I was
rapidly sinking from one base idea to another, until I found my mind a chaos of
confusion, in which desperation and shame alternately passed before me. To
relieve myself from this heavy embarrassment, I took up my hat, and, walking
down stairs sullenly, rushed into the street, with a full determination to
raise some money by one means or another.

As I was rambling along in this state of perturbation, without knowing which
path to pursue for the best, I felt a tap on the shoulder, from a person
behind, which was given with an air of great familiarity; and, upon my turning
round to recognize the person who had saluted me so unexpectedly, a young man
held out his hand as an overture of friendship, and gave me to understand, that
he had enjoyed the pleasure of my company, a few days before, at an ordinary
near the Seven Dials. I instantly recollected him to be one of the gentlemen,
to whose notice my very good friend, the count, had introduced me. As this
rencounter brought his ungenerous behavior to me fresh into my memory, I told
my new acquaintance the whole story, without disguising the smallest
circumstance. When I came to that part of the narrative, where he declared his
intentions of making my fortune by marriage, and had so completely lulled my
understanding by the force of the grossest flattery that was ever directed to a
human being, the young man burst into an immoderate fit of laughter. As I
considered the excessive mirth of my new friend to be another instance of my
disgrace, in consequence of the count's lies and ingenuity, I inveighed against
him in the severest terms of reproach that my resentment could furnish me with,
and swore to chastise him personally the first time that I should meet with
him. Here my new acquaintance thought proper to correct the violence of my
language, by observing, that, admitting the count had played a few of his usual
pranks at my expense, I should yet find it my interest to keep well with him.
"Besides," added he, "the account you have heard of his character, from the
landlady, must have arisen from prejudice; for it is not only overcharged, but
in many respects entirely false, and could have proceeded from no other but the
mouth of his enemy; for, though I will admit that he is fond of indulging an
eccentric disposition, and sometimes fastens too close upon the weaknesses of
mankind, believe me that he is neither destitute of principle or of friendship,
but very often exercises both, in the most disinterested manner, for the
advantage of his fellow creatures." This testimony of the stranger, in favor
of the count, tended considerably to reduce the ill opinion I had formed of
him; and the more particularly when my new companion assured me, that he would
pay me what he had borrowed the first time that he saw me, and would cheerfully
lend me as much more, provided he had it in his pocket, and my necessities
called for such an instance of his generosity.

CHAPTER XL.
We agree to drink together. -- I am comforted by his discourse. -- He favors
me with a short history of his life. -- The melancholy death of a good woman,
occasioned by the wickedness of mankind. -- My spirits raised by Mr. Butler's
philosophy. -- Pledge my waist-coat. -- Am promised relief by the keeper of a
register-office.

IT was now proposed, by my new adherent, that we should drink together to our
better acquaintance; and I felt myself extremely mortified to tell him, that I
was obliged to defer that favor. "Oh! damn it," replies the young fellow, "if
you are shy from the want of ready cash, never mind that. To be sure I am not
very rich myself," continues he; "but, as what we shall spend new will not make
me a penny poorer at the year's end, I must insist upon your accompanying me.
They fell excellent porter at the Crooked Billet, yonder," cries he, pointing
to an alehouse at the end of the street; "and take my word for it, that it will
warm the cockles of your heart, and operate like a draught from the Lethean
lake; it will make you forget your cares, my boy," giving me a hearty flap upon
the back; -- so come along, do you see, and make no more words about the
matter."

By the force of this persuasion, I followed him to the house; and, taking our
seats, he called for a tankard of the best, which soon made its appearance,
mantling with a majestic head at the top, like a small-cauliflower; which he
gently removed aside, and drank to our mutual prosperity; then, offering me the
vessel in my turn, I was so fond of the health-giving beverage, that I took
care to see the bottom of the tankard before my lips would permit the
salubrious liquid to separate from their, embraces.

When we had become a little more intimate, by the influence of the tankard,
(for it is wonderful how forcibly that operates in cementing friendships,) my
new acquaintance informed me, without reserve, of his situation in life, and
his willingness to prove of service to me if I thought him worthy of such a
distinction; at the same time assuring me, that he was himself by no means
unacquainted with misfortune. I had scarcely time to thank him for his kind
offer, when he unbosomed himself in the following terms:

My name, sir, says he, is Butler; my father was an officer in a marching
regiment, who died when I was but ten years old, and left my mother to struggle
with an iniquitous world, incumbered with two children, -- myself, and my
sister, who was my elder by two years. As they had contrived, in my father's
lifetime, to live in a style of some respectability, she had contracted a
numerous acquaintance, some of whom had it in their power to assist her; --
and, as she had frequently received the most unconditional offers of friendship
from them, she thought it no breach of propriety or delicacy, to call their
professions into practice, when she found herself in a situation that made so
exalted an exercise of the human wishes necessary. But here my good mother
found she had been leaning for assistance upon a broken staff; for, as soon as
her polite friends discovered (and they possess uncommon sagacity upon these
occasions) that her circumstances denied her the power of fulfilling the
reciprocity of beneficial offices, they gradually fell off in their
attachments, and the visible declension of their friendship began with pity and
ended with contempt. Dejected with the unfavourable prospect of her affairs,
she found that she must exert her utmost industry to maintain herself and
family; which she effected, however, very tolerably, by taking in plain-work,
in the performance of which, my sister, though young, afforded her considerable
assistance; -- and the profits of that, annexed to the scanty pittance allowed
from government to the widows of subaltern officers, just furnished a bare
sufficiency to bring us up with decency and frugality. In this confined manner
we contrived to jog on, until, one day, she received an unexpected visit from a
distant relation, who had held a place of importance under the East India
company, and who proposed to use his interest with the directors in procuring
me a place in some of the public offices. My mother was overjoyed at this
prospect of my success, and, in consequence, strained every nerve to give me a
suitable education. When I had attained my fifteenth year, not hearing from her
kinsman, she wrote him a letter upon the subject, which he condescended to
answer after a delay of four months; but the sweetness of the contents attoned
for the seeming coolness and neglect; -- for, in that letter, he assured my
mother that she need not be uneasy, for he had got an absolute promise that I
should be appointed to the first vacancy that fell. And, as the appearances of
good fortune are sometimes not content with coming alone, another circumstance
took place, at this time, which gave additional happiness to the poor widow. My
sister, who was remarkably tall and handsome for her years, had attracted the
notice of a gentleman of immense property; and his passion was so deeply
rooted, that he wrote a letter to my sister, desiring an interview, in which he
made the most ardent and unequivocal declaration of his love. My sister had no
sooner received this flaming epistle, than she ran in triumph to her mother,
and showed the flattering testimony of her own powers of attraction; and the
poor woman was not less transported than her daughter, for she literally
believed that the endowments of her child were capable of subduing the heart of
an emperor, and had no doubt of the reality of the circumstance. Indeed this
was my good parent's weak side; for, if ever she discovered more folly than
usual, it was in the extravagance of her raptures, whenever she heard the voice
of deceit attribute that degree of beauty to my sister, and understanding to
myself, which the dispensations of Providence had perhaps denied both the one
and the other. But, as the partiality is amiable, though destructive, it ought
to be forgiven.

To return to the narrative: my sister was permitted to give her enamoured
swain such encouragement as was consistent with prudence; but, at the same
time, to take no material steps in the affair without first consulting her
mother. In the infancy of the attachment, poor Louisa (for that was her name)
faithfully fulfilled the engagement entered into with her fond parent; -- but,
at last she permitted her lover to make some small inroads upon decorum, which
she well knew would be displeasing to the author of her being, and for that
reason she concealed them from her knowledge; till, at length, poor girl! she
waded so deep in the habits of deception, that even the idea of a falsehood had
lost its consequent horror.

Unhappy Louisa! she little imagined that she was wounding her eternal
happiness, when she lost sight of the beauty of truth. In short, eventually
passing from one indiscretion to another, the rapid approaches of vice became
less formidable as they became more frequent, until prudence at length
abdicated her gentle bosom, and left the defenseless victim a prey to the
alluring arts of prostitution.

To come to the catastrophe in a few words. My poor sister fell a prey to the
insinuations of a villain, who first perjured his soul to draw her from the
arms of innocence and peace, and then consigned her to destruction for giving
faith to his detestable and infernal frauds. On the news of this miserable
event, my mother was seized with a fit of sickness, which terminated in a deep
melancholy; and her disorder was strengthened, when, at her particular request,
I went to the India-house, to enquire after her relation, from whom she had not
heard for a considerable time, and learned, to my sorrow, that he had been gone
to the continent for some months before; and, so far from having got me the
situation he promised, that he had never so much as mentioned my name to the
board of directors. Both these disappointments affected her peace so much, that
her melancholy ended in a confirmed madness; and she died, poor woman!" (cried
Mr. Butler with the tears in his eyes,) "in Bedlam-hospital, a shocking
spectacle of woe and wretchedness.

Since her death, I have procured myself a decent livelihood by writing for
attorneys, in which situation I have continued ever since. To be sure, we are
obliged to work devilish hard for what we earn; and the service is not the most
respectable. Besides, I am perfectly convinced, that, if the finer feelings of
human nature are to be rendered callous by example, it must be by associating
with that right honorable fraternity. -- But, as the motto of our family has
been Il faut manger, from time immemorial, I am sometimes obliged to sacrifice
my ease and my ambition to fulfill the intent of so important an obligation.

When my companion had finished his story, he ordered the pot to be
replenished, and bade me not permit the accidental strokes of misfortune, which
visited every man at some period of his life or another, to cast me down; at
the same time, pulling out his purse, he requested me to accept of the loan of
a few shillings; but this I absolutely refused, telling him, with great
firmness, that I would sooner put an entire end to my being, than continue to
live a burden upon fortuitous charity. He clasped my hand in his, and told me
that he admired my spirit, but advised me not to let it carry me too far; that
there was a medium between rashness and meanness; and again entreated my
acceptance of his offer; but, on my refusal a second time, he put his purse in
his pocket, asking me, with a grave air, how I intended to exist. This question
made me thoughtful; but I replied, -- "I trust I shall be able to do that by my
industry: I mean to enquire for some place." "I suppose you are not over nice,"
says my friend. "No," I replied: "if it will but afford me a living, I shall be
satisfied, till something better offers." "Then your best way," rejoins he, "is
to make application to a register-office, and they will direct you to a place
immediately; the fees of office amount only to a few shillings," added he; --
and, if you will not let me assist you, you had better leave something at my
uncle's, and he will lend you half-a-crown with the greatest readiness; and you
may fetch it away at pleasure, when you find it convenient." But will not that
be taking too great a liberty with your relation?" cried I; "besides, you know
that I am a total stranger to his person." Here my friend smiled, and told me,
that the word uncle was only a metaphorical expression, in common use among all
men of the world, and applied to those people who get a convenient livelihood
by lending money on pledges; "and you need not have any scruples of delicacy,"
cries my friend, "on the score of making use of their purse; for they will take
pretty good care not to lay you under the smallest obligation to their
politeness, or even to their humanity." Upon the strength of this information,
I went to a house almost opposite, and which was distinguished from the rest by
the sign of three blue balls; and, entering by a small door in a dark passage,
I pulled off my waistcoat, and deposited it with the man of the shop for two
shillings, though it had cost me a guinea but a short time before, and was not
a bit the worse for wear. However, I pocketed the money; and, buttoning my coat
from the top to the bottom, I hurried back to my friend, who congratulated me
on the dexterity with which I had executed the business. He having previously
insisted upon discharging the reckoning, we parted, extremely well pleased with
each other, and engaging, provided I was not employed in service, to dine with
him, the following day, at the ordinary where I first had the happiness of
attracting his notice.

I did not lose a moment in delay, but went immediately to a register-office
that was kept in Holborn. I had scarcely signified the intention of my visit,
when the keeper informed me that he had several places that would suit me
exactly, and requested me to come in the morning, and he would satisfy me more
fully in the matter.

I was so much pleased with the issue of this adventure, that I went home, and
slept that night with unusual comfort; but, waking before the hour appointed by
the office-keeper for my attendance, I lay in bed ruminating upon the happiness
that awaited my embraces; and, so fondly was I wrapped in the pleasures of the
imagination, that I thought I saw Fortune smiling upon my wishes; which
elevated my heart so much, that every pulse in my body accorded with peace and
harmony.

CHAPTER XLI.
Attend at the office in the morning. -- Dispatched to my new place. -- My
reception by the housekeeper. -- Pass an ordeal before my master. -- Approved
of, and made happy.

BEFORE I got up, a thousand pleasurable circumstances arose in my mind, and I
had no doubt but I had arrived at the end of my calamities. At last, hearing
the clock give notice, that the long-expected hour of nine was come, I leaped
out of bed with uncommon sprightliness, and surveyed my garret with rapture as
I put on my clothes; for those objects, that had appeared to me disagreeable
but the evening before, wore now a more graceful aspect, so much does the
beauty of all exterior objects depend upon the serenity and tincture of the
mind.

When I had dressed myself, I sallied forth to the temple of Fortune, for such
had my fond fancy pictured the register-office to be; and I did not permit the
grass to grow under my feet in the journey, for I performed it as quick as if
the preservation of my life depended upon the speed I should use in that
expedition. I got to the house just as one of the understrappers of the place
was opening the shop for the public accommodation. When I told him my errand,
he looked at me with some surprise, and said, it was very lucky that I had not
called the family up in the middle of the night; and added, that, for his part,
he was much obliged to me that I had patience to wait until he had pulled down
the first shutter. I could not help feeling some resentment toward the author
of these sarcastic remarks upon my eagerness for employment, but resolved to
suppress my anger at any rate, and not suffer my passions to operate, at so
critical a time, to the disadvantage of my interest; so, apparently taking all
in good part, I sat down in the shop to wait until the principal should think
proper to honor me with his presence.

During the time of my attendance in the office, a great number of young people
of both sexes came in, with some of whom I entered into conversation, and
learned, from their discourse, that the hand of necessity had not been employed
in oppressing me alone; but that a considerable number of other people had
received an equal share of her regard, who perhaps deserved, from their merits,
a very different fate.

At last, when my patience was well-nigh exhausted, the director of the office
made his appearance in a morning-gown and a blue velvet cap, and, eyeing me
among the crowd of claimants, called me on one side, and gave me to understand
there was a family, at the west end of the town, that wanted a servant
immediately, and that he believed I should find the place not only easy, but
comfortable; at the same time giving me to understand, that I must take this
part of his behavior as an instance of his great regard for me, as it was not
usual with him to be so expeditious; but that he had conceived a liking for me,
from the first, from the manner and modesty of my application, and had
determined, in consequence, to lose no time in settling me to my advantage.
After I had returned him my warmest thanks for his kindness, I gave him a
shilling, and, taking his recommendation to the family, I set out in quest of a
new place of servitude with a heart as light as a feather.

When I arrived at the house to which I was directed, the door was opened by an
old woman, turned of fifty, who seemed to carry about her person all the
dignity and consequence of a housekeeper, and I found afterward that I was not
deceived by my conjectures. -- When I told her the nature of my errand, she
began to question me as to my age, and if I had ever been in service before; to
all which interrogatories I gave such proper answers, that she deigned to tell
me, that she believed I would answer her master's purpose, bidding me sit down
in the kitchen until she went up stairs to see if the old gentleman was
stirring. In this state I continued for about ten minutes, when a healthy
rosy-cheeked wench came into the kitchen; and, under pretense of wiping some
dishes, she took an opportunity of surveying my figure from the corner of her
eye, which I imagined she did not think displeasing; for, turning round, she
asked me, with a smile of hospitable complaisance, if I would eat any thing
that morning, or, if I had an inclination for some table-beer, she would draw
me some. I returned her many acknowledgements for these instances of her
goodnature, and one word begot another, till I found myself inclined to be
extremely talkative, from the friendly complexion of her manners; and she was
inspired with confidence from the seeming candor of my disposition. The first
question she put to me, that savoured of curiosity, and proved her in full
possession of the true female spirit, was exactly as follows: I supposes you
are the young man that I heard old Honor, the housekeeper, say was coming to
live in our family. To this home thrust I replied, "Yes, I came with that
intention, my dear; but whether I shall succeed or not depends upon the will of
the person who is to employ me." "Oh! as for that," cries the damsel, "if you
have the good fortune to be pleasing to Mrs. Honor, my master will take you
tonight before tomorrow; for he leaves all them there matters to her." As I
thought this was a piece of intelligence well worth attending to, I questioned
the nymph of the kitchen very particularly as to the real situation of Mrs.
Honor; and found that she had lived in the family for many years, and, by her
upright conduct and fidelity, had acquired a very great ascendency over the
inclinations of the old gentleman, her master; -- I found, likewise, from my
communicative fellow servants, that the family consisted of the old gentleman,
and his niece, a beautiful young lady of about eighteen, who was at that time
absent from the family, on a visit to a relation at Epping-forest, and whose
return was most anxiously wished for by the servants, as the sweetness of her
temper not only charmed all those that came near her, but likewise tended to
correct that of the old gentleman, her uncle, whose natural turn of mind
partook of too much acidity, when it was not diverted from its ill-natured
pursuits by the persuasive gentleness of his amiable niece. Those two, with the
housekeeper, the ruddy lass who entertained me with the family-anecdotes, a
housemaid, and myself, formed the domestic establishment of this respectable,
though confined, circle.

I was now summoned by Mrs. Honor, who had come into the kitchen for that
purpose, to follow her up stairs into her master's room* that I might undergo
such enquiries as he should think necessary to make preparatory to my
preferment. When we had ascended two pair of stairs, she bade me stay in the
landing-place till her master was ready; accordingly she went into an adjoining
chamber, but returned in a few minutes, beckoning me to follow her, and tread
as lightly as possible. I obeyed her directions with such a palpitation of my
heart as made me imagine I could even hear its throbbings against my ribs. When
we came to an inner room, I perceived the old gentleman, sitting at a table,
with a napkin under his chin, and very seriously employed in demolishing a
large bowl of bread and milk, which I afterward understood to be his daily
breakfast.

This new master of mine had passed his grand climacteric at least a dozen
years; but, notwithstanding, his aspect was healthy and florid; a large nose,
somewhat inclined to the aquiline, parted too small gray eyes, which seemed to
twinkle with asperity, and emit the rays of discord and ill nature. When he was
given to understand that I waited his pleasure, he took no farther notice than
by nodding his head and eating the remainder of his mess with an additional
haste. When he had finished his morning's repast, he threw himself back in his
chair; and, pulling a pair of spectacles from a case, he fixed them on his
tremendous nose with great deliberation, and sat looking at me, for a few
minutes, with such circumspective curiosity, as if he intended to measure the
exact altitude of my person. During this critical survey of the grey-headed
senior, I not only blushed from ear to ear, but trembled in every limb, lest,
on so nice an investigation of my figure and appearance, I might be found
deficient in the requisites for a servant, at least in the old gentleman's
eyes. But he soon removed those apprehensions, by observing to his housekeeper,
that my person corresponded with her account, and he had no objection to employ
me, provided my character were unexceptionable. At this declaration, I pulled
the lieutenant's letter from my pocket, and was eagerly going to present it to
the old man for his perusal; but he seemed to retreat from my endeavor, with
an observation, that I need not be in such a devilish hurry; and, turning to
his housekeeper, "Why, Honor," says he, this lad you have brought me seems as
much transported at the idea of eating a good dinner as a hungry poet at a
twelve-penny ordinary. I hope he is not half-starved; egad, if he is, he will
cost me more in a month than would pay his wages for a year. The housekeeper
making no reply to this sarcastic interrogation, I made the old gentleman an
humble salute, and told him, that my eagerness arose from an ardent desire of
having the honor to serve him, and not from any other motive. -- He appeared
somewhat pleased at my apology, and told me it was very well; at the same time
he ordered his housekeeper to prepare for my reception on the evening of the
next day.

Perfectly happy at the success of my application, I left my new master, and
was going into the kitchen immediately, to inform the good-natured damsel of my
reception; but I found that measure needless; for, as I opened the door that
led to the landing-place, I discovered her at the passage ready to wish me joy;
by which circumstance I found, that the inquisitive nymph had been listening at
the door during my conversation with her facetious master and the agreeable
Mistress Honor.

CHAPTER XLII.
Stumble by chance upon a former acquaintance. -- A fruitless attempt to
regulate the morals of the vulgar. -- My friend maltreated for his piety. -- He
preaches the doctrine of forbearance in the midst of affliction.

I Sallied out of the house with a light and merry heart, and resolved, after I
had discharged my lodging, to keep my appointment with Mr. Butler, whom I had
promised to meet at the ordinary at dinner.

I was humming over to myself a favorite tune of old Carolan, the Irish bard,
when I observed a crowd of people on the opposite side of the way; and, being
willing to know the cause that had brought so motley a collection of beings
together, I crossed the way, and found one half of the audience listening with
great attention to the exhortations of a man who stood with his back toward
me, and the other half indulging themselves in excessive laughter, seemingly at
the expense of the apostle who addressed them, for I soon learned, from the
tendency of his discourse, that it turned entirely upon religious topics; but
how was I struck with astonishment, when the preacher turned round, and I
discovered him to be the very identical man, who had given me such excellent
admonitions, for my future conduct in life, but a few days before, in St.
James's park, and who had left me in a great hurry to settle a political
dispute that had arisen between him and another person. A recollection of the
disagreeable effects of his elocution would have prompted me to retire from the
scene immediately, for fear of a second part of the same tune; but I soon found
this was impossible, for the major's eye had no sooner come into the line of
direction with mine, than he burst through the crowd, and shook me heartily
with one hand, while he secured a young chimney-sweeper from escaping with the
other; and, after asking me a thousand questions in the same breath,
three-fourths of which I could not understand, from the impediments of his
speech, he concluded his list of enquiries by desiring to know how I liked his
book upon self-knowledge, and if I had read it over and over; and (heaven
forgive me for uttering such a confounded lie) I told the good man, without
hesitation, that I had perused it with great attention, and had no doubt but I
should live the better, and become the happier, for being acquainted with its
contents. This assurance put the good soldier in a rapture; and, turning to me,
he pulled the young chimney-cleanser forward, and, presenting him to my view,
-- Here, says he, this boy you now see I met this morning quarrelling with his
companions; he was then extremely wicked, and swearing the most shocking and
profane oaths, and I thought it my duty, as a Christian, to reclaim them, if
possible, and bring the stray sheep back to the Shepherd's fold; two of the
three abused me for my endeavors, and even were so hardened as to throw stones
at me; but I pitied the poor wretches, for their behavior arose from the
impulse of the devil, and not from themselves; when it pleases heaven that they
should be reclaimed they will, but I fear their time is not come; as for this
poor boy, whom they had beaten severely, I took him into a house in the
neighborhood, and had him washed and cleaned; and he has promised me to be a
good child for the future, and never to swear; have not you, my boy? cries the
major, addressing himself to the young sweep. "Yes, sir," answers the other.
"Aye," continues this worthy character; "and, because I found him of a good
disposition, and not stubborn, I have given him sixpence to encourage him, and
some books to teach him his duty, which I dare say he will attend to; -- will not
you, my lad?" says the major. Yes, sir," says the boy. "Come, read me that
prayer aloud at the beginning of the book," cries the major. "I cannot read,
your honor," says the boy. "That is a shame to your parents," replies the
major; -- "but," continues he, "if you cannot read, you can say your prayers,
and be sure you do that every night and morning." "I will, your honor," says
the boy, "if my master will give me leave." "That Is a good child," replies the
major: "your master must give you leave, or he will never prosper, either in
this world or the next. Come, repeat this prayer after me," added the major.
Here the good man made the boy rehearse a long invocation to the Deity, which
the sooty understrapper seemed to do with wonderful unwillingness, while the
crowd, who was listening to this singular dialogue, were employed in ridiculing
the pious labors of my friend, some by groans, and others by thrusting the
tongue in one cheek, and looking very gravely with the other. But the whole
group was soon dispersed by the arrival of the boy's master, who had been
informed of his delay by another of his apprentices; and, heated with anger, he
tore the young proselyte away from the embraces of the well-meaning reformer of
manners, whom he honored with the most opprobrious epithets for detaining his
lawful apprentice from his duty; and, after beating the lad in a most
unmerciful manner, he began to pelt my friend with the filth of the street
without ceremony, in which agreeable pastime he was joined by the greater part
of the mob; and, in spite of all my endeavors to the contrary, by an unlucky
maneuver of the enemy, they fairly drove us from the field; for, just as the
major, regardless of their shouts, was exercising his lungs, in a most
vociferous and thundering tone, to bring them to a sense of their misconduct,
and to put them in the path of righteousness, he received an untimely as well
as unsavory salute, from the foe, of a large handful of mud, which, striking
him with great force exactly in the mouth, which he had opened, with great
energy, as wide as a small oven, put a final period to my friend's elocution,
by entirely stopping up that necessary aperture, and thereby rendering the
organs of speech totally useless. In this discomfited state we retired into a
house, but not before I had stripped to my skin to offer any of them battle;
and probably I should have come off even worse than my military friend, if the
major had not insisted that I should not use the arm of flesh to correct the
evil machinations of the spirit, but act like a true adherent to the Christian
faith in its primitive purity, and, when I received a blow on one cheek, calmly
to present my enemy with the other. Though I admitted the major to be my
superior in knowledge, it was with a great degree of difficulty that I could
bring myself to follow his pacific notions under the pressure of such
unparallelled insolence. -- However, when we had cleaned ourselves from the
dirt that disfigured us, in consequence of the unsavory and ill-timed
application of the mob, the major and I took our leave of each other, but not
before he had expressed the utmost wishes to be of service to my affairs, and
extorted a promise that I would punctually breakfast with him on the following
morning.

CHAPTER XLIII.
Meet by accident with Count Dapper. -- I resolve to be revenged for his
impositions. -- The method he took to disarm my anger. -- An object of misery.
-- The count's idea of promiscuous charity. -- An noble instance of his
humanity.

WHEN I had left my apostolic preceptor, I was ruminating upon some scheme to
fill up my time till the hour of dinner; and, wandering by a bookseller's shop,
I stopped to peruse some loose pamphlets that lay scattered on the window, when
I observed a smart well-dressed man, ogling through his glass at some ladies
that were crossing the way. It was not long before I recollected the very
identical features of the facetious count, who had played so many pranks with
my vanity at the expense of my purse. I stood for some time surveying him with
great accuracy, that I might be certain of committing no mistake in the
business; for he was so metamorphosed by his dress, that I should not readily
have known him again, but for a peculiar smartness of air and cock of the hat
that characterised all his movements. The moment that I was convinced he was my
man, I walked up to him with a stern and determined manner, to claim not only
the money he had so ingeniously borrowed of me, but likewise satisfaction for
the injuries and shame I had experienced by his artful maneuvers.

When I had approached him, I gave him a hearty slap on the shoulder, which
seemed to set his whole nervous system in commotion, an effect that did not so
much proceed from the violence of the blow as the particular place to which it
was applied. He turned immediately round, as I imagined to thank the person who
had bestowed so great a mark of their esteem upon him; and, perceiving me, he
exclaimed, with a smile, "Aye, aye, my dear fellow, is it you? -- damme, it is
well it is no worse; I thought it was some diabolical understrapper, deputed
from the enchanted castles about Shire-lane to drag me into limbo at the desire
of some vile unhallowed rascal of a tailor, who, not having the fear of decency
before his eyes, had issued a writ, by the L -- d, to abridge my privileges of
action; but, damme, I have met with an agreeable surprise. Give me your hand,
my gay fellow," continues the count; "you shall dine with me today up to your
ears in clover. I know an excellent house; -- beef-steaks and porter fit for a
prince! -- Besides there is the widow Lamb, a monstrous good-natured
gentlewoman, who keeps a house of entertainment, for hungry gentlemen, in
Oxford-road; I will introduce you to her acquaintance; damme, any thing to
serve a friend. The captain is onboard the sloop," cries the count, slapping
his thigh; "and, by the immortal powers, it shall be your own fault if you want
for any thing."

"I tell you what, Mr. Count," replied I with a serious air; "I must inform you
that you have mistaken your man most egregiously. It is true, I have formerly
suffered myself to be made a complete ass; but that is now over; and, what is
more, sir, I insist upon immediate reparation." I would have proceeded farther,
had he not stopped my harangue by indulging an excessive fit of laughter; at
the conclusion of which he cried out, in disjointed sentences, -- "Oh! damme,
this is fine; -- good, -- very good, by Ch -- t. Excuse my laughing, my dear
friend," continued the beau; "but I cannot avoid it; I cannot, upon my soul. This
is too much; but, damn it, you cannot be serious." "Yes, sir, but I am,"
replied I, and strutted up to him with my arms a-kimbo. "No, no, I know
better," rejoins the count; "you are not serious, and, what is more, you do not
intend to be serious." -- Yes, but I do, sir," replied I. -- Oh! no, you
don't,' added he; why, zounds! man, if you were serious, I would not keep you
company; I have a mortal aversion to serious men; and you must laugh now; come,
I know you will, if it is only to oblige me." Whether it arose from my
admiration of his impudence, or that the pleasantness of his features (for he
had habitually a smile) attuned my heart to forgiveness and philanthropy, I
cannot tell; but he certainly hit upon the only possible mode there was of
disarming my resentment; and, before I had time to rally the demons of revenge
to my assistance, he took me under the arm, and, forcing me along the street,
cocked his glass, and saluted every well-dressed man or woman we met, not one
of whom, however, thought proper to return the compliment; and amused himself
in this manner, without paying the most distant attention to me or my
remonstrances.

We had not walked very far before he gave me an instance of his possessing a
goodness of heart that would have done honor to a bishop. A poor woman sat
upon the cold stones, at the corner of an alley, with two children in her lap,
soliciting charity from accidental passengers. Misery and hunger were strongly
depicted in her face; the complexion of her poor infants was sicklied over with
the pale hand of famine; and the tattered vestments, that barely served to
cover one half of her body, and answer the rigid purposes of delicacy, were
ragged, filthy, and unwholesome. In this woe-begone state did the silent
mourner sit, for her tongue seemed to have lost the faculty of telling the
sorrow that was so eloquently delivered from her eyes; and, with an extended
arm, to receive the benevolent offerings of the good and worthy, she reclined,
as one "pining in thought, "With green and yellow melancholy,
"And looked like Patience,
"On a monument, smiling at grief."


When this wretched spectacle first caught the count's attention, he pulled me
by the arm, and pointing to the miserable group, broke forth in the following
apostrophe: "There," said he, behold an instance of the boasted humanity of
this nation. You see that unfortunate being, laden with almost as many
afflictions as the vengeance of heaven can inflict upon a human creature as a
punishment for the most complicated vices; and yet her situation, lamentable as
it is, cannot touch the heart of one person in one hundred, that passes by,
sufficiently to administer any thing to her relief. -- The rich plebeian spurns
at her necessities, because he can silence the appeals of pity in his bosom by
being forced to contribute to the support of a parish-workhouse; the haughty
and swollen ecclesiastic thinks it sufficient that he is paid for teaching
others the beauties and advantages of charity, without being at the unnecessary
trouble of practicing it himself; and the prude, valuing herself upon the
preservation of that chastity which never was besieged, instead of giving a
piece of money for the relief of a sickly female, tosses her head, and wonders
such harlots should be encouraged, by the ill-timed bounty of inconsiderate
people, to live in idleness and get bastards. In this strain," continues the
count, "do they comment upon the variegated miseries of such objects as these,
when none of their remarks, it is highly probable, are founded either in
charity or truth. -- That poor woman," added he, "is the widow of a man of
honor and understanding, whom I knew well. He came over from Ireland, a few
years since, in the hope of mending his fortune; but, poor gentleman! he
experienced a sad reverse; and, falling into misfortunes in a strange country,
it speedily broke his heart, and he left that disconsolate woman pregnant with
these children, who are twins. After the decease of her husband, she contrived
to eke out a subsistence by the donations of her late husband's friends; --
but, that precarious channel having long since been dried up, she is now
obliged to beg her bread in the manner you behold, for the circumstance of her
having drawn her first breath in our sister-kingdom entirely deprives her of
receiving any benefit from a workhouse, and throws her upon the humanity of the
public, whose general sentiments, in regard to such children of calamity as she
is, I have painted to your imagination with, I am afraid, too accurate a pencil.

Here the count pulled out his purse, and took a crown-piece from among a
parcel of money, and, walking up to the object of his discourse, put it into
her hand, which he squeezed with some fervor; and, calling upon God to bless
her, left her, rather precipitately, to wonder at the benevolence of a
dissipated man, whose heart, not being steeled by the rigorous laws of
prudence, or influenced by her narrow, saving, selfish, doctrines, was
tremblingly alive to the necessities of human nature.

This noble behavior of the count not only obliterated the remembrance of our
former transactions, but raised him to such a pitch in my esteem, that I verily
believe I would have encountered any hardship to have served a man of so
exalted a way of thinking.

From this scene we repaired to the ordinary, where I met my friend Butler, to
whom I communicated my success at the register-office. After passing an
afternoon in innocent merriment, I took my leave of these pleasant, but
unthinking, companions; and found, on my attempt to pay my share of the
reckoning, that the whole had been discharged by the count, who took this
opportunity to repay me what he had borrowed, and offered me the loan of a
guinea, which I refused, with many thanks for his good opinion of my principles.

When I had disengaged myself from my friends, and asked pardon of the count
for my unwarrantable behavior, I made the best of my way to my lodging, where
I advertised my landlady of my departure the next day; and, after putting every
thing in readiness to enter upon my new post, I retired to bed, and enjoyed the
most balmy and comfortable night's rest I had ever done since my arrival in
Great Britain.

CHAPTER XLIV.
I go to breakfast with Major Credulous. -- Am surprised at meeting with an
acquaintance. -- My admiration of the major's virtues. -- I repair to my new
place. -- Am struck with the beauty of my master's niece.

AGREEABLE to my appointment with the major, I got up early, and dressed myself
with as much neatness as possible, to answer two purposes: in the first place,
to breakfast with my military friend; and in the second, to appear as decent as
I could upon my entrance to my new situation.

When I arrived at the major's lodgings, in the neighborhood of St. James's, I
was shown up stairs by a decent orderly-looking woman, and found, on my
entrance into the apartment, that several persons were attending there for the
purpose of seeing the major: among the rest was a lady, whom I shrewdly
suspected to be a fille de joye; a strange repulsive-looking man, in a rusty
black coat, with a bushy wig, and a remarkable cast in his left eye, the sight
of which was almost buried in his nose; and a decrepid old woman, who was
almost bent double with the weight of age. While we sat there waiting for the
major, several others came in; and, among the rest, I was astonished to
recognize the face of Captain Blisset, the gentleman whom I formerly mentioned
as having met in Westminster-abbey. His surprise at meeting me was to the full
as great as mine. After congratulating me upon my happiness in being known to
the major, he informed me, that he was the very gentleman to whose kindness
both himself and his family had been so much indebted, and toward whom he had
exercised such a diabolical spirit of rancour while on the same service in
America.

A farther discussion of the subject was now prevented by the major's entering
the chamber. The moment he saw me, he ran up and embraced me, and I was
presented to the company as a young man to whom he considered himself greatly
indebted; then he related the history of our affair with the chimney-sweeper,
and its disagreeable issue. -- While the major was pronouncing this eulogium in
my favor, the people in the room eyed me with great attention and respect; but
particularly the captain, who seemed extremely delighted that I should have
taken so active a part in defense of so worthy a character.

The breakfast apparatus being all placed in order, we were summoned by our
good host to the table, who made us follow him in his truly-laudable custom of
kneeling down and repeating some prayers preparatory to our repast; in the
performance of which, he showed as much zeal for the honor of his Savior, and
respect for the canons of heaven, as ever a ruby-faced pastor in the three
kingdoms; but the most beautiful feature in the major's portrait, and in which
he differed very materially from the reverend gentlemen in question, was, --
that he constantly illustrated and enforced his precepts by his example. When
that part of the morning duty was finished, he performed the honors of his
table with the politeness of a gentleman and the hospitality of an Irishman,
(for I understood, from his own declaration, that he was a native of that
kingdom,) most assiduously endeavoring to render our situation as completely
happy as possible; and his demeanor, so far from being soured by his religious
attachments, was at once open, frank, cheerful, and benevolent.

When the breakfast was over, he gave audience to his visitors in an inner
room, to which they all retired one by one, as the major signified his wishes.
When they were all gone, the good man came into the room where I had remained,
and apologized to me for his absence by making me acquainted with the leading
features of their several characters, and the general intent of his
conversation with them all; by which I found, that my conjectures relative to
the young lady were true; that the old woman had formerly kept a house of ill
fame in the neighborhood of Covent Garden, but had been converted from a
continuance of her meretricious practices by the major's exhortations, who
found her in Bridewell beating hemp for the good of society; that the man with
an oblique vision was formerly one of the greatest reprobates about town, but,
being sent to the county-jail for debt, was enlarged by his creditors at the
intercession of the major, who took upon himself a part of his pecuniary
obligations, on a solemn promise, from the prisoner, that he would follow his
counsels and purify his conduct in future. The major was now proceeding to a
panegyric on the captain; but I interrupted his narrative by informing him of
our conversation in the abbey. My friend frankly declaring, that his time was
not his own, he having long since resigned it to the service of the public, I
took that as a hint for my departure, and wished him a good morning, but not
before he had embraced me in a most affectionate manner, and promised to
remember me particularly in his prayers, which he should daily offer to the
throne of mercy for my felicity; and, if prayers from so incorruptible a heart
as his could not be effectual, I tremble for the authority of a prelate.

I now hurried to my new place, and found every thing prepared for my reception
in the family. I was soon given to understand, by my fellow servants in the
kitchen, that our family had been increased, since my departure, by Miss Jesse,
my master's niece, who had returned home from her annual visit; and, by the
favorable account I heard from Peggy, (for that was the name of the
good-humoured wench in question,) I was enamoured with the young lady's
character before I saw her person; but it was not long before I had an
opportunity of being an eyewitness to those irresistible charms which had
attracted my notice so much in the description. When the bell rang from above,
I was ordered by the housekeeper to lay the cloth for dinner, a service I
performed with such dexterity as procured me the approbation of Mrs. Honor.

I was in the act of placing the last knife and fork, when the young lady
entered the room; and, at the first glance I caught of her person, I was so
transported with an undescribable emotion, that I stood for some minutes
motionless and incapable of fulfilling my duty. I believe she perceived my
confusion, and partly guessed at the cause; for she observed, by way of
encouraging me, when her uncle came in to dinner, that I was a modest-looking
young man, and seemed very attentive to my situation; but the pleasing effects
of her gentle spirit were strongly counteracted by her uncle, who replied, with
a contracted brow, Aye, aye, niece, new brooms sweep clean; when I know him
better, I Will tell you more of my mind. This retort of my master's threw me into
confusion; which the young lady perceiving, she gave me a smile, unperceived by
her saturnine relation, which seemed to insinuate, that old people have their
humors, which ought to be indulged on account of their age, but not regarded
on the score of their folly.

CHAPTER XLV.
Become deeply in love with my master's niece. -- Write a poem on my hopeless
situation. -- The singular event that followed it. -- Am ordered to attend my
charmer at Vauxhall-gardens.

THE personal graces of Miss Jesse, added to the amiable complexion of her
mind, had made such an indelible impression on my heart, that I became unhappy
out of her sight. Indeed the idea of her charms was continually stepping
between me and my peace, and I was ridiculous enough to sigh for the possession
of that, which Fortune had placed infinitely beyond my reach. In this
melancholy state I wandered about the house, sometimes like a being lost to
himself, meditating upon a subject that was hourly preying on my spirits,
without the most distant hope to bear me up against so much inquietude; but, so
little are our inclinations within the government of our own power, that I am
perfectly convinced we are frequently doomed to be involuntarily miserable.

I had not been a fortnight in my new place before I had every reason to
believe I had made a conquest of my fellow servants, Peggy, whose attentions to
me in every thing, accompanied by certain love-fraught smiles, left me no room
to doubt about the the nature of her desires. But I was too much absorbed in
reflecting upon the charms of the mistress to pay the least regard to the wiles
and witcheries of the maid; and my passion for that divine creature became at
last so troublesome, that my nights were sleepless and my days were wretched;
she existed in my imagination when I was awake, and haunted my dreams when I
wished for rest. I had resolved a hundred times, in the moments of madness, to
throw myself at her feet, disclose my passion, and then quit her sight for
ever; but the terrors, which hung about the last part of the resolution,
constantly defeated the advantages of the first; and in this state of
uncertainty and disquiet, I passed my melancholy hours, until my very existence
became intolerable.

One evening, having retired to my room, to indulge in secret the sorrows of my
heart, I took up a pen, and diverted myself with writing the following verses:
The Lover's Complaint.
MY plaints to my Jesse unknown,
Unblessed must I wander and sigh,
While echo rehearses each moan,
And sorrow distills from each eye.
The nymph, I lament to have seen,
Is gentle, complacent, and kind;
The graces have fashioned her mein,
And wisdom illumines her mind.
For her I have roses entwined,
But dare not the chaplet reveal;
For, though her soft spirit is kind,
Her dignity freezes my zeal.
By the aid of my lyre no more
Shall accents of melody flow;
Its tones must my passion deplore,
And breathe but the measure of woe.
Unheeded approaches the spring
To open the blossoms of May;
In vain does sweet Philomel sing,
Or the flower-deck'd valley look gay.
But cease thy emotions, fond heart;
No longer or flutter or beat;
For why should you pine with a smart
The tongue is denied to repeat?
The passions that wound my repose
Will hasten the period of strife;
For love like the phoenix has rose,
And fed on the ashes of life.
Then, since I must never impart
Those feelings I Am doomed to deplore,
The pulses that govern my heart
Shall throb with its transports no more.
My pipe I have thrown on the ground,
That was wont to beguile the sad hours:
Ah me! all the magic of sound
Is broke by superior powers.
How cruel is Fate, with such woes
My ardour of youth to suppress!
Say, why does she smile upon those
Whom prudence forbids her to bless?
Then go, lovely nymph, to the plain,
And enslave all the shepherds you see:
You may find a more affluent swain,
But none that will love you like me:
While I stray the willows among,
Unconscious of peace or of rest;
For hope, that gave strength to my song,
Has deserted thy Corydon's breast.


When I had finished this impassioned epistle, which I left carelessly on the
table, I pursued the avocations of my duty with more alertness; and it should
seem, that, by disburdening my brain of this poetical child, it had operated to
reduce the poignancy of my grief, as the tears of a woman are said to relieve
the heart when laden with the keenest sorrows. -- But how was my joy rekindled,
when, returning to my room, I found that my amorous sonnet had been perused by
some fair incognita, who had even added fuel to my attachment, by annexing the
following lines: Though hope, like coquettes, often plays with the heart,
To prove her seduction and skill,
We all find it best to subscribe to her art,
And obey the caprice of her will.
Then cease, lovesick youth, to abandon her wiles
Or yield up your mind to despair:
Attend her suggestions and cherish her smiles,
For she soon may extinguish your care.
The state of perturbation, that this discovery threw me into, is easier to be
conceived than described. Various were my conjectures relative to the person
who had left this testimony of her concern, and my arrogance, at times, would
hurry me so far as to ascribe it to the fair object of my desires; but my
presumption had scarcely brought such an idea to my imagination before my
reflection reassumed her power, corrected my vanity, and destroyed it. The
impossibility of such a circumstance taking place left me bewildered in doubts
and uncertainties; however, I was relieved from all farther conjectures, as to
the author of the verses, on the following evening.

Some young ladies and gentlemen having formed a party for Vauxhall-gardens, in
which they had engaged my incomparable and charming Jesse to accompany them, I
was ordered by my master to attend at the door of the gardens, at a particular
hour, to wait upon her home. As this was a service I would have preferred to
the honor of attending even royalty itself, and in which I cheerfully could
have spent my existence, I needed no monitor to spur me to my duty, but was
ready at least two hours before the time appointed, waiting, at the grand
avenue to the gardens, with the utmost anxiety, for a sight of her, whose
presence would have cheared me even in the bosom of a wilderness. At length she
approached, all charming as she was, and dressed with such an elegant neatness,
that she appeared like another Venus attired with elegance at the toilet of the
graces. It being determined, by her party, to return to town by water, as it
was a remarkably fine night, I was dispatched to procure a boat in readiness
against their arrival at the stairs; and I executed the commission so much to
their entire satisfaction, that I had the superlative pleasure of hearing the
company commend my assiduity and address to their fair companion.

When they had all taken their seats under a temporary awning, to shield them
from the unwholesome dews of the night, I entered the boat, and sat behind the
watermen. Their company consisted of my mistress and two other ladies, an
officer in the guards, and a young attorney from the Temple. In this manner we
proceeded down the Thames, the party taking it by turns to beguile the time
with songs, and relate tales of mirth, for the mutual entertainment of each
other. But we had not passed beyond the arches of Westminster bridge above a
hundred yards, before an accident took place, that proved fatal to one of the
party, and had nearly involved us all in one general destruction.

CHAPTER XLVI.
An accident happens that threatens us with imminent danger. -- A bait for the
devil. -- My mistress makes a declaration of love in my favor. -- My master
dies. -- I marry the object of my desires. -- The infallible secret to insure
conjugal felicity.

THE moon, which had shone with such unusual brightness on our first setting
out, was almost totally eclipsed by a cloud ere we had performed one half of
our voyage, and rendered the objects on the Thames so indistinct, that our
watermen, not looking about them with that caution their duty required, ran
against a coal-barge which was moored at a small distance from Surry-stairs.
The violence of the shock, added to the sudden bustle of the ladies, who all
started up instantaneously on the first notice of danger, overturned the boat,
notwithstanding all the efforts of the gentlemen to the contrary. Being a good
swimmer, I immediately caught hold of my angelic mistress by the arm, but not
before her whole body had been immerged in the water, and bore her, in that
situation, senseless, to the shore. By the assistance of the watermen, the two
ladies, her companions, were saved, and the officer swam to a parcel of timber,
that floated conveniently in the neighborhood of the place where the disaster
happened. By this time, the shrieks of the ladies had drawn several people to
the waterside, who exercised every office of humanity in their power. As for
the ill-fated limb of the law, though he was heard to call for assistance in
such piteous accents as would have melted a heart of stone, no one could be
prevailed upon to go to his relief, until a young man, who was present,
stripped himself in a trice to swim to the aid of the unfortunate beau; -- and
was just preparing to plunge into the stream, when one of the company happened
to mention the name of his profession, which operated like a charm on the
disposition of the humane youth, who no sooner understood that he was an
attorney, than he very deliberately put on his clothes, protesting that, as he
was a lawyer, he might drown and be damned for him; that, for his part, he
would not run the chance of incurring the displeasure of the devil, by so
untimely robbing him of his dues.

When the fair Jesse had recovered the use of her senses, she eagerly enquired
for her deliverer; and, finding that she was indebted for her life to my zeal
and activity, she clasped her dear arms about my neck, and prayed that she
might have the ability to express her gratitude. I was so overpowered by her
condescension, that I remained speechless, kneeling at her feet, till, my
passion getting the better of my reason, I seized her hand, and smothered it
with kisses. By the gentle manner, in which she rebuked me for this freedom, I
first discovered that I was not indifferent to her heart; which probably I
should have remained ignorant of as long as I lived, if the decrees of Fate had
not turned this seeming evil to my good. -- When we returned home, she made me
a present of a locket, which she entreated me to keep for ever, as a token of
her gratitude and esteem; a present, to me of the most inestimable value, for
it contained a ringlet of her lovely auburn hair, woven in the shape of a
true-lover's knot. On receiving this mark of her favor, I threw myself at her
feet, and, imploring her pardon for my presumption, made a full declaration of
my passion. After this confession, I would have retired from her sight, and
left the house for ever; but, perceiving my intention, she called me back, and
told me, while her beauteous cheek glowed with a suffusion of blushes, that my
partiality in her favor had not been a mystery to her for some time; that she
could trace it in all my actions, and read it in all my looks: "But," added the
divine Jesse, I strove to avoid such observations as much as possible; for, in
spite of the distance that fortune has thrown between us, I felt an advocate,
that pleaded in behalf of your merits, in this breast, so powerfully, that I
was obliged to yield to its solicitations; and must inform you, however painful
to my delicacy, that my happiness cannot be more essential to your peace than
yours is to mine. Here the accomplished lady turned aside her head to hide her
confusion, while I poured forth my acknowledgements at her feet in terms of the
most rapturous gratitude. In short, we made a full confession of our regards
for each other, and resolved to embrace the first opportunity, that Fortune
should offer and Prudence should countenance, to make our bliss complete. And
it was not long before that happened; for, her uncle being suddenly seized with
the gout in his stomach, it carried him off, with the assistance of three
physicians, in a few hours; and we had the pleasure to find, that he had left
the greater part of his fortune at the sole disposal of his niece.

When the customary time had elapsed, that is prescribed for people apparently
to mourn for the loss of those, whose deaths they had hourly prayed for, my
Jesse and I were led to the sacred altar of Hymen; and there, performing all
due rites and ceremonies, the beauteous maid was given up to my possession; and
I may venture to add, that, if every wedded pair experienced as much felicity
as we have done since the mysterious and indissoluble knot made us one, the
honorable state of matrimony would no longer furnish food for the pen of
satire, or laughter for the faculties of folly, by the ridiculous feuds it too
frequently engenders; and, gentle reader, to give you a convincing proof that I
have a proper regard for the well-being of my fellow creatures, I will publicly
make known the inestimable secret, by the observance of which we are so much
happier than our neighbors: it is briefly this, -- looking with an eye of
kindness upon the weaknesses of each other.

FINIS.
NEW BOOKS, printed for W. LANE.
ROUNDELAY, or the new Siren, a Collection of choice Songs, including the most
modern and esteemed, adorned with an elegant Title and Vignette; 1 s. 6 d.
sewed. There needs no farther encomium on this book than its very extensive
sale, upwards of twenty thousand of the various editions having been sold, to
the last of which the NEW SONGS have been added: -- and, in this selection,
care and attention have been paid to have none that would offend the most
delicate ear or vitiate the understanding. The FESTIVAL of MOMUS, a Collection
of COMIC SONGS, including the modern, a new and improved Edition, with a most
superb Frontispiece and Vignette. Price 1 s. 6 d. sewed. The POLITE SONGSTER,
or Vocal Melody, a new Edition. Price only 1 s. sewed. The COMIC SONGSTER, or
Laughing Companion, a new Edition. Price 1 s. sewed. CHARMS of CHEERFULNESS, or
Merry Songster's Companion, 12mo. 1 s. sewed. JOVIAL JESTER, or Tim Grin's
Delight, 1 s. sewed. MERRY JESTER, or Convivial Comp. 1 s. sewed. BALLOON
JESTER, or Flights of Wit, 6 d. sewed. GENIUS IN HIGH GLEE, or Bucks Jester, 6
d. sewed. TIM GRIN'S JESTS, or the new London Joker, 6 d. sewed. LAUGH AND BE
FAT, or Food for all Parties, 6 d. sewed. COMICAL FELLOW, or Wit and Humor for
Town and Country, 6 d. sewed.
This day are published, the following NEW and ENTERTAINING NOVELS, Printed for
WILLIAM LANE, BOOKSELLER, No 33, LEADENHALL-STREET, LONDON.
ANNA, or Memoirs of a Welsh Heiress, a new edition, corrected, 4 vols. price
10 s. sewed. ADELAIDE, or conjugal Affection, 2 s. 6 d. sewed. ARPASIA, or the
Wanderer, 3 vols. 7 s. 6 d. sewed. ALBINA, in a Series of Letters, 2 vols. 5 s.
sewed. BALLOON, or Aerostatic Spy, 2 v. 12mo. 5 s. sewed. BELMONT GROVE, or the
Discovery, in a Series of Letters, 2 vols. 12mo. 5 s. sewed. CAMILLA, or
Correspondence of a deceased Friend, 3 vols. 7 s. 6 d. sewed. CORRESPONDENTS,
an original Novel, in Letters, a new Edition, 12mo. 2 s. 6 d. sewed.
CONFESSIONS OF A COQUETTE, a Novel, 2 s. 6 d. sewed. FRANCIS, the
PHILANTHROPIST, an unfashionable Tale, 3 v. 12mo. 7 s. 6 d. sewed. FAVORITES
of FELICITY, by Dr. Potter, 7 s. 6 d. sewed. FORCE of LOVE, by Dent, 2 vol. 5
s. sewed. IMOGEN, a Pastoral Romance, 2 vols. 5 s. sewed. JULIANA, by the
Author of Francis, the Philanthropist, 3 vols. 7 s. 6 d. JUVENILE
INDISCRETIONS, by the Author of Anna, or the Welsh Heiress, 5 vols. 12 s. 6 d.
sewed. LANE'S ANNUAL NOVELIST, with elegant vignette titles, 2 vols. 5 s.
sewed. LIBERAL AMERICAN, 2 vols. 5 s. sewed. MATILDA, or Efforts of Virtue, 3
vols. 7 s. 6 d. sewed. MYRTLE, or the Effects of Love, 3 vols. 12mo. Price 7 s.
6 d. sewed. MISFORTUNES of LOVE, 2 vols. 12mo. 5 s. sewed. MEMOIRS and
ADVENTURES of a FLEA, 2 vols. 5 s. sewed. THE MAGDALEN, or History of the
Penitents, in Letters, with Anecdotes, by Dr. Dodd, 2 s. 6 d. sewed. MELWIN
DALE, in Letters, 2 vols. 5 s. sewed. The NABOB, in a Series of Letters by the
Author of ARPASIA, 2 vols. 5 s. sewed. PHANTOMS, or Adventures of a Gold-headed
Cane, by Theo. Johnson, 2 vols. 12mo. 5 s. sewed. THE QUAKER, in Letters, by a
Lady, 3 vols. 12mo. 7 s. 6 d. sewed. SENTIMENTAL DECEIVER, or the History of
Miss Hammond, in Letters, 2 s. 6 d. sewed. THEODOSIUS and ARABELLA, by Mrs.
Hampden Pie, 2 vols. 5 s sewed. WARBECK; a Pathetic Tale, 2 vols. 5 s. sewed.
WOMAN of QUALITY, 2 vol. 5 s. sewed.
This Day is published, Price 2 s. A new Edition of the WIT's MUSEUM, OR NEW
LONDON JESTER, Ornamented with striking Likenesses, and Dedicated and addressed
to His Royal Highness GEORGE, Prince of Wales; Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Esquire.
Edmund Burke, Esquire. John Wilkes, Esquire. Right Honorable Lord North;
AND The Right Honorable Charles James Fox.

Containing the lively Sallies of the above Personages, and other choice
Spirits of the Age.

Being the completest Book ever offered the Public.

W. Lane begs to inform any Person, either in Town or Country, desirous of
commencing a Circulating Library, that he has always, ready bound, several
Thousand Volumes, in History, Voyages, Novels, Plays, etc. suitable for that
Purpose; and that he will be happy in instructing them in the Manner of keeping
a Reading-Library. -- On an Address to him, as above, they may receive an
immediate Supply of entertaining Books.

* Wanted several Novels in Manuscript for publishing the ensuing Season.
Address as above.


