ESSAYS UPON Several Projects: OR, Effectual Ways for advancing the Interest of
the Nation.

Wherein are plainly laid down, The Means by which the Subjects in general may
be eased and enriched; the Poor relieved, and Trade increased in the most
material Branches of it, viz. in Constituting Seamen to theirs and the Nations
Advantage, for Encouragement of Merchants and Merchandising; for Relief of the
Poor of Friendly Societies; for discouraging Vice, and encouraging Virtue; the
Usefulness; of Banks and Assurances; to prevent Bankrupts; with the surest way
to recover bad Debts; and many other considerable things, profitable and
conducing to the great Advantage of the Nation in general.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Ballard, at the Rising Sun in Little Britain. 1702.

PREFACE TO Dalby Thomas, Esquire One of the COMMISSIONERS for Managing His
Majesty's Duties on Glass, etc.
SIR,
THIS Preface comes Directed to you, not as Commissioner, etc. under whom I
have the Honor to serve his Majesty; nor as a Friend; though I have great
Obligations of that sort also; but as the most proper Judge of the Subjects
Treated of, and more Capable than the greatest part of Mankind to Distinguish
and Understand them.

Books are useful only to such whose Genius are suitable to the Subject of
them: And to Dedicate a Book of Projects to a Person who had never concerned
himself to Think that way, would be like Music to one that has no Ear.

And yet Your having a Capacity to Judge of these things, no way brings You
under the Despicable Title of a Projector, any more than knowing the Practices
and Subtleties of Wicked Men, makes a Man guilty of their Crimes.

The several Chapters of this Book, are the results of particular Thoughts,
occasioned by Conversing with the Public Affairs during the present War with
France. The Losses and Casualties which attend all Trading Nations in the
World, when involved in so Cruel a War as this, have reached us all, and I am
none of the least Sufferers; if this has put me, as well as others, on
Inventions and Projects, so much the Subject of this Book, it is no more than a
proof of the Reason I give for the general Projecting Humor of the Nation.

One unhappiness I lie under in the following Book, viz. That having kept the
greatest Part of it by me for near Five Years, several of the Thoughts seem to
be hit by other Hands, and some by the Public; which turns the tables upon me,
as if I had Borrowed from them.

As particularly that of the Seamen, which you know well I had contrived long
before the Act for Registring Seamen was Proposed. And that of Educating Women,
which I think my self bound to Declare, was formed long before the Book called
Advice to the Ladies, was made Public; and yet I do not Write this to Magnify
my own Invention, but to acquit my self from Grafting on other People's
Thoughts. If I have Trespassed upon any Person in the World, it is upon Your
self, from whom I had some of the Notions about County Banks, and Factories for
Goods, in the Chapter of Banks; and yet I do not think that my Proposal for the
Women, or the Seamen, clashes at all, either with that Book, on the Public
method of Registring Seamen.

I have been told since this was done, That my Proposal for a Commission of
Enquiries into Bankrupt Estates, is Borrowed from the Dutch; if there is any
thing like it among the Dutch, it is more than ever I knew, or know yet; but if
so, I hope it is no Objection against our having the same here, especially if it
be true, that 'twou'd be so publicly Beneficial as is expressed.

What is said of Friendly Societies, I think no Man will Dispute with me, since
one has met with so much Success already in the Practice of it, I mean, The
Friendly Society for Widows, of which you have been pleased to be a Governor.

Friendly Societies are very extensive, and as I have hinted, might be carried
on to many Particulars. I have omitted one which was mentioned in Discourse
with your self; where a Hundred Tradesmen, all of several Trades, Agree
together to Buy whatever they want of one another, and no where else, Prices
and Payments to be settled among themselves; whereby every Man is sure to have
Ninety nine Customers, and can never want a Trade: And I could have filled up
the Book with Instances of like nature, but I never designed to tire the Reader
with Particulars.

The Proposal of the Pension-Office you will soon see offered to the Public,
as an Attempt for the Relief of the Poor; which if it meets with Encouragement,
will every way answer all the great Things I have said of it.

I had Wrote a great many Sheets about the Coin, about bringing in Plate to the
Mint, and about our Standard; but so many great Heads being upon it, with some
of whom my Opinion does not agree, I would not adventure to appear in Print
upon that Subject.

Ways and Means also I have laid by on the same score. Only adhering to this
one Point, That be it by Taxing the Wares they Sell, be it by Taxing them in
Stock, be it by Composition, which, by the way, I believe is the best; be it by
what way soever the Parliament please, the Retailers are the Men who seem to
call upon us to be Taxed; if not by their own extraordinary good Circumstances,
though that might bear it, yet by the contrary in all other Degrees of the
Kingdom.

Besides, the Retailers are the only men who could pay it with least damage,
because it is in their power to levy it again upon their Customers in the
Prices of their Goods, and is no more than paying a higher Rent for their Shops.

The Retailers of Manufactures, especially so far as relates to the Inland
Trade, have never been taxed yet, and their Wealth or Number is not easily
calculated: Trade and Land has been handled roughly enough; and these are the
men who now lie as a Reserve to carry on the Burden of the War.

These are the Men, who, were the Land Tax collected as it should be, ought to
pay the King more than that whole Bill ever produced; and yet these are the men
who I think I may venture to say, do not pay a Twentieth part in that Bill.

Should the King appoint a Survey over the Assessors, and Indict all those who
were found faulty; allowing a Reward to any Discoverer of an Assessment made
lower than the literal Sense of the Act implies, What a Register of Frauds and
Connivances would be found out!

In a General Tax, if any should be excused, it should be the Poor, who are not
able to pay, or at least are pinched in the necessary parts of Life by paying:
And yet here a poor Labourer who works for Twelve-Pence or Eighteen-Pence a
Day, does not drink a Pot of Beer, but pays the King a Tenth part for Excise;
and really pays more to the King's Taxes in a year, than a Country Shopkeeper,
who is Alderman of the Town, worth perhaps Two or Three Thousand Pounds, brews
his own Beer, pays no Excise, and in the Land Tax is rated it may be 100 l. and
pays 1 l. 4 s. per Annum: But ought, if the Act were put in due execution, to
pay 36 l. per Ann. to the King.

If I were to be asked how I would remedy this? I would answer, It should be by
some Method in which every man may be taxed in the due proportion to his
Estate, and the Act put in execution, according to the true Intent and Meaning
of it; in order to which a Commission of Assessment should be granted to Twelve
Men, such as His Majesty should be well satisfied of, who should go through the
whole Kingdom, Three in a Body, and should make a new Assessment of Personal
Estates, not to meddle with Land.

To these Assessors should all the Old Rates, Parish-Books, Poor-Rates, and
Highway-Rates also be delivered; and upon due Enquiry to be made into the
Manner of Living, and reputed Wealth of the People, the Stock or Personal
Estate of every man should be assess'd, without Connivance; and he who is
reputed to be worth a Thousand Pound, should be taxed at a Thousand Pound; and
so on: And he who was an overgrown Rich Tradesman of Twenty or Thirty thousand
Pounds Estate, should be taxed so, and Plain English and Plain Dealing be
practiced indifferently throughout the Kingdom; Tradesmen and Landed men should
have Neighbors Fare, as we call it; and a Rich Man should not be passed by
when a Poor Man pays.

We read of the Inhabitants of Constantinople, that they suffered their City to
be lost, for want of contributing in time for its Defense; and pleaded Poverty
to their Generous Emperor, when he went from House to House to persuade them;
and yet when the Turks took it, the Prodigious Immense Wealth they found in it,
made 'em wonder at the sordid Temper of the Citizens.

England (with due Exceptions to the Parliament, and the Freedom wherewith they
have given to the Public Charge) is much like Constantinople; we are involved
in a Dangerous, a Chargeable, but withal a most Just and Necessary War, and the
Richest and Moneyed Men in the Kingdom plead Poverty; and the French, or King
James, or the Devil may come for them, if they can but conceal their Estates
from the Public Notice, and get the Assessors to tax them at an Under-Rate.

These are the men this Commission would discover; and here they should find
men taxed at 500 l. Stock, who are worth 20000 l. Here they should find a
certain Rich Man near Hackney, rated to day in the Tax-Book at 1000 l. Stock,
and to morrow offering 27000 l. for an Estate.

Here they should find Sir J -- C -- perhaps taxed to the King at 5000 l.
stock, perhaps not so much, whose Cash no man can guess at: And multitudes of
Instances I could give by name, without wrong to the Gentlemen.

And not to run on in Particulars, I affirm, That in the Land Tax Ten certain
Gentlemen in London put together, did not pay for half so much Personal Estate,
called Stock, as the poorest of them is reputed really to possess.

I do not enquire at whose door this Fraud must lie, it is none of my business.

I wish they would search into it, whose Power can punish it. But this with
Submission I presume to say;

The King is thereby defrauded and horribly abused; the true Intent and Meaning
of Acts of Parliament evaded; the Nation involved in Debt by fatal Deficiencies
and Interests; Fellow Subjects abused, and new Inventions for Taxes occasioned.

The last Chapter in this Book is a Proposal about entering all the Seamen in
England into the King's Pay; a Subject which deserves to be enlarged into a
Book it self; and I have a little Volume of Calculations and Particulars by me
on that Head, but I thought them too long to publish. In short, I am persuaded,
was that Method proposed to those Gentlemen to whom such things belong, the
greatest Sum of Money might be raised by it, with the least Injury to those who
pay it, that ever was or will be during the War.

Projectors, they say, are generally to be taken with allowance of one half at
least; they always have their mouths full of Millions, and talk big of their
own Proposals; and therefore I have not exposed the vast Sums my Calculations
amount to, but I venture to say I could procure a Farm on such a Proposal as
this at Three Millions per Ann. and give very good Security for Payment; such
an Opinion I have of the Value of such a Method; and when that is done, the
Nation would get Three more by paying it; which is very strange, but might
easily be made out.

In the Chapter of Academies, I have ventured to reprove the Vicious Custom of
Swearing: I shall make no Apology for the Fact; for no man ought to be ashamed
of exposing what all men ought to be ashamed of practicing: But methinks I
stand corrected by my own Laws a little, in forcing the Reader to repeat some
of the worst of our Vulgar Imprecations, in reading my Thoughts against it: To
which, however, I have this to reply;

First, I did not find it easy to express what I mean, without putting down the
very Words, at least not so as to be very Intelligible.

Secondly, Why should Words repeated only to expose the Vice, taint the Reader,
more than a Sermon preached against Lewdness should the Assembly; for of
necessity it leads the Hearer to the Thoughts of the Fact; but the Morality of
every Action lies in the End; and if the Reader by ill use renders himself
guilty of the Fact in Reading, which I designed to expose by Writing, the Fault
is his, not mine.

I have endeavored every where in this Book to be as Concise as possible,
except where Calculations obliged me to be particular; and having avoided
Impertinence in the Book, I would avoid it too in the Preface; and therefore
shall break off with subscribing my self,

SIR, Your most Obliged, Humble Servant, D. F.

Introduction.
NEcessity, which is allowed to be the Mother of Invention, has so violently
agitated the Wits of men at this time, that it seems not at all improper, by
way of distinction, to call it, The Projecting Age. For though in times of War
and Public Confusions, the like Humor of Invention has seemed to stir; yet,
without being partial to the present, it is, I think, no Injury to say, the
past Ages have never come up to the degree of Projecting and Inventing, as it
refers to Matters of Negoce, and Methods of Civil Polity, which we see this Age
arrived to.

Nor is it a hard matter to assign probable Causes of the Perfection in this
Modern Art. I am not of their melancholy Opinion, who ascribe it to the general
Poverty of the Nation; since I believe it is easy to prove, the Nation it self,
taking it as one General Stock, is not at all diminished or impoverished by
this Long, this Chargeable War; but on the contrary, was never Richer, since it
was inhabited.

Nor am I absolutely of the Opinion, that we are so happy as to be Wiser in
this Age, than our Forefathers; though at the same time I must own, some parts of
Knowledge in Science as well as Art, has received Improvements in this Age,
altogether concealed from the former.

The Art of War, which I take to be the highest Perfection of Human Knowledge,
is a sufficient Proof of what I say, especially in conducting Armies, and in
offensive Engines; witness the new ways of Mines, Fougades, Entrenchments,
Attacks, Elodgments, and a long Et Cetera of New Inventions which want Names,
practiced in Sieges and Encampments; witness the new sorts of Bombs and
unheard of Mortars, of Seven to Ten Ton Weight, with which our Fleets standing
two or three Miles off at Sea, can imitate God Almighty himself, and rain Fire
and Brimstone out of Heaven, as it were, upon Towns built on the firm Land;
witness also our new-invented Child of Hell, the Machine, which carries
Thunder, Lightning, and Earthquakes in its Bowels, and tears up the most
impregnable Fortifications.

But if I would search for a Cause, from whence it comes to pass that this Age
swarms with such a multitude of Projectors more than usual; who besides the
Innumerable Conceptions which dye in the bringing forth, and (like Abortions of
the Brain) only come into the Air, and dissolve, do really every day produce
new Contrivances, Engines, and Projects to get Money, never before thought of;
if, I say, I would examine whence this comes to pass, it must be thus:

The Losses and Depredations which this War brought with it at first, were
exceeding many, suffered chiefly by the Ill Conduct of Merchants themselves,
who did not apprehend the Danger to be really what it was: For before our
Admiralty could possibly settle Convoys, Cruisers, and Stations for Men of War
all over the World, the French covered the Sea with their Privateers, and took
an incredible number of our Ships. I have heard the Loss computed by those who
pretended they were able to guess, at above Fifteen Millions of Pounds
sterling, in Ships and Goods, in the first two or three Years of the War: A
Sum, which if put into French, would make such a rumbling Sound of great
Numbers, as would fright a weak Accomptant out of his belief, being no less
than One hundred and Ninety Millions of Livres. The weight of this Loss fell
chiefly on the Trading Part of the Nation; and amongst them, on the Merchants;
and amongst them again upon the most refined Capacities, as the Insurers, etc.
And an incredible number of the best Merchants in the Kingdom sunk under the
Load; as may appear a little by a Bill which once passed the House of Commons,
for the Relief of Merchant-Insurers, who had suffered by the War with France.
If a great many fell, much greater were the number of those who felt a sensible
Ebb of their Fortunes, and with difficulty bore up under the Loss of great part
of their Estates. These, prompted by Necessity, rack their Wits for New
Contrivances, New Inventions, New Trades, Stocks, Projects, and any thing to
retrieve the desperate Credit of their Fortunes. That this is probable to be
the Cause, will appear further thus; France, though I do not believe all the
great Outcries we make of their Misery and Distress, if one half of which be
true, they are certainly the best Subjects in the world; yet without question
has felt its share of the Losses and Damages of the War; But the Poverty there
falling chiefly on the Poorer sort of People, they have not been so fruitful in
Inventions and Practices of this nature, their Genius being quite of another
strain. As for the Gentry and more capable sort, the first thing a French man
flies to in his distress, is the Army; and he seldom comes back from thence to
Get an Estate by painful Industry, but either has his Brains knocked out, or
makes his Fortune there.

If Industry be in any Business rewarded with success, it is in the
Merchandising Part of the World, who indeed may more truly be said to live by
their Wits than any people whatsoever. All Foreign Negoce, though to some it is a
plain road by the help of Custom, yet it is in its beginning all Project,
Contrivance, and Invention. Every new Voyage the Merchant contrives, is a
Project; and Ships are sent from Port to Port, as Markets and Merchandises
differ, by the help of strange and Universal Intelligence; wherein some are so
exquisite, so swift, and so exact, that a Merchant sitting at home in his
Counting House, at once converses with all Parts of the known World. This, and
Travel, makes a True-bred Merchant the most Intelligent Man in the World, and
consequently the most capable, when urged by Necessity, to Contrive New Ways to
live. And from hence, I humbly conceive, may very properly be derived the
Projects, so much the Subject of the present Discourse. And to this sort of men
it is easy to trace the Original of Banks, Stocks, Stockjobbing, Assurances,
Friendly Societies, Lotteries, and the like.

To this may be added, the long annual Enquiry in the House of Commons for Ways
and Means, which has been a particular movement to set all the Heads of the
Nation at work; and I appeal, with submission, to the Gentlemen of that
Honorable House, if the greatest part of all the Ways and Means, out of the
common road of Land-Taxes, Polls, and the like, have not been handed to them
from the Merchant, and in a great measure Paid by 'em too.

However I offer this but as an Essay at the Original of this prevaling Humor
of the People; and as it is probable so, it is also possible to be otherwise;
which I submit to future demonstration.

Of the several ways this Faculty of Projecting have exerted it self, and of
the various Methods, as the Genius of the Authors has inclined, I have been a
diligent Observer, and in most an unconcerned Spectator; and, perhaps, have
some advantage from thence more easily to discover the faux Pas of the Actors.
If I have given an Essay toward any thing New, or made Discovery to advantage
of any Contrivance now on foot, all Men are at the liberty to make use of the
Improvement; if any Fraud is discovered, as now practiced, it is without any
particular Reflection upon Parties or Persons.

Projects of the nature I Treat about, are doubtless in general of public
Advantage, as they tend to Improvement of Trade, and Employment of the Poor,
and the Circulation and Increase of the public Stock of the Kingdom; but this
is supposed of such as are built on the honest Basis of Ingenuity and
Improvement; in which, though I Will allow the Author to aim primarily at his own
Advantage, yet with the circumstances of Public Benefit added.

Wherefore it is necessary to distinguish among the Projects of the present
times, between the Honest and the Dishonest.

There are, and that too many, fair pretenses of fine Discoveries, new
Inventions, Engines, and I know not what, which being advanced in Notion, and
talked up to great things to be performed when such and such Sums of Money
shall be advanced, and such and such Engines are made, have raised the Fancies
of Credulous People to such height, that merely on the shadow of Expectation,
they have formed Companies, chose Committees, appointed Officers, Shares, and
Books, raised great Stocks, and cried up an empty Notion to that degree, that
People have been betrayed to part with their Money for Shares in a New-Nothing;
and when the Inventors have carried on the Jest till they have Sold all their
own Interest, they leave the Cloud to vanish of it self, and the poor
Purchasers to Quarrel with one another, and go to Law about Settlements,
Transferrings, and some Bone or other thrown among 'em by the Subtlety of the
Author, to lay the blame of the Miscarriage upon themselves. Thus the Shares at
first begin to fall by degrees, and happy is he that Sells in time; till like
Brass Money it will go at last for nothing at all. So have I seen Shares in
Joint-Stocks, Patents, Engines, and Undertakings, blown up by the air of great
Words, and the Name of some Man of Credit concerned, to 100 l. for a 500 th.
Part, or Share, some more, and at last dwindle away, till it has been
Stock-Jobb'd down to 10, 12, 9, 8 l. a Share, and at last no Buyer; that is, in
short, the fine new word for Nothing-worth, and many Families ruined by the
Purchase. If I should name Linnen-Manufactures, Saltpeter-Works, Copper-Mines,
Diving-Engines, Dipping, and the like, for instances of this, I should, I
believe, do no wrong to Truth, or to some Persons too visibly guilty.

I might go on upon this Subject to expose the Frauds and Tricks of
Stock-Jobbers, Engineers, Patentees, Committees, with those
Exchange-Mountebanks we very properly call Brokers; but I have not Gaul enough
for such a work; but as a general rule of caution to those who would not be
Tricked out of their Estates by such Pretenders to New Inventions, let them
observe, That all such People who may be suspected of Design, have assuredly
this in their Proposal, Your Money to the Author must go before the Experiment:
And here I could give a very diverting History of a Patent-Monger, whose Cully
was no body but my self; but I refer it to another occasion.

But this is no reason why Invention upon honest foundations, and to fair
purposes, should not be encouraged; no, nor why the Author of any such fair
Contrivances should not reap the harvest of his own Ingenuity; out Acts of
Parliament for granting Patents to first Inventors for Fourteen years, is a
sufficient acknowledgment of the due regard which ought to be had such as find
out any thing which may be of public Advantage; new Discoveries in Trade, in
Arts and Mysteries, of Manufacturing Goods, or Improvement of Land, are without
question of as great benefit, as any Discoveries made in the Works of Nature by
all the Academies and Royal Societies in the world.

There is, it is true, a great difference between New Inventions and Projects,
between Improvement of Manufactures or Lands, which tend to the immediate
Benefit of the Public, and Employing of the Poor; and Projects framed by
subtle Heads, with a sort of a Deceptio Visus, and Legerdemain, to bring People
to run needless and unusual hazards: I grant it, and give a due preference to
the first, and yet Success has so sanctified some of those other sorts of
Projects, that 'twou'd be a kind of Blasphemy against Fortune to disallow 'em;
witness Sir William Phips's Voyage to the Wreck; 'twas a mere Project, a
Lottery of a Hundred thousand to One odds; a hazard, which if it had failed,
every body would have been ashamed to have owned themselves concerned in; a
Voyage that would have been as much ridiculed as Don Quixot's Adventure upon
the Windmill: Bless us! that Folks should go Three thousand Miles to Angle in
the open Sea for Pieces of Eight! why, they would have made Ballads of it, and
the Merchants would have said of every unlikely Adventure, 'Twas like Phips his
Wreck-Voyage; but it had Success, and who reflects upon the Project?

Nothing's so partial as the Laws of Fate,
Erecting Blockheads to suppress the Great.
Sir Francis Drake the Spanish Plate-Fleet Won,
He had been a Pyrate if he had got none.
Sir Walter Rawleigh strove, but miss;'d the Plate,
And therefore Di'd a Traitor to the State.
Endeavor bears a Value more or less,
Just as it is recommended by Success:
The lucky Coxcomb every Man will prize,
And Prosperous Actions always pass for Wise.
However, this sort of Projects comes under no Reflection as to their Honesty,
save that there is a kind of Honesty a Man owes to himself and to his Family,
that prohibits him throwing away his Estate in impracticable, improbable
Adventures; but still some hit even of the most unlikely, of which this was
one, of Sir William Phips, who brought home a Cargo of Silver of near 200000 l.
sterling, in Pieces of Eight, fished up out of the open Sea remote from any
shore, from an old Spanish Ship which had been sunk above Forty Years.

THE History of Projects.
WHEN I speak of Writing a History of Projects, I do not mean either of the
Introduction of, or Continuing necessary Inventions, or the Improvement of Arts
and Sciences before known; but a short Account of Projects, and Projecting, as
the Word is allowed in the general Acceptance at this present time, and I need
not go far back for the Original of the Practice.

Invention of Arts with Engines and Handycraft Instruments for their
Improvement, requires a Chronology as far back as the Eldest Son of Adam, and
has to this day afforded some new Discovery in every Age.

The Building of the Ark by Noah, so far as you will allow it a human Work, was
the first Project I read of; and no question seemed so ridiculous to the Graver
Heads of that Wise, though Wicked Age, that poor Noah was sufficiently banter'd
for it; and had he not been set on work by a very peculiar Direction from
Heaven, the Good old Man would certainly have been laughed out of it, as a most
senseless ridiculous Project.

The Building of Babel was a Right Project; for indeed the true definition of a
Project, according to Modern Acceptance, is, as is said before, a vast
Undertaking, too big to be managed, and therefore likely enough to come to
nothing; and yet as great as they are, it is certainly true of 'em all, even as
the Projectors propose; that according to the old tale, If so many Eggs are
hatched, there will be so many Chickens, and those Chickens may lay so many
Eggs more, and those Eggs produce so many Chickens more, and so on. Thus 'twas
most certainly true, That if the People of the Old World could have Built a
House up to Heaven, they should never be Drowned again on Earth, and they only
had forgot to Measure the Height, that is, as in other Projects, it only
Miscarri'd, or else 'twou'd have Succeeded.

And yet when all is done, that very Building, and the incredible Height it was
carried, is a Demonstration of the vast Knowledge of that Infant-Age of the
World, who had no advantage of the Experiments or Invention of any before
themselves.

Thus when our Fathers touched with Guilt,
That Huge Stupendous Staircase Built;
We Mock indeed the fruitless Enterprise,
For fruitless Actions seldom pass for Wise;
But were the Mighty Ruins left, they would show,
To what Degree that Untaught Age did Know.
I believe a very diverting Account might be given of this, but I shall not
attempt it. Some are apt to say with Solomon, No new thing happens under the
Sun, but what is, has been; yet I make no question but some considerable
Discovery has been made in these latter Ages, and Inventions of Human Original
produced, which the World was ever without before, either in whole, or in part;
and I refer only to two Cardinal Points, the use of the Lodestone at Sea, and
the use of Gunpowder and Guns; both which, as to the Inventing-part, I believe
the World owes as absolutely to those particular Ages, as it does the Working
in Brass and Iron to Tubal Cain, or the Inventing of Music to Jubal his
Brother. As to Engines and Instruments for Handycraft-Men, this Age, I dare
say, can show such as never were so much as thought of, much less imitated
before; for I do not call that a real Invention which has something before done
like it, I account that more properly an Improvement. For Handycraft
Instruments, I know none owes more to true genuine Contrivance, without
borrowing from any former use, than a Mechanic Engine contrived in our time,
called, A Knitting Frame, which built with admirable Symetry, works really with
a very happy Success, and may be observed by the Curious to have a more than
ordinary Composition; for which I refer to the Engine it self, to be seen in
every Stocking-Weaver's Garret.

I shall trace the Original of the Projecting Humor that now reigns, no
farther back than the Year 1680. dating its Birth as a Monster then, though by
times it had indeed something of life in the time of the late Civil War. I
allow, no Age has been altogether without something of this nature; and some
very happy Projects are left to us as a taste of their Success; as the
Water-houses for supplying of the City of London with Water; and since that,
the New-River, both very Considerable Undertakings, and Perfect Projects,
adventured on the risque of Success. In the Reign of King Charles the First,
infinite Projects were set on foot for Raising Money without a Parliament;
Oppressing by Monopolies, and Privy Seals; but these are excluded our Scheme,
as Irregularities; for thus the French are as fruitful in Projects as we; and
these are rather Stratagems than Projects. After the Fire of London, the
Contrivance of an Engine to Quench Fires, was a Project the Author was said to
get well by, and we have found to be very useful. But about the Year 1680.
began the Art and Mystery of Projecting to creep into the World. Prince Rupert,
Uncle to King Charles the Second, gave great Encouragement to that part of it
that respects Engines, and Mechanical Motions; and Bishop Wilkins added as much
of the Theory to it, as writing a Book could do: The Prince has left us a Metal
called by his Name; and the first Project upon that was, as I remember, Casting
of Guns of that Metal, and boring them; done both by a peculiar Method of his
own, and which died with him, to the great loss of the Undertaker, who to that
purpose had, with no small Charge, erected a Water-Mill at Hackney-Marsh, known
by the name of the Temple-Mill: Which Mill very happily performed all parts of
the Work; and I have seen of those Guns on board the Royal Charles, a
First-rate Ship, being of a Reddish Color, different either from Brass or
Copper. I have heard some Reasons of State assigned, why that Project was not
permitted to go forward; but I omit them, because I have no good Authority for
it: After this, we saw a Floating Machine, to be wrought with Horses for the
Towing of Great Ships both against Wind and Tide; and another for the raising
of Ballast which, as unperforming Engines, had the honor of being Made,
Exposed, Tried, and laid by, before the Prince died.

If thus we introduce it into the World under the Conduct of that Prince; when
he died, 'twas left a hopeless Brat, and had hardly any Hand to own it, till
the Wreck-Voyage before-noted, performed so happily by Captain Phips,
afterward Sir William; whose strange Performance set a great many Heads on
work to contrive something for themselves; he was immediately followed by my
Lord Mordant, Sir John Narborough, and others from several Parts, whose Success
made 'em soon weary of the Work.

The Project of the Penny-Post, so well known, and still practiced, I cannot
omit; nor the Contriver Mr. Dockwra, who has had the honor to have the Injury
done him in that Affair, repaired in some measure by the public Justice of the
Parliament. And the Experiment proving it to be a Noble and Useful Design, the
Author must be remembered, wherever mention is made of that Affair, to his
very great Reputation.

'Twas no question a great hardship for a man to be Master of so fine a
Thought, that had both the Essential Ends of a Project in it, Public Good, and
Private Advantage; and that the Public should reap the benefit, and the Author
be left out; the Injustice of which, no doubt, discouraged many a Good Design:
But since an Alteration in Public Circumstances has recovered the lost
Attribute of Justice, the like is not to be feared. And Mr. Dockwra has had the
satisfaction to see the former Injury disowned, and an honorable Return made
even by them who did not the Injury, in bare respect to his Ingenuity.

A while before this, several People, under the Patronage of some great
Persons, had engaged in Planting of Foreign Collonies; as William Pen, the Lord
Shaftsbury, Dr. Cox, and others, in Pensilvania, Carolina, East and West
Jersey, and the like places; which I do not call Projects, because 'twas only
prosecuting what had been formerly begun: But here began the forming of public
Joint-Stocks, which, together with the East India, African, and Hudson's-Bay
Companies, before established, begot a New Trade, which we call by a new Name,
Stock-Jobbing, which was at first only the simple Occasional Transferring of
Interest and Shares from one to another, as Persons alienated their Estates;
but by the Industry of the Exchange-Brokers, who got the business into their
hands, it became a Trade; and one perhaps managed with the greatest Intriegue,
Artifice, and Trick, that ever any thing that appeared with a face of Honesty
could be handled with; for while the Brokers held the Box, they made the whole
Exchange the Gamesters, and raised and lowered the Prices of Stocks as they
pleased; and always had both Buyers and Sellers who stood ready innocently to
commit their Money to the mercy of their Mercenary Tongues. This Upstart of a
Trade having tasted the sweetness of Success which generally attends a Novel
Proposal, introduces the Illigitimate wandering Object I speak of, as a proper
Engine to find Work for the Brokers. Thus Stock-Jobbing nursed Projecting, and
Projecting in return has very diligently pimp'd for its Fosterparent, till both
are arrived to be Public Grievances; and indeed are now almost grown
scandalous.

Of PROJECTORS.
MAN is the worst of all God's Creatures to shift for himself; no other Animal
is ever starved to death; Nature without, has provided them both Food and
Clothes; and Nature within, has placed an Instinct that never fails to direct
them to proper means for a supply; but Man must either Work or Starve, Slave or
Dye; he has indeed Reason given him to direct him, and few who follow the
Dictates of that Reason come to such unhappy Exigencies; but when by the Errors
of a Man's Youth he has reduced himself to such a degree of Distress, as to be
absolutely without Three things, Money, Friends, and Health, he Dies in a
Ditch, or in some worse place, an Hospital.

Ten thousand ways there are to bring a Man to this, and but very few to bring
him out again.

Death is the universal Deliverer, and therefore some who want Courage to bear
what they see before 'em, Hang themselves for fear; for certainly
Selfdestruction is the effect of Cowardice in the highest extreme.

Others break the Bounds of Laws to satisfy that general Law of Nature, and
turn open Thieves, House-breakers, Highway-men, Clippers, Coiners, etc. till
they run the length of the Gallows, and get a Deliverance the nearest way at
St. Tyburn.

Others being masters of more Cunning than their Neighbors, turn their
Thoughts to Private Methods of Trick and Cheat, a Modern way of Thieveing,
every jot as Criminal, and in some degree worse than the other, by which honest
men are gulled with fair pretenses to part from their Money, and then left to
take their Course with the Author, who sculks behind the curtain of a
Protection, or in the Mint or Friars, and bids defiance as well to Honesty as
the Law.

Others yet urged by the same necessity, turn their thoughts to Honest
Invention, founded upon the Platform of Ingenuity and Integrity.

These two last sorts are those we call Projectors; and as there was always
more Geese than Swans, the number of the latter are very inconsiderable in
comparison of the former; and as the greater number denominates the less, the
just Contempt we have of the former sort, bespatters the other, who like
Cuckolds bear the reproach of other Peoples Crimes.

A mere Projector then is a Contemptible thing, driven by his own desperate
Fortune to such a Straight, that he must be delivered by a Miracle, or Starve;
and when he has beat his Brains for some such Miracle in vain, he finds no
remedy but to paint up some Bauble or other, as Players make Puppets talk big,
to show like a strange thing, and then cry it up for a New Invention, gets a
Patent for it, divides it into Shares, and they must be Sold; ways and means
are not wanting to Swell the new Whim to a vast Magnitude; Thousands, and
Hundreds of thousands are the least of his discourse, and sometimes Millions;
till the Ambition of some honest Coxcomb is wheedl'd to part with his Money for
it, and then -- Nascitur ridiculus mus.
the Adventurer is left to carry on the Project, and the Projector laughs at
him. The Diver shall walk at the bottom of the Thames; the Saltpeter-Maker
shall Build Tom T -- ds Pond into Houses; the Engineers Build Models and
Windmills to draw Water, till Funds are raised to carry it on, by Men who have
more Money than Brains, and then good night Patent and Invention; the Projector
has done his business, and is gone.

But the Honest Projector is he, who having by fair and plain principles of
Sense, Honesty, and Ingenuity, brought any Contrivance to a suitable
Perfection, makes out what he pretends to, picks no body's pocket, puts his
Project in Execution, and contents himself with the real Produce, as the profit
of his Invention.

Of BANKS.
BANKS, without question, if rightly managed, are, or may be, of great
Advantage, especially to a Trading People, as the English are; and among many
others, this is one particular case in which that Benefit appears, That they
bring down the Interest of Money, and take from the Goldsmiths, Scriveners, and
others, who have command of running Cash, their most delicious Trade of making
advantage of the necessities of the Merchant, in extravagant Discounts, and
Premio's for advance of Money, when either large Customs or Foreign
Remittances, call for Disbursements beyond his common Ability; for by the
easiness of Terms on which the Merchant may have Money, he is encouraged to
venture further in Trade than otherwise he would do; not but that there are
other great advantages a Royal Bank might procure in this Kingdom, as has been
seen in part by this, As advancing Money to the Exchequer upon Parliamentary
Funds and Securities, by which in time of a War our Preparations for any
Expedition need not be in danger of Miscarriage for want of Money, though the
Taxes raised be not speedily paid, nor the Exchequer burdened with the
excessive Interests paid in former Reigns upon Anticipations of the Revenue;
Landed Men might be supplied with Moneys upon Securities on easier Terms, which
would prevent the Loss of multitudes of Estates, now ruined and devoured by
insolent and merciless Mortgagees and the like. But now we unhappily see a
Royal Bank Established by Act of Parliament, and another with a large Fund upon
the Orphans Stock; and yet these Advantages, or others, which we expected, not
answered, though the pretensions in Both have not been wanting at such time as
they found it needful to introduce themselves into public Esteem, by giving
out Prints of what they were rather able to do, than really intended to
practice. So that our having Two Banks at this time settled, and more Erecting,
has not yet been able to reduce the Interest of Money; not because the Nature
and Foundation of their Constitution does not tend toward it; but because,
finding their Hands full of better business, they are wiser than by being
slaves to old obselete Proposals, to lose the advantage of the great
Improvement they can make of their Stock.

This however, does not at all reflect on the Nature of a Bank, nor of the
Benefit it would be to the public Trading-part of the Kingdom, whatever it may
seem to do on the practice of the present. We find Four or Five Banks now in
view to be settled; I confess I expect no more from those to come, than we have
found from the past; and I think I make no breach on either my Charity or good
Manners, in saying so; and I reflect not upon any of the Banks that are or
shall be Established for not doing what I mention, but for making such
publications of what they would do. I cannot think any Man had expected the
Royal Bank should Lend Money on Mortgages at 4 per Cent. nor was it much the
better for them to make publication they would do so, from the beginning of
January next after their Settlement; since to this day, as I am informed, they
have not Lent one Farthing in that manner.

Our Banks are indeed nothing but so many Goldsmiths Shops, where the Credit
being high (and the Directors as high) People lodge their Money; and They, the
Directors I mean, make their advantage of it; if you lay it at Demand, they
allow you nothing; if at Time, 3 per Cent. and so would any Goldsmith in
Lombardstreet have done before; but the very Banks themselves are so awkward in
Lending; so strict, so tedions, so inquisitive, and withal so public in their
taking Securities, that Men who are any thing tender, will not go to them; and so
the easiness of Borrowing Money, so much designed, is defeated; for here is a
private Interest to be made, though it be a public one; and, in short, it is only
a great Trade carried on for the private Gain of a few concerned in the
Original Stock; and though we are to hope for great things, because they have
promised them; yet they are all Future that we know of.

And yet all this while a Bank might be very beneficial to this Kingdom; and
This might be so, if either their own Ingenuity, or Public Authority, would
oblige them to take the Public Good into equal Concern with their Private
Interest.

To explain what I mean;

Banks being established by Public Authority, ought also, as all Public
things are, to be under Limitations and Restrictions from that Authority; and
those Limitations being regulated with a proper regard to the Ease of Trade in
General, and the Improvement of the Stock in Particular, would make a Bank a
Useful, Profitable Thing indeed.

First, A Bank ought to be of a Magnitude proportioned to the Trade of the
Country it is in; which this Bank is so far from, that it is no more to the
Whole, than the least Goldsmith's Cash in Lombardstreet is to the Bank: From
whence it comes to pass, that already more Banks are contriving; and I question
not but Banks in London will e're long be as frequent as Lotteries: The
Consequence of which in all Probability will be, the diminishing their
Reputation, or a Civil War with one another. It Is true, the Bank of England has
a Capital Stock; but yet was that Stock wholly clear of the Public Concern of
the Government, it is not above a Fifth Part of what would be necessary to
manage the whole Business of the Town; which it ought, though not to do, at least
to be Able to do: And I suppose I may venture to say, Above one half of the
Stock of the present Bank is taken up in the Affairs of the Exchequer.

I suppose no body will take this Discourse for an Invective against the Bank
of England; I believe it is a very Good Fund, a very Useful one, and a very
Profitable one: It has been Useful to the Government, and it is Profitable to
the Proprietors; and the establishing it at such a Juncture, when our Enemies
were making great boasts of our Poverty and Want of Money, was a particular
Glory to our Nation, and the City in particular. That when the Paris Gazette
informed the World, That the Parliament had indeed given the King Grants for
raising Money in Funds to be paid in remote Years; but Money was so scarce,
that no Anticipations could be procured: That just then, besides Three Millions
paid into the Exchequer that Spring on other Taxes by way of Advance, there was
an Overplus-Stock to be found of 1200 000 Pounds sterling or (to make it speak
French) of above Fifteen Millions, which was all paid Voluntarily into the
Exchequer, in less than (...) Besides this, I believe the present Bank of
England has been very useful to the Exchequer, and to supply the King with
Remittances for the Payment of the Army in Flanders; which has also, by the
way, been very profitable to it self. But still this Bank is not of that Bulk
that the Business done here requires; nor is it able, with all the Stock it
has, to procure the great proposed Benefit, the lowering the Interest of Money:
Whereas all Foreign Banks absolutely govern the Interest, both at Amsterdam,
Genoa, and other places. And this Defect I conceive the Multiplicity of Banks
cannot supply, unless a perfect Understanding could be secured between them.

To remedy this Defect, several Methods might be proposed: Some I shall take
the Freedom to hint at.

First, That the present Bank increase their Stock to at least Five Millions
sterling, to be settled as they are already, with some small Limitations to
make the Methods more beneficial.

Five Millions sterling is an immense Sum; to which add the Credit of their
Cash, which would supply them with all the Overplus-Money in the Town, and
probably might amount to half as much more; and then the Credit of
Running-Bills, which by circulating would no question be an Equivalent to the
other half: So that in Stock, Credit, and Bank-bills, the Balance of their Cash
would be always Ten Millions sterling: A Sum that every body who can talk of,
does not understand.

But then to find Business for all this Stock; which though it be a strange
thing to think of, is nevertheless easy when it comes to be examined. And first
for the Business; This Bank should enlarge the Number of their Directors as
they do of their Stock; and should then establish several Sub-Committees,
composed of their own Members, who should have the directing of several Offices
relating to the distinct sorts of Business they referred to; to be overruled
and governed by the Governor and Directors in a Body, but to have a Conclusive
Power as to Contracts. Of these there should be

One Office for Loan of Money for Customs of Goods; which by a plain Method
might be so ordered, that the Merchant might with ease pay the highest Customs
down; and so by allowing the Bank 4 per Cent. Advance, be first sure to secure
the 10 l. per Cent. which the King allows for Prompt Payment at the
Custom-house; and be also freed from the troublesome work of finding Bonds-Men,
and Securities for the Money; which has exposed many a Man to the Tyranny of
Extents either for himself or his Friend, to his utter Ruin; who under a more
moderate Prosecution, had been able to pay all his Debts; and by this Method
has been torn to pieces, and disabled from making any tolerable Proposal to his
Creditors. This is a Scene of Large Business, and would in proportion employ a
Large Cash: And it is the easiest thing in the world to make the Bank the
Paymaster of all the Large Customs, and yet the Merchant have so honorable a
Possession of his Goods, as may be neither any Diminution to his Reputation, or
any Hindrance to their Sale.

As for Example:

Suppose I have 100 Hogsheads of Tobacco to Import, whose Customs by several
Duties comes to 1000 l. and want Cash to clear them; I go with my Bill of
Loading to the Bank, who appoint their Officer to Enter the Goods, and pay the
Duties; which Goods so entered by the Bank, shall give them Title enough to any
part, or the whole, without the trouble of Bills of Sale, or Conveyances,
Defeazances, and the like. The Goods are carried to a Warehouse at the
Waterside, where the Merchant has a Free and Public Access to them, as if in
his own Warehouse, and an honorable Liberty to sell and deliver either the
Whole (paying their Disburse) or a Part without it, leaving but sufficient for
the Payment; and out of that Part delivered, either by Notes under the Hand of
the Purchaser, or any other way, he may clear the same, without any Exactions,
but of 4 l. per Cent. and the rest are his own.

The ease this would bring to Trade, the deliverance it would bring to the
Merchants from the insults of Goldsmiths, etc. and the honor it would give to
our management of Public Imposts, with the advantages to the Custom-House it
self, and the utter destruction of Extortion, would be such as would give a due
value to the Bank, and make all Mankind acknowledge it to be a public good.
The Grievance of Exactions upon Merchants in this case is very great; and when
I lay the blame on the Goldsmiths, because they are the principal People made
use of in such occasions, I include a great many other sorts of Brokers, and
Money-jobbing Artists, who all get a snip out of the Merchant. I my self have
known a Goldsmith in Lumbardstreet Lend a Man 700 l. to pay the Customs of a
Hundred Pipes of Spanish Wines; the Wines were made over to him for Security by
Bill of Sale, and put into a Cellar, of which the Goldsmith kept the Key; the
Merchant was to pay 6 l. per Cent. Interest on the Bond, and to allow 10 l. per
Cent. Premio for advancing the Money: When he had the Wines in Possession, the
Owner could not send his Cooper to look after them, but the Goldsmith's Man
must attend all the while, for which he would be paid 5 s. a day. If he brought
a Customer to see them, the Goldsmith's Man must show them; the Money was Lent
for Two Months; he could not be admitted to Sell or Deliver a Pipe of Wine out
single, or Two or Three at a time, as he might have Sold them; but on a word or
two spoken amiss to the Goldsmith or which he was pleased to take so he would
have none Sold, but the whole Parcel together; by this usage the Goods lay on
hand, and every Month the Money remained, the Goldsmith demanded a Guinea per
Cent. forbearance, besides the Interest, till at last by Leakage, Decay, and
other Accidents, the Wines began to lessen: Then the Goldsmith begins to tell
the Merchant, he is afraid the Wines are not worth the Money he has Lent, and
demands further Security; and in a little while growing higher and rougher, he
tells him, he must have his Money; the Merchant too much at his Mercy, because
he cannot provide the Money, is forced to consent to the Sale, and the Goods
being reduced to Seventy Pipes sound Wine, and Four unsound (the rest being
sunk for filling up) were Sold for 13 l. per Pipe the Sound, and 3 l. the
Unsound, which amounted to 922 l. together: l. s. d. The Coopers Bill came to
30 0 0 The Cellerage a Year and Half to 18 0 0 Interests on the Bond to 63 0 0
The Goldsmith's Men for Attendance 08 0 0 Allowance for Advance of the Money,
and Forbearance 74 0 0 193 0 0 Principal Money Borrowed 700 0 0 893 0 0 Due to
the Merchant 29 0 0 922 0 0

By the modetatest Computation that can be, these Wines Cost the Merchant as
follows: First Cost with Charges on Board l. s. d. In Lisbon 15 Mill Reis per
Pipe is 1500 Mill. Re. Exchange, at 6 s. 4 d. per Mill Rei 475 0 0 Freight to
London -- then at 3 l. per Ton 150 0 0 Assurance on 500 l. at 2 per C. 10 0 0
Petty Charges 05 0 0 640 0 0

So that it is manifest by the Extortion of this Banker, the poor Man lost the
whole Capital with Freight and Charges, and made but 29 l. produce of a
Hundred Pipes of Wine.

One other Office of this Bank, and which would take up a considerable branch
of the Stock, is for Lending Money upon Pledges, which should have annexed to
it a Warehouse and Factory, where all sorts of Goods might publicly be Sold by
the Consent of the Owners, to the great Advantage of the Owner, the Bank
receiving 4 l. per Cent. Interest, and 2 per Cent. Commission for Sale of the
Goods.

A Third Office should be appointed for Discounting Bills, Tallies, and Notes,
by which all Tallies of the Exchequer, and any part of the Revenue, should at
stated Allowances be ready Money to any Person, to the great Advantage of the
Government, and ease of all such as are any ways concerned in public
Undertakings.

A Fourth Office for Lending Money upon Land-Securities at 4 per Cent.
Interest; by which the Cruelty and Injustice of Mortgagees would be wholly
restrained, and a Register of Mortgages might be very well kept, to prevent
Frauds.

A Fifth Office for Exchanges and Foreign Correspondences.

A Sixth for Inland Exchanges, where a very large Field of Business lies before
them.

Under this Head 'twill not be improper to consider, that this Method will most
effectually answer all the Notions and Proposals of County-Banks; for by this
Office they would be all rendered useless and unprofitable; since One Bank, of
the Magnitude I mention, with a Branch of its Office set apart for that
Business, might with ease Manage all the Inland-Exchange of the Kingdom.

By which such a Correspondence with all the Trading-Towns in England might be
maintained, as that the whole Kingdom should Trade with the Bank. Under the
Direction of this Office a Public Cashier should be appointed in every County,
to reside in the Capital Town as to Trade, and in some Counties more, through
whose Hands all the Cash of the Revenue of the Gentry, and of Trade, should be
returned on the Bank in London, and from the Bank again on their Cashier in
every respective County or Town, at the small Exchange of per Cent. by which
means all loss of Money carried upon the Road, to the encouragement of Robbers,
and Ruining of the Country, who are Su'd for those Robberies, would be more
effectually prevented, than by all the Statutes against Highway-Men that are or
can be made.

As to Public Advancings of Money to the Government, they may be left to the
Directors in a Body, as all other Disputes and Contingent cases are; and
whoever examines these Heads of Business apart, and has any Judgment in the
Particulars, will, I suppose, allow, that a Stock of Ten Millions may find
Employment in them, though it be indeed a very great Sum.

I could offer some very good Reasons, why this way of Management by particular
Offices for every particular sort of Business, is not only the easiest, but the
safest way of executing an Affair of such variety and consequence; also I could
state a Method for the Proceedings of those private Offices, their Conjunction
with, and Dependence on the General Court of the Directors, and how the various
Accounts should Center in one General Capital account of Stock, with
Regulations and Appeals; but I believe them to be needless, at least in this
place.

If it be Objected here, That it is impossible for One Joint Stock to go
thorough the whole Business of the Kingdom. I Answer, I believe it is not
either impossible or impracticable, particularly on this one account, that
almost all the Country Business would be Managed by running-Bills, and those
the longest abroad of any, their distance keeping them out, to the Increasing
the Credit, and consequently the Stock of the Bank.

Of the Multiplicity of Banks.
What is touched at in the foregoing part of this Chapter, refers to One
Bank-Royal, to Preside, as it were, over the whole Cash of the Kingdom: But
because some People do suppose this Work fitter for many Banks than for One; I
must a little consider that Head: And first, allowing those many Banks could
without clashing maintain a constant Correspondence with one another, in
passing each others Bills as Current from one to another, I know not but it
might be better performed by Many, than by One; for as Harmony makes Music in
Sound, so it produces Success in Business.

A Civil War among Merchants is always the Ruin of Trade: I cannot think a
Multitude of Banks could so consist with one another in England, as to join
Interests, and uphold one another's Credit, without joining Stocks too; I
confess, if it could be done, the Convenience to Trade would be Visible.

If I were to Propose which way these Banks should be Established; I answer,
Allowing a due regard to some Gentlemen who have had thoughts of the same,
whose Methods I shall not so much as touch upon, much less discover; My
thoughts run upon quite different Methods, both for the Fund, and the
Establishment.

Every principal Town in England is a Corporation, upon which the Fund may be
settled; which will sufficiently answer the difficult and chargeable work of
Suing for a Corporation by Patent or Act of Parliament.

A general Subscription of Stock being made, and by Deeds of Settlement placed
in the Mayor and Aldermen of the City or Corporation for the time being, in
Trust, to be declared by Deeds of Uses, some of the Directors being always made
Members of the said Corporation, and joined in the Trust, the Bank hereby
becomes the Public Stock of the Town, something like what they call the Rents
of the Townhouse in France, and is Managed in the Name of the said
Corporation, to whom the Directors are Accountable, and they back again to the
General Court.

For Example:

Suppose the Gentlemen, or Tradesmen, of the County of Norfolk, by a
Subscription of Cash, design to Establish a Bank: The Subscriptions being made,
the Stock is paid into the Chamber of the City of Norwich, and managed by a
Court of Directors, as all Banks are, and chosen out of the Subscribers, the
Mayor only of the City to be always one; to be managed in the Name of the
Corporation of the City of Norwich, but for the Uses in a Deed of Trust to be
made by the Subscribers, and Mayor and Aldermen, at large mentioned. I make no
question but a Bank thus settled, would have as firm a Foundation as any Bank
need to have, and every way answer the Ends of a Corporation.

Of these sorts of Banks England might very well establish Fifteen, at the
several Towns hereafter mentioned. Some of which, tho they are not the Capital
Towns of the Counties, yet are more the Center of Trade, which in England runs
in Veins, like Mines of Metal in the Earth. Canterbury. Salisbury. Exeter.
Bristol. Worcester. Shrewsbury. Manchester. Newcastle upon Tyne. Leeds, or
Halifax, or York. Nottingham. Warwick, or Birmingham. Oxford, or Reading.
Bedford. Norwich. Colchester.


Every one of these Banks to have a Cashier in London, unless they could all
have a general Correspondence and Credit with the Bank-Royal.

These Banks in their respective Counties should be a General Staple and
Factory for the Manufactures of the said County; where every man that had Goods
made, might have Money at a small Interest for Advance; the Goods in the mean
time being sent forward to Market, to a Warehouse for that purpose erected in
London, where they should be disposed of to all the Advantages the Owner could
expect, paying only 1 per Cent. Commission. Or if the Maker wanted Credit in
London either for Spanish Wool, Cotton, Oil, or any Goods, while his Goods were
in the Warehouse of the said Bank, his Bill should be paid by the Bank to the
full Value of his Goods, or at least within a small matter. These Banks, either
by Correspondence with each other, or an Order to their Cashier in London,
might with ease so pass each other's Bills, that a man who has Cash at
Plymouth, and wants Money at Berwick, may transfer his Cash at Plymouth to
Newcastle in half an hours time, without either Hazard, or Charge, or Time,
allowing only per Cent. Exchange; and so of all the most distant parts of the
Kingdom. Or if he wants Money at Newcastle, and has Goods at Worcester, or at
any other Cloathing-Town, sending his Goods to be sold by the Factory of the
Bank of Worcester, he may remit by the Bank to Newcastle, or any where else, as
readily as if his Goods were sold and paid for; and no Exactions made upon him
for the Convenience he enjoys.

This Discourse of Banks the Reader is to understand to have no relation to the
present Posture of Affairs, with respect to the Scarcity of Current Money,
which seems to have put a stop to that part of a Stock we call Credit; which
always is, and indeed must be the most essential part of a Bank, and without
which no Bank can pretend to subsist, at least to Advantage.

A Bank is only a Great Stock of Money put together, to be employed by some of
the Subscribers, in the name of the rest, for the Benefit of the Whole. This
Stock of Money subsists not barely on the Profits of its own Stock, for that
would be inconsiderable, but upon the Contingences and Accidents which
Multiplicity of Business occasions: As for Instance; A man that comes for
Money, and knows he may have it Tomorrow, perhaps he is in haste, and will not
take it to day: Only that he may be sure of it to morrow, he takes a Memorandum
under the Hand of the Officer, That he shall have it whenever he calls for it;
and this Memorandum we call a Bill. To morrow when he Intended to fetch his
Money, comes a Man to him for Money; and to save himself the labor of Telling,
he gives him the Memorandum or Bill aforesaid for his Money; this Second Man
does as the First, and a Third does as he did, and so the Bill runs about a
Month, Two or Three; and this is that we call Credit; for by the Circulation of
a quantity of these Bills, the Bank enjoys the full Benefit of as much Stock in
real Value, as the supposititious Value of the Bills amounts to; and wherever
this Credit fails, this Advantage fails; for immediately all men come for their
Money, and the Bank must die of it self; for I am sure no Bank by the simple
Improvement of their single Stock, can ever make any considerable Advantage.

I confess a Bank who can lay a Fund for the Security of their Bills, which
shall produce, first an Annual Profit to the Owner, and yet make good the
Passant-Bill, may stand, and be advantageous too, because there is a Real and a
Supposititious Value both, and the Real always ready to make good the
Supposititious; and this I know no way to bring to pass, but by Land, which at
the same time that it lies Transferred to secure the Value of every Bill given
out, brings in a separate Profit to the Owner; and this way no question but the
whole Kingdom might be a Bank to it self, though no ready Money were to be found
in it.

I had gone on in some Sheets with my Notion of Land, being the best bottom for
Public Banks, and the easiness of bringing it to answer all the Ends of Money
deposited, with double Advantage; but I find my self happily prevented by a
Gentleman, who has published the very same, though since this was Wrote; and I
was always Master of so much Wit, as to hold my Tongue while they spoke who
understood the thing better than my self.

Mr. John Asgill of Lincoln's Inn, in a small Tract, Entitled, Several
Assertions proved, in Order to Create another Species of Money than Gold and
Silver, has so distinctly handled this very Case, with such strength of
Argument, such clearness of Reason, such a Judgment, and such a Style, as all
the Ingenious part of the World must acknowledge themselves extremely Obliged
to him for that Piece.

At the sight of which Book I laid by all that had been written by me on that
Subject; for I had much rather confess my self incapable of handling that Point
like him, than have convinced the World of it by my impertinence.

Of the HIGHWAYS.
IT is a prodigious Charge the whole Nation groans under for the Repair of
Highways, which, after all, lie in a very ill Posture too; I make no question
but if it was taken into Consideration by those who have the Power to Direct
it, the Kingdom might be wholly eased of that Burden, and the Highways be
kept in good condition, which now lie in a most shameful manner in most parts
of the Kingdom, and in many places wholly unpassable; from whence arise Tolls
and Impositions upon Passengers and Travelers; and on the other hand,
Trespasses and Encroachments upon Lands adjacent, to the great Damage of the
Owners.

The Rate for the Highways is the most Arbitrary and Unequal Tax in the
Kingdom; in some places two or three Rates of 6 d. per. l. in the year, in
others the whole Parish cannot raise wherewith to defray the Charge, either by
the very bad condition of the Road, or distance of Materials; in others the
Surveyors raise what they never Expend; and the Abuses, Exactions, Connivances,
Frauds, and Embezlements, are innumerable.

The Romans, while they Governed this Island, made it one of their principal
cares to Make and Repair the Highways of the Kingdom, and the Chief Roads we
now use, are of their Marking out; the Consequence of maintaining them was
such, or at least so esteemed, that they thought it not below them to Employ
their Legionary Troops in the Work; and it was sometimes the Business of whole
Armies, either when in Winter Quarters, or in the intervals of Truce or Peace
with the Natives. Nor have the Romans left us any greater tokens of their
Grandeur and Magnificence, than the ruins of those Causways and Streetways
which are at this day to be seen in many parts of the Kingdom; some of which
has by the visible Remains been discovered to traverse the whole Kingdom; and
others for more than an Hundred Miles are to be traced from Colony to Colony,
as they had particular occasion. The famous Highway, or Street, called
Watlingstreet, which some will tell you began at London-stone, and passing that
very Street in the City, which we to this day call by that Name, went on West
to that spot where Tyburn now stands, and then turned North-West in so straight
a line to St. Albans, that it is now the exactest Road (in one Line for Twenty
Miles) in the Kingdom; and though disused now as the Chief, yet is as good, and I
believe the best Road to St. Albans, and is still called the Street-way: From
whence it is traced into Shropshire above an Hundred and sixty Miles, with a
multitude of visible Antiquities upon it, Discovered and Described very
Acurately by Mr. Cambden. The Fosse, another Roman Work, lies at this day as
visible, and as plain a high Causway, of above Thirty Foot broad, Ditch'd on
either side, and Cop'd and Paved where need is, as exact and every jot as
beautiful as the King's new Road through Hide-Park; in which figure it now lies
from near Marshfield to Cirencester, and again from Cirencester to the Hill
Three Miles on this side Gloucester, which is not less than Twenty six Miles,
and is made use of as the great Road to those Towns, and probably has been so
for a Thousand Years with little Repairs.

If we set aside the Barbarity and Customs of the Romans, as Heathens, and take
them as a Civil Government, we must allow they were the Pattern of the whole
World for Improvement and Increase of Arts and Learning, Civilizing and
Methodizing Nations and Countries Conquered by their Valor; and if this was
one of their great Cares, That consideration ought to move something. But to
the great Example of that Generous People, I Will add Three Arguments. (1.) It Is
Useful, and that as it is convenient for Carriages, which in a Trading Country
is a great help to Negoce, and promotes universal Correspondence, without which
our Inland Trade could not be managed. And under this Head I could name a
thousand Conveniences of a safe, pleasant, well-Repair'd Highway, both to the
Inhabitant and the Traveller; but I think it is needless. (2.) It Is easy. I
question not to make it appear it is easy, to put all the High Roads, especially
in England, in a noble Figure, Large, Dry, and Clean, well Drein'd and free
from Floods, unpassable Sloughs, deep Cartrouts, high Ridges, and all the
Inconveniences they now are full of; and when once done, much easier still to
be maintained so. (3.) It may be Cheaper, and the whole Assesment for the
Repairs of Highways for ever be Dropped, or Applied to other uses for the
Public Benefit.


Here I beg the Reader's Favor for a small Digression.

I am not Proposing this as an Undertaker, or setting a Price to the Public,
for which I will perform it like one of the Projectors I speak of; but laying
open a Project for the Performance, which whenever the Public Affairs will
admit our Governors to Consider of, will be found so feasible, that no question
they may find Undertakers enough for the Performance; and in this
Undertaking-Age I do not doubt but 'twou'd be easy at any time to procure
Persons at their own Charge to perform it for any single County, as a Pattern
and Experiment for the whole Kingdom.

The Proposal is as follows.

First, That an Act of Parliament be made, with Liberty for the Undertakers to
Dig and Trench, to cut down Hedges and Trees, or whatever is needful for
ditching, dreining and carrying off Water, cleaning, enlarging and levelling
the Roads, with Power to lay open or enclose Lands; to incroach into Lands,
dig, raise, and level Fences, plant and pull up Hedges or Trees, for the
enlarging, widening, and dreining the Highways, with Power to turn either the
Roads, or Watercourse, Rivers and Brooks, as by the Directors of the Works
shall be found needful, always allowing satisfaction to be first made to the
Owners of such Lands, either by assigning to them equivalent Lands, or Payment
in Money, the Value to be adjusted by Two indifferent Persons, to be Named by
the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper for the time being; and no Watercourse to
be turned from any Water-Mill, without Satisfaction first made both to the
Landlord and Tenant.

But before I proceed, I must say a word or two to this Article.

The Chief, and almost the Only Cause of the deepness and foulness of the
Roads, is occasioned by the standing Water, which for want of due care to draw
it off by scouring and opening Ditches and Dreins, and other Watercourse, and
clearing of Passages, soaks into the Earth, and softens it to such a degree,
that it cannot bear the weight of Horses and Carriages; to prevent which, the
Power to Dig, Trench, and Cut down, etc. mentioned above, will be of absolute
necessity: But because the liberty seems very large, and some may think it is
too great a Power to be granted to any Body of Men over their Neighbors: It Is
answered; (1.) It Is absolutely necessary, or the Work cannot be done; and the
doing of the Work is of much greater Benefit than the Damage can amount to.
(2.) Satisfaction to be made to the Owner, and that first too, before the
Damage be done, is an Unquestionable Equivalent; and Both together, I think,
are a very full Answer to any Objection in That case.


Besides this Act of Parliament, a Commission must be granted to Fifteen, at
least, in the Name of the Undertakers, to whom every County shall have Power to
join Ten, who are to Sit with the said Fifteen, so often and so long as the
said Fifteen do Sit for Affairs relating to that County; which Fifteen, or any
Seven of them, shall be Directors of the Works, to be advised by the said Ten,
or any Five of them, in matters of Right and Claim; and the said Ten to adjust
Differences in the Countries, and to have Right by Process to appeal in the
name either of Lords of Manors, or Privileges of Towns or Corporations, who
shall be either damaged or encroach'd upon by the said Work: All Appeals to be
heard and determined immediately by the said Lord Chancellor, or Commission
from him, that the Work may receive no Interruption.

This Commission shall give Power to the said Fifteen to press Wagons, Carts,
and Horses, Oxen, and Men, and detain them to work a certain Limited Time, and
within certain Limited Space of Miles from their own Dwellings, and at a
certain Rate of Payment: No Men, Horses, or Carts to be pressed against their
Consent, during the times of Hay-time, or Harvest; or upon Market-days, if the
Person aggrieved will make Affidavit he is obliged to be with his Horses or
Carts at the said Markets.

It is well known to all who have any knowledge of the Condition the Highways
in England now lie in, that in most places there is a convenient distance of
Land left open for traveling, either for driving of Cattle, or marching of
Troops of Horse, with perhaps as few Lanes or Defiles, as in any Countries: The
Cross-Roads, which are generally Narrow, are yet Broad enough in most places
for two Carriages to pass; but on the other hand, we have on most of the
High-Roads a great deal of waste-Land thrown in as it were for an Overplus to
the Highway; which though it be used of course by Cattle and Travelers on
occasion, is indeed no Benefit at all either to the Traveller as a Road, or to
the Poor as a Common, or to the Lord of the Manor as a Waste; upon it grows
neither Timber nor Grass, in any quantity answerable to the Land; but, tho to
no purpose, is trodden down, poach'd, and overrun by Drifts of Cattle in the
Winter, or spoiled with the Dust in the Summer: And this I have observed in
many parts of England to be as good Land as any of the Neighboring Enclosures,
as capable of Improvement, and to as good purpose.

These Lands only being enclosed and manured, leaving the Roads to Dimensions
without measure sufficient, are the Fund upon which I build the Prodigious
Stock of Money that must do this Work. These Lands, which I shall afterward
make an Essay to value, being enclosed, will be either saleable to raise Money,
or fit to exchange with those Gentlemen who must part with some Land where the
Ways are narrow: Always reserving a quantity of these Lands to be Let out to
Tenants; the Rent to be paid into the Public Stock or Bank of the Undertakers,
and to be reserved for keeping the Ways in the same Repair; and the said Bank
to forfeit the Lands if they are not so maintained.

Another Branch of the Stock must be Hands; for a Stock of Men is a Stock of
Money; to which purpose every County, City, Town, and Parish, shall be Rated at
a Set Price, equivalent to Eight Years Payment for the Repair of Highways;
which each County, etc. shall raise, not by Assessment in Money, but by
pressing of Men, Horses, and Carriages for the Work; the Men, Horses, etc. to
be employed by the Directors: In which case all Corporal Punishments, as of
Whippings, Stocks, Pillories, Houses of Correction, etc. might be easily
transmitted to a certain Number of Days Works on the Highways, and in
Consideration of this provision of Men, the Country should for ever after be
acquitted of any Contribution, either in Money or Work, for Repair of the
Highways, Building of Bridges excepted.

There lies some Popular Objection against this Undertaking; and the first is,
the great Controverted Point of England, Enclosure of the Common, which tends
to Depopulation, and Injures the Poor.

(2.) Who shall be Judges or Surveyors of the Work, to Oblige the Undertakers
to perform to a certain limited degree.

For the First; The Enclosure of the Common; A Clause that runs as far as to an
Incroachment upon Magna Charta, and a most considerable branch of the Property
of the Poor: I Answer it thus. (1.) The Lands we Enclose, are not such as from
which the Poor do indeed reap any Benefit, or at least any that is
considerable. (2.) The Bank and Public Stock, who are to Manage this great
Undertaking, will have so many little Labors to perform, and Offices to
bestow, that are fit only for Laboring Poor Persons to do, as will put them in
a condition to provide for the Poor who are so Injured, that can work; and to
those who cannot, may allow Pensions for Overseeing, Supervising, and the like,
which will be more than Equivalent. (3.) For Depopulations, the contrary should
be secured, by obliging the Undertakers, at such and such certain distances, to
erect Cottages, Two at least in a place, which would be useful to the Work, and
safety of the Traveller, to which should be an Allotment of Land, always
sufficient to invite the Poor Inhabitant, in which the Poor should be Tenant
for Life Gratis, doing Duty upon the Highway, as should be appointed; by
which, and many other Methods, the Poor should be great Gainers by the
Proposal, instead of being Injured. (4.) By this erecting of Cottages at proper
distances, a Man might Travel over all England as through a Street, where he
could never want, either Rescue from Thieves, or Directions for his way. (5.)
This very Undertaking once duly settled, might in a few Years so order it, that
there should be no Poor for the Common; and if so, What need of a Common for
the Poor? Of which in its proper place.


As to the second Objection, Who should oblige the Undertakers to the
Performance? (1.) I Answer, Their Commission and Charter should become Void,
and all their Stock Forfeit, and the Lands Enclosed and Unsold, remain as a
Pledge, which would be Security sufficient. (2.) The Ten Persons chosen out of
every County, should have Power to Inspect and Complain, and the Lord
Chancellor upon such Complaint, to make a Survey, and to determine by a Jury,
in which case on Default, they shall be obliged to proceed. (3.) The Lands
settled on the Bank shall be liable to be extended for the Uses mentioned, if
the same at any time be not maintained in the condition at first provided, and
the Bank to be amerc'd upon Complaint of the Country.


These and other Conditions, which on a Legal Settlement to be made by Wiser
Heads than mine, might be thought on, I do believe would form a Constitution so
firm, so fair, and so equally Advantageous to the Country, to the Poor, and to
the Public, as has not been put in practice in these latter Ages of the World.
To Discourse of this a little in general, and to instance in a Place, perhaps,
that has not its fellow in the Kingdom, the Parish of Islington in Middlesex;
there lies through this large Parish the greatest Road in England, and the most
frequented, especially by Cattle for Smithfield-Market; this great Road has so
many Branches, and lies for so long a way through the Parish, and withal has
the inconvenience of a Clayey Ground, and no Gravel at hand, that, modestly
speaking, the Parish is not able to keep it in Repair, by which means several
Cross-Roads in the Parish lie wholly Unpassable, and Carts and Horses, and Men
too, have been almost Buried in Holes and Sloughs, and the main Road it self
has for many Years lain in a very ordinary condition, which occasioned several
Motions in Parliament to Raise a Toll at Highgate, for the performance of what
it was impossible the Parish should do, and yet was of so absolute necessity to
be done; And is it not very probable the Parish of Islington would part with
all the waste Land upon their Roads, to be eased of the intolerable Assessment
for Repair of the Highway, and answer the Poor, who reap but a small Benefit
from it, some other way? And yet I am free to affirm, That for a Grant of
Waste, and almost useless Land, lying open to the Highway, those Lands to be
improved, as they might easily be, together with the Eight Years Assessment to
be provided in Workmen, a noble Magnificent Causeway might be Erected, with
Ditches on either side deep enough to receive the Water, and Dreins sufficient
to carry it off, which Causway should be Four Foot High at least, and from
Thirty to Forty Foot Broad, to reach from London to Barnet, paved in the
middle, to keep it Cop'd, and so supplied with Gravel, and other proper
Materials, as should secure it from Decay with small Repairing.

I hope no Man would be so weak now, as to imagine that by Lands lying open to
the Road, to be Assigned to the Undertakers, I should mean that all
Finchly-Common should be Enclosed and Sold for this Work; but least somebody
should start such a preposterous Objection, I think it is not improper to
mention, That wherever a Highway is to be carried over a Large Common,
Forest, or Waste without a Hedge on either hand for a certain distance, there
the several Parishes shall allot the Directors a certain quantity of the Common
to lie Parallel with the Road, at a proportioned number of Feet to the Length
and Breadth of the said Road; consideration also to be had to the Nature of the
Ground, or else giving them only room for the Road directly, shall suffer them
to Enclose in any one Spot so much of the said Common, as shall be equivalent
to the like quantity of Land lying by the Road; thus where the Land is good,
and the Materials for erecting a Causway near, the less Land may serve; and on
the contrary the more; but in general, allowing them the quantity of Land
proportioned to the length of the Causway, and Forty Rod in Breadth, though where
the Land is poor, as on Downs and Plains, the Proportion must be considered to
be adjusted by the Country.

Another Point for the Dimensions of Roads, should be adjusted; and the Breadth
of them, I think, cannot be less than thus:

From London every way 10 Miles the High Post-Road to be Built full 40 Foot in
Breadth, and 4 Foot High, the Ditches 8 Foot Broad, and 6 Foot Deep, and from
thence onward 30 Foot, and so in Proportion.

Cross Roads to be 20 Foot Broad, and Ditches Proportioned; no Lanes and Passes
less than 9 Foot without Ditches.

The Middle of the High Causeways to be Paved with Stone, Chalk, or Gravel, and
kept always Two Foot Higher than the Sides, that the Water might have a free
course into the Ditches, and Persons kept in constant Employ to fill up Holes,
let out Water, open Dreins, and the like, as there should be occasion: A proper
Work for Highwaymen, and such Malefactors, as might on those Services be
exempt'd from the Gallows.

It may here be Objected, That Eight Years Assessment to be demanded down, is
too much in reason to expect any of the Poorer sort can pay; as for Instance;
If a Farmer who keeps a Team of Horse be at the common Assessment, to Work a
Week, it must not be put so hard upon any Man, as to Work Eight Weeks together.
It Is easy to Answer this Objection.

So many as ate wanted, must be had; if a Farmer's Team cannot be spared
without prejudice to him so long together, he may spare it at sundry times, or
agree to be Assess'd, and pay the Assessment at sundry Payments; and the Bank
may make it as easy to them as they please.

Another Method, however, might be found to fix this Work at once; As suppose a
Bank be settled for the Highways of the County of Middlesex, which as they are,
without doubt, the most used of any in the Kingdom, so also they require the
more Charge, and in some Parts lie in the worst Condition of any in the Kingdom.

If the Parliament fix the Charge of the Survey of the Highways upon a Bank to
be Appointed for that Purpose, for a certain term of Years, the Bank
Undertaking to do the Work, or to Forfeit the said Settlement.

As thus:

Suppose the Tax on Land, and Tenements for the whole County of Middlesex,
does, or should be so ordered, as it might amount to 20000 l. per Ann. more or
less, which it now does, and much more, including the Work of the Farmer's
Teams, which must be accounted as Money, and is equivalent to it, with some
Allowance to be Rated for the City of London, etc. who do enjoy the Benefit,
and make the most use of the said Roads, both for carrying of Goods, and
bringing Provisions to the City, and therefore in reason ought to Contribute
toward the Highways; for it is a most unequal thing, that the Road from
Highgate to Smithfield-Market, by which the whole City is, in a manner,
supplied with Live Cattle, and the Road by those Cattle horribly spoiled,
should lie all upon that one Parish of Islington to Repair; wherefore I Will
suppose a Rate for the Highways to be gathered through the City of London of
10000 l. per Ann. more; which may be Appointed to be paid by Carriers, Drovers,
and all such as keep Teams, Horses, or Coaches, and the like, or many ways, as
is most Equal and Reasonable; the waste Lands in the said County, which by the
Consent of the Parishes, Lords of the Manors, and Proprietors, shall be
allowed to the Undertakers when Enclosed and Let out, may (the Land in
Middlesex generally Letting high) amount to 5000 l. per Ann. more. If then an
Act of Parliament be procured to settle the Tax of 30000 l. per Ann. for Eight
Years, most of which will be Levi'd in Workmen, and not in Money, and the Waste
Lands for ever: I dare be bold to offer, That the Highways for the whole
County of Middlesex should be put into the following Form, and the 5000 l. per
Ann. Land be bound to remain as a Security to maintain them so, and the County
be never Burdened with any further Tax for the Repair of the Highways.

And that I may not Propose a Matter in General, like begging the Question,
without Demonstration, I shall enter into the Particulars, How it may be
performed, and that under these following Heads of Articles. (1.) What I
Propose to do to the Highways. (2.) What the Charge will be. (3.) How to be
Raised. (4.) What Security for Performance. (5.) What Profit to the Undertaker.


(1.) What I Propose to do to the Highways.

I Answer First, Not Repair them; And yet Secondly, Not alter them, that is,
not alter the Course they run.

But perfectly Build them as a Fabric. And to descend to the Particulars, it is
first necessary to Note, which are the Roads I mean, and their Dimensions.

First, The High Post-Roads, and they are for the County of Middlesex as
follows. Miles From London to Stanes, which is 15 Colebrook is from Hounslow 05
Uxbridge 15 Bushy the Old Street-way 10 Barnet, or near it 09 Waltham-Cross in
Ware Road 10 Bow 02 67

Besides these, there are Cross-Roads, By-Roads, and Lanes, which must also be
looked after, and that some of them may be put into Condition, others may be
wholly slighted and shut up, or made Drift-ways, Bridle-ways, or Foot-ways, as
may be thought convenient by the Countries.

The Cross-Roads of most Repute are as follows: Miles From London to Hackney,
Old Ford, and Bow 05 Hackney Dalston and Islington 02 Ditto Hornsy,
Muzzle-Hill, to Whetston 08 Tottenham The Chase, South-Gate, etc. called
Greenlanes 06 Enfield-Wash Enfield-Town, Whetston, Totteridge, to Egworth 10
London Hamstead, Hendon, and Edgworth 08 Edgworth Stanmore, to Pinner, to
Uxbridge 08 London Harrow and Pinner-Green 11 London Chelsea, Fullham 04
Brantford Thistleworth, Twittenham, and Kingston 06 Kingston Stanes, Colebrook
and Uxbridge 17 Ditto Chersey-Bridge 05 90 Overplus Miles 50 140

And because there may be many Parts of the Cross-Roads which cannot be
accounted in the Number abovementioned, or may slip my knowledge or memory, I
allow an overplus of 50 Miles, to be added to the 90 Miles above, which
together makes the Cross-Roads of Middlesex to be 140 Miles.

For the By-Lanes, such as may be slighted need nothing but to be ditch'd up;
such as are for private use of Lands, for carrying off Corn, and driving
Cattle, are to be looked after by private hands.

But of the last sort, not to be accounted by Particulars, in the small County
of Middlesex, we cannot allow less in Cross By-lanes, from Village to Village,
and from Dwelling-Houses which stand out of the way to the Roads, than 1000
Miles

So in the whole County I reckon up, Miles Of the High Post-Road 0067 Of
Cross-Roads less Public 0140 Of By-Lanes and Passes 1000 1207

These are the Roads I mean, and thus divided under their several denominations.

To the Question, What I would do to them? I Answer, (1.) For the 67 Miles of
High Post-Road, I Propose to throw up a firm strong Causway well bottomed, 6
Foot high in the middle, and 4 Foot on the side, faced with Brick or Stone, and
crowned with Gravel, Chalk, or Stone, as the several Countries they are made
through will afford, being 44 Foot in Breadth, with Ditches on either side 8
Foot Broad and 4 Foot Deep; so the whole Breadth will be 60 Foot, if the Ground
will permit.

At the end of every Two Miles, or such like convenient distances, shall be a
Cottage Erected, with Half an Acre of Ground allowed, which shall be given
Gratis, with 1 s. per Week Wages, to such Poor Man of the Parish, as shall be
approved, who shall Once, at least, every day, view his Walk, to open Passages
for the Water to run into the Ditches, to fill up Holes or soft Places.

Two Riders shall be allowed to be always moving the Rounds, to view every
thing out of Repair, and make Report to the Directors, and to see that the
Cottagers do their Duty.

(2.) For the 140 Miles of Cross-Road, a like Causway to be made, but of
different Dimensions, the Breadth 20 Foot, if the Ground will allow it, the
Ditches 4 Foot Broad, 3 Foot Deep, the Height in the middle 3 Foot, and on the
sides 1 Foot, or 2 where it may be needful; to be also crowned with Gravel, and
1 s. per Week to be allowed to the Poor of every Parish, the Constables to be
Bound to find a Man to Walk on the Highway every Division, for the same
Purpose as the Cottagers do on the Greater Roads.

Posts to be set up at every turning to Note whither it goes, for the Direction
of Strangers, and how many Miles distant.

(3.) For a 1000 Miles By-Lanes, only good and sufficient Care to keep them in
Repair as they are, and to carry the Water off by clearing and cutting the
Ditches, and laying Materials where it is wanted.




This is what I Propose to do to them; and what if once performed, I suppose
all People would own to be an Undertaking both Useful and Honorable.

(2.) The Second Question I Propose to give an Account of, is, What the Charge
will be.

Which I account thus;

The Work of the great Causway I Propose, shall not Cost less than 10 s. per
Foot, supposing Materials to be Bought, Carriage and Men's Labor to be all
Hired, which for 67 Miles in Length, is no less than the Sum of 176880 Pounds;
as thus,

Every Mile accounted at 1760 Yards, and 3 Foot to the Yard, is 5280 Foot,
which at 10 s. per Foot, is 2640 l. per Mile, and that again Multiplied by 67,
makes the sum of 176880, into which I include the Charge of Watercourse,
Mills to throw off Water where needful, Dreins, etc.

To this Charge must be added, Ditching to Enclose Land for 30 Cottages, and
Building 30 Cottages at 40 l. each, which is 1200 l.

The Work of the smaller Causway I Propose to finish at the Rate of 12 d. per
Foot, which being for 140 Miles in Length, at 5280 Foot per Mile, amounts to
36960 l.

Ditching, Dreining, and Repairing 1000 Miles, supposed at 3 s. per Rod, as for
320000 Rod, is 48000 l. which added to the Two former Accounts, is thus, l. The
High Post-Roads, or the Great Cawsey 178080 The small Cawsey 036960 By Lanes,
etc. 048000 263040

If I were to Propose some Measures for the easing this Charge, I could,
perhaps, lay a Scheme down how it may be performed for less than one half of
this Charge.

As first, By a grant of the Court at the Old Bailey, whereby all such Criminals
as are Condemned to Die for smaller Crimes, may instead of Transportation be
Ordered a Year's Work on the Highways; others instead of Whippings, a
proportioned Time, and the like; which would, by a moderate computation,
provide us generally a supply of 200 Workmen, and coming in as fast as they go
off; and let the Overseers alone to make them Work.

Secondly, By an Agreement with the Guinea-Company to furnish 200 Negroes, who
are generally Persons that do a great deal of Work; and all these are Subsisted
very reasonably out of a Public Storehouse.

Thirdly, By Carts and Horses to be Bought, not Hired, with a few Able Carters;
and to the other a few Workmen that have Judgment to Direct the rest; and thus
I question not the Great Causway shall be done for 4 s. per Foot Charge; but of
this by the by.

Fourthly, A Liberty to ask Charirities and Benevolences to the Work.

(3.) To the Question, How this Money shall be Raised? I think if the
Parliament settle the Tax on the County for Eight Years, at 30000 l. per Ann.
no Man need ask, how it shall be Raised, -- It will be easy enough to Raise the
Money; and no Parish can grudge to pay a little larger Rate for such a Term, on
condition never to be Taxed for the Highways any more.

Eight Years Assessment at 30000 l. per Ann. is enough to afford to Borrow the
Money by way of Anticipation, if need be, the Fund being secured by Parliament,
and appropriated to that Use and no other.

As to what Security for Performance:

The Lands which are Enclosed may be appropriated by the same Act of Parliament
to the Bank and Undertakers, upon condition of Performance, and to be Forfeit
to the use of the several Parishes to which they belong, in case upon
Presentation by the Grand Juries, and reasonable Time given, any part of the
Roads in such and such Parishes, be not kept and maintained in that Posture
they are Proposed to be. Now the Lands thus settled are an eternal Security to
the Country, for the keeping the Roads in Repair; because they will always be
of so much Value over the needful Charge, as will make it worth while to the
Undertakers to preserve their Title to them; and the Tenure of them being so
precarious, as to be liable to Forfeiture on Default, they will always be
careful to uphold the Causways.

Lastly, What Profit to the Undertakers? For we must allow them to Gain, and
that considerably, or no Man would undertake such a Work.

To this I propose, First,

During the Work allow them out of the Stock 3000 l. per Ann. for Management.

After the Work is finished, so much of the 5000 l. per Ann. as can be saved,
and the Roads kept in good Repair, let be their own; and if the Lands Secured
be not of the Value of 5000 l. a Year, let so much of the Eight Years Tax be
set apart as may Purchase Land to make them up; if they come to more, let the
Benefit be to the Adventurers.

It may be Objected here, That a Tax of 30000 l. for Eight Years will come in
as fast as it can well be laid out, and so no Anticipations will be requisite;
for the whole Work Proposed cannot be probably finished in less Time; and if
so, l. The Charge of the Country amounts to 240000 The Lands saved Eight Years
Revenue 040000 280000 which is 13000 l. more than the Charge; and if the Work
be done so much Cheaper, as is mentioned, the Profit to the Undertaker will be
Unreasonable.

To this I say, I would have the Undertakers bound to accept the Sallary of
3000 l. per Ann. for Management, and if a whole Years Tax can be spared, either
leave it Unrais'd upon the Country, or put it in Bank to be improved against
any occasion, of Building, perhaps, a great Bridge; or some very wet Season, or
Frost, may so Damnify the Works, as to make them require more than ordinary
Repair. But the Undertakers should make no private Advantage of such an
Overplus, there might be ways enough found for it.

Another Objection lies against the Possibility of Enclosing the Lands upon the
Waste, which generally belongs to some Manor, whose different Tenures may be
so cross, and so otherwise encumbred, that even the Lord of those Manors,
though they were willing, could not Convey them.

This may be Answered in General, That an Act of Parliament is Omnipotent with
respect to Titles and Tenures of Land, and can Empower Lords and Tenants to
Consent to what else they could not; as to Particulars, they cannot be Answered
till they are Proposed; but there is no doubt but an Act of Parliament may
adjust it all in one Head.

What a Kingdom would England be if this were performed in all the Counties of
it! and yet I believe it is feasible, even in the worst. I have narrowly
observed all the Considerable Ways in that unpassable County of Sussex, which
especially in some parts in the Wild, as they very properly call it, of the
County, hardly admits the Country People to Travel to Markets in Winter, and
makes Corn dear at Market because it cannot be brought, and cheap at the
Farmer's House because he cannot carry it to Market; yet even in that County
would I undertake to carry on this Proposal, and that to great Advantage, if
backed with the Authority of an Act of Parliament.

I have seen in that horrible Country the Road 60 to 100 Yards Broad, lie from
side to side all Poach'd with Cattle, the Land of no manner of Benefit, and yet
no going with a Horse, but at every step up to the Shoulders, full of Sloughs
and Holes, and covered with standing-water. It costs them incredible Sums of
Money to Repair them; and the very Places that are mended, would fright a young
Traveller to go over them: The Romans Mastered this Work, and by a firm
Causeway made a Highway quite through this deep Country, through Darkin in
Surry to Stansted, and thence to Okeley, and so on to Arundel; its Name tells
us what it was made of; for it was called Stonestreet, and many visible parts
of it remain to this day.

Now would any Lord of a Manor refuse to allow 40 Yards in breadth out of that
Road I mentioned, to have the other 20 made into a Firm, Fair, and Pleasant
Causeway over that Wilderness of a Country?

Or would not any man acknowledge, That putting this Country into a condition
for Carriages and Travelers to pass, would be a great Work? The Gentlemen
would find the Benefit of it in the Rent of their Land, and Price of their
Timber; the Country People would find the difference in the Sale of their
Goods, which now they cannot carry beyond the first Market Town, and hardly
thither; and the whole County would reap an Advantage an hundred to one greater
than the Charge of it. And since the Want we feel of any Convenience is
generally the first Motive to Contrivance for a Remedy, I wonder no man ever
thought of some Expedient for so considerable a Defect.

Of ASSURANCES.
ASSURANCES among Merchants I believe may plead Prescription, and has been of
use time out of mind in Trade; tho perhaps never so much a Trade as now.

It Is a Compact among Merchants. Its beginning being an Accident to Trade, and
arose from the Disease of Men's Tempers, who having run larger Adventures in a
single Bottom than afterward they found convenient, grew fearful and uneasy;
and discovering their uneasiness to others, who, perhaps, had no Effects in the
same Vessel, they offer to bear part of the Hazard for part of the Profit;
Convenience made this a Custom, and Custom brought it into a Method, till at
last it becomes a Trade.

I cannot question the Lawfulness of it, since all Risque in Trade is for Gain;
and when I am necessitated to have a greater Cargo of Goods in such or such a
Bottom, than my Stock can afford to lose, another may surely offer to go a Part
with me; and as it is just if I give another part of the Gain, he should run
part of the Risque, so it is as just, that if he runs part of my Risque, he
should have part of the Gain. Some Object the disparity of the Premio to the
Hazard, when the Ensurer runs the Risque of 100 l. on the Seas from Jamaica to
London for 40 s. which, say they, is preposterous and unequal. Though this
Objection is hardly worth Answering to Men of Business, yet it looks something
fair to them that know no better; and for the Information of such, I trouble
the Reader with a few Heads.

First, They must consider the Ensurer is out no Stock.

Secondly, It is but one Risque the Ensurer runs, whereas the Assured has had a
Risque out, a Risque of Debts abroad, a Risque of a Market, and a Risque of his
Factor, and has a Risque of a Market to come, and therefore ought to have an
answerable Profit.

Thirdly, If it has been a Trading Voyage, perhaps, the Adventurer has Paid
Three or Four such Premio's, which sometimes make the Ensurer clear more by a
Voyage, than the Merchant; I my self have Paid 100 l. Ensurances in those small
Premio's on a Voyage I have not gotten 50 l. by; and I suppose I am not the
first that has done so neither.

This way of Assuring has also, as other Arts of Trade have, suffered some
Improvement (if I may be allowed that Term) in our Age; and the first step upon
it, was an Ensurance-Office for Houses to Ensure them from Fire; Common Fame
gives the Project to Dr. Barebone; a Man, I suppose, better known as a Builder
than a Physician. Whether it were his, or whose it was, I do not enquire; it
was settled on a Fund of Ground-Rents, to Answer in case of Loss, and met with
very good Acceptance.

But it was soon followed by another, by way of Friendly Society; where every
one who Subscribe, pay their Quota to Build up any Man's House who is a
Contributor, if it shall happen to be Burnt. I will not decide which is the Best,
or which Succeeded best, but I believe the latter brings in most Money to the
Contriver.

Only one Benefit I cannot omit which they reap from these Two Societies who
are not concerned in either, That if any Fire happen, whether in Houses Ensur'd
or not Ensur'd, they have each of them a set of Lusty Fellows, generally
Watermen, who being immediately called up, wherever they live, by Watchmen
Appointed, are, it must be confessed, very Active and Diligent in helping to
put out the Fire.

As to any further Improvement to be made upon Assurances in Trade, no question
there may, and I doubt not but on Payment of a small Duty to the Government,
the King might be made the General Ensurer of all Foreign Trade: Of which more
under another Head.

I am of the opinion also, that an Office of Ensurance Erected to Ensure the
Titles of Lands, in an Age where they are so precarious as now, might be a
Project not unlikely to succeed, if Established on a good Fund. But I shall say
no more to that, because it seems to be a Design in hand by some Persons in
Town, and is indeed no Thought of my own.

Ensuring of Life I cannot admire; I shall say nothing to it; but that in Italy
where Stabbing and Poisoning is so much in Vogue, something may be said for it,
and on contingent Annuities; and yet I never knew the thing much approved of on
any account.

Of FRIENDLY-SOCIETIES.
ANother Branch of Ensurance, is by Contribution, or (to borrow the Term from
that beforementioned) Friendly-Societies; which, is in short, a Number of
People entering into a Mutual Compact to Help one another, in case any Disaster
or Distress fall upon them.

If Mankind could agree, as these might be Regulated, all things which have
Casualty in them, might be Secured. But one thing is Particularly required in
this way of Assurances; None can be admitted, but such whose Circumstances are,
at least in some degree, alike, and so Mankind must be sorted into Classes; and
as their Contingences differ, every different Sort may be a Society upon even
Terms; for the Circumstances of People, as to Life, differ extremely by the Age
and Constitution of their Bodies, and difference of Employment; as he that
lives on shore, against him that goes to Sea, or a Young Man against an Old
Man; or a Shopkeeper against a Soldier, are unequal; I don't pretend to
determine the Controverted Point of Predestination, the Foreknowledge and
Decrees of Providence; perhaps, if a Man be Decreed to be Killed in the
Trenches, the same Foreknowledge Ordered him to List himself a Soldier that it
might come to pass; and the like of a Seaman; but this I am sure, speaking of
Second Causes, a Seaman or a Soldier is subject to more contingent hazards than
other Men, and therefore are not upon equal Terms to form such a Society; nor
is an Annuity on the Life of such a Man worth so much as it is upon other Men;
therefore if a Society should agree together to Pay the Executor of every
Member so much after the Decease of the said Member, the Seamens Executors
would most certainly have an Advantage, and receive more than they Pay. So that
it is necessary to sort the World into Parcels, Seamen with Seamen, Soldiers
with Soldiers, and the like.

Nor is this a new thing; the Friendly Society must not pretend to assume to
themselves the Contrivance of the Method, or think us guilty of borrowing from
them, when we draw this into other Branches; for I know nothing is taken from
them but the bare word, Friendly-Society, which they cannot pretend to be any
considerable piece of Invention neither.

I can refer them to the very individual Practice in other things, which claims
prescription beyond the beginning of the last Age, and that is in our Marshes
and Fens in Essex, Kent, and the Isle of Ely; where great Quantities of Land
being with much Pains and a vast Charge recovered out of the Seas and Rivers,
and maintained with Banks (which they call Walls) the Owners of those Lands
agree to Contribute to the keeping up those Walls, and keeping out the Sea,
which is all one with a Friendly-Society; and if I have a Piece of Land in any
Level or Marsh, though it bounds no where on the Sea or River, yet I pay my
Proportion to the Maintenance of the said Wall or Bank; and if at any time the
Sea breaks in, the Damage is not laid upon the Man in whose Land the Breach
happened, unless it was by his neglect, but it lies on the whole Land, and is
called a Level-Lot.

Again, I have known it practiced in Troops of Horse, especially when it was so
ordered that the Troopers Mounted themselves; where every private Trooper has
agreed to Pay, perhaps, 2 d. per diem out of his Pay into a Public Stock,
which Stock was employed to Remount any of the Troop who by Accident should
lose his Horse.

Again, The Sailors Contribution to the Chest at Chatham, is another
Friendly-Society; and more might be named.

To argue against the Lawfulness of this, would be to cry down common Equity,
as well as Charity; for as it is kind that my Neighbor should Relieve me if I
fall into Distress or Decay; so it is but Equal he should do so if I agreed to
have done the same for him; and if God Almighty has Commanded us to Relieve and
Help one another in Distress, sure it must be commendable to bind our selves by
Agreement to Obey that Command; nay, it seems to be a Project that we are led
to by the Divine Rule, and has such a Latitude in it, that, for ought I know,
as I said, all the Disasters in the World might be prevented by it, and Mankind
be secured from all the Miseries, Indigences, and Distresses that happen in the
World. In which I crave leave to be a little Particular.

First, General Peace might be secured all over the World by it, if all the
Powers agreed to suppress him that Usurped or Encroach'd upon his Neighbor.
All the Contingences of Life might be fenced against by this Method, (as Fire
is already) as Thieves, Floods by Land, Storms by Sea, Losses of all Sorts, and
Death it self, in a manner, by making it up to the Survivor.

I shall begin with the Seamen; for as their Lives are subject to more hazards
than others, they seem to come first in view.

Of Seamen.
Sailors are Les Enfans Perdue, the Forlorn hope of the World; they are Fellows
that bid Defiance to Terror, and maintain a constant War with the Elements; who
by the Magic of their Art, Trade in the very confines of Death, and are always
posted within shot, as I may say, of the Grave: It Is true, their familiarity
with Danger makes them despise it, for which, I hope, no body will say they are
the wiser; and Custom has so hardened them, that we find them the worst of Men,
though always in view of their last Moment.

I have observed one great Error in the Custom of England, relating to these
sort of People, and which this way of Friendly-Society would be a Remedy for.

If a Seaman who Enters himself, or is Pressed into the King's Service, be by
any Accident Wounded or Disabled, to Recompense him for the Loss, he receives a
Pension during Life, which the Sailors call Smart-Money, and is proportioned to
their Hurt, as for the Loss of an Eye, Arm, Leg, or Finger, and the like; and
as it is a very Honorable thing, so it is but reasonable, That a Poor Man who
Loses his Limbs (which are his Estate) in the Service of the Government, and is
thereby disabled from his Labor to get his Bread, should be provided for, and
not suffered to Beg or Starve for want of those Limbs he lost in the Service of
his Country.

But if you come to the Seamen in the Merchants Service, not the least
Provision is made; which has been the Loss of many a good Ship, with many a
Rich Cargo, which would otherwise have been Saved.

And the Sailors are in the Right of it too: For Instance; A Merchant Ship
coming home from the Indies, perhaps very Rich, meets with a Privateer (not so
Strong but that She might Fight him, and perhaps get off); the Captain calls up
his Crew, tells them, Gentlemen, You see how it is, I don't question but we may
Clear our selves of this Caper, if you will Stand by Me. One of the Crew, as
willing to Fight as the rest, and as far from a Coward as the Captain, but
endowed with a little more Wit than his Fellows, Replies, Noble Captain, We are
all willing to Fight, and don't question but to Beat him off; but here is the
Case, If we are Taken, we shall be set on Shore, and then sent Home, and Lose,
perhaps, our Clothes, and a little Pay; but if we Fight and Beat the Privateer,
perhaps Half a Score of us may be Wounded and Lose our Limbs, and then we are
Undone and our Families; if you will Sign an Obligation to us, That the Owners,
or Merchants, shall allow a Pension to such as are Maimed, that we may not
Fight for the Ship, and go a Begging our selves, we will bring off the Ship, or
Sink by her side, otherwise I am not willing to Fight, for my part. The Captain
cannot do this; so they Strike, and the Ship and Cargo is Lost.

If I should turn this supposed Example into a real History, and Name the Ship
and the Captain that did so, it would be too plain to be contradicted.

Wherefore, for the Encouragement of Sailors in the Service of the Merchant, I
would have a Friendly-Society Erected for Seamen; wherein all Sailors, or
Seafaring-men, Entering their Names, Places of Abode, and the Voyages they go
upon, at an Office of Ensurance for Seamen, and Paying there a certain small
Quarteridge, of 1 s. per Quarter, should have a Sealed Certificate from the
Governors of the said Office, for the Articles hereafter mentioned.

(1.) If any such Seaman, either in Fight, or by any other Accident at Sea,
come to be disabled, he should receive from the said Office the following Sums
of Money, either in Pension for Life, or Ready Money, as he pleased. l. l. For
the Loss of An Eye 25 or 2 Per Ann. for Life. Both Eyes 100 8 One Leg 50 4 Both
Legs 80 6 Right Hand 80 6 Left Hand 50 4 Right Arm 100 8 Left Arm 80 6 Both
Hands 160 12 Both Arms 200 16 Any Broken Arm, or Leg, or Thigh, toward the
Cure 10 l. If taken by the Turks, 50 l. toward his Ransom. If he become Infirm
and Unable to go to Sea, or Maintain himself, by Age or Sickness, 6 l. per Ann.
To their Wives if they are Killed or Drowned, 50 l.

In Consideration of this, every Seaman Subscribing to the Society, shall Agree
to Pay to the Receipt of the said Office, his Quota of the Sum to be Paid,
whenever, and as often as such Claims are made; the Claims to be Entered into
the Office, and upon sufficient Proof made, the Governors to Regulate the
Division, and Publish it in Print.

For Example:

Suppose 4000 Seamen Subscribe to this Society, and after Six Months, for no
Man should Claim sooner than Six Months, a Merchant's Ship having Engaged a
Privateer, there comes several Claims together: As thus; l. A Was Wounded and
Lost one Leg 50 B Blown up with Powder, and has Lost an Eye 25 C Had a Great
Shot took off his Arm 100 D With a Splinter had an Eye struck out 25 200 E Was
Killed with a Great Shot, to be paid to his Wife 50 250

The Governors hereupon settle the Claim of these Persons, and make
Publication, That whereas such and such Seamen, Members of the Society, have in
an Engagement with a French Privateer, been so and so Hurt, their Claims upon
the Office, by the Rules and Agreements of the said Office, being adjusted by
the Governors, amounts to 250 l. which being equally divided among the
Subscribers, comes to 1 s. 3 d. each; which all Persons that are Subscribers to
the said Office are desired to Pay in, for their respective Subscriptions, that
the said Wounded Persons may be Relieved accordingly, as they expect to be
Relieved, if the same, or the like Casualty should befall them.

It Is but a small matter for a Man to Contribute, if he gave 1 s. 3 d. out of
his Wages to Relieve Five Wounded Men of his own Fraternity, but at the same
time to be assured that if he is Hurt or Maimed he shall have the same Relief,
it is a thing so rational, that hardly any thing but a Harebrain'd Fellow that
thinks of nothing, would omit Entering himself into such an Office.

I shall not enter further into this Affair, because, perhaps, I may give the
Proposal to some Persons who may set it on foot; and then the World may see the
Benefit of it by the Execution.

II. For Widows.
The same Method of Friendly-Society I conceive would be a very proper Proposal
for Widows.

We have abundance of Women who have been Bred well, and Lived well, Ruined in
a few Years, and, perhaps, left Young, with a House full of Chidren, and
nothing to Support them; which falls generally upon the Wives of the Inferior
Clergy, or of Shopkeepers and Artificers.

They Marry Wives with perhaps 300 l. to 1000 l. Portion, and can settle no
Jointure upon them; either they are Extravagant and Idle, and Waste it, or
Trade Decays, or Losses, or a thousand Contingences happen to bring a Tradesman
to Poverty, and he Breaks; the Poor Young Woman, it may be, has Three or Four
Children, and is driven to a thousand shifts, while he lies in the Mint or
Friars under the Dilemma of a Statute of Bankrupt; but if he Dies, then she is
absolutely Undone, unless she has Friends to go to.

Suppose an Office to be Erected, to be called An Office of Ensurance for
Widows, upon the following Conditions:

Two thousand Women, or their Husbands for them, Enter their Names into a
Register to be kept for that purpose, with the Names, Age, and Trade of their
Husbands, with the Place of their Abode, Paying at the time of their Entering 5
s. down with 1 s. 4 d. per Quarter, which is to the setting up and support of
an Office with Clerks, and all proper Officers for the same; for there is no
maintaining such without Charge; they receive every one of them a Certificate,
Sealed by the Secretary of the Office, and Signed by the Governors, for the
Articles hereafter mentioned.

If any one of the Women become a Widow at any time after Six Months from the
Date of her Subscription, upon due Notice given, and Claim made at the Office
in form, as shall be directed, she shall receive within Six Months after such
Claim made, the Sum of 500 l. in Money, without any Deductions, saving some
small Fees to the Officers, which the Trustees must settle, that they may be
known.

In Consideration of this, every Woman so Subscribing, Obliges her self to Pay
as often as any Member of the Society becomes a Widow, the due Proportion or
Share allotted to her to Pay, toward the 500 l. for the said Widow, provided
her Share does not exceed the Sum of 5 s.

No Seaman or Soldiers Wives to be accepted into such a Proposal as this, on
the account beforementioned, because the Contingences of their Lives are not
equal to others, unless they will admit this general Exception, supposing they
do not Die out of the Kingdom.

It might also be an Exception, That if the Widow, that Claimed, had really,
bona fide, left her by her Husband to her own use, clear of all Debts and
Legacies, 2000 l. she should have no Claim; the Intent being to Aid the Poor,
not add to the Rich. But there lies a great many Objections against such an
Article: As (1.) It may tempt some to Forswear themselves. (2.) People will
Order their Wills so as to Defraud the Exception.


One Exception must be made; and that is, Either very Unequal Matches, as when
a Woman of Nineteen Marries an Old Man of Seventy; or Women who have Infirm
Husbands, I mean known and publicly so. To remedy which, Two things are to be
done. (1.) The Office must have moving Officers without doors, who shall inform
themselves of such matters, and if any such Circumstances appear, the Office
should have 14 days time to return their Money, and declare their Subscriptions
Void. (2.) No Woman whose Husband had any visible Distemper, should claim under
a Year after her Subscription.


One grand Objection against this Proposal, is, How you will oblige People to
Pay either their Subscription, or their Quarteridge.

To this I Answer, By no compulsion (though that might be performed too) but
altogether voluntary; only with this Argument to move it, that if they do not
continue their Payments, they lose the Benefit of their past Contributions.

I know it lies as a fair Objection against such a Project as this, That the
number of Claims are so uncertain, That no Body knows what they engage in, when
they Subscribe, for so many may Die Annually out of Two thousand, as may make
my Payment 20 or 25 l. per Ann. and if a Woman happen to Pay that for Twenty
Years, though she receives the 500 l. at last she is a great Loser; but if she
dies before her Husband, she has lessened his Estate considerably, and brought
a great Loss upon him.

First, I say to this, That I would have such a Proposal as this be so fair and
so easy, that if any Person who had Subscribed, found the Payments too high,
and the Claims fall too often, it should be at their liberty at any time, upon
Notice given, to be Released, and stand Obliged no longer; and if so, Volenti
non fit injuria; every one knows best what their own Circumstances will bear.

In the next Place, because Death is a Contingency, no Man can directly
calculate, and all that Subscribe must take the hazard; yet that a Prejudice
against this Notion may not be built on wrong grounds, let us examine a little
the probable hazard, and see how many shall die Annually out of 2000
Subscribers, accounting by the common proportion of Burials, to the number of
the Living.

Sir William Petty in his Political Arithmetic, by a very Ingenious
Calculation, brings the account of Burials in London, to be 1 in 40 Annually,
and proves it by all the proper Rules of proportioned Computation; and I Will
take my Scheme from thence.

If then One in Forty of all the People in England Die, that supposes Fifty to
Die every Year out of our Two Thousand Subscribers; and for a Woman to
Contribute 5 s. to every one, would certainly be to Agree to Pay 12 l. 10 s.
per Ann. upon her Husband's Life, to receive 500 l. when he Di'd, and lose it
if she Di'd first; and yet this would not be a Hazard beyond reason too great
for the Gain.

But I shall offer some Reasons to prove this to be impossible in our Case;
First, Sir William Petty allows the City of London to contain about a Million
of People, and our Yearly Bill of Mortality never yet amounted to 25000 in the
most Sickly Years we have had, Plague Years excepted, sometimes but to 20000,
which is but One in Fifty: Now it is to be considered here, that Children and
Ancient People make up, one time with another, at least one third of our Bills
of Mortality; and our Assurances lies upon none but the Midling Age of the
People, which is the only Age wherein Life is any thing steady; and if that be
allowed, there cannot Die by his Computation, above One in Eighty of such
People every Year; but because I would be sure to leave room for Casualty, I Will
allow One in Fifty shall Die out of our Number Subscribed.

Secondly, It must be allowed, that our Payments falling due only on the Death
of Husbands, this One in Fifty must not be reckoned upon the Two thousand; for
it is to be supposed at least as many Women shall Die as Men, and then there is
nothing to Pay; so that One in Fifty upon One Thousand, is the most that I can
suppose shall Claim the Contribution in a Year, which is Twenty Claims a Year,
at 5 s. each, and is 5 l. per Ann. and if a Woman Pays this for Twenty Year,
and Claims at last, she is Gainer enough, and no extraordinary Loser if she
never Claims at all: And I verily believe any Office might Undertake to Demand
at all Adventures not above 6 l. per Ann. and secure the Subscriber 500 l. in
case she come to Claim as a Widow.

I forbear being more particular on this Thought, having occasion to be larger
in other Prints; the Experiment being resolved upon by some Friends, who are
pleased to think this too useful a Project not to be put in execution; and
therefore I refer the Reader to the Public Practice of it.

I have named these two Cases as special Experiments of what might be done by
Assurances in way of Friendly Society; and I believe I might without Arrogance
affirm, That the same Thought might be improved into Methods that should
prevent the General Misery and Poverty of Mankind, and at once secure us
against Beggars, Parish-Poor, Almshouses, and Hospitals; and by which, not a
Creature so Miserable, or so Poor, but should claim Subsistence as their Due,
and not ask it of Charity.

I cannot believe any Creature so wretchedly base, as to Beg of mere choice,
but either it must proceed from Want, or sordid prodigious Covetousness; and
thence I affirm, There can be no Beggar, but he ought to be either Relieved, or
Punished, or both. If a man begs for mere Covetousness, without Want, it is a
baseness of Soul so extremely sordid, as ought to be used with the utmost
Contempt, and punished with the Correction due to a Dog. If he begs for Want,
that Want is procured by Slothfulness and Idleness, or by Accident; if the
latter, he ought to be relieved; if the former, he ought to be punished for the
Cause, but at the same time relieved also; for no man ought to starve, let his
Crime be what it will.

I shall proceed therefore to a Scheme, by which all Mankind, be he never so
mean, so poor, so unable, shall gain for himself a Just Claim to a comfortable
Subsistence, whenever Age or Casualty shall reduce him to a necessity of
making use of it. There is a Poverty so far from being Despicable, that it is
Honorable, when a man by direct Casualty, sudden Providence, and without any
procuring of his own, is reduced to want Relief from others, as by Fire,
Shipwreck, Loss of Limbs, and the like.

These are sometimes so apparent, that they command the Charity of others; but
there are also many Families reduced to Decay, whose Conditions are not so
public, and yet their Necessities as great. Innumerable Circumstances reduce
men to want; and pressing Poverty oblige some people to make their Cases
public, or starve; and from thence came the Custom of Begging, which Sloth and
Idleness has improved into a Trade. But the Method I propose, thoroughly put in
practice, would remove the Cause, and the Effect would cease of course.

Want of Consideration is the great reason why People do not provide in their
Youth and Strength for Old Age and Sickness; and the ensuing Proposal is, in
short, only this, That all Persons in the time of their Health and Youth, while
they are able to Work and spare it, should lay up some small inconsiderable
part of their gettings as a deposit in safe hands, to lie as a Store in bank to
relieve them, if by Age or Accident they come to be disabled, or incapable to
Provide for themselves; and that if God so Bless them, that they nor theirs
never come to need it, the overplus may be employed to relieve such as shall.

If an Office in the same nature with this, were appointed in every County in
England, I doubt not but Poverty might easily be prevented, and Begging wholly
suppres'd.

The Proposal is for A PENSION-OFFICE.
THAT an Office be erected in some convenient place, where shall be a
Secretary, a Clerk, and a Searcher, always attending.

That all Sorts of People, who are Laboring People, and of Honest Repute, of
what Calling or Condition soever, Men or Women, Beggars and Soldiers excepted,
who being sound of their Limbs, and under Fifty Years of Age, shall come to the
said Office, and enter their Names, Trades, and Places of Abode, into a
Register to be kept for that purpose, and shall pay down at the time of the
said Entering, the Sum of Sixpence, and from thence One Shilling per Quarter;
shall every one have an Assurance under the Seal of the said Office, for these
following Conditions. (1.) Every such Subscriber, if by any Casualty (
Drunkenness and Quarrels excepted) they break their Limbs, dislocate Joints, or
are dangerously Maimed or Bruised, able Surgeons appointed for that purpose
shall take them into their care, and endeavor their Cure Gratis. (2.) If they
are at any time dangerously Sick, on notice given to the said Office, able
Physicians shall be appointed to Visit them, and give their Prescriptions
Gratis. (3.) If by Sickness or Accident, as aforesaid, they lose their Limbs or
Eyes, so as to be visibly disabled to Work, and are otherwise Poor and unable
to provide for themselves, they shall either be Cured at the Charge of the
Office, or be allowed a Pension for Subsistence during Life. (4.) If they
become Lame, Aged, Bedrid, or by real Infirmity of Body ( the Pox excepted) are
unable to Work, and otherwise incapable to provide for themselves, on proof
made that it is really and honestly so, they shall be taken into a College or
Hospital provided for that purpose, and be decently maintained during life.
(5.) If they are Seamen, and die abroad on board the Merchants Ships they were
employed in, or are cast away and drowned, or taken and die in slavery, their
Widows shall receive a Pension during their Widowhood. (6.) If they were
Tradesmen, and paid the Parish Rates, if by decay and failure of Trade they
Break and are put in Prison for Debt, they shall receive a Pension for
Subsistence during close Imprisonment. (7.) If by Sickness or Accidents they
are reduced to extremities of Poverty for a season, on a true representation to
the Office, they shall be Relieved as the Governors shall see cause.


It is to be Noted, That in the 4th. Article such as by Sickness and Age are
disabled from Work, and Poor, shall be taken into the House and provided for;
whereas in the 3d. Article, they who are Blind, or have lost Limbs, etc. shall
have Pensions allowed them.

The reason of this difference is this:

A Poor Man or Woman that has lost his Hand, or Leg, or Sight, is visibly
disabled, and we cannot be deceived, whereas other Infirmities are not so
easily judged of, and every body would be claiming a Pension, when but few will
demand being taken into an Hospital but such as are really in want.

And that this might be managed with such Care and Candor as a Design which
carries so good a face ought to be, I Propose the following Method for putting
it in Practice.

I suppose every Undertaking of such a magnitude must have some principal Agent
to push it forward, who must manage and direct every thing always with
direction of the Governors.

And First, I Will suppose One General Office erected for the great Parishes of
Stepney and Whitechappel; and as I Will lay down afterward some Methods to
oblige all People to come in and Subscribe, so I may be allowed to suppose
here, That all the Inhabitants of those Two large Parishes (the meaner
Laboring sort I mean) should Enter their Names, and that the number of them
should be a 100000, as I believe they would be at least.

First, There should be Named 50 of the principal Inhabitants of the said
Parishes (of which the Churchwardens for the time being, and all the Justices
of the Peace dwelling in the bounds of the said Parish, and the Ministers
resident for the time being, to be part) to be Governors of the said Office.

The said 50 to be first Nominated by the Lord Mayor of London for the time
being, and every Vacancy to be supplied in 10 days at farthest, by the Majority
of Voices of the rest.

The 50 to choose a Committee of 11, to sit twice a week, of whom 3 to be a
Quorum; with a Chief Governor, a Deputy Governor, and a Treasurer.

In the Office, a Secretary with Clerks of his own, a Register, and 2 Clerks, 4
Searchers, a Messenger, one in daily attendance under Salary, a Physician, a
Surgeon, and 4 Visitors.

In the Hospital, more or less, according to the Number of People entertained,
a Housekeeper, a Steward, Nurses, a Porter, and a Chaplain.

For the Support of this Office, and that the deposite Money might go to none
but the Persons and Uses for whom it is paid, and that it might not be said
Officers and Salaries was the chief end of the Undertaking, as in many a
Project it has been; I propose, That the Manager, or Undertaker, who I
mentioned before, be the Secretary, who shall have a Clerk allowed him, whose
business it shall be to keep the Register, take the Entries, and give out the
Tickets Sealed by the Governors, and Signed by himself, and to Enter always the
Payment of Quarteridge of every Subscriber. And that there may be no Fraud or
Connivance, and too great Trust be not reposed in the said Secretary, every
Subscriber who brings his Quarteridge, is to put it into a great Chest, locked
up with 11 Locks, every Member of the Committee to keep a Key, so that it
cannot be opened but in the Presence of them all; and every time a Subscriber
pays his Quarteridge, the Secretary shall give him a Sealed Ticket, thus
Christmas 96 which shall be allowed as the Receipt of Quarteridge for that
Quarter.

Note, The reason why every Subscriber shall take a Receipt or Ticket for his
Quarteridge, is because this must be the standing Law of the Office, that if
any Subscriber fail to pay their Quarteridge, they shall never Claim after it,
until double so much be paid, nor not at all that Quarter, whatever befalls
them.

The Secretary should be allowed to have 2 d. for every Ticket of Entry he
gives out, and 1 d. for every Receipt he gives for Quarteridge, to be accounted
for as follows: One Third to himself in lieu of Salary, he being to Pay Three
Clerks out of it. One Third to the Clerks, and other Officers among them. And
One Third to defray the incident Charge of the Office.
Thus Calculated. Per Ann. l. s. d. 100000 Subscribers paying 1 d. each every
Quarter is 1666 3 4 One Third To the Secretary per Ann. and Three Clerks 555 7
9 l. Per Ann. One Third To a Register 100 550 0 0 To a Clerk 50 To 4 Searchers
100 To a Physician 100 To a Surgeon 100 To Four Visitors 100 One Third To
Incident Charges, such as To Ten Committee Men, 5 s. each sitting twice per
Week is 260 560 15 7 To a Clerk of Committees 50 To a Messenger 40 A House for
the Office 40 A House for the Hospital 100 Contingencies 70 15 s. 7 d. 1666 3 4

All the Charge being thus paid out of such a Trifle as 1 d. per Quarter, the
next Consideration is to examine what the Incomes of this Subscription may be,
and in time what may be the Demands upon it. l. s. d. If 100 000 persons
subscribe, they pay down at their entering, each 6 d. which is 2500 00 00 And
the first year's Payment is in Stock at 1 s. per Quarter 20000 00 00 It must be
allowed, that under Three Months the Subscriptions will not be well complete;
so the Payment of Quarteridge shall not begin but from the Day after the Books
are full, or shut up; and from thence one year is to pass before any Claim can
be made; and the Money coming in at separate times, I suppose no Improvement
upon it for the first year, except of the 2500, which lent to the King on some
good Fund, at 7 l. per Cent. Interest, advances the first year, 175 00 00 The
Quarteridge of the Second year, abating for 1000 Claims, 19800 00 00 And the
Interest of the first year's Money, at the end of the second year, lent to the
King, as aforesaid, at 7 per Cent. Interest, is 1774 10 00 The Quarteridge of
the Third year, abating for Claims, 19400 00 00 The Interest of former Cash, to
the end of the Third Year, 3284 08 00 Income of Three Years 66933 18 00

Note, Any person may pay 2 s. up to 5 s. Quarterly, if they please, and upon a
Claim, will be allowed in proportion.

To assign what shall be the Charge upon this, where Contingency has so great a
share, is not to be done; but by way of Political Arithmetic a probable Guess
may be made.

It Is to be noted, That the Pensions I propose to be paid to Persons claiming
by the Third, Fifth, and Sixth Articles, are thus; Every Person who paid 1 s.
Quarterly, shall receive 12 d. Weekly, and so in proportion, every 12 d. paid
Quarterly by any one Person, to receive so many Shillings Weekly, if they come
to claim a Pension.

The first Year no Claim is allowed; so the Bank has in Stock completely 22500
l. From thence we are to consider the Number of Claims.

Sir William Petty, in his Political Arithmetic, supposes not above one in 40
to dye per Ann. out of the whole number of people; and I can by no means allow,
that the Circumstances of our Claims will be as frequent as Death; for these
Reasons: (1.) Our Subscriptions respect all persons grown, and in the Prime of
their Age; past the first, and providing against the last part of Danger. Sir
William's Account including Children and Old People, which always makes up One
Third of the Bills of Mortality. (2.) Our Claims will fall thin at first, for
several Years; and let but the Money increase for Ten Years, as it does in the
Account for Three Years, 'twould be almost sufficient to maintain the whole
Number. (3.) Allow that Casualty and Poverty are our Debtor-side; Health,
Prosperity, and Death, are the Creditor-side of the Account; and in all
probable Accounts, those Three Articles will carry off Three Fourth Parts of
the Number, as follows: If 1 in 40 shall dye Annually, as no doubt they shall,
and more, that is 2500 a year, which in 20 Years is 50000 of the Number, I hope
I may be allowed One Third to be out of condition to claim, apparently living
wihtout the help of Charity; and One Third in Health of Body, and able to work;
which put together, makes 83332; so it leaves 16668 to make Claims of Charity
and Pensions in the first 20 years, and One half of them must, according to Sir
William Petty, Die on our hands in 20 years; so there remains but 8334.


But to put it out of doubt, beyond the proportion to be guessed at, I Will allow
they shall fall thus;

The First Year, we are to note, none can claim, and the Second Year the Number
must be very few, but increasing; wherefore I suppose, l. One in every 500
shall claim the second year, which is 200, The Charge whereof is 500 One in
every 100 the third year, is 1000; the Charge, 2500 Together with the former
200, 500 3000 To carry on the Calculation. l. s. d. We find the Stock at the
end of the 3 d year, 66933 18 0 The Quarteridge of the 4 th year, abating as
before, 19000 00 0 Interest of the Stock, 4882 17 6 The Quarteridge of the 5 th
year, 18600 00 0 Interest of the Stock, 6473 00 0 115879 15 6 l. s. d. The
Charge 3000 00 0 2000 to fall the 4 th Year 5000 00 0 And the Old continued
3000 00 0 2000 the 5 th Year 5000 00 0 The Old continued 11000 00 0 27000 00 0

By this computation the Stock is increased above the Charge in Five years
89379 l. 15 s. 6 d. and yet here are sundry Articles to be considered on both
sides of the Account, that will necessarily increase the Stock and diminish the
Charge. l. s. d. First, In the Five years time 6200 having claimed Charity, the
Number being abated for in the reckoning above for Stock, it may be allowed New
Subscriptions will be taken in to keep the Number full, which in Five years
amounts to 3400 00 0 Their Sixpences is 155 00 0 3555 00 0 Which added to
115879 l. 15 s. 6 d. Augments the Stock to 119434 15 6 l. s. d. Six thousand
two hundred persons claiming help, which falls to be sure, on the Aged and
Infirm, I think, at a modest computation, in Five years time 500 of them may be
dead, which, without allowing annually, we take at an Abatement of 4000 l. out
of the Charge 4000 00 0 Which reduces the Charge to 23000 00 0

Besides this, the Interest of the Quarteridge, which is supposed in the former
Account to lie dead till the Year is out, which cast up from Quarter to
Quarter, allowing it to be put out Quarterly, as it may well be, amounts to by
computation for Five Year, 5250 l.

From the 5 th year, as near as can be computed, the Number of Pensioners being
so great I make no doubt but they shall Die off of the hands of the Undertaker
as fast as they shall fall in, excepting so much difference as the Payment of
every Year, which the Interest of the Stock shall supply.

For Example: l. s. d. At the end of the Fifth Year the Stock in hand 94629 15
6 The Payment of the Sixth Year 20000 00 0 Interest of the Stock 5408 04 0
120037 19 6 l. s. d. Allow an overplus Charge for keeping in the House, which
will be dearer than Pensions, 10000 l. per Ann. 10000 00 0 Charge of the 6 th
Year 22500 00 0 Balance in Cash 87537 19 6 120037 19 6

This also is to be allowed, That all those Persons who are kept by the Office
in the House shall have Employment provided for them, whereby no Persons shall
be kept Idle, the Works to be suited to every one's Capacity without Rigor,
only some distinction to those who are most willing to Work; the Profits of the
said Work to the Stock of the House.

Besides this there may great and very profitable Methods be found out to
improve the Stock beyond the settled Interest of 7 per Cent. which perhaps may
not always be to be had, for the Exchequer is not always borrowing Money; but a
Bank of 80000 l. employed by faithful hands, need not want opportunities of
great and very considerable Improvement.

Also it would be a very good Object for Persons who Die Rich to leave Legacies
to, which in time might be very well supposed to raise a standing Revenue to it.

I will not say but various Contingencies may alter the Charge of this
Undertaking, and swell the Claims beyond proportion, further than I extend it;
but all that, and much more, is sufficiently answered in the Calculations, by
above 80000 l. in Stock to Provide for it.

As to the Calculation being made on a vast Number of Subscribers, and more
than, perhaps, will be allowed likely to Subscribe, I think the proportion may
hold good in a few, as well as in a great many; and, perhaps, if 20000
Subscribed, it might be as effectual; I am indeed willing to think all Men
should have sense enough to see the usefulness of such a Design, and be
persuaded by their Interest to engage in it; but some Men have less Prudence
than Brutes, and will make no provision against Age till it comes; and to deal
with such, Two ways might be used by Authority to Compel them. (1.) The
Churchwardens and Justices of Peace should send the Beadle of the Parish, with
an Officer belonging to this Office, about to the Poorer Parishioners to tell
them, That since such Honorable Provision is made for them to secure
themselves in Old Age from Poverty and Distress, they should expect no Relief
from the Parish, if they refused to Enter themselves, and by sparing so small a
part of their Earnings to prevent future Misery. (2.) The Churchwardens of
every Parish might refuse the removal of Persons and Families into their Parish
but upon their having Entered into this Office. (3.) All Persons should be
publicly desired to forbear giving any thing to Beggars; and all common
Beggars suppressed after a certain time; for this would effectually suppress
Beggary at last.


And to oblige the Parishes to do this on behalf of such a Project, the
Governor of the House should secure the Parish against all Charges coming upon
them from any Person who did Subscribe and pay the Quarteridge, and that would
most certainly oblige any Parish to endeavor that all the Laboring Meaner
People in the Parish should enter their Names; for in time 'twou'd most
certainly take all the Poor in the Parish off of their hands.

I know that by Law no Parish can refuse to Relieve any Person or Family fallen
into Distress, and therefore to send them word they must expect no Relief,
would seem a vain threatening; but thus far the Parish may do, they shall be
esteemed as Persons who deserve no Relief, and shall be used accordingly; For
who, indeed, would ever pity that Man in his Distress, who at the expense of
Two Pots of Beer a Month, might have prevented it, and would not spare it?

As to my Calculations, on which I do not depend neither, I say this, if they
are probable, and that in Five years time a Subscription of a Hundred thousand
Persons would have 87537 l. 19 s. 6 d. in Cash, all Charges paid, I desire any
one but to reflect what will not such a Sum do; for instance, were it laid out
in the Million Lottery Tickets, which are now Sold at 6 l. each, and bring in 1
l. per Ann. for Fifteen Years, every 1000 l. so laid out, pays back in time
2500 l. and that time would be as fast as it would be wanted, and therefore be
as good as Money; or if laid out in improving Rents, as Ground-Rents with
Buildings to devolve in time, there is no question but a Revenue would be
raised in time to Maintain One third part of the Number of Subscribers, if they
should come to Claim Charity.

And I desire any Man to consider the present State of this Kingdom, and tell
me, if all the People of England, Old and Young, Rich and Poor, were to Pay
into one common Bank, 4 s. per Ann. a Head, and that 4 s. duly and honestly
managed, Whether the overplus paid by those who Die off, and by those who never
come to Want, would not in all probability Maintain all that should be Poor,
and for ever Banish Beggary and Poverty out of the Kingdom.

Of WAGERING.
WAGERING, as now practiced by Polities and Contracts, is become a Branch of
Assurances; it was before more properly a part of Gaming, and as it deserved,
had but a very low esteem; but shifting sides, and the War providing proper
subjects, as the contingences of Sieges, Battles, Treaties, and Campaigns, it
increased to an extraordinary Reputation, and Offices were erected on purpose
which managed it to a strange degree and with great Advantage, especially to
the Office-keepers; so that as has been computed, there was not less Gaged on
one side and other upon the second Siege of Limerick, than Two hundred thousand
Pound.

How it is managed, and by what trick and artifice it became a Trade, and how
insensibly Men were drawn into it, an easy Account may be given.

I believe Novelty was the first wheel that set it on work, and I need make no
reflection upon the power of that Charm: It was wholly a new thing, at least
upon the Exchange of London; and the first occasion that gave it a room among
public Discourse, was some Persons forming Wagers on the Return and Success of
King James, for which the Government took occasion to use them as they deserved.

I have heard a Bookseller in King James's time say, That if he would have a
Book sell, he would have it Burnt by the hand of the Common Hangman; the Man,
no doubt, valued his Profit above his Reputation; but People are so addicted to
prosecute a thing that seems forbid, that this very practice seemed to be
encouraged by its being Contraband.

The Trade increased, and first on the Exchange and then in Coffee-houses it
got life, till the Brokers, those Vermin of Trade, got hold of it, and then
particular Offices were set apart for it, and an incredible resort thither was
to be seen every day.

These Offices had not been long in being, but they were thronged with Sharpers
and Setters as much as the Groom-Porter's, or any Gaming-Ordinary in Town,
where a Man had nothing to do, but to make a good Figure and prepare the Keeper
of the Office to give him a Credit as a good Man, and though he had not a Groat
to pay, he should take Guineas and sign Polities, till he had received, perhaps
3 or 400 l. in Money on condition to pay great Odds, and then Success tries the
Man; if he Wins, his Fortune is made; if not, he is a better Man than he was
before, by just so much Money, for as to the Debt, he is your Humble Servant in
the Temple or Whitehall.

But besides those who are but the Thieves of the Trade, there is a Method as
effectual to get Money as possible, managed with more appearing Honesty, but no
less Art, by which the Wagerer, in Confederacy with the Office-keeper, shall
lay vast Sums, great Odds, and yet be always sure to Win.

For Example:

A Town in Flanders, or elsewhere, during the War is besieged; perhaps at the
beginning of the Siege the Defense is vigorous, and Relief probable, and it is
the opinion of most people, the Town will hold out so long, or perhaps not be
taken at all: The Wagerer has two or three more of his fort in conjunction, of
which always the Office-keeper is one; and they run down all discourse of the
taking the Town, and offer great Odds it shall not be taken by such a day:
Perhaps this goes on a Week, and then the Scale turns; and though they seem to
hold the same opinion still, yet underhand the Office-keeper has Orders to Take
all the Odds which by their Example was before given, against the taking the
Town; and so all their first-given Odds are easily secured, and yet the people
brought into a vein of Betting against the Siege of the Town too. Then they
order all the Odds to be Taken as long as they will run, while they themselves
openly give Odds, and sign Polities, and oftentimes take their own Money, till
they have received perhaps double what they at first laid. Then they turn the
Scale at once, and cry down the Town, and lay that it shall be taken, till the
length of the first Odds is fully run; and by this Manage, if the Town be taken
they win perhaps Two or Three Thousand Pounds, and if it be not taken, they are
no Losers neither.

It Is visible by experience, not one Town in ten is besieged, but it is taken.
The Art of War is so improved, and our Generals are so wary, that an Army
seldom attempts a Siege, but when they are almost sure to go on with it; and no
Town can hold out, if a Relief cannot be had from abroad.

Now if I can by first laying 500 l. to 200 l. with A, that the Town shall not
be taken, wheedle in B to lay me 5000 l. to 2000 l. of the same; and after
that, by bringing down the Vogue of the Siege, reduce the Wagers to Even-hand,
and lay 2000 l. with C that the Town shall not be taken; by this Method, it is
plain, If the Town be not Taken, I win 2200 l. and lose 2000 l. If the Town be
Taken, I win 5000 l. and lose 2500 l.


This is Gaming by Rule, and in such a Knot it is impossible to lose; for if it
is in any Man's or Company of Men's power, by any Artifice to alter the Odds,
it is in their power to command the Money out of every man's Pocket, who has no
more Wit than to venture.

Of FOOLS.
OF all Persons who are Objects of our Charity, none move my Compassion, like
those whom it has pleased God to leave in a full state of Health and Strength,
but deprived of Reason to act for themselves. And it is, in my opinion, one of
the greatest Scandals upon the Understanding of others, to mock at those who
want it. Upon this account I think the Hospital we call Bedlam, to be a Noble
Foundation; a visible Instance of the sense our Ancestors had of the greatest
Unhappiness which can befall Human Kind: Since as the Soul in Man distinguishes
him from a Brute, so where the Soul is dead (for so it is as to acting) no
Brute so much a Beast as a Man. But since never to have it, and to have lost
it, are synonimous in the Effect, I wonder how it came to pass, that in the
Settlement of that Hospital they made no Provision for Persons born without the
use of their Reason, such as we call Fools, or, more properly, Naturals.

We use such in England with the last Contempt, which I think is a strange
Error, since though they are useless to the Commonwealth, they are only so by
God's direct Providence, and no previous Fault.

I think 'twould very well become this Wise Age to take care of such: And
perhaps they are a particular Rentcharge on the Great Family of Mankind, left
by the Maker of us all; like a Younger Brother, who though the Estate be given
from him, yet his Father expected the Heir should take some care of him.

If I were to be asked, Who ought in particular to be charged with this Work? I
would answer in general, Those who have a Portion of Understanding
extraordinary: Not that I would lay a Tax upon any man's Brains, or discourage
Wit, by appointing Wise Men to maintain Fools: But some Tribute is due to God's
Goodness for bestowing extraordinary Gifts; and who can it be better paid to,
than such as suffer for want of the same Bounty?

For the providing therefore some Subsistence for such, that Natural Defects
may not be exposed:

It is Proposed,

That a Fool-House be Erected, either by Public Authority, or by the City, or
by an Act of Parliament; into which, all that are Naturals, or born Fools,
without Respect or Distinction, should be admitted and maintained.

For the Maintenance of this, a small stated Contribution, settled by the
Authority of an Act of Parliament, without any Damage to the Persons paying the
same, might be very easily raised, by a Tax upon Learning, to be paid by the
Authors of Books. Every Book that shall be Printed in Folio, from 40 sheets and
upwards, to pay at the Licensing, (for the whole Impression.) 5 l. Under 40
sheets, 40 s. Every Quarto, 20 s. Every Octavo of 10 sheets and upward, 20 s.
Every Octavo under 10 sheets, and every Bound Book in 12s. 10 s. Every stitched
Pamphlet, Reprinted Copies the same Rates. 2 s.

This Tax to be paid into the Chamber of London for the space of Twenty Years,
would without question raise a Fund sufficient to Build and Purchase a
Settlement for this House.

I suppose this little Tax being to be raised at so few places as the
Printing-Presses, or the Licensers of Books, and consequently the Charge but
very small in gathering, might bring in about 1500 l. per Annum, for the term
of Twenty Years, which would perform the Work to the degree following.

The House should be Plain and Decent, (for I don't think the Ostentation of
Buildings necessary or suitable to Works of Charity); and be built somewhere
out of Town, for the sake of the Air.

The Building to cost about 1000 l. or if the Revenue exceed, to cost 2000 l.
at most, and the Salaries mean in proportion.

In the House, A Steward, 30 l. per Ann. A Purveyor, 20 A Cook, 20 A Butler, 20
Six Women to assist the Cook, and clean the House, 4 l. each, 24 Six Nurses to
Tend the People, 3 l. each, 18 A Chaplain, 20 152 A Hundred Alms-People, at 8
l. per Ann. Diet, etc. 800 952 l. per Ann. The Table for the Officers, and
Contingences, and Clothes for the Alms-People, and Firing, put together, 500 l.
per Ann. An Auditor of the Accounts, a Committee of the Governors, and Two
Clerks.

Here I suppose 1500 Pounds per Ann. Revenue, to be settled upon the House,
which it is very probable might be raised from the Tax aforesaid. But since an
Act of Parliament is necessary to be had for the Collecting this Duty, and that
Taxes for keeping of Fools would be difficultly obtained, while they are so
much wanted for Wise Men; I would propose to raise the Money by voluntary
Charity, which would be a Work would leave more Honor to the Undertakers, than
Feasts and great Shows, which our Public Bodies too much diminish their Stocks
with.

But to pass all suppositious ways, which are easily thought of, but hardly
procured; I propose to maintain Fools out of our own Folly: And whereas a great
deal of Money has been thrown about in Lotteries, the following Proposal would
very easily perfect our Work.

A Charity-Lottery.

That a Lottery be set up by the Authority of the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, for a Hundred thousand Tickets, at Twenty Shillings each, to be drawn
by the known Way and Method of drawing Lotteries, as the Million-Lottery was
drawn; in which no Allowance to be made to any body; but the Fortunate to
receive the full Sum of One hundred thousand Pounds put in, without Discount;
and yet this double Advantage to follow: (1.) That an immediate Sum of One
hundred thousand Pounds shall be raised and paid into the Exchequer for the
Public Use. (2.) A Sum of above Twenty thousand Pounds be gained, to be put
into the hands of known Trustees, to be laid out in a Charity for the
Maintenance of the Poor.


That as soon as the Money shall be come in, it shall be paid into the
Exchequer, either on some good Fund, if any suitable, or on the Credit of
Exchequer; and that when the Lottery is drawn, the Fortunate to receive Tallies
or Bills from the Exchequer for their Money, payable at Four Years.

The Exchequer receives this Money, and gives out Tallies according to the
Prizes, when it is drawn, all payable at Four Years; and the Interest of this
Money for Four Years is struck in Tallies proportioned to the time, and given
to the Trustees; which is the Profit I propose for the Work.

Thus the Fortunate have an immediate Title to their Prizes, at Four Years,
without Interest; and the Hospital will have also an immediate Title to 6000 l.
per Ann. for Four Years, which is the Interest at 6 per Cent. per Ann.

If any should object against the Time of staying for their Prizes, it should
be answered thus, That whoever did not like to stay the Time for the Money,
upon discounting Four Years Interest at 8 per Cent. should have their Money
down.

I think this Specimen will inform any body what might be done by Lotteries,
were they not hackney'd about in Private Hands, who by Fraud and Ill Management
put them out of Repute, and so neither gain themselves, nor suffer any useful
handsome Design to succeed.

'Twould be needless, I suppose, to mention, That such a Proposal as this ought
to be set on foot by Public Approbation, and by Men of known Integrity and
Estates, that there may be no room left for a suspicion of private advantage.

If this or any equivalent Proposal succeeded to raise the Money, I would have
the House established as aforesaid, with larger or smaller Revenues, as
necessity obliged; then the Persons to be received should be without
distinction or respect, but principally such as were really Poor and
Friendless; and any that were kept already by any Parish-Collection, the said
Parish should allow Forty Shillings Yearly toward their Maintenance; which no
Parish would refuse that subsisted them wholly before.

I make no question but that if such an Hospital was erected within a Mile or
two of the City, one great Circumstance would happen, (viz.) That the common
sort of people, who are very much addicted to rambling in the Fields, would
make this House the customary Walk, to divert themselves with the Objects to be
seen there, and to make what they call Sport with the Calamity of others; as is
now shamefully allowed in Bedlam.

To prevent this, and that the condition of such, which deserves Pity, not
Contempt, might not be the more exposed by this Charity, it should be ordered,
That the Steward of the House be in Commission of the Peace within the
Precincts of the House only, and authorized to punish by limited Fines, or
otherwise, any person that shall offer any Abuse to the poor Almspeople, or
shall offer to make Sport at their Condition.

If any person at Reading of this, should be so impertinent as to ask, To what
purpose I would appoint a Chaplain in an Hospital of Fools? I could answer him
very well, by saying, For the use of the other Persons, Officers and Attendants
in the House.

But besides that, Pray, Why not a Chaplain for Fools, as well as for Knaves,
since both, though in a different manner, are incapable of reaping any benefit by
Religion, unless by some invisible Influence they are made docible; and since
the same Secret Power can restore these to their Reason, as must make the other
Sensible; Pray, Why not a Chaplain? Idiots indeed were denied the Communion in
the Primitive Churches, but I never read they were not to be prayed for, or
were not admitted to hear.

If we allow any Religion, and a Divine Supreme Power, whose Influence works
invisibly on the hearts of men ( as he must be worse than the people we talk
of, who denies it), we must allow at the same time, that Power can restore the
Reasoning-Faculty to an Idiot; and it is our part to use the proper means of
supplicating Heaven to that end, leaving the disposing-part to the Issue of
unalterable Providence.

The Wisdom of Providence has not left us without Examples of some of the most
stupid Natural Idiots in the world, who have been restored to their Reason, or
as one would think, had Reason infused after a long Life of Ideotism; Perhaps,
among other wise ends, to confute that sordid Supposition, That Idiots have no
Souls.

Of BANKRUPTS.
THis Chapter has some Right to stand next to that of Fools; for besides the
common acceptance of late, which makes every Unfortunate Man a Fool, I think
no man so much made a Fool of as a Bankrupt.

If I may be allowed so much liberty with our Laws, which are generally good,
and above all things are tempered with Mercy, Lenity, and Freedom, This has
something in it of Barbarity; it gives a loose to the Malice and Revenge of the
Creditor, as well as a Power to right himself, while it leaves the Debtor no
way to show himself honest: It contrives all the ways possible to drive the
Debtor to despair, and encourages no new Industry, for it makes him perfectly
incapable of any thing but starving.

This Law, especially as it is now frequently executed, tends wholly to the
Destruction of the Debtor, and yet very little to the Advantage of the Creditor.

(1.) The Severities to the Debtor are unreasonable, and, if I may so say, a
little inhuman; for it not only strips him of all in a moment, but renders him
for ever incapable of helping himself, or relieving his Family by future
Industry. If he escapes from Prison, which is hardly done too, if he has
nothing left, he must starve, or live on Charity; if he goes to work, no man
dare pay him his Wages, but he shall pay it again to the Creditors; if he has
any private Stock left for a Subsistence, he can put it no where; every man is
bound to be a Thief, and take it from him: If he trusts it in the hands of a
Friend, he must receive it again as a great Courtesy, for that Friend is liable
to account for it. I have known a poor man prosecuted by a Statute to that
degree, that all he had left was a little Money, which he knew not where to
hide; at last, that he might not starve, he gives it to his Brother, who had
entertained him; the Brother, after he had his Money, quarrels with him to get
him out of his House; and when he desires him to let him have the Money lent
him, gives him this for Answer, I cannot pay you safely, for there is a Statute
against you; which run the poor man to such Extremities, that he destroyed
himself. Nothing is more frequent, than for men who are reduced by Miscarriage
in Trade, to Compound and Set up again, and get good Estates; but a Statute, as
we call it, for ever shuts up all doors to the Debtor's Recovery; as if
Breaking were a Crime so Capital, that he ought to be cast out of Human
Society, and exposed to Extremities worse than Death. And, which will further
expose the fruitless Severity of this Law, it is easy to make it appear, That
all this Cruelty to the Debtor is so far (generally speaking) from advantaging
the Creditors, that it destroys the Estate, consumes it in extravagant Charges,
and unless the Debtor be consenting, seldom makes any considerable Dividends.
And I am bold to say, There is no Advantage made by the prosecuting of a
Statute with Severity, but what might be doubly made by Methods more merciful.
And though I am not to prescribe to the Legislators of the Nation, yet by way of
Essay I take leave to give my Opinion and my Experience in the Methods,
Consequences, and Remedies of this Law.

All people know, who remember any thing of the Times when that Law was made,
that the Evil it was pointed at, was grown very rank, and Breaking to defraud
Creditors so much a Trade, that the Parliament had good reason to set up a Fury
to deal with it; and I am far from reflecting on the Makers of that Law, who,
no question, saw 'twas necessary at that time: But as Laws, though in themselves
good, are more or less so, as they are more or less seasonable, squared, and
adapted to the Circumstances and Time of the Evil they are made against; so
'twere worth while (with Submission) for the same Authority to examine: (1.)
Whether the Length of Time since that Act was made, has not given opportunity
to Debtors, 1. To evade the Force of the Act by Ways and Shifts to avoid the
Power of it, and secure their Estates out of the reach of it? 2. To turn the
Point of it against those whom it was made to relieve? Since we see frequently
now, that Bankrupts desire Statutes, and procure them to be taken out against
themselves.
(2.) Whether the Extremities of this Law are not often carried on beyond the
true Intent and Meaning of the Act it self, by Persons, who besides being
Creditors, are also Malicious, and gratify their private Revenge, by
prosecuting the Offender, to the Ruin of his Family.


If these Two Points are to be proved, then I am sure 'twill follow, That this
Act is now a Public Grievance to the Nation; and I doubt not but will be one
time or other repealed by the same Wise Authority which made it.

(1.) Time and Experience has furnished the Debtors with Ways and Means to
evade the Force of this Statute, and to secure their Estate against the reach
of it; which renders it often insignificant, and consequently, the Knave,
against whom the Law was particularly bent, gets off; while he only who fails
of mere Necessity, and whose honest Principle will not permit him to practice
those Methods, is exposed to the Fury of this Act: And as things are now
ordered, nothing is more easy, than for a man to order his Estate so, that a
Statute shall have no power over it, or at least but a little.

If the Bankrupt be a Merchant, no Statute can reach his Effects beyond the
Seas; so that he has nothing to secure but his Books, and away he goes into the
Friars. If a Shopkeeper, he has more difficulty; but that is made easy, for
there are Men (and Carts) to be had, whose Trade it is, and who in One Night
shall remove the greatest Warehouse of Goods, or Cellar of Wines in the Town,
and carry them off into those Nurseries of Rogues, the Mint and Friars; and our
Constables and Watch, who are the allow'd-Magistrates of the Night, and who
shall stop a poor little lurking Thief, that it may be has stole a bundle of
old Clothes, worth 5 s. shall let them all pass without any disturbance, and
fee a hundred honest men robbed of their Estates before their faces, to the
Eternal Infamy of the Justice of the Nation.

And were a man but to hear the Discourse among the Inhabitants of those Dens
of Thieves, when they first swarm about a New Comer, to comfort him; for they
are not all hardened to a like degree at once. -- Well, says the first, Come,
don't be concerned, you have got a good Parcel of Goods away, I promise you;
you need not value all the World. Ah! would I had done so, says another, I Would a
laughed at all my Creditors. Ay, says the young Proficient in the hardened
Trade, but my Creditors! Damn the Creditors, says a Third, Why, there is such a
one and such a one, they have Creditors too, and they will not agree with them,
and here they live like Gentlemen, and care not a farthing for them. Offer your
Creditors Half a Crown in the Pound, and pay it them in Old Debts, and if they
will not take it, let them alone, they will come after you, never fear it. O! But a
Statute, says he again. O! But the Devil, cries the Minter. Why, it is the
Statutes we live by, say they: Why, if 'twere not for Statutes, Creditors would
comply, and Debtors would compound, and We Honest Fellows here of the Mint
would be starved. Prithee, What need you care for a Statute? A Thousand
Statutes cannot reach you here. This is the Language of the Country, and the
New Comer soon learns to speak it; (for I think I may say, without wronging any
man, I have known many a man go in among them Honest, that is, without Ill
Design, but I never knew one come away so again.) -- Then comes a Graver Sort
among this Black Crew, (for here, as in Hell, are Fiends of Degrees, and
different Magnitude), and he falls into Discourse with the New Comer, and gives
him more solid Advice. Look you, Sir, I am concerned to see you melancholy, I
am in your Circumstance too, and if you will accept of it, I Will give you the best
Advice I can; and so begins the Grave Discourse.

The man is in too much trouble, not to want Counsel, so he thanks him, and he
goes on: Send a Summons to your Creditors, and offer them what you can propose
in the Pound (always reserving a good Stock to begin the World again), which if
they will take, you are a Freeman, and better than you were before; if they
will not take it, you know the worst of it, you are on the better side of the
hedge with them: If they will not take it, but will proceed to a Statute, you
have nothing to do, but to oppose Force with Force; for the Laws of Nature tell
you, you must not starve; and a Statute is so barbarous, so unjust, so
malicious a way of proceeding against a man, that I do not think any Debtor
obliged to consider any thing but his own Preservation, when once they go on
with that. -- For why, says the old studi'd Wretch, should the Creditors spend
your Estate in the Commission, and then demand the Debt of you too? Do you owe
any thing to the Commission of the Statute? (No, says he); Why then, says he, I
warrant their Charges will come to 200 l. out of your Estate, and they must
have 10 s. a day for starving you and your Family. I cannot see why any man
should think I am bound in Conscience to pay the Extravagance of other men. If
my Creditors spend 500 l. in getting in my Estate by a Statute, which I offered
to surrender without it, I Will reckon that 500 l. paid them, let them take it
among them; for Equity is due to a Bankrupt as well as to any man; and if the
Laws do not give it us, we must take it.

This is too rational Discourse not to please him, and he proceeds by this
Advice; the Creditors cannot agree, but take out a Statute; and the man that
offered at first, it may be, 10 s. in the Pound, is kept in that cursed place
till he has spent it all, and can offer nothing, and then gets away beyond Sea,
or after a long Consumption gets off by an Act of Relief to poor Debtors, and
all the Charges of the Statute falls among the Creditors. Thus I knew a Statute
taken out against a Shopkeeper in the Country, and a considerable Parcel of
Goods too seized, and yet the Creditors, what with Charges, and two or three
Suits at Law, lost their whole Debts, and 8 s. per Pound Contribution-Money for
Charges; and the poor Debtor, like a man under the Surgeon's hand, died in the
Operation.

(2.) Another Evil that Time and Experience has brought to light from this Act,
is, when the Debtor himself shall confederate with some particular Creditor to
take out a Statute; and this is a Masterpiece of Plot and Intriegue: For
perhaps some Creditor honestly received in the way of Trade a large Sum of
Money of the Debtor for Goods sold him when he was sui juris; and he by consent
shall own himself a Bankrupt before that time, and the Statute shall reach back
to bring in an Honest Man's Estate, to help pay a Rogue's Debt. Or a man shall
go and borrow a Sum of Money upon a Parcel of Goods, and lay them to Pledge; he
keeps the Money, and the Statute shall fetch away the Goods to help forward the
Composition. These are Tricks I can give too good an account of, having more
than once suffered by the Experiment. I could give a Scheme of more ways, but I
think it is needless to prove the Necessity of laying aside that Law, which is
pernicious to both Debtor and Creditor, and chiefly hurtful to the Honest Man
who it was made to preserve.

The next Enquiry is, Whether the Extremities of this Law are not often carried
on beyond the true Intent and Meaning of the Act it self, for Malicious and
Private Ends, to gratify Passion and Revenge?

I remember the Answer a Person gave me, who had taken out Statutes against
several Persons, and some his near Relations, who had failed in his Debt; and
when I was one time dissuading him from prosecuting a man who owed me Money as
well as him, I used this Argument with him; You know the man has nothing left
to pay. That Is true, says he, I know that well enough. To what purpose then,
said I, will you prosecute him? Why, Revenge is sweet, said he. -- Now a man
that will prosecute a Debtor, not as a Debtor, but by way of Revenge, such a
man is, I think, not intentionally within the benefit of our Law.

In order to state the Case right, there are four Sorts of People to be
considered in this Discourse; and the true Case is how to distinguish them.
(1.) There is the Honest Debtor, who fails by visible Necessity, Losses,
Sickness, Decay of Trade, or the like. (2.) The Knavish, Designing, or Idle,
Extravagant Debtor, who fails because either he has run out his Estate in
Excesses, or on purpose to cheat and abuse his Creditors. (3.) There is the
moderate Creditor, who seeks but his own, but will omit no lawful Means to gain
it, and yet will hear reasonable and just Arguments and Proposals. (4.) There
is the Rigorous Severe Creditor, that values not whether the Debtor be Honest
Man or Knave, Able, or Unable; but will have his Debt, whether it be to be had
or no; without Mercy, without Compassion, full of Ill Language, Passion, and
Revenge.


How to make a Law to suit to all these, is the Case: That a necessary Favor
might be shown to the first, in Pity and Compassion to the Unfortunate, in
Commiseration of Casualty and Poverty, which no man is exempt from the danger
of. That a due Rigor and Restraint be laid upon the second, that Villainy and
Knavery might not be encouraged by a Law. That a due Care be taken of the
third, that men's Estates may, as far as can be, secured to them. And due Limits
set to the last, that no man may have an unlimited Power over his
Fellow Subjects, to the Ruin of both Life and Estate.

All which I humbly conceive might be brought to pass by the following Method;
to which I give the Title of

A Court of Enquiries.

This Court should consist of a select Number of Persons, to be chosen Yearly
out of the several Wards of the City, by the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen;
and out of the several Inns of Court, by the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper,
for the time being, and to consist of, To be chosen by the rest, and named
every year also. A President, A Secretary, A Treasurer,
A Judge of Causes for the Proof of Debts. Fifty two Citizens, out of every
Ward two; of which number to be Twelve Merchants. Two Lawyers (Baristers at
least) out of each of the Inns of Court.


That a Commission of Enquiry into Bankrupts Estates be given to these,
confirmed and settled by Act of Parliament, with Power to Hear, Try, and
Determine Causes as to Proof of Debts, and Disputes in Accounts between Debtor
and Creditor, without Appeal.

The Office for this Court to be at Guildhall, where Clerks should be always
attending, and a Quorum of the Commissioners to sit de Die in Diem, from Three
to Six a Clock in the Afternoon.

To this Court every man who finds himself pressed by his Affairs, so that he
cannot carry on his Business, shall apply himself as follows:

He shall go to the Secretary's Office, and give in his Name, with this short
Petition: To the Honorable the President and Commissioners of His Majesty's
Court of Enquiries. The humble Petition of A. B. of the Parish of in the
Haberdasher.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner being unable to carry on his Business, by reason of great
Losses and Decay of Trade, and being ready and willing to make a full and
entire Discovery of his whole Estate, and to deliver up the same to your
Honors upon Oath, as the Law directs for the satisfaction of his Creditors,
and having to that purpose entered his Name into the Books of your Office on the
(...) of this Instant:

Your Petitioner humbly prays the Protection of this Honorable Court. And
shall ever Pray, etc.


The Secretary is to lay this Petition before the Commissioners, who shall sign
it of course; and the Petitioner shall have an Officer sent home with him
immediately, who shall take Possession of his House and Goods, and an exact
Inventory of every thing therein shall be taken at his Entrance by other
Officers also, appointed by the Court; according to which Inventory the first
Officer and the Bankrupt also shall be accountable.

This Officer shall supersede even the Sheriff in Possession, excepting by an
Extent for the King; only with this Provision;

That if the Sheriff be in Possession by Warrant on Judgment, obtained by due
Course of Law, and without Fraud or Deceit, and, bona fide, in Possession
before the Debtor entered his Name in the Office, in such case the Plaintiff to
have a double Dividend allotted to his Debt; for it was the fault of the Debtor
to let Execution come upon his Goods before he sought for Protection; but this
not to be allowed upon Judgment confessed.

If the Sheriff be in Possession by fieri facias for Debt immediately due to
the King, the Officer however shall quit his Possession to the Commissioners,
and they shall see the King's Debt fully satisfied, before any Division be made
to the Creditors.

The Officers in this case to take no Fee from the Bankrupt, nor to use any
indecent or uncivil Behavior to the Family (which is a most notorious Abuse
now permitted to the Sheriffs Officers), whose Fees I have known, on small
Executions, on pretense of Civility, amount to as much as the Debt, and yet
behave themselves with unsufferable Insolence all the while.

This Officer being in Possession, the Goods may be removed, or not removed,
the Shop shut up, or not shut up, as the Bankrupt upon his Reasons given to the
Commissioners may desire.

The Inventory being taken, the Bankrupt shall have Fourteen Days time, and
more if desired, upon showing good Reasons to the Commissioners, to settle his
Books, and draw up his Accounts; and then shall deliver up all his Books,
together with a full and true Account of his whole Estate, Real and Personal;
to which Account he shall make Oath, and afterward to any particular of it, if
the Commissioners require.

After this Account given in, the Commissioners shall have Power to examine
upon Oath all his Servants, or any other Person; and if it appears that he has
concealed any thing, in breach of his Oath, to Punish him, as is hereafter
specified.

Upon a fair and just Surrender of all his Estate and Effects, bona fide,
according to the true Intent and Meaning of the Act, the Commissioners shall
return to him in Money, or such of his Goods as he shall choose, at a value by a
just Appraisement, 5 l. per Cent. of all the Estate he surrendered to him,
together with a full and free Discharge from all his Creditors.

The Remainder of the Estate of the Debtor to be fairry and equally divided
among the Creditors, who are to apply themselves to the Commissioners. The
Commissioners to make a necessary Enquiry into the Nature and Circumstances of
the Debts demanded, that no pretended Debt be claimed for the private Account
of the Debtor: In order to which Enquiry, they shall administer the following
Oath to the Creditor, for the Proof of the Debt.

I A. B. do solemnly swear and attest, That the Account hereto annexed is true
and right, and every Article therein rightly and truly stated and charged in
the Names of the Persons to whom they belong: And that there is no Person or
Name named, concealed, or alterd in the said Account by me, or by my Knowledge,
Order, or Consent: And that the said (...) does really and bona fide owe and
stand indebted to me for my own proper account, the full Sum of (...) mentioned
in the said Account, and that for a fair and just Value made good to him, as by
the said Account expressed; and also that I have not made or known of any
Private Contract, Promise, or Agreement between him the said (...) (or any body
for him) and me, or any Person whatsoever.

So help me God. Upon this Oath, and no Circumstances to render the Person
suspected, the Creditor shall have an unquestioned Right to his Dividend, which
shall be made without the Delays and Charges that attend the Commissions of
Bankrupts. For, (1.) The Goods of the Debtor shall upon the first meeting of
the Creditors, be either sold in Parcels, as they shall agree, or divided among
them in due proportion to their Debts. (2.) What Debts are standing out, the
Debtors shall receive Summons's from the Commissioners, to pay by a certain
time limited; and in the mean time the Secretary is to transmit Accounts to the
Persons owing it, appointing them a reasonable time to consent or disprove the
Account.


And every Six Months a just Dividend shall be made among the Creditors of the
Money received: And so if the Effects lie abroad, Authentic Procurations shall
be signed by the Bankrupt to the Commissioners, who thereupon correspond with
the Persons abroad, in whose hands such Effects are, who are to remit the same
as the Commissioners order; the Dividend to be made, as before, every Six
Months, or oftener, if the Court see cause.

If any man thinks the Bankrupt has so much favor by these Articles, that
those who can dispense with an Oath have an opportunity to cheat their
Creditors, and that hereby too much Encouragement is given to men to turn
Bankrupt; let them consider the Easiness of the Discovery, the Difficulty of a
Concealment, and the Penalty on the Offender.

(1.) I would have a Reward of 30 per Cent. be provided to be paid to any
person who should make discovery of any part of the Bankrupt's Estate concealed
by him; which would make Discoveries easy and frequent. (2.) Any person who
should claim any Debt among the Creditors, for the account of the Bankrupt, or
his Wife or Children, or with design to relieve them out of it, other or more
than is, bona fide, due to him for Value received and to be made out; or any
person who shall receive in Trust, or by Deed of Gift, any part of the Goods or
other Estate of the Bankrupt, with design to preserve them for the use of the
said Bankrupt, or his Wife or Children, or with design to conceal them from the
Creditors, shall forfeit for every such Act 500 l. and have his Name published
as a Cheat, and a Person not fit to be credited by any man. This would make it
very difficult for the Bankrupt to conceal any thing. (3.) The Bankrupt having
given his Name, and put the Officer into Possession, shall not remove out of
the House any of his Books; but during the Fourteen days time which he shall
have to settle the Accounts, shall every night deliver the Books into the hands
of the Officer; and the Commissioners shall have liberty, if they please, to
take the Books the first day, and cause Duplicates to be made, and then to give
them back to the Bankrupt to settle the Accounts. (4.) If it shall appear that
the Bankrupt has given in a false Account, has concealed any part of his Goods
or Debts, in breach of his Oath, he shall be set in the Pillory at his own
door, and be imprisoned during Life, without Bail. (5.) To prevent the Bankrupt
concealing any Debts abroad, it should be enacted, That the Name of the
Bankrupt being entered at the Office, where every man might search gratis,
should be Publication enough; and that after such Entry, no Discharge from the
Bankrupt should be allowed in Account to any man, but whoever would adventure
to pay any Money to the said Bankrupt or his Order, should be still Debtor to
the Estate, and pay it again to the Commissioners.
And whereas Wiser Heads than mine must be employed to compose this Law, if
ever it be made, they will have time to consider of more ways to secure the
Estate for the Creditors, and, if possible, to tie the hands of the Bankrupt
yet faster.

This Law, if ever such a Happiness should arise to this Kingdom, would be a
present Remedy for a multitude of Evils which now we feel, and which are a
sensible detriment to the Trade of this Nation.

(1.) With submission, I question not but it would prevent a great number of
Bankrupts, which now fall by diverse Causes: For, 1. It would effectually remove
all crafty designed Breakings, by which many Honest Men are ruined. And 2. Of
course 'twou'd prevent the Fall of those Tradesmen who are forced to break by
the Knavery of such.
(2.) It would effectually suppress all those Sanctuaries and Refuges of
Thieves, the Mint, Friars, Savoy, Rules, and the like; and that these two ways;
1. Honest Men would have no need of it, here being a more Safe, Easy, and more
Honorable Way to get out of Trouble. 2. Knaves should have no Protection from
those Places, and the Act be fortified against those Places by the following
Clauses, which I have on purpose reserved to this Head.

Since the Provision this Court of Enquiries makes for the ease and deliverance
of every Debtor who is honest, is so considerable, it is most certain that no
man, but he who has a design to Cheat his Creditors, will refuse to accept of
the Favor; and therefore it should be Enacted,

That if any man who is a Tradesman or Merchant shall break or fail, or shut up
Shop, or leave off Trade, and shall not either pay or secure to his Creditors
their full and whole Debts, Twenty Shillings in the Pound, without Abatement or
Deduction; or shall convey away their Books or Goods, in order to bring their
Creditors to any Composition; or shall not apply to this Office as aforesaid,
shall be guilty of Felony, and upon Conviction of the same, shall suffer as a
Felon, without Benefit of Clergy.

And if any such person shall take Sanctuary either in the Mint, Friars, or
other pretended Priviledge-Place, or shall convey thither any of their Goods as
aforesaid, to secure them from their Creditors, upon Complaint thereof made to
any of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, they shall immediately grant
Warrants to the Constable, etc. to search for the said Persons and Goods, who
shall be aided and assisted by the Train'd-Bands, if need be, without any
Charge to the Creditors, to search for and discover the said Persons and Goods;
and whoever were aiding in the carrying in the said Goods, or whoever knowingly
received either the Goods or the Person, should be also guilty of Felony.

For as the Indigent Debtor is a branch of the Commonwealth, which deserves its
Care, so the wilful Bankrupt is one of the worst sort of Thieves. And it seems
a little unequal, that a poor Fellow, who for mere Want steals from his
Neighbor some Trifle, shall be sent out of the Kingdom, and sometimes out of
the World; while a sort of people who defye Justice, and violently resist the
Law, shall be suffered to carry men's Estates away before their faces, and no
Officers to be found who dare execute the Law upon them.

Any man would be concerned to hear with what Scandal and Reproach Foreigners
do speak of the Impotence of our Constitution in this Point: That in a
Civilized Government, as ours is, the strangest Contempt of Authority is shown,
that can be instanced in the world.

I may be a little the warmer on this Head, on account that I have been a
larger Sufferer by such means than ordinary: But I appeal to all the world as
to the Equity of the Case; What the difference is between having my House
broken up in the Night to be robbed, and a man coming in good Credit, and with
a Proffer of Ready Money in the middle of the Day, and buying 500 l. of Goods,
and carry them directly from my Warehouse into the Mint, and the next day laugh
at me, and bid me defiance; yet this I have seen done: I think it is the justest
thing in the world, that the last should be esteemed the greater Thief, and
deserves most to be hanged.

I have seen a Creditor come with his Wise and Children, and beg of the Debtor
only to let him have part of his own Goods again, which he had bought, knowing
and designing to break: I have seen him with Tears and Entreaties petition for
his own, or but some of it, and be taunted and swore at, and denied by a saucy
insolent Bankrupt: That the poor man has been wholly ruined by the Cheat. It Is
by the Villainy of such, many an Honest man is undone, Families starved and sent
a begging, and yet no Punishment prescribed by our Laws for it.

By the aforesaid Commission of Enquiry, all this might be most effectually
prevented, an Honest, Indigent Tradesman preserved, Knavery detected, and
punished; Mints, Friars, and Privilege-Places suppressed, and without doubt a
great number of Insolences avoided and prevented; of which many more
Particulars might be insisted upon, but I think these may be sufficient to lead
any body into the Thought; and for the Method, I leave it to the wise Heads of
the Nation, who know better than I how to state the Law to the Circumstances of
the Crime.

Of ACADEMIES.
WE have in England fewer of these than in any part of the World, at least
where Learning is in so much esteem. But to make amends, the two great
Seminaries we have, are without comparison the Greatest, I will not say the Best
in the World; and though much might be said here concerning Universities in
general, and Foreign Academies in particular, I content my self with noting
that part in which we seem defective. The French, who justly value themselves
upon erecting the most Celebrated Academy of Europe, owe the Luster of it very
much to the great Encouragement the Kings of France have given to it. And one
of the Members making a Speech at his Entrance, tells you, That it is not the
least of the Glories of their Invincible Monarch, to have engrossed all the
Learning of the World in that Sublime Body.

The peculiar Study of the Academy of Paris, has been to Refine and Correct
their own Language; which they have done to that happy degree, that we see it
now spoken in all the Courts of Christendom, as the Language allowed to be most
universal.

I had the Honor once to be a Member of a small Society, who seemed to offer
at this Noble Design in England. But the Greatness of the Work, and the Modesty
of the Gentlemen concerned, prevailed with them to desist an Enterprise which
appeared too great for Private Hands to undertake. We want indeed a Richlieu to
commence such a Work: For I am persuaded, were there such a Genius in our
Kingdom to lead the way, there would not want Capacities who could carry on the
Work to a Glory equal to all that has gone before them. The English Tongue is a
Subject not at all less worthy the Labor of such a Society than the French,
and capable of a much greater Perfection. The Learned among the French will
own, That the Comprehensiveness of Expression is a Glory in which the English
Tongue not only Equals but Excels its Neighbors; Rapin, St. Evremont, and the
most Eminent French Authors have acknowledged it: And my Lord Roscommon, who is
allowed to be a good Judge of English, because he wrote it as exactly as any
ever did, expresses what I mean, in these Lines; "For who did ever in French
Authors see
"The Comprehensive English Energy?
"The weighty Bullion of one Sterling Line,
"Drawn to French Wire would through whole Pages shine.


"And if our Neighbors will yield us, as their greatest Critic has done, the
Preference for Sublimity and Nobleness of Style, we will willingly quit all
Pretensions to their Insignificant Gaiety.

It Is great pity that a Subject so Noble should not have some as Noble to
attempt it: And for a Method, what greater can be set before us, than the
Academy of Paris? Which, to give the French their due, stands foremost among
all the Great Attempts in the Learned Part of the World.

The present King of England, of whom we have seen the whole World writing
Panegyricks and Encomiums, and whom his Enemies, when their Interest does not
silence them, are apt to say more of than our selves; as in the War he has
given surprising Instances of a Greatness of Spirit more than common; so in
Peace, I dare say, with Submission, he shall never have an Opportunity to
illustrate his Memory more, than by such a Foundation: By which he shall have
Opportunity to darken the Glory of the French King in Peace, as he has by his
daring Attempts in the War.

Nothing but Pride loves to be flattered, and that only as it is a Vice which
blinds us to our own Imperfections. I think Princes as particularly unhappy in
having their Good Actions magnified, as their Evil Actions covered: But King
William, who has already won Praise by the Steps of dangerous Virtue, seems
reserved for some Actions which are above the Touch of Flattery, whose Praise
is in themselves.

And such would this be: And because I am speaking of a Work which seems to be
proper only for the Hand of the King himself, I shall not presume to carry on
this Chapter to the Model, as I have done in other Subjects. Only thus far;

That a Soceiety be erected by the King himself, if his Majesty thought fit,
and composed of none but Persons of the first Figure in Learning; and 'twere to
be wished our Gentry were so much Lovers of Learning, that Birth might always
be joined with Capacity.

The Work of this Society should be to encourage Polite Learning, to polish and
refine the English Tongue, and advance the so much neglected Faculty of Correct
Language, to establish Purity and Propriety of Style, and to purge it from all
the Irregular Additions that Ignorance and Affectation have introduced; and all
those Innovations in Speech, if I may call them such, which some Dogmatic
Writers have the Confidence to foster upon their Native Language, as if their
Authority were sufficient to make their own Fancy legitimate.

By such a Society I dare say the true Glory of our English Style would appear;
and among all the Learned Part of the World, be esteemed, as it really is, the
Noblest and most Comprehensive of all the Vulgar Languages in the World.

Into this Society should be admitted none but Persons Eminent for Learning,
and yet none, or but very few, whose Business or Trade was Learning: For I may
be allowed, I suppose, to say, We have seen many great Scholars, mere Learned
Men, and Graduates in the last Degree of Study, whose English has been far from
Polite, full of Stiffness and Affectation, hard Words, and long unusual
Coupling of Syllables and Sentences, which sound harsh and untuneable to the
Ear, and shock the Reader both in Expression and Understanding.

In short, There should be room in this Society for neither Clergyman,
Physician, or Lawyer. Not that I would put an Affront upon the Learning of any
of those Honorable Employments, much less upon their Persons: But if I do
think that their several Professions do naturally and severally prescribe
Habits of Speech to them peculiar to their Practice, and prejudicial to the
Study I speak of, I believe I do them no wrong. Nor do I deny but there may be,
and now are among some of all those Professions, Men of Style and Language,
great Masters of English, whom few men will undertake to Correct; and where
such do at any time appear, their extraordinary Merit should find them a Place
in this Society; but it should be rare, and upon very extraordinary
Occasisions, that such be admitted.

I would therefore have this Society wholly composed of Gentlemen; whereof
Twelve to be of the Nobility, if possible, and Twelve Private Gentlemen, and a
Class of Twelve to be left open for mere Merit, let it be fonnd in who or what
sort it would, which should lie as the Crown of their Study, who have done
something eminent to deserve it. The Voice of this Society should be sufficient
Authority for the Usage of Words, and sufficient also to expose the Innovations
of other men's Fancies; they should preside with a Sort of Judicature over the
Learning of the Age, and have liberty to Correct and Censure the Exorbitance of
Writers, especially of Translators. The Reputation of this Society would be
enough to make them the allowed Judges of Style and Language; and no Author
would have the Impudence to Coin without their Authority. Custom, which is now
our best Authority for Words, would always have its Original here, and not be
allowed without it. There should be no more occasion to search for Derivations
and Constructions, and 'twou'd be as Criminal then to Coin Words, as Money.

The Exercises of this Society would be Lectures on the English Tongue, Essays
on the Nature, Original, Usage, Authorities and Differences of Words, on the
Propriety, Purity, and Cadence of Style, and of the Politeness and Manner in
Writing; Reflections upon Irregular Usages, and Corrections of Erroneous
Customs in Words; and in short, every thing that would appear necessary to the
bringing our English Tongue to a due Perfection, and our Gentlemen to a
Capacity of Writing like themselves; to banish Pride and Pedantry, and silence
the Impudence and Impertinence of Young Authors, whose Ambition is to be known,
though it be by their Folly.

I ask leave here for a Thought or two about that Inundation Custom has made
upon our Language and Discourse by Familiar Swearing; and I place it here,
because Custom has so far prevailed in this foolish Vice, that a man's
Discourse is hardly agreeable without it; and some have taken upon them to say,
It is pity it should not be lawful, it is such a Grace in a man's Speech, and
adds so much Vigor to his Language.

I desire to be understood right, and that by Swearing I mean all those Cursory
Oaths, Curses, Execrations, Imprecations, Asseverations, and by whatsoever
other Names they are distinguished, which are used in Vehemence of Discourse,
in the Mouths almost of all men more or less, of what sort soever.

I am not about to argue any thing of their being sinful and unlawful, as
forbid by Divine Rules; let the Parson alone to tell you that, who has, no
question, said as much to as little purpose in this Case as in any other: But I
am of the opinion, that there is nothing so Impertinent, so Insignificant, so
Senseless and Foolish, as our vulgar way of Discourse, when mixed with Oaths and
Curses; and I would only recommend a little Consideration to our Gentlemen, who
have Sense and Wit enough, and would be ashamed to speak Nonsense in other
things, but value themselves upon their Parts; I would but ask them to put into
Writing the Common-Places of their Discourse, and read them over again, and
examine the English, the Cadence, the Grammar of them; then let them turn them
into Latin, or translate them into any other Language, and but see what a
Jargon and Confusion of Speech they make together.

Swearing, that Lewdness of the Tongue, that Scum and Excrement of the Mouth,
is of all Vices the most foolish and senseless; it makes a man's Conversation
unpleasant, his Discourse fruitless, and his Language Nonsense.

It makes Conversation unpleasant, at least to those who do not use the same
foolish way of Discourse; and indeed, is an Affront to all the Company who
swear not as he does; for if I swear and Curse in Company, I either presume all
the Company likes it, or affront them who do not.

Then it is fruitless; for no man is believed a jot the more for all the
Asseverations, Damnings and Swearings he makes: Those who are used to it
themselves, do not believe a man the more, because they know they are so
customary, that they signify little to bind a man's Intention; and they who
practice them not, have so mean an opinion of those that do, as makes them
think they deserve no belief.

Then, they are the Spoilers and Destroyers of a man's Discourse, and turn it
into perfect Nonsense; and to make it out, I must descend a little to
Particulars, and desire the Reader a little to foul his Mouth with the
Brutish, Sordid, Senseless Expressions, which some Gentlemen call Polite
English, and speaking with a Grace.

Some part of them indeed, though they are foolish enough, as Effects of a mad,
inconsiderate Rage, are yet English; as when a man swears he will do this or
that, and it may be adds, God damn him he will; that is, God damn him if he
don't: This, though it be horrid in another sense, yet may be read in writing,
and is English: But what Language is this?

Jack, God damn me Jack, How do do, thou little dear Son of a Whore? How
have thou done this long time, by God? -- And then they kiss; and the the other,
as lewd as himself, goes on;

Dear Tom, I am glad to see thee with all my heart, let me dye. Come, let us go
take a Bottle, we must not part so; prithee let us go and be drunk by God. --

This is some of our new florid Language, and the Graces and Delicacies of
Style, which if it were put into Latin, I would fain know which is the
principal Verb.

But for a little further remembrance of this Impertinence, go among the
Gamesters, and there nothing is more frequent than, God damn the Dice, or God
damn the Bowls.

Among the Sportsmen it is, God damn the Hounds, when they are at a Fault; or
God damn the Horse, if he bau'ks a Leap: They call men Sons of Bitches, and
Dogs, Sons of Whores: And innumerable Instances may be given of the like
Gallantry of Language, grown now so much a Custom.

It Is true, Custom is allowed to be our best Authority for Words, and it is fit
it should be so; but Reason must be the Judge of Sense in Language, and Custom
can never prevail over it. Words, indeed, like Ceremonies in Religion, may be
submitted to the Magistrate; but Sense, like the Essentials, is positive,
unalterable, and cannot be submitted to any Jurisdiction; it is a Law to it
self, it is ever the same, even an Act of Parliament cannot alter it.

Words, and even Usages in Style, may be altered by Custom, and Proprieties in
Speech differ according to the several Dialects of the Country, and according
to the different manner in which several Languages do severally express
themselves.

But there is a direct Signification of Words, or a Cadence in Expression,
which we call speaking Sense; this, like Truth, is sullen and the same, ever
was and will be so, in what manner, and in what Language soever it is expressed.
Words without it, are only Noise, which any Brute can make as well as we, and
Birds much better; for Words without Sense make but dull Music. Thus a man may
speak in Words, but perfectly unintelligible as to Meaning; he may talk a great
deal, but say nothing. But it is the proper Position of Words, adapted to their
Significations, which makes them intelligible, and conveys the Meaning of the
Speaker to the Understanding of the Hearer; the contrary to which we call
Nonsense; and there is a superfluous crowding in of insignificant Words, more
than are needful to express the thing intended, and this is Impertinence; and
that again carried to an extreme, is ridiculous.

Thus when our Discourse is interlin'd with needless Oaths, Curses, and long
Parentheses of Imprecations, and with some of very indirect signification, they
become very Impertinent; and these being run to the extravagant degree
instanced in before, become perfectly ridiculous and Nonsense; and without
forming it into an Argument, it appears to be Nonsense by the
Contradictoriness; and it appears Impertinent, by the Insignificancy of the
Expression.

After all, how little it becomes a Gentleman to debauch his Mouth with Foul
Language, I refer to themselves in a few Particulars.

This Vicious Custom has prevailed upon Good Manners too far; but yet there are
some degrees to which it is not yet arrived.

As first, The worst Slaves to this Folly will neither teach it to, nor approve
of it in their Children: Some of the most careless will indeed negatively teach
it, by not reproving them for it; but sure no man ever ordered his Children to
be taught to curse or swear.

2. The Grace of Swearing has not obtained to be a Mode yet among the Women;
God damn ye, does not sit well upon a Female Tongue; it seems to be a Masculine
Vice, which the Women are not arrived to yet; and I would only desire those
Gentlemen who practice it themselves, to hear a Woman swear: It has no Music
at all there, I am sure; and just as little does it become any Gentleman, if he
would suffer himself to be judged by all the Laws of Sense or Good Manners in
the world.

It Is a senseless, foolish, ridiculous Practice; it is a Mean to no manner of
End; it is Words spoken which signify nothing; it is Folly acted for the sake of
Folly, which is a thing even the Devil himself don't practice: The Devil does
evil, we say, but it is for some design, either to seduce others, or, as some
Divines say, from a Principle of Enmity to his Maker: Men Steal for Gain, and
Murder to gratify their Avarice or Revenge; Whoredoms and Ravishments,
Adulteries and Sodomy, are committed to please a vicious Appetite, and have
always alluring Objects; and generally all Vices have some previous Cause, and
some visible Tendency; but this, of all Vicious Practices, seems the most
Nonsensical and Ridiculous; there is neither Pleasure nor Profit; no Design
pursued, no Lust gratified, but is a mere Frenzy of the Tongue, a Vomit of the
Brain, which works by putting a Contrary upon the Course of Nature.

Again, other Vices men find some Reason or other to give for, or Excuses to
palliate; men plead Want, to extenuate Theft; and strong Provocations, to
excuse Murders; and many a lame Excuse they will bring for Whoring; but this
sordid Habit, even those that practice it will own to be a Crime, and make no
Excuse for it; and the most I could ever hear a man say for it, was, That he
could not help it.

Besides, as it is an inexcusable Impertinence, so it is a Breach upon Good
Manners and Conversation, for a man to impose the Clamor of his Oaths upon the
Company he converses with; if there be any one person in the Company that does
not approve the way, it is an imposing upon him with a freedom beyond Civility;
as if a man should Fart before a Justice, or talk Bawdy before the Queen, or
the like.

To suppress this, Laws, Acts of Parliaments, and Proclamations, are Bawbles
and Banters, the Laughter of the Lewd Party, and never had, as I could
perceive, any Influence upon the Practice; nor are any of our Magistrates fond
or forward of putting them in execution.

It must be Example, not Penalties, must sink this Crime; and if the Gentlemen
of England would once drop it as a Mode, the Vice is so foolish and ridiculous
in it self, 'twou'd soon grow odious and out of fashion.

This Work such an Academy might begin; and I believe nothing would so soon
explode the Practice, as the Public Discouragement of it by such a Society.
Where all our Customs and Habits both in Speech and Behavior, should receive
an Authority. All the Disputes about Precedence of Wit, with the Manners,
Customs, and Usages of the Theater would be decided here; Plays should pass
here before they were Acted, and the Critics might give their Censures, and
damn at their pleasure; nothing would ever dye which once received Life at this
Original: The Two Theaters might end their Jangle, and dispute for Priority no
more; Wit and Real Worth should decide the Controversy, and here should be the
Infallible Judge.

The Strife would then be only to do well,
And he alone be crowned who did excel.
Ye called them Whigs, who from the Church withdrew,
But now we have our Stage-Dissenters too;
Who scruple Ceremonies of Pit and Box,
And very few are Sound and Orthodox:
But love Disorder so, and are so nice,
They hate Conformity, though it is in Vice.
Some are for Patent-Hierarchy; and some,
Like the old Gauls, seek out for Elbowroom;
Their Arbitrary Governors disown,
And build a Conventicle-Stage of their own.
Phanatick Beaus make up the gaudy Show,
And Wit alone appears Incognito.
Wit and Religion suffer equal Fate;
Neglect of both attends the warm Debate.
For while the Parties strive and countermine,
Wit will as well as Piety decline.
Next to this, which I esteem as the most Noble and most Useful Proposal in
this Book, I proceed to Academies for Military Studies; and because I design
rather to express my meaning, than make a large Book, I bring them all into one
Chapter.

I allow the War is the best Academy in the World, where men study by
Necessity, and practice by Force, and both to some purpose, with Duty in the
Action, and a Reward in the End; and it is evident to any man who knows the
World, or has made any Observations on things, what an Improvement the English
Nation has made, during this Seven Years War.

But should you ask how dear it first cost, and what a condition England was in
for a War at first on this account; how almost all our Engineers and Great
Officers were Foreigners, it may put us in mind how necessary it is to have our
people so practiced in the Arts of War, that they may not be Novices when they
come to the Experiment.

I have heard some, who were no great Friends to the Government, take advantage
to reflect upon the King in the beginning of his Wars in Ireland, That he did
not care to trust the English, but all his Great Officers, his Generals, and
Engineers were Foreigners. And though the Case was so plain as to need no Answer,
and the Persons such as deserved none, yet this must be observed, though it was
very strange, That when the present King took Possession of this Kingdom, and
seeing himself entering upon the bloodiest War this Age has known, began to
regulate his Army, he found but very few among the whole Martial Part of the
Nation fit to make use of for General Officers; and was forced to employ
Strangers, and make them Englishmen; as the Counts Schomberg, Ginkel, Solms,
Ruvigny, and others: And yet it is to be observed also, that all the
Encouragement imaginable was given to the English Gentlemen, to qualify
themselves, by giving no less than Sixteen Regiments to Gentlemen of Good
Families, who had never been in any Service, and knew but very little how to
command them: Of these several are now in the Army, and have the Rewards
suitable to their Merit, being Major-Generals, Brigadeers, and the like.

If then a long Peace had so reduced us to a degree of Ignorance that might
have been dangerous to us, had we not a King, who is always followed by the
greatest Masters in the World, Who knows what Peace and different Governors may
bring us to again?

The manner of making War differs perhaps as much as any thing in the world;
and if we look no further back than our Civil Wars; it is plain a General then
would hardly be fit to be a Colonel now, saving his Capacity of Improvement.
The Defensive Art always follows the Offensive; and though the latter has
extremely got the start of the former in this Age, yet the other is mightily
improving also.

We saw in England a bloody Civil War, where, according to the old Temper of
the English, fighting was the Business. To have an Army lying in such a Post,
as not to be able to come at them, was a thing never heard of in that War; even
the weakest Party would always come out and fight; Dunbar Fight, for instance;
and they that were beaten to day, would fight again to morrow, and seek one
another out with such Eagerness, as if they had been in haste to have their
Brains knocked out. Encampments, Intrenchments, Batteries, Counter-marchings,
fortifying of Camps, and Cannonadings, were strange, and almost unknown things,
and whole Campaigns were past over, and hardly any Tents made use of. Battles,
Surprises, Storming of Towns, Skirmishes, Sieges, Ambuscades, and Beating up
Quarters, was the News of every day. Now it is frequent to have Armies of Fifty
thousand men of a side stand at Bay within view of one another, and spend a
whole Campaign in Dodging, or as it is genteely called, Observing one another,
and then march off into Winter Quarters. The difference is in the Maxims of
War, which now differ as much from what they were formerly, as Long Perukes do
from Piqued Beards; or as the Habits of the People do now, from what they then
wore. The present Maxims of the War are; Never Fight without a manifest
Advantage. And always Encamp so as not to be forced to it. And if two opposite
Generals nicely observe both these Rules, it is impossible they should ever
come to fight.

I grant that this way of making War spends generally more Money and less Blood
than former Wars did; but then it spins Wars out to a greater Length; and I
almost question whether if this had been the way of Fighting of old, our Civil
War had not lasted till this day. Their Maxim was, Wherever you meet your
Enemy, fight him.

But the Case is quite different now; and I think it is plain in the present
War, that it is not he who has the longest Sword, so much as he who has the
longest Purse, will hold the War out best. Europe is all engaged in the War,
and the Men will never be exhausted while either Party can find Money; but he
who finds himself poorest, must give out first; and this is evident in the
French King, who now inclines to Peace, and owns it, while at the same time his
Armies are numerous and whole; but the Sinews fail, he finds his Exchequer
fail, his Kingdom drained, and Money hard to come at: Not that I believe half
the Reports we have had of the Misery and Poverty of the French are true; but
it is manifest the King of France finds, whatever his Armies may do, his Money
will not hold out so long as the Confederates; and therefore he uses all the means
possible to procure a Peace, while he may do it with the most advantage.

There is no question but the French may hold the War out several Years longer;
but their King is too wise to let things run to extremity; he will rather
condescend to Peace upon hard terms now, than stay longer, if he finds himself
in danger to be forced to worse.

This being the only Digression I design to be guilty of, I hope I shall be
excused it.

The Sum of all is this, That since it is so necessary to be in a condition for
War in a time of Peace, our People should be inured to it. It Is strange that
every thing should be ready but the Soldier: Ships are ready, and our Trade
keeps the Seamen always taught, and breeds up more; but Soldiers, Horsemen,
Engineers, Gunners, and the like, must be bred and taught; men are not born
with Muskets on their Shoulders, nor Fortifications in their Heads; it is not
natural to shoot Bombs, and undermine Towns: For which purpose I propose,

A Royal Academy for Military Exercises.

The Founder the King himself; the Charge to be paid by the Public, and
settled by a Revenue from the Crown, to be paid Yearly.

I propose this to consist of Four Parts. (1.) A College for breeding up of
Artists in the useful Practice of all Military Exercises; the Scholars to be
taken in Young, and be maintained, and afterward under the King's Care for
Preferment, as their Merit and His Majesty's Favor shall recommend them; from
whence His Majesty would at all times be furnished with able Engineers,
Gunners, Fire-masters, Bombardiers, Miners, and the like. The Second College
for Voluntary Students in the same Exercises; who should all upon certain
limited Conditions be entertained, and have all the advantages of the Lectures,
Experiments, and Learning of the College, and be also capable of several
Titles, Profits, and Settlements in the said College, answerable to the Fellows
in the Universities. The Third College for Temporary Study, into which any
Person who is a Gentleman, and an Englishman, entering his Name, and conforming
to the Orders of the House, shall be entertained like a Gentleman for one whole
Year gratis, and taught by Masters appointed out of the Second College. The
Fourth College, of Schools only, where all Persons whatsoever for a small
Allowance shall be taught and entered in all the particular Exercises they
desire; and this to be supplied by the Proficients of the first College.


I could lay out the Dimensions, and necessary Incidents of all this Work; but
since the Method of such a Foundation is easy and regular from the Model of
other Colleges, I shall only state the Economy of the House.

The Building must be very Large, and should rather be Stately and Magnificent
in Figure, than Gay and Costly in Ornament: And I think such a House as
Chelsea-College, only about four times as big, would answer it; and yet I
believe might be finished for as little Charge as has been laid out in that
Palace-like Hospital.

The First College should consist of, One General Five Colonels Twenty Captains

Being such as Graduates by Preferment, at first named by the Founder; and
after the first Settlement to be chosen out of the First or Second College;
with Apartments in the College, and Salaries.

The General 300 l. per Ann. The Colonels 100 The Captains 60

2000 Scholars; among whom shall be the following Degrees; Governors 100.
Allowed 10 l. per An. Directors 200. 5. Exempts 200. 5. Proficients 500.
Juniors 1000.

The General to be named by the Founder, out of the Colonels; the Colonels to
be named by the General, out of the Captains; the Captains out of the
Governors; the Governors from the Directors, and the Directors from the
Exempts, and so on.

The Juniors to be divided into Ten Schools; the Schools to be thus governed:
Every School has 100 Juniors, in 10 Classes. Every Class to have 2 Directors.
100 Classes of Juniors, is 1000 Each Class 2 Directors, 200 1200

The Proficients to be divided into Five Schools: Every School to have 10
Classes of 10 each. Every Class 2 Governors. 50 Classes of Proficients, is 500
Each Class 2 Governors, is 100 600

The Exempts to be Supernumerary, having a small Allowance, and maintained in
the College till Preferment offer.

The Second College to consist of Voluntary Students, to be taken in after a
certain Degree of Learning, from among the Proficients of the First, or from
any other Schools, after such and such Limitations of Learning; who study at
their own Charge, being allowed certain Privileges; as, Chambers Rent-free, on
condition of Residence. Commons gratis, for certain fixed terms. Preferment, on
condition of a Term of Years Residence. Use of Libraries, Instruments, and
Lectures of the College.


This College should have the following Preferments, with Salaries. A Governor,
200 l. per Ann. A President, 100 50 College-Majors, 50 200 Proficients, 10 500
Voluntary Students, without Allowance.

The Third and Fourth Colleges, consisting only of Schools for Temporarary
Study, may be thus;

The Third being for Gentlemen to learn the necessary Arts and Exercises, to
qualify them for the Service of their Country, and entertaining them one whole
year at the Public Charge, may be supposed to have always One thousand Persons
on its hands, and cannot have less than 100 Teachers; who I would thus order;

Every Teacher shall continue at least One year, but by allowance Two years at
most; shall have 20 l. per Ann. Extraordinary Allowance; shall be bound to give
their constant Attendance, and shall have always 5 College-Majors of the Second
College to supervise them, who shall command a Month, and then be succeeded by
5 others, and so on; 10 l. per Ann. extraordinary to be paid them for their
Attendance.

The Gentlemen who practice, to be put to no manner of Charge, but to be
obliged strictly to the following Articles: (1.) To constant Residence, not to
lie out of the House without leave of the College-Major. (2.) To perform all
the College-Exercises, as appointed by the Masters, without dispute. (3.) To
submit to the Orders of the House.


To quarrel, or give Ill Language, should be a Crime to be punished by way of
Fine only, the College-Major to be Judge, and the Offender be put into Custody
till he ask Pardon of the Person wronged; by which means every Gentleman who
has been affronted, has sufficient satisfaction.

But to Strike, Challenge, Draw, or fight, should be more severely punished;
the Offender to be declared no Gentleman, his Name posted up at the
College-Gate, his Person expelled the House, and to be pumped as a Rake if ever
he is taken within the College-Walls.

The Teachers of this College to be chosen, one half out of the Exempts of the
First College, and the other out of the Proficients of the second.

The Fourth College being only of Schools, will be neither Chargeable nor
Troublesome, but may consist of as many as shall offer themselves to be taught,
and supplied with Teachers from the other Schools.

The Proposal being of so large an Extent, must have a proportionable
Settlement for its Maintenance; and the Benefit being to the whole Kingdom, the
Charge will naturally lie upon the Public, and cannot well be less,
considering the Number of Persons to be maintained, than as follows;

First College. l. per An. The General, 300 5 Colonels at 100 l. per Ann.
each, 500 20 Captains, at 60. 1200 100 Governors, at 10. 1000 200 Directors, at
5. 1000 200 Exempts, at 5. 1000 2000 Heads for Subsistence, at 20 l. per Head,
per Ann. Including Provision, and all the Officers Salaries in the House, as
Butlers, Cooks, Purveyors, Nurses, Maids, Laundresses, Stewards, Clerks,
Servants, Chaplains, Porters, and Attendants, which are numerous. 40000 Second
College. A Governor, 200 A President, 100 50 College-Majors, at 50 l. per An.
2500 200 Proficients, at 10 l. 2000 Commons for 500 Students, during times of
Exercises, at 5 l. per An. each, 2500 200 Proficients Subsistence, reckoning as
above, 4000 Third College. The Gentlemen here are maintained as Gentlemen, and
are to have good Tables, who shall therefore have an Allowance at the Rate of
25 l. per Head, all Officers to be maintained out of it; which is, 25000 100
Teachers, Salary and Subsistence ditto, 4500 50 College-Majors at 10 l. per
Ann. is 500 Annual Charge 86300 l. The Building to cost 50000 Furniture, Beds,
Tables, Chairs, Linen, etc. 10000 Books, Instruments, and Utensils for
Experiments, 2000 So the Immediate Charge would be 62000 l. per An. The Annual
Charge, 86300 To which add the Charges of Exercises and Experiments, 3700 90000

The King's Magazines to furnish them with 500 Barrels of Gunpowder per An. for
the Public Uses of Exercises and Experiments.

In the first of these Colleges should remain the Governing-Part, and all the
Preferments be made from thence, to be supplied in course from the other; the
General of the first to give Orders to the other, and be subject only to the
Founder.

The Government should be all Military, with a Constitution for the same
regulated for that purpose, and a Council to hear and determine the Differences
and Trespasses by the College-Laws.

The Public Exercises likewise Military, and all the Schools be disciplined
under proper Officers, who are so in turn, or by Order of the General, and
continue but for the Day.

The several Classes to perform several Studies, and but one Study to a
distinct Class, and the Persons as they remove from one Study to another, to
change their Classes, but so as that in the General Exercises all the Scholars
may be qualified to act all the several Parts, as they may be ordered.

The proper Studies of this College should be the following: Geometry Astronomy
History Navigation Decimal Arithmetic Trigonometry Dialing Gauging Mining
Fireworking Bombarding Gunnery Fortification Encamping Entrenching Approaching,
Attacking Delineation Architecture Surveying.
And all Arts or Sciences Appendixes to such as these.

With Exercises for the Body, to which all should be obliged, as their Genius
and Capacities led them. As, (1.) Swimming; which no Soldier, and indeed no Man
whatever ought to be without. (2.) Handling all sorts of Firearms. (3.)
Marching and Countermarching in Form. (4.) Fencing, and the Long Staff. (5.)
Riding and Managing, or Horsemanship. (6.) Running, Leaping, and Wrestling.


And herewith should also be preserved and carefully taught all the Customs,
Usages, Terms of War, and Terms of Art, used in Sieges, Marches of Armies, and
Encampments; that so a Gentleman taught in this College, should be no Novice
when he comes into the King's Armies, though he has seen no Service abroad. I
remember the Story of an English Gentleman, an Officer at the Siege of Limerick
in Ireland, who though he was Brave enough upon Action, yet for the only matter
of being ignorant in the Terms of Art, and knowing not how to talk
Camp-Language, was exposed to be laughed at by the whole Army, for mistaking
the opening of the Trenches, which he thought had been a Mine against the Town.

The Experiments of these Colleges would be as well worth publishing, as the
Acts of the Royal Society. To which purpose the House must be built where they
may have Ground to cast Bombs, to raise Regular Works, as Batteries, Bastions,
Half-Moons, Redoubts, Horn-works, Forts, and the like; with the convenience of
Water to draw round such Works, to exercise the Engineers in all the necessary
Experiments of Dreining, and Mining under Ditches. There must be room to fire
Great Shot at a distance, to Canonade a Camp, to throw all sorts of Fireworks
and Machines, that are or shall be invented; to open Trenches, form Camps, etc.

Their Public Exercises will be also very diverting, and more worth while for
any Gentlemen to see, than the Sights or Shows which our people in England are
so fond of.

I believe, as a Constitution might be formed from these Generals, this would
be the Greatest, the Gallantest, and the most Useful Foundation in the World.
The English Gentry would be the best qualified, and consequently, best accepted
abroad, and most useful at home of any people in the world; and His Majesty
should never more be exposed to the necessity of employing Foreigners in the
Posts of Trust and Service in His Armies.

And that the whole Kingdom might in some degree be better qualified for
Service, I think the following Project would be very useful.

When our Military Weapon was the Long-Bow, at which our English Nation in some
measure excelled the whole World, the meanest Countreyman was a good Archer;
and that which qualified them so much for Service in the War, was their
Diversion in Times of Peace; which also had this good Effect, That when an Army
was to be raised, they needed no disciplining: And for the Encouragement of the
People to an Exercise so publicly Profitable, an Act of Parliament was made,
to oblige every Parish to maintain Buts for the Youth in the Country to shoot
at.

Since our way of fighting is now altered; and this destructive Engine, the
Musket, is the proper Arms for the Soldier, I could wish the Diversion also of
the English would change too, that our Pleasures and Profit might correspond.
It Is a great Hindrance to this Nation, especially where Standing-Armies are a
Grievance, that if ever a War commence, men must have at least a Year before
they are thought fit to face an Enemy, to instruct them how to handle their
Arms; and new-raised men are called Raw Soldiers. To help this, at least in
some measure, I would propose, That the Public Exercises of our Youth should
by some Public Encouragement, ( for Penalties will not do it) be drawn off from
the foolish Boyish Sports of Cocking, and Cricketing, and from Tippling, to
shooting with a Firelock; an Exercise as Pleasant, as it is Manly and Generous;
and Swimming, which is a thing so many ways profitable, besides its being a
great Preservative of Health, that methinks no Man ought to be without it.

(1.) For Shooting; the Colleges I have mentioned above, having provided for
the instructing the Gentry at the King's Charge; the Gentry in return of that
Favor should introduce it among the Countrey-people; which might easily be
done thus:

If every Countrey-Gentleman, according to his degree, would contribute to set
up a Prize, to be shot for by the Town he lives in, or the Neighborhood, about
once a year, or twice a year, or oftener, as they think fit; which Prize not
single only to him who shoots nearest, but according to the Custom of Shooting:

This would certainly set all the Young Men in England a shooting, and make
them Marks-men; for they would be always practicing and making Matches among
themselves too, and the advantage would be found in a War; for no doubt if all
the Soldiers in a Battalion took a true Level at their Enemy, there would be
much more Execution done at a distance than there is; whereas it has been known
now, that a Battalion of men has received the Fire of another Battalion, and
not lost above 30 or 40 men; and I suppose it will not easily be forgot how at
the Battle of Agrim, a Battalion of the English Army received the whole Fire of
an Irish Regiment of Dragoons, but never knew to this day whether they had any
Bullets or no; and I need appeal no further than to any Officer that served in
the Irish War, what advantages the English Armies made of the Irish being such
wonderful Marks-men.

Under this Head of Academies, I might bring in a Project for

An Academy for Women.

I Have often thought of it as one of the most barbarous Customs in the world,
considering us as a Civilized and a Christian Country, that we deny the
advantages of Learning to Women. We reproach the Sex every day with Folly and
Impertinence, while I am confident, had they the advantages of Education equal
to us, they would be guilty of less than our selves.

One would wonder indeed how it should happen that Women are conversible at
all, since they are only beholding to Natural Parts for all their Knowledge.
Their Youth is spent to teach them to Stitch and Sow, or make Bawbles: They are
taught to Read indeed, and perhaps to Write their Names, or so; and that is the
height of a Woman's Education. And I would but ask any who slight the Sex for
their Understanding, What is a Man (a Gentleman, I mean) good for, that is
taught no more?

I need not give Instances, or examine the Character of a Gentleman with a good
Estate, and of a good Family, and with tolerable Parts, and examine what Figure
he makes for want of Education.

The Soul is placed in the Body like a rough Diamond, and must be polished, or
the Luster of it will never appear: And it is manifest, that as the Rational
Soul distinguishes us from Brutes, so Education carries on the distinction, and
makes some less brutish than others: This is too evident to need any
demonstration. But why then should Women be denied the benefit of Instruction?
If Knowledge and Understanding had been useless additions to the Sex, God
Almighty would never have given them Capacities; for he made nothing needless:
Besides, I would ask such, What they can see in Ignorance, that they should
think it a necessary Ornament to a Woman? Or how much worse is a Wise Woman
than a Fool? Or what has the Woman done to forfeit the Privilege of being
taught? Does she plague us with her Pride and Impertinence? Why did we not let
her learn, that she might have had more Wit? Shall we upbraid Women with Folly,
when it is only the Error of this inhuman Custom, that hindered them being made
wiser?

The Capacities of Women are supposed to be greater, and their Senses quicker
than those of the Men; and what they might be capable of being bred to, is
plain from some Instances of Female-Wit, which this Age is not without; which
upbraids us with Injustice, and looks as if we denied Women the advantages of
Education, for fear they should vye with the Men in their Improvements.

To remove this Objection, and that Women might have at least a needful
Opportunity of Education in all sorts of Useful Learning, I propose the Draught
of an Academy for that purpose.

I know it is dangerous to make Public Appearances of the Sex; they are not
either to be confined or exposed; the first will disagree with their
Inclinations, and the last with their Reputations; and therefore it is somewhat
difficult; and I doubt a Method proposed by an Ingenious Lady, in a little
Book, called, Advice to the Ladies, would be found impracticable. For, saving
my Respect to the Sex, the Levity, which perhaps is a little peculiar to them,
at least in their Youth, will not bear the Restraint; and I am satisfied,
nothing but the height of Bigotry can keep up a Nunnery: Women are
extravagantly desirous of going to Heaven, and will punish their Pretty Bodies
to get thither; but nothing else will do it; and even in that case sometimes it
falls out that Nature will prevail.

When I talk therefore of an Academy for Women, I mean both the Model, the
Teaching, and the Government, different from what is proposed by that Ingenious
Lady, for whose Proposal I have a very great Esteem, and also a great Opinion
of her Wit; different too from all sorts of Religious Confinement, and above
all, from Vows of Celibacy.

Wherefore the Academy I propose should differ but little from Public Schools,
wherein such Ladies as were willing to study, should have all the advantages of
Learning suitable to their Genius.

But since some Severities of Discipline more than ordinary would be absolutely
necessary to preserve the Reputation of the House, that Persons of Quality and
Fortune might not be a fraid to venture their Children thither, I shall venture
to make a small Scheme by way of Essay.

The House I would have built in a Form by it self, as well as in a Place by it
self.

The Building should be of Three plain Fronts, without any Jettings, or
Bearing-Work, that the Eye might at a Glance see from one Coin to the other;
the Gardens walled in the same Triangular Figure, with a large Moat, and but
one Entrance.

When thus every part of the Situation was contrived as well as might be for
discovery, and to render Intrieguing dangerous, I would have no Guards, no
Eyes, no Spies set over the Ladies, but shall expect them to be tried by the
Principles of Honor and strict Virtue.

And if I am asked, Why? I must ask Pardon of my own Sex for giving this reason
for it:

I am so much in Charity with Women, and so well acquainted with Men, that it is
my opinion, There needs no other Care to prevent Intrieguing, than to keep the
men effectually away: For though Inclination, which we prettily call Love, does
sometimes move a little too visibly in the Sex, and Frailty often follows; yet
I think verily, Custom, which we miscall Modesty, has so far the Ascendant over
the Sex, that Solicitation always goes before it.

Custom with Women 'stead of Virtue rules;
It leads the Wisest, and commands the Fools:
For this alone, when Inclinations reign,
Though Virtue's fled, will Acts of Vice restrain.
Only by Custom it is that Virtue lives,
And Love requires to be asked, before it gives.
For that which we call Modesty, is Pride:
They scorn to ask, and hate to be denied.
It Is Custom thus prevails upon their Want;
They Will never beg, what asked they easily grant.
And when the needless Ceremony's over,
Themselves the Weakness of the Sex discover.
If then Desires are strong, and Nature free,
Keep from her Men, and Opportunity.
Else 'twill be vain to curb her by Restraint;
But keep the Question off, you keep the Saint.
In short, let a Woman have never such a Coming-Principle, she will let you ask
before she complies, at least if she be a Woman of any Honor.

Upon this ground I am persuaded such Measures might be taken, that the Ladies
might have all the Freedom in the world within their own Walls, and yet no
Intrieguing, no Indecencies, nor Scandalous Affairs happen; and in order to
this, the following Customs and Laws should be observed in the Colleges; of
which I would propose One at least in every County in England, and about Ten
for the City of London.

After the Regulation of the Form of the Building as before; (1.) All the
Ladies who enter into the House, should set their Hands to the Orders of the
House, to signify their Consent to submit to them. (2.) As no Woman should be
received, but who declared her self willing, and that it was the Act of her
Choice to enter her self, so no Person should be confined to continue there a
moment longer than the same voluntary Choice inclined her. (3.) The Charges of
the House being to be paid by the Ladies, every one that entered should have
only this Encumbrance, That she should pay for the whole Year, though her mind
should change as to her continuance. (4.) An Act of Parliament should make it
Felony without Clergy, for any man to enter by Force or Fraud into the House,
or to solicit any Woman, though it were to Marry, while she was in the House. And
this Law would by no means be severe; because any Woman who was willing to
receive the Addresses of a Man, might discharge her self of the House when she
pleased; and on the contrary, any Woman who had occasion, might discharge her
self of the Impertinent Addresses of any Person she had an Aversion to, by
entering into the House.


In this House,

The Persons who Enter, should be taught all sorts of Breeding suitable to both
their Genius and their Quality; and in particular, Music and Dancing, which it
would be cruelty to bar the Sex of, because they are their Darlings: But
besides this, they should be taught Languages, as particularly French and
Italian; and I would venture the Injury of giving a Woman more Tongues than one.

They should, as a particular Study, be taught all the Graces of Speech, and
all the necessary Air of Conversation; which our common Education is so
defective in, that I need not expose it: They should be brought to read Books,
and especially History, and so to read as to make them understand the World,
and be able to know and judge of things when they hear of them.

To such whose Genius would lead them to it, I would deny no sort of Learning;
but the chief thing in general is to cultivate the Understandings of the Sex,
that they may be capable of all sorts of Conversation; that their Parts and
Judgments being improved, they may be as Profitable in their Conversation as
they are Pleasant.

Women, in my observation, have little or no difference in them, but as they
are, or are not distinguished by Education. Tempers indeed may in some degree
influence them, but the main distinguishing part is their Breeding.

The whole Sex are generally Quick and Sharp: I believe I may be allowed to say
generally so; for you rarely see them lumpish and heavy when they are Children,
as Boys will often be. If a Woman be well-bred, and taught the proper
Management of her Natural Wit, she proves generally very sensible and
retentive: And without partiality, a Woman of Sense and Manners is the Finest
and most Delicate Part of God's Creation; the Glory of her Maker, and the great
Instance of his singular regard to Man, his Darling Creature, to whom he gave
the best Gift either God could bestow, or man receive: And it is the sordid'st
Piece of Folly and Ingratitude in the world, to withhold from the Sex the due
Luster which the advantages of Education gives to the Natural Beauty of their
Minds.

A Woman well Bred and well Taught, furnished with the additional
Accomplishments of Knowledge and Behavior, is a Creature without comparison;
her Society is the Emblem of sublimer Enjoyments; her Person is Angelick, and
her Conversation heavenly; she is all Softness and Sweetness, Peace, Love, Wit,
and Delight: She is every way suitable to the sublimest Wish; and the man that
has such a one to his Portion, has nothing to do but to rejoice in her, and be
thankful.

On the other hand, Suppose her to be the very same Woman, and rob her of the
Benefit of Education, and it follows thus;

If her Temper be Good, want of Education makes her Soft and Easy.

Her Wit, for want of Teaching, makes her Impertinent and Talkative.

Her Knowledge, for want of Judgment and Experience, makes her Fanciful and
Whimsical.

If her Temper be Bad, want of Breeding makes her worse, and she grows Haughty,
Insolent, and Loud.

If she be Passionate, want of Manners makes her Termagant, and a Scold, which
is much at one with Lunatic.

If she be Proud, want of Discretion (which still is Breeding) makes her
Conceited, Fantastic, and Ridiculous.

And from these she degenerates to be Turbulent, Clamorous, Noisy, Nasty, and
the Devil.

Methinks Mankind for their own sakes, since say what we will of the Women, we
all think fit one time or other to be concerned with 'em, should take some care
to breed them up to be suitable and serviceable, if they expected no such thing
as Delight from 'em. Bless us! What Care do we take to Breed up a good Horse,
and to Break him well! and what a Value do we put upon him when it is done, and
all because he should be fit for our use! and why not a Woman? Since all her
Ornaments and Beauty, without suitable Behavior, is a Cheat in Nature, like
the false Tradesman, who puts the best of his Goods uppermost, that the Buyer
may think the rest are of the same Goodness.

Beauty of the Body, which is the Women's Glory, seems to be now unequally
bestowed, and Nature, or rather Providence, to lie under some Scandal about it,
as if 'twas given a Woman for a Snare to Men, and so make a kind of a She-Devil
of her: Because they say Exquisite Beauty is rarely given with Wit; more rarely
with Goodness of Temper, and never at all with Modesty. And some, pretending to
justify the Equity of such a Distribution, will tell us it is the Effect of the
Justice of Providence in dividing particular Excellencies among all his
Creatures, share and share alike, as it were, that all might for something or
other be acceptable to one another, else some would be despised.

I think both these Notions false; and yet the last, which has the show of
Respect to Providence, is the worst; for it supposes Providence to be Indigent
and Empty; as if it had not wherewith to furnish all the Creatures it had made,
but was fain to be parcimonious in its Gifts, and distribute them by
piecemeal, for fear of being exhausted.

If I might venture my Opinion against an almost universal Notion, I would say,
Most men mistake the Proceedings of Providence in this case, and all the world
at this day are mistaken in their Practice about it. And because the Assertion
is very bold, I desire to explain my self.

That Almighty First Cause which made us all, is certainly the Fountain of
Excellence, as it is of Being, and by an Invisible Influence could have
diffused Equal Qualities and Perfections to all the Creatures it has made, as
the Sun does its Light, without the least Ebb or Diminution to himself; and has
given indeed to every individual sufficient to the Figure his Providence had
designed him in the world.

I believe it might be defended, if I should say, That I do suppose God has
given to all Mankind equal Gifts and Capacities, in that he has given them all
Souls equally capable; and that the whole difference in Mankind proceeds either
from Accidental Difference in the Make of their Bodies, or from the foolish
Difference of Education.

1. From Accidental Difference in Bodies. I would avoid discoursing here of the
Philosophical Position of the Soul in the Body: But if it be true as
Philosophers do affirm, That the Understanding and Memory is dilated or
contracted according to the accidental Dimensions of the Organ through which
it is conveyed; then though God has given a Soul as capable to me as another, yet
if I have any Natural Defect in those Parts of the Body by which the Soul
should act, I may have the same Soul infused as another man, and yet he be a
Wise Man, and I a very Fool. For example, If a Child naturally have a Defect in
the Organ of Hearing, so that he could never distinguish any Sound, that Child
shall never be able to speak or read, though it have a Soul capable of all the
Accomplishments in the world. The Brain is the Center of the Souls actings,
where all the distinguishing Faculties of it reside; and it is observable, A man
who has a narrow contracted Head, in which there is not room for the due and
necessary Operations of Nature by the Brain, is never a man of very great
Judgment; and that Proverb, A Great Head and Little Wit, is not meant by
Nature, but is a Reproof upon Sloth; as if one should, by way of wonder, say,
Fie, fie, you that have a Great Head, have but Little Wit, that is strange! that
must certainly be your own fault. From this Notion I do believe there is a
great matter in the Breed of Men and Women; not that Wise Men shall always get
Wise Children; but I believe Strong and Healthy Bodies have the Wisest
Children; and Sickly Weakly Bodies affect the Wits as well as the Bodies of
their Children. We are easily persuaded to believe this in the Breeds of
Horses, Cocks, Dogs, and other Creatures; and I believe it is as visible in Men.

But to come closer to the business; the great distinguishing difference which
is seen in the world between Men and Women, is in their Education; and this is
manifested by comparing it with the difference between one Man or Woman, and
another.

And herein it is that I take upon me to make such a bold Assertion, That all
the World are mistaken in their Practice about Women: For I cannot think that
God Almighty ever made them so delicate, so glorious Creatures, and furnished
them with such Charms, so Agreeable and so Delightful to Mankind, with Souls
capable of the same Accomplishments with Men, and all to be only Stewards of
our Houses, Cooks and Slaves.

Not that I am for exalting the Female Government in the least: But, in short,
I would have Men take Women for Companions, and Educate them to be fit for it.
A Woman of Sense and Breeding will scorn as much to encroach upon the
Prerogative of the Man, as a Man of Sense will scorn to oppress the Weakness of
the Woman. But if the Women's Souls were refined and improved by Teaching, that
word would be lost; to say, The Weakness of the Sex, as to Judgment, would be
Nonsense; for Ignorance and Folly would be no more to be found among Women than
Men. I remember a Passage which I heard from a very Fine Woman, she had Wit and
Capacity enough, an Extraordinary Shape and Face, and a Great Fortune, but had
been cloistered up all her time, and for fear of being stoll'n had not had the
liberty of being taught the common necessary knowledge of Women's Affairs; and
when she came to converse in the world, her Natural Wit made her so sensible of
the want of Education, that she gave this short Reflection on her self:

I am ashamed to talk with my very Maids, says she, for I don't know when they
do right or wrong: I had more need go to School, than be Married.

I need not enlarge on the Loss the Defect of Education is to the Sex, nor
argue the Benefit of the contrary Practice; it is a thing will be more easily
granted than remedied: This Chapter is but an Essay at the thing, and I refer
the Practice to those Happy Days, if ever they shall be, when men shall be wise
enough to mend it.

Of a COURT-MERCHANT.
I Ask Pardon of the Learned Gentlemen of the Long Robe, if I do 'em any wrong
in this Chapter, having no design to affront 'em; when I say, That in Matters
of Debate among Merchants, when they come to be argued by Lawyers at the Bar,
they are strangely handled. I my self have heard very famous Lawyers make sorry
Work of a Cause between the Merchant and his Factor; and when they come to
argue about Exchanges, Discounts, Protests, Demorages, Charter-Parties,
Fraights, Port-Charges, Assurances, Barratries, Bottomries, Accounts Current,
Accounts in Commission, and Accounts in Company, and the like, the Solicitor
has not been able to draw a Brief, nor the Council to understand it: Never was
Young Parson more put to it to make out his Text when he is got into the Pulpit
without his Notes, than I have seen a Council at the Bar, when he would make
out a Cause between two Merchants: And I remember a pretty History of a
particular Case, by way of Instance, When two Merchants contending about a long
Factorage-Account, that had all the Niceties of Merchandising in it, and
laboring on both sides to instruct their Council, and to put them in when they
were out; at last they found them make such ridiculous stuff off it, that they
both threw up the Cause, and agreed to a Reference; which Reference in one
Week, without any Charge, ended all the Dispute, which they had spent a great
deal of Money in before to no purpose.

Nay, the very Judges themselves (no Reflection upon their Learning) have been
very much at a loss in giving Instructions to a Jury, and Juries much more to
understand them; for when all is done, Juries, which are not always, nor often
indeed of the Wisest Men, are to be sure ill Umpires in Causes so nice, that
the very Lawyer and Judge can hardly understand them.

The Affairs of Merchants are accompanied with such variety of Circumstances,
such new and unusual Contingences, which change and differ in every Age, with a
multitude of Niceties and Punctilio's; and those again altering as the Customs
and Usages of Countries and States do alter; that it has been found
impracticable to make any Laws that could extend to all Cases: And our Law it
self does tacitly acknowledge its own Imperfection in this Case, by allowing
the Custom of Merchants to pass as a kind of Law, in cases of Difficulty.

Wherefore it seems to me a most Natural Proceeding, That such Affairs should
be heard before, and judged by such as by known Experience and long Practice in
the Customs and Usages of Foreign Negoce, are of course the most capable to
determine the same.

Besides the Reasonableness of the Argument, there are some Cases in our Laws
in which it is impossible for a Plaintiff to make out his Case, or a Defendant
to make out his Plea; as in particular, when his Proofs are beyond Seas, for no
Protests, Certifications, or Procurations are allowed in our Courts as
Evidence; and the Damages are Infinite and Irretrievable by any of the
Proceedings of our Laws.

For the answering all these Circumstances, a Court might be erected by
Authority of Parliament, to be composed of Six Judges Commissioners, who should
have Power to Hear and Decide as a Court of Equity, under the Title of, A
Court-Merchant.

The Proceedings of this Court should be short, the Trials speedy, the Fees
easy, that every man might have immediate Remedy where Wrong is done: For in
Trials at Law about Merchants Affairs, the Circumstances of the Case are often
such, as the long Proceedings of Courts of Equity are more pernicious than in
other Cases; because the matters to which they are generally relating, are
under greater Contingences than in other cases, as Effects in hands abroad,
which want Orders, Ships and Seamen lying at Demoreage, and in Pay, and the
like.

These Six Judges should be chosen of the most Eminent Merchants of the
Kingdom, to reside in London, and to have Power by Commission to summon a
Council of Merchants, who should decide all Cases on the Hearing of both
Parties, with Appeal to the said Judges.

Also to delegate by Commission Petty Councils of Merchants in the most
considerable Ports of the Kingdom for the same purpose.

The Six Judges themselves to be only Judges of Appeal; all Trials to be heard
before the Council of Merchants, by Methods and Proceedings Singular and
Concise.

The Council to be sworn to do Justice, and to be chosen annually out of the
principal Merchants of the City.

The Proceedings here should be without Delay; the Plaintiff to exhibit his
Grievance by way of Brief, and the Defendant to give in his Answer, and a time
of Hearing to be appointed immediately.

The Defendant by Motion shall have liberty to put off Hearing, upon showing
good Cause; not otherwise.

At Hearing, every man to argue his own Cause, if he pleases, or introduce any
person to do it for him.

Attestations and Protests from Foreign Parts, regularly procured, and
authentickly signified in due Form, to pass in Evidence; Affidavits in due Form
likewise attested and done before proper Magistrates within the King's
Dominions, to be allowed as Evidence.

The Party grieved may appeal to the Six Judges, before whom they shall plead
by Council, and from their Judgment to have no Appeal.

By this Method Infinite Controversies would be avoided, and Disputes amicably
ended, a multitude of present Inconveniences avoided; and Merchandizing-Matters
would in a Merchant-like manner be decided, by the known Customs and Methods of
Trade.

Of SEAMEN.
IT is observable, That whenever this Kingdom is engaged in a War with any of
its Neighbors, two great Inconveniences constantly follow; one to the King,
and one to Trade.

(1.) That to the King is, That he is forced to press Seamen for the Manning of
his Navy, and force them involuntarily into the Service: Which way of violent
dragging men into the Fleet, is attended with sundry ill circumstances: As, 1.
Our Naval Preparations are retarded, and our Fleets always late, for want of
Men; which has exposed them not a little, and been the ruin of many a good and
well-laid Expedition. 2. Several Irregularities follow, as the Officers taking
Money to dismiss Able Seamen, and filling up their Complement with raw and
improper Persons. 3. Oppressions, Quarrelings, and oftentimes Murders, by the
rashness of Press-masters, and the obstinacy of some unwilling to go. 4. A
secret Aversion to the Service, from a Natural Principle, common to the English
Nation, to hate Compulsion. 5. Kidnapping people out of the Kingdom, robbing
Houses, and picking Pockets, frequently practiced under pretense of Pressing;
as has been very much used of late.
With various Abuses of the like nature, some to the King, and some to the
Subject.

(2.) To Trade. By the extravagant Price set on Wages for Seamen, which they
impose on the Merchant with a sort of Authority, and he is obliged to give by
reason of the Scarcity of Men; and that not from a real want of Men; for in the
height of a Press, if a Merchant-man wanted Men, and could get a Protection
for them, he might have any number immediately, and none without it; so shye
were they of the Public Service.

The First of these things has cost the King above Three Millions Sterling,
since the War, in these Three Particulars: 1. Charge of Pressing on Sea, and on
Shore, and in small Craft employed for that purpose. 2. Ships lying in Harbor
for want of Men, at a vast Charge of Pay and Victuals for those they had. 3.
Keeping the whole Navy in constant Pay and Provisions all the Winter, for fear
of losing the Men against Summer, which has now been done several Years,
besides Bounty-Money and other Expenses, to court and oblige the Seamen.


The Second of these, (viz.) the great Wages paid by the Merchant, has cost
Trade, since the War, above Twenty Millions Sterling. The Coal-Trade gives a
Specimen of it, who for the first Three Years of the War gave 9 l. a Voyage to
Common Seamen, who before sailed for 36 s. which computing the number of Ships
and Men used in the Coal-Trade, and of Voyages made, at 8 hands to a Vessel,
does modestly accounting make 896000 l. difference in one year, in Wages to
Seamen in the Coal-Trade only.

For other Voyages, the difference of Sailors Wages is 50 s. per Month, and 55
s. per Month, to Foremastmen, who before went for 26 s. per Month; besides
subjecting the Merchant to the Insolence of the Seamen, who are not now to be
pleased with any Provisions, will admit no Half-Pay, and command of the
Captains even what they please; nay, the King himself can hardly please them.

For Cure of these Inconveniences it is, the following Project is proposed;
with which the Seamen can have no reason to be dissatisfied, nor are not at all
injured; and yet the Damage sustained will be prevented, and an immense Sum of
Money spared, which is now squandered away by the Profuseness and Luxury of the
Seamen: For if Prodigality weakens the Public Wealth of the Kingdom in
general, then are the Seamen but ill Commonwealths-men, who are not visibly the
Richer for the prodigious Sums of Money paid them either by the King or the
Merchant.

The Project is this;

That by an Act of Parliament an Office or Court be erected, within the
Jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty, and subject to the Lord High Admiral;
or otherwise Independent, and subject only to a Parliamentary Authority; as the
Commission for taking and stating the Public Accounts.

In this Court or Office, or the several Branches of it (which to that end
shall be subdivided, and placed in every Seaport in the Kingdom) shall be
listed and entered into immediate Pay all the Seamen in the Kingdom, who shall
be divided into Colleges or Chambers of sundry degrees, suitable to their
several Capacities, with Pay in proportion to their Qualities; as Boys, Youths,
Servants, Men Able, and Raw, Midship-men, Officers, Pilots, Old Men, and
Pensioners.

The Circumstantials of this Office; 1. No Captain or Master of any Ship or
Vessel should dare to hire or carry to Sea with him any Seaman, but such as he
shall receive from the Office aforesaid. 2. No man whatsoever, Seaman or other,
but applying himself to the said Office to be employed as a Sailor, should
immediately enter into Pay, and receive for every Able Seaman 24 s. per Month,
and Juniors in proportion; to receive Half-Pay while unemploy'd, and liberty to
work for themselves, only to be at Call of the Office, and leave an account
where to be found. 3. No Sailor could desert, because no Employment would be to
be had elsewhere. 4. All Ships at their clearing at the Custom-house, should
receive a Ticket to the Office for Men, where would be always Choice rather
than Scarcity; who should be delivered over by the Office to the Captain or
Master, without any Trouble or Delay; all liberty of Choice to be allowed both
to Master and Men, only so as to give up all Disputes to the Officers appointed
to decide. Note, By this would be avoided the great Charge Captains and Owners
are at to keep Men on Board before they are ready to go; whereas now the care
of getting Men will be over, and all come on board in one day; for the Captain
carrying the Ticket to the Office, he may go and choose his Men, if he will;
otherwise they will be sent on board him, by Tickets sent to their Dwellings,
to repair on board such a Ship.

5. For all these Men that the Captain or Master of the Ship takes, he shall
pay the Office, not the Seamen, 28 s. per Month, (which 4 s. per Month Overplus
of Wages, will be employed to pay the Half-Pay to the men out of Employ), and
so in proportion of Wages for Juniors. 6. All Disputes concerning the mutinying
of Mariners, or other matters of Debate between the Captains and Men, to be
tried by way of Appeal, in a Court for that purpose to be erected as aforesaid.
7. All discounting of Wages, and Time, all Damages of Goods, Avarages, stopping
of Pay, and the like, to be adjusted by stated and Public Rules, and Laws in
Print, established by the same Act of Parliament; by which means all litigious
Suits in the Court of Admiralty (which are Infinite) would be prevented. 8. No
Ship that is permitted to enter at the Custom-House, and take in Goods, should
ever be refused Men, or delayed in the delivering them above five days after a
Demand made, and a Ticket from the Custom-house delivered; general Cases, as
Arrests and Embargoes, excepted.


The Consequences of this Method.

1. By this means the Public would have no want of Seamen, and all the Charges
and other Inconveniences of Pressing Men would be prevented. 2. The intolerable
Oppression upon Trade, from the Exorbitance of Wages, and Insolence of
Mariners, would be taken off. 3. The following Sums of Money should be paid to
the Office, to lie in Bank as a Public Fund for the Service of the Nation, to
be disposed of by Order of Parliament, and not otherwise; a Committee being
always substituted in the Intervals of the Session, to audit the Accounts, and
a Treasury for the Money, to be composed of Members of the House, and to be
changed every Session of Parliament. 1. Four Shillings per Month Wages advanced
by the Merchants to the Office for the Men, more than the Office pays them. 2.
In consideration of the reducing Men's Wages, and consequently Fraights to the
former Prices or near them, the Owners of Ships, or Merchants, shall pay at the
Importation of all Goods, 40 s. per Ton Freight, to be stated upon all Goods
and Ports in proportion; reckoning it on Wine Tonnage from Canaries, as the
Standard, and on special Freights in proportion to the Freight formerly paid,
and half the said Price in times of Peace.

Note, This may well be done, and no Burden; for if Freights are reduced to
their former Prices (or near it) as they will be if Wages are so too, then the
Merchant may well pay it: As for Instance; Freight from Jamaica to London,
formerly at 6 l. 10 s. per Ton, now at 18 and 20 l. From Virginia, at 5 l. to 6
l. 10 s. now at 14, 16, and 17 l. From Barbados, at 6 l. now at 16 l. From
Oporto, at 2 l. now at 6 l. and the like.

The Payment of the abovesaid Sums being a large Bank for a Fund, and it being
supposed to be in fair hands, and currently managed, the Merchants shall
further pay upon all Goods shipped out, and shipped on board from abroad, for
and from any Port of this Kingdom, 4 l. per Cent. on the real Value, bona fide,
to be sworn to, if demanded: In consideration whereof, the said Office shall be
obliged to pay and make good all Losses, Damages, Avarages, and Casualties
whatsoever, as fully as by the Custom of Assurances now is done, without any
Discounts, Rebates, or Delays whatsoever; the said 4 l. per Cent. to be stated
on the Voyage to the Barbados, and enlarged or taken off, in proportion to the
Voyage, by Rules and Laws, to be Printed and publicly known.

Reserving only, That then, as reason good, the said Office shall have Power to
direct Ships of all sorts, how, and in what manner, and how long they shall
sail, with, or wait for Convoys; and shall have Power (with Limitations) to lay
Embargoes on Ships, in order to compose Fleets for the benefit of Convoys.

These Rules, formerly noted, to extend to all Trading by Sea, the Coasting and
Home-Fishing Trade excepted; and for them it should be ordered;

First, For Coals; the Colliers being provided with Men at 28 s. per Month, and
Convoys in sufficient number, and proper Stations from Tinmouth-Bar to the
River, so as they need not go in Fleets, but as Wind and Weather presents, run
all the way under the Protection of the Men of War, who should be continually
cruising from Station to Station; they would be able to perform their Voyage in
as short time as formerly, and at as cheap Pay, and consequently could afford
to sell their Coals at 17 s. per Chaldron, as well as formerly at 15 s.

Wherefore there should be paid into the Treasury appointed at Newcastle, by
Bond to be paid where they deliver, 10 s. per Chaldron, Newcastle Measure; and
the stated Price at London to be 27 s. per Chaldron in the Pool, which is 30 s.
at the Buyers House; and is so far from being dear, a time of War especially,
as it is cheaper than ever was known in a War; and the Officers should by
Proclamation confine the Seller to that Price.

In consideration also of the Charge of Convoys, the Ships bringing Coals shall
all pay 1 l. per Cent. on the Value of the Ship, to be agreed on at the Office;
and all Convoy-Money exacted by Commanders of Ships, shall be relinquished, and
the Office to make good all Losses of Ships, not Goods, that shall be lost by
Enemies only.

These Heads indeed are such as would need some Explication, if the Experiment
were to be made; and, with submission, would reduce the Seamen to better
Circumstances, at least 'twou'd have them in readiness for any Public Service
much easier than by all the late methods of Encouragement by registring Seamen,
etc.

For by this Method all the Seamen in the Kingdom should be the King's hired
Servants, and receive their Wages from him, whoever employed them; and no man
could hire or employ them, but from him: The Merchant should hire them of the
King, and pay the King for them; nor would there be a Seaman in England out of
Employ, which, by the way, would prevent their seeking Service abroad. If they
were not actually at Sea, they would receive Half-Pay, and might be employed in
Works about the Yards, Stores, and Navy, to keep all things in Repair.

If a Fleet or Squadron was to be fitted out, they would be manned in a Week's
time, for all the Seamen in England would be ready: Nor would they be shye of
the Service; for it is not an Aversion to the King's Service; nor it is not that
the Duty is harder in the Men of War than the Merchantmen; nor it is not fear
of Danger which makes our Seamen lurk, and hide, and hang back in a time of
War; but it is Wages is the matter: 24 s. per Month in the King's Service, and
40 to 50 s. per Month from the Merchant, is the true cause; and the Seaman is
in the right of it too; for who would serve his King and Country, and fight,
and be knocked of the head at 24 s. per Month that can have 50 s. without that
hazard: And till this be remedied, in vain are all the Encouragements which can
be given to Seamen; for they tend but to make them Insolent, and encourage
their Extravagance.

Nor would this Proceeding be any damage to the Seamen in general; for 24 s.
per Month Wages, and to be kept in constant Service, or Half-Pay when idle, is
really better to the Seamen than 45 s. per Month, as they now take it,
considering how long they often lie idle on shore, out of Pay: For the
extravagant Price of Seamens Wages, though it has been an Intolerable Burden to
Trade, has not visibly enriched the Sailors; and they may as well be content
with 24 s. per Month now as formerly.

On the other hand, Trade would be sensibly revived by it, the intolerable
Price of Freights would be reduced, and the Public would reap an immense
Benefit by the Payments mentioned in the Proposal; as, (1.) 4 s. per Month upon
the Wages of all the Seamen employed by the Merchant; which if we allow 200000
Seamen always in Employ, as there cannot be less in all the Ships belonging to
England, is 40000 l. per Month. (2.) 40 s. per Ton Freight upon all Goods
imported. (3.) 4 per Cent. on the Value of all Goods exported or imported. (4.)
10 s. per Chaldron upon all the Coals shipped at Newcastle; and 1 per Cent. on
the Ships which carry them.


What these Four Articles would pay to the Exchequer yearly, 'twou'd be very
difficult to calculate, and I am too near the End of this Book to attempt it:
But I believe no Tax ever given since this War, has come near it.

It Is true, out of this the Public would be to pay Half-Pay to the Seamen who
shall be out of Employ, and all the Losses and Damages on Goods and Ships;
which though it might be considerable, would be small, compared to the Payment
aforesaid; for as the Premio of 4 per Cent. is but small, so the Safety lies
upon all men being bound to Insure: For I believe any one will grant me this,
it is not the smallness of a Premio Ruins the Ensurer, but it is the smallness of
the Quantity he Insures; and I am not at all ashamed to affirm, That let but a
Premio of 4 l. per Cent. be paid into one Man's hand for all Goods Imported and
Exported, and any Man may be the General Ensurer of the Kingdom, and yet that
Premio can never hurt the Merchant neither.

So that the vast Revenue this would raise, would be felt no where, neither
Poor nor Rich would Pay the more for Coals; Foreign Goods would be brought home
cheaper, and our own Goods carried to Market cheaper; Owners would get more by
Ships, Merchants by Goods, and Losses by Sea would be no Loss at all to any
Body, because Repaid by the Public Stock.

Another unseen Advantage would arise by it, we should be able to outwork all
our Neighbors, even the Dutch themselves, by Sailing as cheap, and carrying
Goods as cheap in a time of War as in Peace, an Advantage which has more in it,
than is easily thought of, and would have a noble influence upon all our
Foreign Trade. For what could the Dutch do in Trade, if we could carry our
Goods to Cadiz at 50 s. per Ton Freight, and they give 8 or 10 l. and the like
in other Places? Whereby we could be able to Sell cheaper or get more thau our
Neighbors.

There are several considerable clauses might be added to this Proposal, some
of great advantage to the General Trade of the Kingdom, some to particular
Trades, and more to the Public; but I avoid being too Particular in things
which are but the Product of my own private Opinion.

If the Government should ever proceed to the Experiment, no question but much
more than has been hinted at would appear; nor do I see any great difficulty in
the Attempt, or who would be aggrieved at it; and there I leave it, rather
wishing than expecting to see it undertaken.

The Conclusion.
UPon a Review of the several Chapters of this Book, I find that instead of
being able to go further, some things may have suffered for want of being fully
expressed; which if any person object against, I only say, I cannot now avoid
it: I have endeavored to keep to my Title, and offered but at an Essay; which
any one is at liberty to go on with as they please; for I can promise no
Supplement. As to Errors of Opinion, though I am not yet convinced of any, yet I
no where pretend to Infallibility: However, I do not willingly assert any thing
which I have not good Grounds for. If I am mistaken, let him that finds the
Error, inform the World better, and never trouble himself to animadvert upon
this, since I assure him I shall not enter into any Pen and Ink Contest on the
matter.

As to Objections which may lie against any of the Proposals made in this Book,
I have in some places mentioned such as occurred to my Thoughts. I shall never
assume that Arrogance to pretend no other or further Objections may be raised;
but I do really believe no such Objection can be raised, as will overthrow any
Scheme here laid down, so as to render the thing impracticable: Neither do I
think but that all men will acknowledge most of the Proposals in this Book
would be of as great, and perhaps greater Advantage to the Public, than I have
pretended to.

As for such who read Books only to find out the Author's faux Pas, who will
quarrel at the Meanness of Style, Errors of Pointing, Dullness of Expression, or
the like, I have but little to say to them; I thought I had corrected it very
carefully, and yet some Mispointings and small Errors have slipped me, which it is
too late to help: As to Language, I have been rather careful to make it speak
English suitable to the Manner of the Story, than to dress it up with Exactness
of Style; choosing rather to have it Free and Familiar, according to the Nature
of Essays, than to strain at a Perfection of Language, which I rather wish for
than pretend to be Master of.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
INtroduction, Page 3. Line 7. for Elodgments read Lodgments. Page 9. Line 19.
put the Comma between probable and so. Page 316. Line 10. for 896000 read 89600.


