THE MODISH WIFE, A COMEDY.

[PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.]

THE MODISH WIFE, A COMEDY, PERFORMED WITH UNINFLUENCED APPLAUSE AT THE
THEATER ROYAL, HAYMARKET.

Laudatur et Alget. TO WHICH IS PREFIXED A SUMMARY VIEW OF THE STAGE, As it has
been, is, and ought to be.

With biographical Anecdotes of Messrs. MOSSOP, DEXTER, DERRICK, and the
AUTHOR, School-fellows, and public Cotemporaries.

LONDON: Sold by T. EVANS, Paternoster-Row; and J. BELL, near Exeter-Change, in
the Strand.

A SUMMARY VIEW OF THE ENGLISH, SCOTS, and IRISH STAGES.
THE utility and dignity of the Stage, when properly conducted, has never been
disputed in any age or nation, by men of liberal sentiments in church or state;
some exclamatory blasts of enthusiasm have indeed, at different times, made
virulent, yet feeble attacks, some faint remains of these now and then issue
officially from Tottenham-court-road and Moorfields instructors; but even they
only utter invectives to preserve custom and affected sanctity, while their
hearers, as well as themselves, laugh at the unnecessary frivolous delusion:
the stage should not complain of this abuse, as every institution may be, and
certainly is, misconducted as well as misrepresented; indeed as to the
scandalous, irrational, and most illiberal Roman act, adopted ridiculously by
our legislature, which stigmatizes performers, while not only the matter and
manner of their performances have been, and are legally authorized and
universally encouraged, it deserves general reprobation and theatrical contempt.

Roscius, Cicero's idol, if his profession could be originally deemed bad,
should receive no credit from excellence in pursuing an infamous path; as well
might a dexterous highwayman claim praise for excelling in actions totally
unsufferable.

Some three years since, I publicly invited a bigoted preacher in Scotland,
to bring one text of scripture in corroboration of his rigid opinions; I asked,
if dramatic compositions were inconsistent with strict christianity, why Saint
Paul should have quoted from a Greek author in that sphere? with some other
pinching interrogations, which appeared unanswerable, and occasioned, what I
did not wish or mean, the defection of many subscribers to this person's
preaching, a manifest temporal injury to him.

In the course of what I have to offer I shall be desultory, consequently
unmethodical; I shall produce nothing which does not, in my idea, deserve
notice; but as to arrangement I shall let circumstances and anecdotes fall in
as they may, the more to sport with and amuse attention; I shall endeavor to
pursue Othello's rule, and "nothing extenuate," even respecting myself, "nor
ought let down in malice," concerning others: while impartiality is my guide I
wish to be (...), the moment I pass that line may contempt be my portion, the
same contempt I have ever entertained for envy, malevolence, and adulation,
three common attendants upon (...), actors, and every degree of public life. A
str^ng symptom of pride may appear in this declaration, but a strict attenti^n
to the several degrees of human nature, with many severe ^ubs, some gleams of
sunshine, many self-delusions, more relative ones, and rigid inspection into
social connections, have made me, I presume, a tolerable judge of the subject I
now enter upon.

From every historical circumstance, we have reason to believe that such
entertainments as a theater affords, could not be in a state of regularity or
elegance for many years after their existence: the reformation in its infancy,
the grand Spanish invasion, not only threatened but prosecuted; these, and
other succeeding circumstances, all contributed to prevent that justice of
exhibition for Shakespeare's inimitable productions which they deserved; no
amendment could be expected in the quibbling, sanctified, pedantic,
witch-hunting period of James the First; as to the miserable monarch his son
Charles, his time of royalty was so perplexed, so turbulent, and so fatal to
himself, nothing gentle, elegant, amusing, or instructive could possibly
prevail: Cromwell's prevalence, though a glorious era for the nation, was very
unfavourable, and necessarily so to the drama after the interregnum, if I may
so call an admirable and spirited administration of government.

A volatile, and we may add politic monarch came forward, who perceiving a
settled gloom on the nation, determined to work a change by introducing the
levity of wit, the glare of show, the ba^t of gallantry, and a general plan of
dissipation, to shake off attention from matters of serious concern; if ever
the stage was prostituted it was at this time, amidst a flow of great, of
original powerful genius. Dryden may stand a proof of the whole, who ranted
pompously, enthusiastically in his tragedies, and descended to the lowest, most
fulsome stuff in his comedies: however in this reign we may commence the first
degree of theatrical excellence as to performers; and upon a retrospect, we
find great uniformity in the cast of plays, as it is phrased, every one, like a
good soldier, kept his place, and by not being misplaced, we may conclude, made
a good figure; nay, from the best accounts, we are taught to believe so, even
the printed dramas strengthen this opinion; and this is one of the best methods
to judge by, both comparatively and decisively, as in examining the present
stage hereafter I will clearly demonstrate. From this period composition and
representation have, save the comedies of C^ve, (...), and Farquhar, with
Rowe's tragedies, been improving, I mean as approaching nearer nature; I do not
contend for spirit, character, or invention in favor of the present age, but a
claim to superior propriety may b^ justly maintained upon compari^on.

The era of Wilkes, Booth, and Cibber, has been highly blazened, and there is
reason to credit tradition in many points; but from the imitators of them I
have seen (who though they had by no means equal execution, certainly possessed
their manner) it was offensive to chaste criticism; thus Quin's turgid swell
was derived from Booth, who catched his from Betterton; young Cibber's
caricature grimace, and snip-snap expression, were but the remnants of his
father's oddity; and the late Mr. Giffard's genteel comedy, which he valued
himself upon, was but a costive retail of that formal gentility, which obtained
for Mr. Wilkes (when full-bottomed wigs, mechanic utterance and stiff
deportment were in fashion) general applause.

From their time to Mr. Garrick's introduction of nature upon the stage,
dramatic entertainments were miserably mangled amidst wretched anarchy and most
disgraceful management.

The Irish stage, till Mr. Sheridan's assuming the reins of direction, was,
from all I have been able to learn, scarce worth mention; in my own
remembrance, four Elrington's, the most deplorable manglers of dialogue,
serious or comic, that ever disgraced a Theater Royal, monopolized all the
principal characters; the women were perfect mop-squeezers, and the decorations
mere puppet-show trumpery: Mr. Sheridan labored for, and in a great measure
effected, a reformation; if his execution as an actor had been equal to his
judgment, and his general succe^s as a manager been equal to his liberality
(...) spirit, his condescension to performers, and his zeal for the stage, he
would have made ere now a very genteel fortune; but being in some points
capricious, and rather too fond of rigid exercise of authority, he incurred, at
various times, very prejudicial public resentment; and though supported by many
friends, he was frequently attacked both by public and private foes, 'till at
length from a r^^iculous attachment to court principles, (for he was
wonderfully fond of a smile at the castle levees) he drew upon himself a storm
which blighted all his fairest hopes, and b^re away with it the fruit of much
labor and several favorable harvests.

To this gentleman (for whom I shall always entertain a proper degree of
respect) I stand indebted for an introduction to the stage, an introduction
more like that of a friend than a manager, from whom, had I chosen to stay in
his theater, I had reason to expect the most l^beral encouragement. Here, to
anticipate any biographical manufacturer, who might in future, as actor or
author, gibbet me up to the view of posterity, I shall give an impartial
narrative of my coming into, and general progress through life, which will
naturally take in, by connexions, some school-fellows and public cotemporaries,
whom I wish to preserve from misrepresentation as much as I do myself.

Without any boast of parentage, suffice it to say my father had the general
repute of an honest man, who, without any brilliance of parts, possessed a
share of sense to command respect, he had seen much of the world, and from
thence laid in a stock of liberal notions; by forty years service in the army,
during which time he had seen many coxcombs of fortune, titles, or interest,
put over his head, he obtained a Captain's commission; in this station, most
unfortunately for me, he died when I was but seventeen, he was blessed with a
wife, and I with a mother, who by invariable conduct proved herself a worthy
pattern of both characters.

The 23d of October, 1728, gave me to this mortal stage; my state of infancy
was most affectionately attended to, and by unremitting care, an imperfect
constitution rendered very strong; at ten, or a little after, I was put under
the care of Mr. Butler, a clergyman, who kept a grammar school in
Digges-street, Dublin; here my first acquaintance and intimacy began with
Messrs. Mossop and Dexter, both within a year of my age; Mr. Mossop's father
residing at his rectory, his son Henry was sent to the care of an uncle, who
then kept a bookseller's shop, this uncle put him to Mr. Butler's school, and
lodged him at an obscure butcher's in an obscure market, as I presume for
cheapness sake; not very happy in his situation, he frequently, by leave,
passed a few days at my father's with me, and being of a grave cast was much
liked by all the family as well as myself.

During the space of five years we were inseparable, and, as I thought, that
kind of esteem daily grew upon us which seldom terminates but with life. At
fifteen I had the misfortune to obtain a commission in the same regiment with
my father, the inconveniency of which station I did not experience till the
death of my best friend brought it to light; indeed before that melancholy
event I began to dislike the school of Mars, which was then, and I am afraid is
too much so still, a scene of dissipation and excess, exceedingly dangerous for
a young unformed mind possessed of warm passions.

In the year of the rebellion, a camp of 5000 men was formed at
Bennet's-bridge, near Kilkenny, which though a pleasing show, was certainly an
idle affair, discipline being in a most relaxed state; our marchings and
counter-marchings, our sweatings and our swimmings, were almost as laughable as
Major S^urgeon's expedition to Acton, Ealing, etc. however we furnished many
important paragraphs for the Dublin newspapers* one of which I well remember,
though we were but fifty miles from the capital, killed 500 of us by an
epidemical distemper, which had never been heard of in the camp; a strong proof
of what authentic intelligence those political vehicles convey.

From Bennet's-bridge we returned to Dublin duty, here I found Messrs. Mossop
and Dexter members of Trinity-college; the former complained grievously at the
narrowness of his allowance; lamenting his discontent, in a romantic fit of
friendship, I gave him my commission, purposing to accomplish myself for the
church; this circumstance he has often mentioned, as I have been informed,
however he had not interest to get the tran^fer ratified by government. From
Dublin we were ordered into separate quarters, the company I belonged to was
destined for Cashell, neither the Captain nor Lieutenant attending -- a pretty
circumstance in time of war! the care of a hundred men fell to my share; the
route pointed out our way, and we pursued it with commendable regularity, save,
as I suspected, the plunder of some hen-roosts; on our arrival at Cashell, a
well situated, pleasant, plentiful city, I received a complimentary message
from the new mayor, who was that day giving a feast on commencing magistracy,
to partake of the festivity. -- I attended, was received with most polite
hospitality, and found myself immediately acquainted with near thirty leading
gentlemen; thus far was well, but it being a kind of custom in that county to
drink a visiter's senses away, I sustained a most formidable attack, surrounded
by seasoned veterans; at length my prudence, head, and heels gave way, and I
fell a sacrifice to Bacchus, but not till three Aldermen and two Parsons had
previously fallen prostrate.

This was rather an unfavourable commencement; but during my stay in the place
afterward, I kept rather aloof, and was better enabled thereto by passing much
time in the family of a gentleman who had three very agreeable daughters, one
of whom, though at least twelve years older than myself, had rearly captivated
me; however, Cupid perhaps thinking me a trifling conquest, let me for that
time escape. Dr. Price, then Archbishop of the sea, was another strong motive
of prevention from excess, for as that liberal-minded prelate very
condescendingly gave me a general invitation to his palace, and to ride with
him, which took place every fair morning. I was edifyingly drawn from the
company of those who prefer hunting and the bottle to every mental enjoyment.

I was not above four months in this very agreeable, and I may add, profitable
situation, till my party was ordered to Kinsale, where a large number of French
prisoners were rather refractory. At Cork I found two hundred of those gently
waiting to be conducted to Kinsale by me, I took them in charge, but never
recollected, till we had marched eight miles, that there was not a grain of
ammunition in the whole party; however nothing amiss happened.

At Kinsale discipline took place, and the young officers were commendably
attentive, but being altogether in a mess we misled one another abominably,
both as to expenses and constitutions; our propensity to dissipation was
considerably increased by the good-natured volatility of Capt. Henry Boil
Walsingham, son of the then Speaker of the House of Commons, whose unbounded
goodnature, and uncommon flow of spirits, rendered him amiably delusive; and
persons who had little but their pay, endeavoring to associate with him, ran
into difficulties, which however his generosity, having a large income besides
a captain's commission, often removed.

I cannot pay a just tribute to the merits of this young gentleman, taken out
of life too soon, as with a few more years, and reflection, he would have been
a very complete ornament of society, and a most valuable friend to his country.

While we were at Kinsale together, an account reached us that liberty was
given to raise two regiments for the Dutch service; being tired of a life so
inactive in the military view as ours then was, we determined to apply for
commissions of an advanced rank in one of those regiments, he promised to take
me by the hand, which would have insured me success, and even offered to assist
with money if any thing of that kind seemed necessary. The Dutch design being
dropped on a view of peace, I was foolish enough to give a hundred guineas for
advance of rank in the same regiment, without considering it took me from a
station wherein I stood secure from reduction, and placed me in one of the four
additional companies, which about eight months after were reduced; here I found
myself within the penurious limits of half-pay; I had a right to some freehold
property, but being under age could not dispose of it, and was cheated out of
the rent, all but a trifle, by a knavish tenant.

Here I flew to the stage, without any great affection for it as a performer,
and found a most gentleman-like reception from Mr. Sheridan, who judiciously
recommended Aboan, in O^oon^ko, for my trial, in which, notwithstanding a most
unconsequential figure, and uncommon timidity, I succeeded beyond my most
sanguine expectations; but this did by no means reconcile me to the back of the
curtain, as the spirit of malevolence, envy, and scandal, was hourly invading
my ears. A season and a half passed without one symptom of ambition to urge for
parts, and at a time when Mr. Sheridan had marked out a very reputable cast for
me I declined; so precipitate a retreat was in a great measure occasioned by
receiving a letter, that an uncle of mine, till then totally unknown to me even
by name, had died in the East Indies, and left me 800 l. this gave me a turn
for domestic life, as the sale of my little freehold was likely, exclusive of a
500 l. mortgage, to produce me 700 l. more. When of age, I was advised, that on
coming to London, or by sending proper authority, I might receive my Indian
legacy; desirous of seeing the English capital I set out.

Here I shall return a little. -- During my connection with the Dublin theater,
I received a letter from Mr. Mossop, then in London, that he had been drawn
from Ireland by the invitation of an uncle, who, as he said, would do nothing
material for him; that he had offered himself to Mr. Garrick and Mr. Rich, who
both (the latter is not surprising) deemed him unworthy acceptance, and
therefore requested I would mention him to Mr. Sheridan; I did, and was
informed that a Mr. Marshall, with whom we were both intimate, had previously
mentioned the matter; I was asked some questions, which I answered with all the
friendship and impartiality (my ever favorite principle) would allow. Mr.
Sheridan, always above envy, gave him a cordial invitation; he came over and
had his choice of parts, he very judiciously chose Zanga, in the Revenge, and
displayed in it an astonishing degree of beautiful wildness; his amazing powers
of voice were clearly perceived and unanimously approved; his action was what
in a great measure it ever remained, forced, awkward, and unpicturesque; his
emphasis mechanical and laborious; however, a whole pit full of collegians
terrified criticism from any exertion for two nights; and indeed, his merit
went so far before his faults, that the encouragement, though enthusiastic, was
right.

The same week which produced Mr. Mossop to public view, furnished the stage
with another very considerable ornament, Mr. Digges, who had been an officer; a
young gentleman furnished with very agreeable and essential requisites, such as
a graceful person, a comely countenance, marking eyes, and a full-toned,
distinct, though not harmonious voice.

These two competitors set off in the race of fame nearly together, and
emulated with becoming spirit; however, Mr. Mossop, both in diligence and
powers, rather outstripped his competitor, though Mr. Digges has since shown
himself a much more general performer. By so powerful a reinforcement Mr.
Sheridan had a brilliant season, nor did he, as has been practiced since, bind
rising merit to a kind of an apprenticeship, upon penurious terms, he rewarded
them liberally, and brought them forward with rapid speed.

A ludicrous instance of Mr. Mossop's capricious haughtiness may, out of many,
be produced; after performing the part of Zanga three nights, he chose Richard
for a fourth appearance, and most unaccountably dressed the character in
puckered white satin; Mr. Sheridan, very justly observing that it had a most
coxcombly appearance, the remark reached Mr. Mossop's ear, who next morning
went to the manager's room, and most emphatically addressed him thus: "Mr. She
-- ri -- dan, I hear you said I dressed Richard like a cox -- comb; that is an
af -- front; you wear a sword, pull it out of the scab -- bard, I Will draw mine,
and thrust it into your bell -- ly." This furious attack was smiled off, and had
an amicable conclusion.

A circumstance here strikes recollection painfully, which is, that success, in
less than a month, raised my school-fellow so high on tragedy-stilts, that a
most ungracious reserve prevailed in his deportment, and even to me he was the
great man though civil. Though I ever admired merit, and respected pre-eminence, I
never did, nor never will, idolize either; this he wanted in both respects; I
would not flatter, my friendship forbad it; he grew shy according to the
dictates of his pride; thus fell gradually into decay, what I wished, a
permanent friendship. I may have been too ready to catch offense, but he
certainly was too ready to furnish cause; I was rather concerned at such a
divorce of an early regard, yet I believe we still entertained good wishes for
each other, and am willing to style it the jarring of two oddities, who had not
forbearance sufficient for each others foibles.

This supposed defection of a friend hastened my expedition to England; I
reached Chester at a time when Mr. Macklin had brought an excellent company to
that city, knowing several of the members, and wishing to know others, I
protracted my journey a matter of three months, which passed pleasantly and
rationally, save too great expense, loss of time, and a near chance of
matrimony, which would then have been peculiarly indiscreet. One leading defect
of my disposition has been procrastination, which has operated most powerfully;
however I was not totally idle, for during my stay I altered Ben Johnson's
Sejanus, which I shall speak of in future. Just previous to setting off for
London, Mr. Derrick, another early acquaintance, pursued my steps, not liking
the avocation he was placed to, viz. that of a linen-draper; very bare of cash,
and little acquainted, I was obliged to stand forth for him, which I had great
pleasure in doing.

Soon after coming to London, for sake of better air, I took lodgings at
Richmond, Mr. Derrick remained with me there near a year, and was most of the
time using his admirable talents for pushing into an extensive acquaintance,
while I, waited with philosophic patience, though not proper economy, for my
expected legacy, passed most of my time in reading (...) the employment of my
pen. A strong degree of theatrical frenzy having seized poor Derrick, who,
contrary to (...) sense, and void of every executive requisite, would make a
stage attempt; in friendly compassion I prevailed on him to assume a character
wherein his diminutive and deformed figure would not be so laughable; he, in
consequence murdered Gloucester in Jane Shore, and I believe convinced himself, a
well as the audience, that he could never be bearable, for I recollect no
similar attempt -- well for the stage if many others had followed so sensible
an example!

During my stay at Richmond I published the alteration of Johnson's Sejanus,
and from a connection my father had with the Orrery family, I dedicated it to
the late Earl John, whose literary abilities, and extreme liberal turn of mind,
reflected honor on nobility, and even on the name of Boil; being ever of a
distant nature in matters of this sort, I referred presentation of the copy to
Mr. Derrick, who never was better pleased than when employed in this manner; he
brought me a verbal account that my piece was politely received, and that his
Lordship wished to see me at his house, then in Leicester-fields; I obeyed the
summons, and never experienced more affability or good sense than at this
interview: he was pleased to say that I had given some marks of genius, but
feared, if I should in future show much improved abilities, they would be but
of little advantage, for (as he emphatically observed) the fountainhead of
critical taste was frozen and benumbed; if you have a turn for politics,
continues his Lordship, and will prostitute principle to profit, either for or
against administration, some lucrative consequences will doubtless ensue; but
if you are an honest principled writer, ten to one but laudatur and alget is a
proper motto for you: how far I have found this veri^ied I will not pretend to
say, but heartily wish I had been fated to use an awl and end sooner than the
pen, for nothing but a pensioned defender of government, a sycophant to
managers, or a slave to booksellers, can do any thing more than crawl.

In about a week after I had seen Lord Orrery, I received from him a letter,
with an order on Mr. Hoare, his banker, for twenty guineas, and an observation,
"that he wished more substantial approbation to attend every future production
of mine." After this (the only profit from dedication I ever experienced, and
indeed did not expect) I never saw his Lordship.

However, Mr. Derrick made such good use of his first visit, that he pursued,
and at length -- miraculous to think! -- drew his Lordship, as well as some
other distinguished characters, unto a cordial epistolary correspondence. A
little after this period, I was saluted with an account that my legacy was
arrived and payable; but how was I surprised to find, that three honest lawyers
here, had, upon perusing my uncle's will, explained away 600l. out of the 800l.
I expected; this disagreeable stroke precipitated me into fresh dissipation,
which shortly narrowed my circumstances much, and occasio^ed me to accept an
engagement for Mr. Simpson's theater at Bath.

Before my expedition thither (under the gothic management of one Mr.
Phillip's, an old theatrical coxcomb, vain of playing, and covetous of money) I
had the pleasure to see both town houses in a very reputable state of
performance; but as to tragedy (save some of Mr. Garrick's peculiar parts, if I
may so speak) Covent Garden was much superior, in comedy Drury Lane claimed
manifest precedence; there never was a more masterly performance than Every Man
in his Humor, from Kitely to Cash, every part was supported with a
proportional degree of pleasant propriety.

Mr. Mossop, who had reached the English stage, had the Dublin audiences
approbation cordially, therefore essentially confirmed here; yet though he
possessed undoubted merit, some share of what may be styled good fortune,
attended him in both places, for what the Irish Collegians began with,
animation, the London Templars finished with zeal; would he had been as
friendly to himself as the public was to his endeavors. Here, as in Dublin,
too much ill-concerted expense attended his pride, yet I cannot recollect his
circumstances were, at this period, so much reduced as those of some other
successful knights-errant of the stage I have known; no intimacy prevailed
between us, considerably owing, I believe, to my rigid remembrance of his
sudden contemptible exaltation of deportm^nt, and unfriendly precision of
conversation, below the idea of a liberal education, and much more so of a
liberal mind; however, before leaving town, I paid him a complimentary visit,
when he wished me, and I believe with friendly meaning, all possible success.

When arrived at Bath, where the campaign was begun, I found a very imperfect
odd jumbled crew, and according to many of the undertakings I was forced upon,
most of my endeavors only tended to make the groupe more ridiculous; for being
chiefly in a much varied capital line, I must necessarily have been often
capitally wrong; however, in the most unjustifiable attempts, I always met with
forbearance, without the aid of a single puff, or any support from personal
acquaintances, for I neither sought, (...) obtained, above twelve during eight
months residence, multiplicity of acquaintance, and especially upon an
interested plan, I ever despised.

So many repetitions of self are disagreeable, but as they are unavoidable, and
as what I shall advance can be corrobolated o^ contradicted, by many persons
living, egotism becomes less painful, and may be the more credible. Amidst the
study of a multiplicity of parts, I wrote the Suita^, a tragedy, which was well
received, though weakly performed; even Mr. Quin vouchsafed to say, it was a
tolerable thing, but the male performers were mere sprats of mussulmen; a
remark not amiss, for there were several light figures: however, that
gentleman, with more than usual condescension, gave me, on my night, two
guineas for a ticket, wishing me a better trade than a Bath author or actor,
"for, says he, the people of fashion come here only to tipple water, or game;
and as to the town's people they understand little save extortion;" two points
I found amply confirmed.

The second season I produced Zaphira, a tragedy, on the same story of Dr.
Brown's Barbarossa, but performed before that gentleman's piece came out at
Drury Lane, it was better represented, and better received than the Sultan,
though with less profit to me. The same season I fitted up an alteration of
Shakespeare's Richard the Second, which, though incumbered with too many
characters of importance, to be adequately supported by a country company (for
such Bath might then be called) was also very well received; indeed the
performance of one Miss Ibbot, the best declamatory actress I ever heard,
contributed much to the piece's reputation. The manuscripts of these two
tragedies have, I know not how, been purloined from me.

During summer, between the second and third seasons at Bath, I came to London,
and found Mr. Derrick studying law and practical philosophy in that agreeable
academy the (...), where his situation would have been painfully exigent, had
not the late Sir Francis Delaval, Mr. Foot, a Dr. Thompson, and, through their
assistance, other gentlemen, liberally subscribed for his support, the me^ns of
which was placed in Mr. Vailla^^'s hands, from whom he received it weekly.

Luckily when this supply was near exhausted, I recommended his situation to
the notice of a most benevolent gentlem^n, who served him essentially, as he
has me on many occasions. Mr. C -- not only raised him twenty pounds
subscription to a volume of poems, but by means of the late Sergeant H^d, got
him out of confinement; this pleasing point ^d, I went to Bath, and there sound
the company under the direction of Mr. King, whose spirited performances
drawing better audiences than ever had been known there before, and whose
regular, yet mild and gentleman-like management, rendered the theater much more
agreeable than to me it ever had been, and to the proprietors much more prof^t.

Departing from Bath, I shall omit several excursions made to places of less
note, and only observe, that during a year's vacation from dramatic
connections, I had an opportunity to see the London stages in their meridian
glory, and a very noble emulation carried on with great spirit and ability on
each side; the uniformity of each cast, filled by persons devoted to a
particular department, was now strictly adhered to; the managers did not then
play the game of cross and pile as they do now, nor make what is head one night
tail another; the policy of this scheme I shall presently elucidate, as also
endeavor at showing its manifest detriment to the stage in general, and
hackney'd drudges in particular.

Having received an invitation from Edinburgh, I went thither, and met there,
on my arrival, an extreme disagreeable disappointment; Mr. Digges and Mrs.
Ward, two very popular favorites, instead of joining the company, as was
expected, decamped to Dublin, leaving nothing to apologize for them, and
reduced me to the same disadvantageous state I was first in at Bath, obliging
me to take a porter's load on a school-boy's back. Judge of my regret when I
was obliged to march on, with a very insignificant figure, the first night in
Othello, and the second in Hotspur, parts I would ever have wished to decline;
after all I met indulgence, and the season for six weeks, during which time I
had the misfortune to be acting manager -- a most disagreeable station! -- went
smoothly on; at length, considering some friends I had brought to the company
(and without whom it would have been truly deplorable) ill used, I resigned,
with secret joy, the reins of painful government, painful, except where a
thirst of power, even in a pageant state, stifles delicacy of feeling. Several
theatrical maneuvers were practiced to make me uneasy, but finding me
vulnerable only through the sides of my friends, I was so closely attacked that
way, that an entire breach ensued; and at the end of the season I parted with
the managers, as they styled themselves, on terms not the most polite, however
I was well pleased to get rid of such a disagreeable shuffling connection, and
wishing to see Glasgow, a city I had heard much of, I went thither without any
public view.

The place, upon examination, answered the description I had heard of it, in
the disposal of streets, and elegance of buildings, as well as in briskness of
trade and opulence of merchants. I was unexpectedly invited, by some gentlemen
who had seen me in Edinburgh, to stay a few months, and assist some persons of
respectable families in the proper pronunciation of English; some gentlemen of
the university soon after applied to me for the same purpose; I undertook the
task with some reluctance, but at length went through it pleasingly and
profitably. Just before my departure, it was intimated to me, by persons of
some influence, that if I would settle there, it was more than probable, that a
professorship for English oratory might be obtained for me, with a settled
salary, and the advantage of pupils, which I make no doubt would have turned
out a comfortable establishment; yet, strange is the mind of man, though from
early years I had wished for a calm retreat, now a very eligible and
practicable one appeared, a sudden wandering seized my brain, and I would set
off for London; but not without returning warm and grateful acknowledgements
for favors received, and those proposed.

From Glasgow I went to Carlisle, over a country rather wild, but good road
rendered it agreeable; at Carlisle, which is a pretty little agreeable city,
peopled with genteel affable inhabitants, but not much enriched with trade, I
expected a remittance from Ireland through London; I waited a fortnight with
patience, then received information that my draft had been evaded; highly
chagrined at this, and being ever more prone to revenge injuries on myself than
other people, I precipitately, in the heat of vexation, joined a company of
Thespians, then exhibiting there. This is the only scene of real theatrical
wretchedness, both as to performance and finances I ever met, indeed from the
former nothing of the latter could be expected; however I was only a pitying
spectator of surrounding woes, for some remains of cash, and a tolerable
benefit, brought me through bareably.

By means of the philosophy I always possessed, upon a little reflection, time
would have passed agreeably enough here, had not sympathetic feelings for the
penury around me rather encumbered it; two men of the company were rational and
well behaved, my landlord Boniface had a smart prattling agreeable daughter,
and there was lodged in the house a very affable young French prisoner; by
these, with two or three honest blades of Cumberland, my mind, though not
improved, was innocently, and often cheerfully, relaxed.

At the end of five weeks, I received an invitation from Mr. Whitley, whom I
heard of as, and found to be, a reputable, bustling, judicious manager, also a
good actor in his line, out of which the state of his company often forced him,
and perhaps sometimes inclination; yet this admitted, it is only what much
greater performers have been guilty of; many considerable towns have been, and
are much indebted to him for regularity, good dresses, and as suitable
decorations as they could expect; he also deserves praise for sustaining the
stage with spirited resolution against much malevolence and many oppressive
attacks.

I took the road to Scarbro', which place, as I staid there only a week, I
should not now have mentioned but for the following ludicrous affair:

On my road thither, I set up at a small house, in a small village called
Kirkleatham, here I fell in, for want of better company, with half a dozen
farmers, and some servants of Mr. Turner, lord of the manor; as it has been
always an invariable rule with me to conform to the humors of every strange
company, as one method of knowing the general disposition of mankind, I said as
they did; this conformity, pleasing even to brutes, with some compliments on
Mr. Turner, obtained me the titles of honest fellow, hearty cock, etc.
accompanied by several slaps on the shoulder, and squeezes by the hand, which,
from their roughness, I would most gladly have excused; however this social
sunshine did not last long, for happening to pull out my handkerchief, a piece
of paper dropped, on which a person had traced out my road from Carlisle, and
specified the towns, to prevent my mistaking a due direction; from Sunderland,
to the place I have mentioned, is all on the seacoast.

Happening to go out of the room, this paper was picked up by one who, for a
miracle, could read; they had, while I saw my horse dispatch a feed of oats,
laid their politic noddles together, and, as I found, had discovered me to be a
French Spy. On coming in I perceived looks of great distance, consequence, and
curiosity; silence reigned for about a minute, when my making the trite
observation that it was a right English meeting; "Look ye there, says the
one-eyed clerk of the parish, did not I tell ye, neighbors, there are French
Papists about;" "ay, says another, turning to his right hand man, I told thee,
Giles, the pig-tail was suspicious, and do see what a skeleton it is -- he
never eat beef or plum-pudding in his life."

Not by any means comprehending these disjointed remarks, I applied to my
landlord for an explanation; who said, "we all suspect thee to be a French Spy,
though, for my part. I cannot say but you have called for supper like an
Englishman, and drank like one; but our parish clerk and schoolmaster, and the
rest of the neighbors, suspect you to be what I have said; now as I am
constable and magistrate, do you see, in his worship's absence, who is gone to
Richmond races, I must look sharp;" "Right, Mr. Constable, says a smart prig in
a green coat and coachman-like wig, it is time to be wigilance, I was born a
cockney, and know that there man is as sure French as I sit at this here table;
I have a right to be cunning; a'ant I groom to a Justice of Peace? and was'nt I
whipper-in to the Lord Chancellor? sure I should know law." In warmth I
exclaimed, whip the Lord Chancellor and 'Squire too, for having such fools as
you about them.

High treason was now echoed through the room, for calling, a (...) said, the
Chancellor and 'Squire fools; the wise and patriotic company here, after giving
solemn charge of me to my h^, retired with no small apprehensions in their
countenances. My supper now approached, and rather laughing upon recollection
at so ridiculous an affair, I sat down to it with good appetite, asking my
landlord to partake, who, with the resolution of a Caesar, joined me in the
attack, declaring he did not think I would do him any harm.

My room being guarded all night by a couple of stout laborers, who first
searched my pockets, and pilfered, as I found afterward, two very good razors;
in the morning I was conducted on horseback, for there was no justice nearer
than eight miles: this was the first, and indeed the last time, I was ever
admired by females for my beauty, but they, I suppose, thinking the rope about
my neck, where ever we passed, pitifully exclaimed, "he is a likely weel fared
mon; its a pity of him, I hope as how may get off;" on our road too, the
tenderhearted constable, with a most solemn face, told me it was a pity that
men should be hanged, but it could not be helped, and advised me to prepare for
the worst; I have a regard for you, says he, for you made me a good reckoning.

When we came before the justice, at a place called Ayton, or vulgarly Yatton,
the matter was settled at once, by my showing some letters I had about me,
particularly one from a gentleman whose person and handwriting he both knew.
After a sharp rebuff, and some severe strictures from his worship, upon the
constable's ill-timed activity, we departed; Mr. Longstaff, with all the
penitence and politeness which defeated vermin of the law are capable of,
declared that we must not part till we had drank friends, I rather declined
this ceremony, but complied to save worse trouble; half a crown's worth of
punch was called for, with some cold beef, etc. etc. several ludicrous
observations passed from my companions, among the rest, my landlord declared,
"that unless I would drink a glass of forgiveness to the parish clerk, who had
caused all this, he knew the poor man so well, his conscience would not let him
sleep for putting an innocent man in the way of hanging; for, continues he, if
his worship had been as foolish as we folks of Kirkleatham, who knows what
might have happened?"

Our repast over, and a general forgiveness both for soul and body offered on
my side, my rejoiced conductor paid the reckoning; I offered to be Yorkshire
club, but, with a side insinuation, he told me, it was not out of his pocket,
the parish should pay it, ay, and his time, the attendants, horse-hi^e, etc.
which, when we have another half-crown's worth, says he, will make up about
forty shillings -- I know how to make up a constable's bill. After two glasses
of the second bowl I departed, without a grain of resentment, and I dare say my
friends staid, at the parish expense, till they were as happy as princes.

Having observed that I should, at present, only make bare mention of Scarbro',
let us pass at once to Manchester, and open to view a convenient, though not an
elegant theater, with a very good apparatus, and a tolerable company: the
season was successful beyond my expectation, the performers were cordial, (easy
circumstances promote good humor) the town's people were affable and social;
indeed I never met with more ease amidst opulence, more industry with less
selfishness, or more critical taste with steady judgment, than in this
flourishing mart of trade; (the great capital excepted) the audiences are
liberal without levity, and good-natured without weakness.

During the season I produced a dramatic satire called the Mentalist, which
through the uncommonly excellent performance of Mr. Ryder (now a respectable
manager, and deserving actor, in one of the Dublin theaters) met a truly
favorable reception, and rendered me pecuniary advantage.

By the scandalous artifices of a person whom I had essentially served at Bath,
by tittle-tattle misrepresentations carried to both sides, near the close of
the season, a difference, somewhat serious in its nature, arose between Mr.
Whitley and me; from what I soon discovered, I found, and acknowledged then, as
I do now, that he behaved with spirit and candor, while I proceeded with
censurable impetuosity, though I believe no animosity remained on either side.
At the conclusion of the season I left his party, determining again for London.

I shall now, for some time, drop myself, to pursue Mr. Mossop, and the general
circumstances of the stage. -- In the theater both male and female performers
are, in general, the most discontented mortals breathing, the top want to be
higher, and the bottom want to be top; I know a performer of distinguished
abilities (no matter for his name) who, four and twenty years ago, lamentingly
told me, that he had but one guinea and a half per week; "now, continues he, if
I could but rise to four guineas I should reach my utmost ambition." This same
person, by some happy requisites, and about seven years practice, without a
grain of diligence, attained to twice the extent of his wish, yet was then as
poor, or poorer than when he first complained; he has since trebled the
advantages of his first idea, yet though he may live more luxuriantly, I cannot
learn that he either has, or ever had, much money to spare.

Discontent is the most irrational, yet the most common, perturbation of human
nature; it inva^es the wisest as well as the weakest, and wherever admitted
turns philosophy headlong out of doors; somewhat of this having invaded Mr.
Mossop, and occasioned him, when well established with the London audience,
when possessed of a salary, and other emolum^nt, more than sufficient for every
reasonable, and some refined enjoyment of life, considering him as a single
man, without one matrimonial wish in his heart; when treated, as he since told
me, with great gentility by Mr. Garrick, transported himself, I may justly so
phrase it, to Ireland. Let it be observed, that Mr. Barry and Mr. Woodward
acted on the same wise plan; but as the latter exhibited his penitence
publicly, and the former, I am told, recollects his splendid but impoverishing
reign, with sincere inward compunction, we'll cast a shade over the whole
lavish blunder: Dublin was never made for two theaters, nor ever will properly
support that number, one real good company rather bears hard on the theatrical
finances of that metropolis, for what avails general spirit without money to
support that spirit.

Hence Messrs. Barry and Woodward who had money to lose, lost it; and my old
school-fellow, who had little more than public merit and private character to
sacrifice, impaired both very much. During the greatest part of his mock
monarchy he was but ruler of a crew not much above the mendicant tribe; if he
had pompous dresses for himself, an unlimited round of characters, some quality
acquaintance, (who stripped him of more by private gaming than they served him
in public) and the free exercise of his own infallible opinion he was happy,
though hourly solicited by starving actors, and daily watched by keen-scented
bailiffs; he prostituted native honesty, which I am sure he possessed, to
insuperable pride and immovable obstinacy. When the disposal of parts was in
his own power, thinking the king's name a tower of defense, he undertook as
many things out of his way as he did in it, hence, in the general view, he
resembled a man who wears a suit of clothes of contrast materials, look at his
right side he is velvet and elegance, turn to his left, he is coarse frize,
which though warm and convenient is offensively misplaced.

For some seasons this unhappy, and in the main, great man, maintained painful,
unprofitable, and perturbed authority; he was all through an entire slave to
his passions, and most part of the time a prisoner to his circumstances; and he
who thought one half, if not all mankind, beneath him, could, for occasional
forbearance, bribe and truckle to the most contemptible rascally set of the
human species -- need the word bailiffs be added

However paradoxical this may appear, it is certainly true, and shows how very
contradictory the human heart is often to itself; after toiling through much
more than I am able, or think necessary to relate ( outlines of misery are
sufficient) he was seized with a malignant fever, which, unfortunately for
himself, and I may add for all his well-wishers, did not take him off, yet
shattered his constitution so much, that, to my immediate knowledge, he could
never have made in public a figure equal to his original abilities; of this I
shall mention more, and more properly hereafter.

My next trip from Manchester, was to join a company, as it was called, of
kidnapped comedians, picked up from London, Dublin, etc. led by one Bardin, a
noted adventurer, who, without any consent obtained from the magistrates, most
ignorantly and impudently intruded himself and unhappy Co. upon the town of
Liverpool; where the wise Mayor had, at that time, conceived a wise prejudice
against theatrical performances, why or wherefore he knew not, but power is
power however used. A set of people, who innocent with regard to their general
intentions, were decoyed there by threats of prosecution, curiously fabricated
in the chicanery of law; the performers were not only intimidated, but their
finances were so much reduced, that they neither knew how to return, or how to
stay upon honest principles; indeed, I believe two or three were capable of any
retreat, not possessing the last-mentioned ingredient.

The principle of self-defence, in the first place, and a social concern for
persons trepanned into a praemunire, made me strike out a rational evasion of
that childish, or rancorous law, which makes that in common prosecutable, which
a Royal Patent can sanctify; my scheme was, to style, and to occupy the theater
as a school of Oratory, for the explanation of moral and practical philosophy,
both according to the ancients and moderns; to render this plausible, and
indeed incontrovertible, as to both law, equity, and common sense, I gave
before each of the pieces, a short introductory lecture upon the general
subject and tendency of the play; a point not amiss to be practiced here,
instead of farcical unmeaning prologues.

For six or seven nights that we performed, our little hovel was filled, and
every thing bore a pleasing prospect as to profit, nor did any storm
immediately threaten our quiet; but Mr. Mayor -- a wonderful man! thinking the
territory of his jurisdiction was invaded, determined (sense or no sense) to
suppress the same kind of entertainment in winter, which, at a most improper
season (the summer) he was an encourager of: to say a disagreeable truth, it
was, on good authority, reported that the London company, who had been excluded
that summer, had interposed to effect our exclusion, which took place
accordingly, but not in the ungenteel tyranical manner designed by our
adversaries; for sorry am I to say, that the late Mr. Holland, going from
Manchester to London, took Liverpool in his way, and offered liberally to lay a
gentleman, who told me of it, live guineas, that the itenerants -- what was he
at the time? would all be shop'd (his polite phrase) in less than a week. He
was deceived in this point, and would have been in the whole of his
expectations, had not a miserable illiterate wretch, who has since played at
Drury Lane, on being interrogated how he lived, answered, by the stage; which
was equally mean and false, mean as he had been instructed otherwise, and
false, as it was impossible he could live by what he in no shape understood.

On the day before our defeat (from the above paltry explanation) took place,
our valorous manager, ever renowned for being the first in, and the first out
of a scrape, secreted himself, as I was credibly informed, in a coal-house; and
a person, who now fancies himself the paragon of actors -- oh dire necessity of
the stage! -- sculked out of town, accompanied by a flimzy female, his then
wife.

The noble group of heroes and heroines dissolved, some scrambled back to
London, with this small difference of carriage, that several who came down in
the coach were glad to return in the basket; others swam upon credit to Dublin;
while Mr. Hurst, of Drury Lane, and I remained; we gave two or three lectures,
were indulged with genteel audiences, and put some essential pounds in our
pockets: I also delivered two for servants, as they are styled, of the company,
who I understood to be pennyless; they were, by this effort, to my very great
satisfaction, decently relieved; thus ended an expedition, well conceived,
miserably conducted, and pitifully marred.

From this mingled scene of laughter and woe I went to Chester, where I again
met Mr. Whitley; having several cordial and respectable friends in the city, I
resolved to pass some time there as a private visiter. At my leisure hours I
wrote the Modish Wife, and though I had no connection with, or emolument from
the company, I gave my manuscript to the manager to use it he chose it; he
received the offer politely, and got the piece up with care; it was very well
performed, and most kindly received for four nights, though full three quarters
of an hour longer of performance than in its present state; Mr. Hurst, who did
a material part, can testify this.

During my stay I also pieced together a little interlude, calculated for an
admirable set of children, called the Fairy Court; this trifle was so
excellently presented, so indescribably supported by the little ones,
especially by one Miss Wheeler, not then eight years of age, that it ran
fifteen nights ((...) benefits) a circumstance scarce ever known in a country
town, save in the case of the Beggar's Opera, when it find came out; I don't
mention this any further in praise of myself, than in furnishing ideas which
the children so aptly conceived, and so excellently expressed; besides, I had
novelty on my side, as so very young a dramatis personae had never been seen
there.

At this period, being near Dublin, I was much inclined to visit my native
soil, but a fresh and material disappointment irritated me to a new theatrical
expedition, to which I was the more readily induced by the formation of a new
company, set on foot by two persons I wished extremely well; I joined the
infant society, which was very regular, (...), and respectable in private,
though the^e was not much stage merit to boast of; I made a tour of twelve
months, and though some rubs interrupted us, yet I had the pleasure, at
parting, to know that my friend Mr. Bates, then sole proprietor, was, if not
quite, very near established, indeed a few mon^hs proved the matter; he has
since maintained a very advantageous circuit in Yorkshire, wherein from his
complacent disposition, good regulations, and punctual honesty, he has acquired
universal esteem, and I heartily hope a c^mfortable competency, no man deserves
it better, either as a conductor of a theater or as a member of society.

It may seem odd that I make particular mention of persons little, it at all
known here, but I shall always be glad of acknowledging worth when and wherever
I find it.

Having, by my own desire, and on the utmost terms of friendship, quitted this
connection just when profits began to be considerable, I went from Scarbro' (a
place like Bath) made up in the summer of fantastical people of quality, and
ravenous tradesmen, who prey on them, let me except however the seafaring
part, who are blunt, hospitable, and sincere.

I now went, once more sick of public life, to an agreeable and reasonable
market town, about twenty miles from York, called Malton, remained there a
year, and married a most deserving female -- excuse a sigh and tear to her
loved memory -- I remained in this domestic retreat four years, and experienced
from the inhabitants (save one with whom I had some dealings in the bill way)
very kind friendly treatment, as also from some leading gentlemen in the
neighborhood. During my residence here, I wrote a thing in two volumes, called
a Trip to the Moon, which had uncommon praise in that part of the world, and
was not severely treated by those critical dictators, the Monthly Reviewers,
yet the success of that publication was no way considerable.

My pen was next employed, by advice of a gentleman, consequ^ ^n fortune and
connexions, in composing a set of fables for his ROYAL HIGHNESS the PRINCE of
WALES; the work was perused and approved by several acknowledged judges; it was
corrected and published under the inspection of a gentleman here, whom I should
think it an honor to name, were such freedom consistent with delicacy; it was
dedicated, by permission, to his ROYAL HIGHNESS, was presented and graciously
received: I had, in consequence a very polite letter from a Lady of Quality,
eminent in her station at court -- but further on this point we say not.

After this moonshine gleam of advantage had passed over, a ^^^sh prospect, the
more agreeable as unexpected, started up, I mean the patronage of that justly
and generally lamented friend of his country the late Marq^ss of Granby. A
gentleman, who knew my father's and my former ^^ation, recommended me to his
Lordship, showing him, at the same time, some of my productions; the
consequence was, that he would provide comfortably for me, a promise I had
afterward from the Marquiss's own mouth. Near twelve months I waited in
pleasing expectation, then came to town, and had not been above a quarter of a
year, when death, my frequent friend in such cases, before and since, robbed me
of my foremost hope, and a favorite son in the s^m day.

With essential philosophy I looked forward and endeavored to avoid casting a
glance behind, notwithstanding a peevish state of circumstances urged
perturbation; at this time I waited on Mr. Foot, who had the following comedy
(recommended by the late Sir Francis Delaval) two years in his possession; he
waved bringing it out, pleading the insufficiency of his company to do a five
act piec^.

In lieu of rejecting my piece, Mr. Foot very kindly, and then conveniently
for me, offered a summer engagement, which I gratefully accepted, played, and
was, without any agreement, gratified by Mr. F^ote's generosity, with a ^al^^y,
which according to the state of his theater, and the little trouble performers
have there, beyond my own opinion. With this gentleman I passed three agreeable
and advantageous summers, an expedition to Edinburgh, one of the intervening
winters was, though pleasant, rather a balance against me, as I took no
benefit; however renewing some valuable acquaintanceships, and having the
pleasure to see a great improvement, not only in the city, but in customs,
manners, and critical task, I by no means lamented pecuniary deficiencies.
During my connection with the Haymarket I fabricated two after pieces, the
^oba^^mist and Cupid's Revenge, which were exceedingly well received, yet again
P^l G^rlick received but trifling advantage. March 1773 most fatally deprived
me of a companion equal to every idea of matrimonial happiness, whose loved
memory no revolutions, fortunate or adverse, will ever eraze; great indeed have
been the prejudices of mind and circumstances, accruing from this very fatal
and most unexpected catastrophe, health, recollection, and every mental
exertion were for some months thrown into absolute confusion.

About a fortnight before Mr. Foote's theater began, I was struck with an
information that he had no more occasion for my assistance; this, at a time of
peculiar embarrassment, embarrassment known to the manager, was what I could
not at that time account for, nor have I to the present moment a single idea of
explanation.

Notwithstanding I was thus unaccountably detached from a place my warm wishes,
and utmost endeavors were attached to, I wrote intentionally for Mr. Weston,
the Panthe^nites; how that piece, written in four days, and sent into the world
without a procured friend to support it succeeded, is too recent a circumstance
to repeat; here I cannot help remarking on a ridiculous custom of authors
reading their pieces to the performers, this is giving a false consequence in
general to the former, and is making mere machines of the latter, unless such
instructors as Mr. Garrick and Mr. Foot step forth; the former from his
extreme intimacy with nature, and from adequate power of expression, must give
useful striking ideas even to the happiest natural conceptions; the latter,
having a very bold singular caricature imagination of character, is
indispensibly necessary for the exhibition of his own pieces; but after all, it
is to be wished that the instructed did not catch up the peculiarities instead
of the beauties of the instructors: it may be advanced that an author best
knows his own ideas, I grant it intellectually, but expressively makes a wide
difference; I have known some write very tolerably who could not read decently,
and I have heard parsons preach very good borrowed sermons, who could not write
a paragraph fit for a school-boy's theme.

The season before my separation from Mr. Foot, I was astonished by a most
friendly line from Mr. Mossop, wishing to see me at an appointed hour, at
Forest's Coffee-house, Charing Cross; though so long at a distance I punctually
and cheerfully attended; he received me like and I hope as a friend, talked of
his theater in Dublin, asked my connection and salary with Mr. Foot; I gave
him faithful information; he sounded my inclination for Dublin in a theatrical
capacity; and suggested not only my assistance to raise recruits but to accept
the style of manager-depute; I declined all but the recommendation of some
performers, and even there told him I supposed they would expect collateral
security for payment of their salaries; here the great man broke out in the
syllabled utterance of the word se -- cu -- ri -- ty; however I sent two of
diligence and merit to him, warning them of his situation, as I never chose nor
ever will be a kidnapper in any shape; his being arrested put an end to the
negotiation. Two days before he got into salva custodia (a circumstance I very
sincerely lamented) in a tete a tete, I asked him why he did not close with one
house or the other here? he observed that Mrs. Yates was the only theatrical
lady who could play consonantly with him, that she was then at Covent Garden,
and as there was a particular reason why he could not properly be where Mr.
Colman was manager (the reason I don't choose to ^elate) he was indifferent
about engaging: I then suggested his obtaining, which he certainly might have
done, license for six nights at Mr. Foote's, after the season, by which I told
him he might at least get 500l. and if his original powers remained, by
presenting himself to public view, might oblige the managers of either house to
comply with his terms.

Whether conscious of that natural inward decay, I plainly saw, or rather more
plainly heard, or whether through native pride, he replied thus, "old
school-fellow and friend, I would not appear at Mr. Foote's theater in London
to clear 1000l. in the time you mention." -- here is a great light thrown on
character. After the circumstance of his bankruptcy I saw him not, but heard
that he passed his time dependantly in the south of France -- dismal situation
for a proud man! when he returned here I know not, nor did I know of his
precipitate decline, however of his penury and obscure death I painfully heard
too soon; Mr. Garrick, I am informed, offered to bury him, but an uncle, most
generously, took that enormous task to himself. Here we place to rest an actor
of as great natural powers as ever graced the stage for tragedy, and as great
defects as ever cast a damp on merit even in that style -- shall we, in
opposition to that charitable maxim, de mortuis nil nisi bonum, enter a little
into private character, as I wish to be done by myself, so will I do in this
case, with truth and brevity.

As a schoolboy he was diligent in study, good-natured, and strictly honest,
but rather abstracted; as a member of the college he was tolerably oeconomical,
free from debauchery and equally attentive as at school; transplanted to the
stage he almost instantaneously grew self-sufficient and arrogant, having very
little money to command before, and rushing into what I may call a profusion
for him, he forgot not only h^s early friends but even himself, was in short a
Bashaw off as well as on the stage; on coming to London his arrogance rather
abated, but success still cherished pride.

As to his connections with the female sex I will say no more than this, that
at the age of eighteen he had, as far as I could judge, a just and generous
idea of their influence; but commencing a great man he was intimidated at
marriage, fearing any invasion of lordly rule; however, by credible
informations he was a dupe to artful females, especially an old noble lady in
Dublin, who used to make a tolerable audience for her dear Harry, as she styled
him, and after the play stripped him at her route of twice what her interest
had procured; thus starving actors were deprived of their salaries, and the
daped imperious manager was worn out of all circumstances.

Of his management it may be said, he never consulted any thing but self, not
so much for gain as selfish vanity; from the whole it may be collected that he
had original integrity strongly planted in his breast, that he was by nature a
gentleman, by opportunity and assiduity a scholar, by uncommon requisites a
great actor, and by particular failings a very reprehensible man; I arde^tly
wish to cast a veil over the dark shades, but as I profess myself real^y an
enthusiast of impartiality, I cannot disguise or varnish; that so little
respect was paid by the theatrical word to such an ornament is a reproach to
the communities of both houses, save those who attended; but he who lived rich
in abilities, went to the grave poor in commemoration, very little cons^quence
to the de^d, but shameful to the living.

Great things were proposed respecting the amiable worthy Dr. Goldsmith, but
the great folks dropped off, and he went to his grave (to their disgrace)
silently, as a common ballad-singer after tu^^s were at an end.

Oh life what are thy strange variations! the idol of to day, either as a man
of power or of genius, when breath departs, and that power or genius operates
no more, is neglected not only by the multitude, but also by persons who plume
themselves on superior, or perhap inferior abilities; this is an i^refragabl^
proof that all worldly applause, more than a man can conscientiously approve,
is contemptible and highly below sensible regard.

Having left Mr. Mossop in that final state of liberation from sublunary cares,
which we must all by one means or other reach, I shall proceed to a general
view of the London stages, from my arrival in town six years ago to the present
time.

After ten years absence, I found a most dreadful declension of tragic merit,
comedy indeed has not suffered so much; I both ^eard and judged without
prejudice, and grieved I was to find so little room for approbation, most of
the faults I had formerly discovered appeared now in an enlarged state, and few
ver^ few of the beauties remained; though it would be peevish criticism to deny
Mr. Holland and Mr. Powell capital merit in some views, yet it must be
acknowledged that both were very confined; the former should never have uttered
a tender sentiment, the latter should have been entirely limited to pathetic
and generous characters; Mr. Powell's Macbeth was boyish to the last degree,
and Mr. Holland making love was totally preposterous; yet were these two the
main props of the stage in a variety of inconsistent lights; death letting fall
the curtain of mortality closed their scenes of action.

What remained? Mr. Garrick ever excepted, and Mr. Barry also, while he has
half a leg to stand or hop on. -- Mr. Reddish steps forth in Alexander when
Lysimachus is as far, as with credit to himself, or justice to the public, he
should go in that play; Mr. Smith did every thing at the other house, and every
thing the same way; Mr. Cantherley, another capital actor, has figured away in
Hamlet when Laertes would rather overload him; Mr. Brereton has -- I will not
mention for his sake what he has done; Mr. Bensley went to school or college,
as I have been informed, with Mr. Colman, so of necessity must be as exquisite
in acting as the late manager was, and may be in writing: to say truth, absurd
elevation has reduced very good second and third rate actors, into miserable
apologies for the first style, and drawn upon them frequent censures they might
otherwise have reputably escaped.

I promised to give some light into the managerical artifice in making actors
so exceedingly ridiculous and metamorphosable; an actor really capital is
missed by the audience, and therefore will have adequate terms, without being
under slavish subjection to the manager; if therefore an hungry appetite for
seeing plays, however mangled, prevails through the public, and a man for seven
or eight pounds per week is sent on to bungle through principal parts, which,
properly sustained, would deserve twice that sum, so much is really, or
supposed to be, saved; besides a stop-gap of this kind, should he assume any
importance, is immediately removed, because next ours may succeed him without
any public complaint; thus actors and audiences are brought effectually into
the gripe of pattentees.

Let us only view comparatively the cast of one play as I have seen it done,
the Orphan; Castalio Mr. Barry, Polydore Mr. Sheridan, Chamont Mr. Garrick; the
other view -- oh lamentable! Castalio Mr. Reddish, Polydore Mr. Cantherley,
Chamont Mr. Brereton; after several instances, nearly equal to this, can
complaint be unjust or censure cruel?

It i^ somewhat odd tha^ female merit keeps much nearer its predecessors than
that of the males; M^s. Barry, Mrs Yates, and Miss Young in tragedy; Mrs.
Abington -- herself ^lone -- Mrs. Bul^el^y, Miss Pope, Mrs. Mattocks, and Mrs.
Green in comedy, with the excellent support of Mess^s. King, particularly
Woodward, Shuter, Weston, Quick, Dodd, Parsons ^n the soc^, deserve a large
share of approbation; how could imagination accept, even in most uncommon
abilities, such contraste transitions as follow; one night we see Mr. Palmer,
who has considerable merit properly applied, exhibiting Dionisyus, a blustering
tyrant, the next Brush, a coxcombly valet, now Tamerlane, a cool philosophical
declaimer, then Wilding, a rhapsodical, pert, incoherent, volatile young
fellow; observe Mr. Clinch at Covent Garden, one night stuck up for Alexander,
and the next stuck up for Pylades; I grant the latter much more within his
compass than the former; this is annihilating the real talents of performers,
it is setting a waggon-horse to run a race, and yoking a galloper into a cart.

Let us suppose Mrs. Yates put into comedy chamber-maids, and Miss Pope into
tragedy heroines, would not the former promote sleep and the latter laughter?
beyond doubt -- why then should the men be made butts of ridicule? Mr. Reddish
kept from all violent passions, might be extremely respectable; Mr. Smith, more
applied to comedy, must be more pleasing; and Mr. Palmer, freed from ^umbling
parts, which he is apt to overdo, might, in his proper place, be a theatrical
ornament.

Here a remark occurs -- after Mr. Mossop quitted the English stage, his
original part of Barbarossa, which he shone exceedingly in, was supplied by Mr.
Bransby, a worthy man, and very decent actor in his road; Mr. Mossop, with the
consequence I have already mentioned, asked an acquaintance in Dublin, if he
could think " who was his successor in one of his principal parts?" receiving
no answer, he imperiously, but satirically continued, "the frigid Bransby NOW
represents Barbarossa;" incapable politicians have exposed themselves as
ministers of state, and why not actors vainly, mistakenly, or compulsively,
render themselves, or be rendered pitiable and contemptible objects.

I could point out a number of faults in decorum and enunciation, but presuming
I shall be deemed rather severe for saying so much as I have done, I shall
contract myself on these points, and only observe, that in respect of the
former, I have frequently and lately, seen the side wings of a chamber
continued three or four minutes through a grove, a garden scene, etc. I have
seen gothic pillars leading to a summer house, and wood wings to a hall; I have
observed attendant lords and ladies pay no more attention or respect to their
principals, than if they were merely leading puppets; I have observed friends
assist Orestes in his madness without a gleam of concern in their countenances;
and even pages neglect the trains of queens, though spreading those royal
ornaments is the only purpose they are sent on for, and indeed necessary for a
dignified display of figure.

In point of enunciation the blunders are innumerable, and as to emphasis the
misapplication incredible, take one instance for all; from head to foot it is
now become fashionable, if the words thou or thy are uttered, to mark them
strongly without any doubt of meaning; as for instance, our present tragedy
orators, in saying, give me thy hand, though no hand but one is meant,
childishly, or rather pedantically, pronounce thy hand -- thou art a villain;
this, without comparison, should be directly opposite, thou art a villain; but
these, and many other essentials, are below the notice of all accomplished
infallible performers, who are as repugnant to the tickling of criticism, as a
country girl to the approaches of her lover in early hours of cour^ship.

Action, one most graceful and expletive ornament, is almost totally neglected
as to correctness; a needless extravagant misplaced expansion of arms, is
substituted for that descriptive and impressive disposition of limbs, which
renders the meaning more obvious and delights the view; if the wings of a paper
kite (an emblem of some arms on the stage) did not move so invariably, even
they would be more diverting.

Among the heroines, a strange exertion of masculine gestures take places,
which though it may enforce expression, destroys essential delicacy; there is
also a dreadful misapplication here, such as pointing to the ground, or
depressing the hand when elevation of the heart or mind is expressed.

Standing further back than where the curtain falls, is another constant and
very prejudicial error, as in that situation the voice is devoured, and the
features are obscured, nay, sometimes rendered scarce distinguishable, it is
also very objectionable for those who do, or apologize for, capital parts, to
monopolize what they think the most favorable points of view; thus a great man
stands full fronted to the pit, while another character, perhaps of
cons^quence, is obliged to speak with his back three parts to the audience,
forming a picture rude and unsatisfactory; characters too, in general, pay too
little at^ention to each other, male and female acquaintances in pit or boxes,
too often call off eyes that should be rivetted to the subject and business of
the stage.

I have freely, and perhaps it will be thought severely, as I have determined
to sacrifice all other feelings at the shrine of truth, exposed the lamentable
declension of capital merit, it behooves me to give some reason: musical pieces
have been a most detrimental alternative, and pantomime, with luxuriant
scenery, have nearly swallowed up all regard for intrinsic genius, and
smothered every generous, useful sympathetic feeling.

Before I quit this part of my subject, a part disagreeably insisted on, I
think it a duty to congratulate the public, the patentees, and the performers,
that so dispassionate a regulator is appointed at Covent Garden, as Mr. Hall,
whose head and heart, from particular knowledge, I can farely pronounce capable
of ornamenting any station, except that of a politician, there impartiality and
liberal feelings are an obstacle; I sincerely wish, for the credit of the
stage, that every performer either would, or was obliged to keep so uniformly
within their powers as this gentleman does; I cannot be unreasonable enough to
wish every son of the buskin to understand his author so well, that never was
nor can be.

Of Mr. Garrick's management, the policy and success have been so long and so
universally known, that it will suffice as a proof of his generalship to say,
that he has often, particularly of late, gained conquests without many front
rank men; sorry are all true lovers of the drama, that he has condescended to
call upon, as mercenaries or allies, the patched coat, wooden sword, Fete
Champetre, etc. there is not a single article of that sort but renders capital
acting merit unnecessary; suffer a mourning friend of the stage to utter this
lamentable truth with emphatic feeling.

Mr. Foote's institution, extremely peculiar in its nature, is scarce
describable, I believe he does not wish it so; if in his temple of Momus, local
characters, temporary sarcasms, and biting witticisms, enriched with caricature
features and grimace, will do, the whole end is answered; and indeed no place
of public exhibition ever answered the purpose so well; let me not here be
supposed scanty or churl^sh of praise, since, according to my own opinion,
there is more wit, satire, sentiment, and pleasantry, in the comic productions
in this swallow season theater, than either of the winter ones, considering the
quantity of matter produced.

The English, Scots, and Irish stages, viewed as to critical taste, a very
short opinion will let in sufficient light upon the whole.

In London the audience are judicious, forbearing, and fond of catching
beauties, ready to make every allowance, slow to find fault, keen to seize all
occasions of applause, tardy to resentment, yet treated properly easy to
forgive; they know best what is right, and yet will soonest forgive what is
wrong; they are prone to the dignity, but not the malevolence of criticism.

In Scotland they well know bad performance, and bear it with inconceivable
sufferance in public, yet are sure to remember it in private; and if a public
conviction generally takes place it is rigorously enforced: the point of
criticism in which they are most judicious is declamation, here judgment holds
a very nice scale, and among them would sooner gain applause for a cool
deliberate sentiment, well delivered, than for all the enthusiastic rants of
Lee, poured forth with force; their idea of players, in a private capacity, has
been much, but justly vitiated by the misconduct of individuals, who, under
public favor and great emoluments, for that place, have shamefully evaded the
engagements of honesty, I could name particulars but wish to be excused;
however, be it enough to say, that those who should have preserved the stage
from shame in that part of the world, and had it most in their power, have
labored most for its reprobation.

As to the Dublin stage, which has been a most excellent nursery for this
metropolis, a variety of storms has assailed it; some owing to proud obstinate
managers, others to proud luxuriant managers, and several to proud ignorant
managers; to say truth, though they are excellent critics in the Hibernian
metropolis, yet the warmth of passion occasions unwarrantable prejudice and
savage opposition; support is equally violent, and a stranger has exceeding
fair hospitable play: they, as well as we here, have been, from vic^ssitudes
and want of leading genius, most miserably off for some seasons, insomuch that
not a performer has been thought worth importing but Mr. Lewis, who we freely
admit a pleasant comedian -- keep him out of tragedy his and our good stars!

The taste of Bath, in and out of the theater, is frippery, governed by
coxcombly fashion; people of consequence there think dramatic entertainments
mere time killing amusement: the box customers are inattentive and insolent;
the pit and galleries, made up of their domestics or tradesmen, are submissive
and ignorant; if a Lady of Quality commands, (a case common there) that play
must be liked. As a proof of profound judgment, a Royal Personage, in my
remembrance, bespoke Shakespeare's As You Like It, there was a very pleasant
Rosalind, and a good Touchstone, the rest could not be much out of the way;
scarce a creature appear^d in the boxes till -- the glorious farce of
Chronon^otonthologos was beginning, th^n came the grande^s -- oh wonderful! --
Lord Chesterfield among the rest! but it may be easily conceived he politely
sacrificed to folly, though it never could be his favou^^^e. What I have
advanced of Bath may serve all the watering places in the kingdom.

Manchester I have already mentioned as a place of opulence, affability, and
spirit, the upper class are not very keen, yet they are very sensible and very
candid critics; they would rather praise than fin^ fault, yet they expect
somewhat more than bare decency; attention is the chiefest put of their
applause, and indeed the best any audience can give; that cannot be obtain^d by
puffing; the lower class, freed from their industrious avocations, are willing
to receive relaxation in the most agreeable manner.

At Chester, having had many excellent companies from London, and many of the
inhabitants going frequently to Dublin, there is a capricious opinion prevails,
and they are rather to be taken with a Theater Royal name, than real merit
without that very honorable addition; there is much politeness, hospitality,
and friendship in this city, but too much affectation in their criticism.

York is good-naturedly dull; audiences there are remarkable for fixing public
regard on individuals, whom they pronounce incomparable; they are a kind of
parents to such actors, and maintain them from youth to gray hairs, even
against judgment; private character, much to the city's honor, is peculiarly
considered, and, when good, is sure to be patronized. Mr. Wilkinson, the
present pattentee, has given, in a few years, much spirit both to the theater,
performers and frequenters of it.

Thus much for the stage -- My school fellows Deuter and Derrick paid the debt
of nature under the age of thirty; the former was placid in public and private
life, gave no particular offense or pleasure on or off the stage; he was
liberal, a gentleman, and a scholar; an unhappy matrimonal connection breaking
his temper broke his heart.

Mr. Derrick, when astonishingly chosen master of the ceremonies at Bath,
without a single requisite for the place, promised a grateful return, and
actually began to make it; but being involved amongst ladies of easy virtue, he
soon forgot his friend, and sacrificed his unhappy life to the shrine of Venus.

As to myself I am still scrambling on the surface of existence, "with more
offenses at my beck, etc." as to them let some future commemorator set them
down, and, if I have any good qualities, join them; from my heart I wish to be
treated with the same honest veritable freedom with which I have treated
others; if anatomizing my mind, even while living, and anatomizing my body when
dead, can render any public use, I freely subscribe to both; one favorable
circumstance only, I shall advance, and venture to maintain, that I would in no
case, nor upon any view, flatter a monarch, or insult a beggar.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COUNTESS OF MEXBOROUGH, AS A DISTINGUISHED
CONTRASTE TO THE MODISH WIFE: AS A LIBERAL AND JUDICIOUS ENCOURAGER OF THE
DRAMA; AND AS AN ORNAMENT, NOT ONLY OF NOBILITY, BUT OF DOMESTIC LIFE; THE
FOLLOWING COMEDY, IS MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY HER LADYSHIP'S VERY
OBEDIENT SERVANT,

The AUTHOR.
LONDON, JAN. 1775.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir SCRAPEALL, Mr. FOLLET. Sir CHARLES PRUDENT, Mr. DAVIS. COLONEL, Mr.
CRESSWICK. STARBOARD Mr. WILLIAMS. CRAMBO, Mr. HAMILTON. TIMOTHY, Mr. LOYD.
FUSEE, Mr. FEARON.
Lady BRAINLESS, Mrs. WILLIAMS. Lady CHARLOTTE, Mrs. GREVILLE. Mrs. BUSY, Mrs.
ROCHE. EMMELINE, -- RUELLE, Miss ATKINSON.
SCENE LONDON.

THE MODISH WIFE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
ENTER COLONEL PARAPET meeting FUSEE. HAVE you delivered the cards as I ordered?

Fusee. Yes, Sir -- but the one for Lady Brainless could hardly gain admittance.


Col. How so?


Fusee. Why, that formal cautious domestic, Mr. Timothy, said he would
introduce me to his master, but that honor, from a knowledge of Sir Barnaby, I
prudently declined.


Col. For what reason?


Fusee. Because, Sir, I have no great affection for bruised flesh, or broken
bones.


Col. Ha! ha! ha! a pretty fellow for a soldier, truly, to be afraid of a
feeble old citizen.


Fusee. Ah, Sir, you don't know the force and activity of his crab-tree crutch;
besides, this love silences every other consideration; and runs us into as many
hazards as war -- do you forget our midnight adventure, when the great tan-yard
dog eased your coat of a skirt, and was very near pruning my body of a leg?


Col. All the better, as in war so in love, dangers and difficulties beget
glory and pleasure.


Fusee. Very likely, Sir, but to hazard life and limb without hopes of a
pension, is to be mere knights-errant.


Col. Patience and perseverance may gain a pension beyond thy utmost wishes.


Fusee There, Sir, you speak to the purpose; and I hope your honor wont think
me the worse servant for having an eye to the main chance; as every day shows
us that interest rules all ranks, from the general to the sentinel; from the
duchess to the chambermaid.


Col. True; and you have a right to all the favor I can show, for rescuing me
from those whisker'd hussars at Warbourg: -- what think you therefore of being
provided with a good wife?


Fusee. And a good fortune too, Sir.


Col. Certainly: suppose Sir Scrapeall's sister, old mother Busy?


Fusee. And a sad supposition, too Sir, I think, for if she had lived in
Scotland, some century ago, her looks would have brought her to the faggot for
a witch.


Col. What I suppose nothing will go down with you but the roses and lillies of
youth? don't you know, numscull, that beauty is one of the most fading and
perishable commodities in the world? now old Busy, having received most of the
injuries that time can do human nature, will be as engaging at last as at
first: besides, you need not fear a rival.


Fusee Really I believe not, Sir, unless the devil himself turns gallant.


Col. Besides, she has five hundred a year jointure.


Fusee Has she so, Sir? that makes a very great alteration, why she is not half
so disagreeable as she was -- your honor's humble servant is not so nice, but
he can find roses and lillies in the solemn hue of old gold, and the harmony of
the spheres from chinking of guinea; sbut, Sir, there is one rub still, if I
should make prize of this old crazy galleon, I must try to keep her above
water, as the cargo is to sink with her; if I could but keep the gold, and send
her to the bottom, it would be making a good cruise of it.


Col. I warrant she has an old chest that will afford good spoil, and I have no
doubt of your success.


Fusee Ah, Sir, I must be a dull scholar, indeed, not to have learned from you
how to tickle female ears; and the view of a snug retreat, will make me
encounter wrinkled cheeks, sunk eyes, toothless gums, and gray hairs, with as
much alacrity as if youth and beauty were the prize.


Col. On that will depend your success -- mother Sly shall prepare the way for
a proper introduction.


Fusee But, Sir; there is another rub we had like to forget -- your honor knows
that I have been forced to make some advances to Mrs. Ruelle, Lady Brainless's
woman; now what shall I do to quiet her? she is a good friend, and may be a
bitter foe.


Col. Well observed, she is a necessary agent, and must not be lost; should she
know you in your disguise, you must have recourse to your old method of lying;
and if that will not prevail, my purse shall produce some irresistible arguments;
she is a politic jade, and seems to know the value of a few guineas extremely
well.


Fusee Yes, truly, I believe she does, Sir, and though possessed of a nimble
tongue, can always be silent when interest tips her the wink.


Col. Retire, I see Sir Charles -- I shall furnish you with necessary
materials, and full instruction after dinner. Exit Fusee.


ENTER SIR CHARLES PRUDENT. Sir Char. Colonel, good morrow, is not my visit
unfashionably early?


Col. Not at all, Sir Charles; an agreeable companion can never come
unseasonably, save a wench in the case; as to fashion, she is a capricious
jade, and below the regard of a sensible man.


Sir Char. How can that be? when no body, in general, pays a stricter regard to
her rules than my friend?


Col. you must not imagine that every custom I conform to commands my
approbation; but as peculiarities, however rational, are rather offensive to
the general eye, why should a man render himself disagreeably wiser than his
neighbors; it is a peevish characteristic of age, to idolize the modes of its
youth, for my part, I think revolutions in taste necessary; and cannot suppose,
that either the morals, or understandings of mankind are injured by a social
conformity.


Sir Char. Most certainly they are not.


Col. So far then I am the voluntary subject, but never can become the slave of
fashion.


Sir Char. To be free, Colonel, does not this sensible compliance proceed
chiefly from the influence of the ladies.


Col. To confess the truth I believe it may; and among us soldiers it is no
more than duty; by our commissions we are ranked under the banners of fame and
beauty, to render the cause of the former service, and the dictates of the
latter obedience.


Sir Char. In which light, you have happily distinguished yourself; and if
report speaks true, the ladies have not proved insensible to your merit; what
fame may do --


Col. Gives me very little concern; she is, an empty airy glittering bubble, as
the song says; when my country calls, my best endeavors are at her service,
but for a mistress, let me have warm flesh and blood; lips to melt, and eyes to
fire the heart.


Sir Char. Like those of Emmeline Fairlove.


Col. Right, my friend; what were the glory of an Alexander to possession of
such charms?


Sir Char. A mere aerial phantoms but prithee Frank, has that lady had the
power to touch your heart in reality?


Col. Touch, why she has shot it through and through with Cupid's arrows; made
a perfect riddle of it, and, notwithstanding my love of freedom, I begin to
think that matrimony alone can work its cure.


Sir Char. Ha! ha! ha! what the gay, gallant, and universal lover Colonel
Parapet monopolized by a single happy fair one? after all, my friend, I am
afraid that roving, dissipated heart of thine will hardly bear limitation.


Col. Why so, Sir Charles; when that limitation proceeds from choice; gallantry
is a pretty agreeable amusement for some years, at a man's first entrance into
life; but like other light appendages of youth, should give place to more
serious enjoyments.


Sir. Char. So then you have at last determined to become a grave, city-like
fellow.


Col. Not that neither; a husband may have spirit without running at large; and
a wife gaiety without indiscretion.


Sir Char. Dear Colonel, you have perfectly expressed pressed my opinion;
should one happy day give Lady Charlotte to my arms, and Emmeline to yours, I
have no more to ask of fortune.


Col. Nor I; but you, my friend, have much the nearer prospect: however,
fortune favors the bold; and having laid siege I am determined to carry on my
operations with vigor; could I but secure the outworks I should have no doubt
of the town.


Sir Char. By the outworks, I presume, you mean Lady Brainless and the amiable
Mrs. Busy?


Col. You are right -- and sure no mortal had ever greater contrast's to deal
with; as to the former, being young, handsome, sprightly, and good natured, it
is not a disagreeable point to flatter her vanity; but the old beldam is quite
intolerable: however I have warm hopes of getting her off my hands immediately.


Sir Char. By what means?


Col. That you shall know hereafter -- the hour calls me at my agent's to sign
some accounts; if you will take a place in my chariot, and accompany me thither,
I shall not detain you above five minutes, then I am yours as you please?


Sir Char. With all my heart.


Col. Allons. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
LADY CHARLOTTE meeting EMMELINE. L. Charlo Good morning to my dear Emmeline.


Emme. Lady Charlotte, your servant.


L. Charlo. Oh, Emmy, I begin to think quality a sad encumbrance; so much
ceremony, such fatigue, and so little society; that inexhaustable spirits, and
very pliant reason are necessary to go through the whimsical round, why last
night, now, at Lady Ombre's route, was I obliged to stay till the tell-tale sun
rendered flambeaux unnecessary; and had not your Colonel gallanted me most
pleasantly, I should have made a very humdrum, pitiful figure.


Emme. My Colonel!


L. Charlo. Nay, nay, don't change color, child, every honest heart, like
yours, speaks through the eyes, therefore you may as well confess; but you are
diffident, and require help in these cases, so let me say for you, that Colonel
Parapet is a pretty fellow.


Emme. Dear Lady Charlotte, your cordial regard commands my utmost confidence,
and obliges me to acknowledge I have always thought him a man of merit.


L. Charlo. Very well my dear, and when a woman of sense, in the single state,
allows a bachelor merit, take my word for it, love is not far off; but I hope
you have not betrayed your good opinion to his knowledge; for the men, like us,
Emmy, grow vain upon being admired.


Emme. I hope, and believe, no word or action has revealed my opinion.


L. Charlo. So much the better; hope kept at a distance, in the affairs of
love, causes a more eager pursuit; there is my swain, Sir Charles Prudent, has
paid his addresses to me these twelve months; yet has arrived at no point of
certainty; nor do I know when he will; notwithstanding he has an exalted place
in my esteem.


Emme. Your Ladyship's caution is the effect of good sense, and I flatter
myself with considerable advantage from so prudent an example -- oh, I see my
agreeable tutoress approaching.


L. Charlo. Mercy deliver us from the nauseous wretch.


ENTER MRS. BUSY. Mrs. B. My dear Lady Charlotte, your very obedient humble
servant; I profess it is such an age since I had the pleasure of seeing your
Ladyship, that I quite languish'd to salute you.


L. Charlo. You are infinitely obliging madam -- odious creature. ( aside.)


Mrs. B. Emmeline, your sister desires to see you -- [ Ex^t Emme.] and how does
your good Ladyship; our little family is never so happy as when graced with
your presence.


L. Charlo. Such a profusion of compliments, madam, prevents all reply.


Mrs. B. Your Ladyship flatters me, how should such a one as me that has never
been at court but once to taste the Queen's caudle, cope with dear Lady
Charlotte; though we see some good things in the city -- when Mr Alderman Busy
was alive I never missed the ball on Lord Mayor's day, and I danced with such
an air, that Mr. Deputy Stiffrump always chose me for his partner -- I might
have been a Lady too, if my husband had my spirit -- but its no matter, there
are so many paltry creatures with titles now adays, I give myself very little
concern about it.


L. Charlo. You are certainly right, madam, it is better to deserve a title,
than to wear one without merit.


Mrs B. Most infinitely polite -- I warrant your Ladyship hears a great deal of
news, at the court end of the town


L. Charlo. Really, madam, I seldom bend my attention that way.


Mrs B No! suprizing! we in the city always love to know what stirring -- now I
talk of stirrings, has your Ladyship heard that Sir John Rampant, carried off
sukey Tallow-^akes?


L. Ch^rlo. Fulsome gossip ( aside) no, madam.


Mrs. B. Why I believe it has been in the news paper -- I d^nt love to speak
ill of any one; but I always said Sukey was a forward minx -- I am sorry for
the mother, because she is a nieghbour ^d friend -- though, between ourselves,
there was odd (...) of talk about her, when she was a girl -- as (...) don't
^ovet^ttle-tattle scand I -- let other (...) ^nswer for themselves -- but one
must hear when things are talked of -- ah, there are sad doings in the world --
would your Ladyship believe it, a cousin of my own over the way -- but I shant
say all I know neither.


L. Charlo. You are perfectly right, madam, your humanity does not at all check
my curiosity.


Mrs. B. Nay its no secret, only one does not love to repeat such things but --
well -- I could have as soon suspected myself, never did she miss church, of
prayer days, and twice of a Sunday: yet for all this sanctity it is not a week
since a gallant was found -- as I live; found in her bedchamber.


L. Charlo. Intolerable tormentor ( aside) perhaps, madam, there may be more
scandal than truth in the story.


Mrs. B. No, no, its true enough -- I thought I saw something suspicious a long
time past; but I am good natured, and think the best; besides, being a
relation, your Ladyship knows that --


L. Charlo. I must change the subject ( aside) pray, madam, has Colonel Parapet
visited here lately?


Mrs. B. Oh dear, yes -- we could not do without the Colonel; he is here three
or four times a week, and is always pleased to say he finds more charms here,
then throughout the whole circle of his acquaintance besides: oh he is a most
engaging sensible man -- so grave, so prudent -- none of your feather-sculled
fops: I assu^e your Ladyship, the Colonel and I have many a trate a trate
conversation, as the French call it.


L. Charlo. I shall laugh in her ignorant face -- oh, Emmeline comes happily to
my relief. ( aside)


ENTER EMMELINE. Emmi. Lady Charlotte, my sister begs to see you at her
toilette.


L. Charlo. I attend her -- madam, your humble servant.


Mrs. B. Dear Lady Charlotte your most obedient -- may I hope to see your Lad
ship soon again?


L. Charlo. With the first conve^ience, madam.


Mrs. B. I shall insist upon it -- I shall be quite unhappy till then, as there
is not a person upon earth, I more respect than dear, dear, dear, Lady
Charlotte.


L. Charlo. You quite overwhelm me, madam.


Mrs. B. Nothing equal to your ladyship's deserts.


L. Charlo. You oblige me to fly -- besides Lady Brainless expects me.


Mrs. B. Since we must part so soon, I am your Ladyship's most obedient humble
servant ( curtsies after Lady Charlotte to the door) what a proud conceited
piece of stuff it is -- don't you think so Emmeline?


Emme. No, really madam.


Mrs. B. That Is so stange now -- because madam has got some quality blood in
her veins, and wears some trinkumbob jewels, there is nobody so good as her I
warrant; but for ought I know she is no better than her neighbors -- it is not
for nothing that Sir Charles Prudent has dangled after her, and a swarm of
fellows besides; but as the proverb says, a blot's no blot till it is hit.


Emme. Nay, madam, such innuendo's are too severe; for the world allows Lady
Charlotte wit, beauty and virtue.


Mrs. B. The world -- what world pray? and how come you to know the world; mind
your needle child, that becomes you better than to contradict your elders --
her Ladyship, I suppose, would make you as great a rantipole as herself, and
bring fellows about you, there is her virtue; but I Will take care my brother
shall look sharp -- go -- order a pen and ink to my chamber ( Exit Emme.) I Will
write to the Colonel, such a dear man is not to be missed; and when I get him
fast, I Will show the young gill-flirts that I can hold my head as high as the
best of them. Exit. SIR SCRAPEALL discovered perusing Accounts. Hum -- hum --
hum let me see, gained by variations of stocks within the last six months, five
thousand pounds -- ah, a good, a very good article that: this same
Change-Alley, to men of true knowledge, is a second Mexico or Peru, what are
your Oxford's and Cambridge's to it for education -- what, indeed, -- but to go
on -- lost by cargo of the ship Luckless coming to a bad market -- fifteen
hundred pounds -- a terrible article -- yet, mercy on us, what are the losses
in trade to matrimonial cares -- ever since I married this fine, fashionable
wife of mine, neither my head, my heart, nor my purse have had any rest --
visiters distract my ears, cuckoldom haunts my sleep, and, while I am awake, my
forehead feels a constant pain, as if it was breeding horns -- well, I have no
body to blame for it but myself; I could not be satisfied while I was well, and
now -- mercy on us! -- repentance comes too late -- ENTER TIMOTHY. now,
Timothy, what has all this knocking at the door been about this morning?


Ti. About compliments to her Ladyship, an like your worship; and here is a
pack of cards they have left her.


Sir Scr. Pox on their compliments and cards too -- gilt edges! -- extravagant
wretches! -- like themselves -- fine without -- nothing within; eh Timothy?


Ti. To be sure, an like your worship -- all that glitters is not gold, as the
old proverb says.


Sir Scr. Right, Timothy, right -- ah those old proverbs -- they are as much
beyond your modern wit as -- let us see -- let us see what nonsensical stuff is
written on them -- umph! -- ay -- Lady Fussoc's compliments to Lady Brainless;
begs to be excused from her engagement, having got cold returning from the
King's Theater in the Haymarket last night -- I Am glad of it -- I Am glad of it;
and I wish my hopeful wife had got one too, that would confine her to the house
these three months -- eh Timothy?


Ti. Yes, Sir, that would do rarely, though, lack aday, Sir, there would be such
a crowd of nurses, and visiters, and doctors, and surgeons, and apothecaries,
that --


Sir Scr. Say no more, Timothy, the horrid catalogue thrills through my blood,
like the cold fit of an intermitting -- no, no, we'll have no pills, draughts
and bolus's, in this house: so heaven preserve her health -- or take her all
together -- eh Timothy?


Ti. A very good prayer an like your worship.


Sir Scr. Come, let us see another -- Colonel Parapet offers compliments, and --
how! what! have I got the military so near my citadel?


Ti. Oh, Sir, that must be the handsome, sprightly young gentleman, in scarlet
and gold, that comes here so often.


Sir. Scr. A handsome, sprightly young gentleman, in scarlet and gold -- three
dangerous articles in the way of five and twenty, wedded to such a husband as I
am -- eh Timothy,


Ti. Very true, Sir -- and I am afraid there is something more than common; for
last week, as he was going out, I saw him give Mrs Ruelle, my Lady's woman,
half a guinea -- ay I saw him kiss her, and slip it into her hand at the same
time.


Sir Scr. Did you so, Timothy? -- then there is fine work in this family of
mine; ah, these confounded red coats -- they strip our pockets of money, our
wives of honesty, and our hearts of rest -- eh Timothy?


ENTER LADY BRAINLESS. L. Brain. Ruelle, see if the chariot be almost ready --
so my dear, you and your prime minister, Timothy, have been in close
consultation -- ha! ha! ha! -- never was master and man better paired; so much
wisdom, such gravity; and then for appearance, our sagacious domestic might
make a good figure amongst the curiosities of the Antiquarian Society; ha! ha!
ha!


Sir Scr. I wish, madam, I had been as prudent in the choice of all my family,
as I was in taking this domestic, as you call him.


L. Brain. So my dove, that is a compliment for me -- well, certainly no woman
ever had a more polished lord and master than mine; and that too, after
eighteen comfortable months of marriage.


Sir. Scr. Eighteen months of slavery I say -- galloping abroad or rioting at
home is all the business of the female part of this family -- here now are a
parcel of nonsensical messages enough to fright reason out of doors. [gives her
the cards]


L. Brain. Nay, but Sir Scrapeall, in compassion to those delicate features of
yours don't frown -- Mrs. Rattlers compliments -- I suppose my love you have
been perusing these little billets; now was that so polite when they are
addressed to me? do I peep into your papers? do I scrutinize your affairs?


Sir Scr. No truly, madam, my purse is the only affair of mine you dive into.


L. Brain. Well, Sir, and that I do for your credit, you love to get money and
I to spend it* how could you expect to make a figure in the world, if I was not
to give some shining proofs abroad, of your industry at home?


Sir Scr. Very hopeful reasoning indeed.


L. Brain. Most certainly my dear, you act with economy, I with spirit; so
that our affairs shine forth with respect and brilliance: but I know this is a
subject you are not fond of, therefore to show myself a polite wife, I shall
give it up and peruse my cards. [she reads]


Sir Scr. Mighty condescending truly -- so all my comfort for becoming a beggar
is that I am made one politely -- ay, now madam is in her element -- there --
smile; that must be from the handsome young fellow in scarlet and gold.


L Brain. Do you know Colonel Parapet, Sir Scrapeall?


Sir Scr. Ay, I thought as much ( aside) no, not I.


L Brain. Oh dear its a great pity, he is one of the most sensible, polite,
gallant young fellows about town; a little conversation with him would be of
infinite service, and so polish your contracted city notions -- positively you
shall be acquainted with him.


Sir Scr. Positively but I will not, madam.


L. Brain. Nay, that is so unkind, when the Gentleman is impatient to be
intimate with you.


Sir Scr. A cuckold making son of a whore -- ( aside) look you, my lady, few
words are best, so in plain terms, I wont have such doings nor such visiters in
my house; flesh and blood cannot bear them, so determine upon a reformation, or
madam -- madam --


L. Brain. There is really too much of the spirituoso in your expression, Sir
Scrapeall, it wounds my ear: had you politely attended our opera's, you would
have attained a more melodious modulation; but since you are obstinate, and
will not go to public places; what think you my dove if I should engage some of
the best hands and voices, to perform once a week in our own room: you know as
the poet says -- Music has charms to sooth a savage breast,
To soften rocks and bend the knotted oak.
and who knows what effect it may have upon you, my Adonis, ha! ha! ha! ha!


Sir Scr. I am very much obliged to your ladyship, and am glad to see you so
merry; but I Will have no tweedledum, tweedledum, in my house; if I catch any of
the catgut tribe within my doors, I Will try which, their empty noddles or my
cane is hardest.


L. Brain. I never knew before that cudgel-playing was an accomplishment for a
city knight, ha! ha! ha!


Sir Scr. Very well, madam, very well; but I Will do as I say for all your yah,
yah, yah, -- music, quotha! if you are so fond of that cannot you go to church,
and hear three or four tunes upon the organ for nothing.


L. Brain Church music! barbarous! worse than the sermon! and as bad as the
humstrum of a rustic ^iddle at a country wake -- what a solecism in taste to
mention it!


ENTER RUELLE. Ruelle. Madam, the chariot is ready -- and the Countess of
Rantipole is at the door in her sedan; and desires to speak three words to your
ladyship.


L. Brain. Oh dear, I Will wait on her instantly. [Exit Ruelle] Let me see, I
have ten visits to pay, besides calling at Grogram the mercer's, and Dresden
the millener's; so that I cannot dine 'till five o'clock -- I know that is
something late for your city appetite, Sir Scrapeall; but if you cannot wait,
your right hand man, Timothy, can help you to a slice in your own polite way --
I have a world of business, and that must apologize for leaving such delightful
company, ha! ha! ha! Exit.


Sir Scra. Business! -- pretty business, truly! -- ten visits, besides calling
at Grogram's the mercer, and Dresden's the millener; why at this rate my horses
will never come home alive, eh Timothy?


Tim. Why an they don't, Sir, its no great matter, your worship need not buy
any more, so there will be keeping and a coachman saved.


Sir Scra. Right -- admirably said. Timothy! -- so let her rattle them out as
soon as she pleases -- but five o'clock to dinner -- well, that is not amiss
neither, for a late dinner may save a supper -- then this Colonel, this
Colonel; I shall have swords flashing in my eyes, and drums beating in my ears
constantly; every color will turn scarlet before me; and tormenting
imagination will fortify my head with horns -- ah, Timothy, Timothy, what a
terrible blunder did I make; How did I study to procure a curse, --


Tim. The day you said, for better and for worse.


END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
SIR SCRAPEALL and TIMOTHY. Sir Scr. SO, Timothy, by this letter I find I am
like to have another plague shortly.


Tim. Marry, heaven forbid, Sir!


Sir Scra. You shall hear, Timothy, you shall hear ( Reads) "Brother Brainless,
this is to let you know, that after a voyage of twelve weeks, from Jamaica, I
cast anchor this morning at Deptford, where I am lying too at the punch house;
when I have knocked off a cann or two of my old landlady's grog, I Will stretch
right ahead with a merry gale, for Thames Street; and salute you, old heart of
oak, with a broadside of affection, which is all at present from your brother,
till death, Dick Starboard."


Tim. Mercy deliver us, Sir! this is the West India captain that used to drink
three bottles of rum at a sitting, when he was here last; and gave your worship
the gout for three months, by cutting a caper on your great toe.


Sir Scra. Ay, ay, the very same; -- and now, I suppose, out of friendship he
intends to finish me.


Starb. within Who Is a board, yo ho.


Tim. Strait forward, Sir, strait forward.

ENTER STARBOARD. What cheer, what cheer, brother (...) Spring my bowsprit he
seems in a (...) back your sails, heave out an anchor, and bring too with your
head to the sea, or you will be upon the shallows next trip.


Sir Scra. Oh, brother Starboard, I did not see you.


Starb. You might have heard me then, for I hailed you loud enough for a
league's distance; but you land-lubbers are always in one d^stress or another;
now we at sea mind nothing while we have beef, biscuit, and slip, but a strong
gale, a heavy tide, and a lee-shore.


Sir Scra. Ah, you are happy mortals.


Starb. Mess, and so we are -- but how are your timbers? not crazy, I hope; for
I hear as how you have made a matrimonial voyage since I saw you; and strike my
flag that station requires a sound bottom, good rigging, an able stee^sman, and
a stout helm.


Sir Scra. Yes, yes, I am married.


Starb. Well, and what sort of a frigate have you got? is she French or Dutch
built? crank or broad bottomed? will she ride out a squall of flattery, or is
she apt to turn keel upwards? have you found out her trim?


Sir Scra. No, truly; but she has found out mine, and trimmed me with a
vengeance.


Star. And who is fault's that? you was old enough to be your own pilot, wan't
you?


Sir Scra. Ay, very true -- I have nobody to blame but myself -- why just now I
had an impudent, bag-wigg'd villain, came to demand five hundred pounds she had
lost to him at cards.


Starb. Say you so? board me an she makes many more such trips to the land of
the Four Kings, you will be stranded on the shore of poverty.


Sir Scra. Ay, it must be so; yet what can I do -- advise me, brother, pray do
advise me ( a loud squall of women) Mercy deliver us! what is that?


Starb. Burst my guns, it seems the signal for s^ri^ing on a rock, and eight
feet water in the hold.


ENTER TIMOTHY passing across. Sir Scra. Timothy, why this haste?


Tim. I am going for half a dozen doctors. Exit


Sir Scra. Half a dozen doctors! -- why Timothy, -- Ruelle.


RUELLE running across. I cannot stop a moment, Sir. Exit.


Sir Scra. Not stop a moment -- why? -- how -- I am in such confusion I know
not what to think ( Ruelle returns across) Ruelle -- Ruelle -- not a word --
what in the name of wonder can possess them all -- oh, I see my hopeful wife.


Starb. What is that there your pleasure-barge? Strike my slag she shows a snug
built thing, and only wants an able seaman to navigate her -- she carries a
signal of distress in her poop though.


ENTER LADY BRAINLESS, supported by RUELLE and another maid, all three weeping.
L. Brain. Reach me a chair -- this unexpected stroke has quite en^eebled me.


Sir Scr. What stroke, pray, madam?


L Brain. Oh, Sir Scrapeall, the most fatal --


Sir Scr. What is Zorobabel run away?


L Brain. Oh worse, worse, the most irreparable accident.


Sir Scr How! worse! is the government bankrupt?


L. Brain. More dreadful still -- let one of these, whose hearts are not so
susceptible of tender impressions, nor so nearly interested as mine, relate the
dismal tale, while I indulge my tears -- oh -- oh -- oh ( the three women cry)


Starb. Harkee, brother, the squall cannot last long with such showers.


Sir Scr. If I am kept a moment longer in suspense I shall run distracted --
tell me, Ruelle, tell me, thi^ dr^^dful accident, and make me cry too.


Starb. Cry! -- hark^e, young woman, could not you toss up a tankard of punch
for brother Brainless and I, we shall weather the gale better.


Sir Scr. Don't talk so, don't talk so, when perhaps I am ruined.


Ruelle. Oh, Sir, we are all ruined; a heart of ^^int would melt at so pitiful
a case -- I have scarce power to tell you; but my lady's, Sir -- my lady's --
la -- la -- lap dog's dead -- oh -- h -- h -- h ( the three women cry again).


Starb. A lap-dog -- ho! ho! ho!


Sir Scr. La, lal, laral, lal derol -- positively we'll have the punch, brother.


L. Brain. Oh, cruel wretch, to make my grief your sport -- poor little charmer
-- the sprightliest companion, the politest of the four-footed kind; then so
delicate, he could not drink his tea unsweetened, nor eat bread without butter
-- was not he a most engaging creature, Ruelle?


Ruelle. Ye -- ye -- yes, madam, I Am sure I shall never forget him, because I
think the pretty rogue broke his heart for love.


L. Brain. Do you really think so, Ruelle?


Ruelle. I do indeed, madam; for the sweet creature has never been himself
since lady Doublechin took away her Dido.


L. Brain. Ah, cruel Dido -- barbarous Doublechin -- well, I am resolved that
Meagre, the physician, and Julep, the apothecary, shall never come near me
again, since they could not save little charmer.


Si^ Scr. How! a doctor and an apothecary! would they were buried with their
patient, and their bi^l along with them.


L. Brain. You have often complained of my little favorite, Sir Scrapeall, but
he will trouble you no more -- he is out of this troublesome world; however, in
respect of his merits, I must desire to have an epitaph, and a neat marble
monument dedicated to his dear memory.


Sir Scra. What! an epitaph! and a marble monument for a dog! -- Did you ever
hear the like, brother?


L, Brain. What, Sir Scrapeall, is that man your brother?


Starb. Yes, woman, that man is his brother; I Am sure I took his sister in tow
a voyage of seven years, and as good a sea-boat she was as ever cut water, till
death started a plank and sunk her.


L. Brain. What jargon the creature utters; why, friend, you are as rough and
boisterous as the element you belong to.


Starb. And what then? mayhap, mistress, though I have no palaver, nor flippaty
flappets about me, I Am better than your painted butterflies, that only live
while the sun shines; now all weather's alike to me.


L. Brain. Keep a little farther off -- your tar's offensive, friend.


Starb. My tar's better than your musk; and if you cannot bear me along-side,
you must strike; no frenchified engagements for me, yard-arm and yard-arm's
Dick Starboard's trim, I can tell you.


Sir. Scr. Ah, well said, brother -- give her a little more of it -- she talks
too fast for me.


L. Brain. Well, Sir Scrapeall, I congratulate you upon having a relation
equally polite with yourself; but that we may not lay aside all decency, I
change the subject -- Ruelle, you must assist me to lay the plan of charmer's
funeral.


Starb. Funeral! smite his limbs, give him a sea funeral; stitch up his carcass
in the reef of an old hammock, clap in some ballast, and heave him overboard
into the next horse-pond.


Sir Scr. Ay, and too good for him -- ah, brother, if she would but listen to
your advice, if you would undertake to direct her, some good might be expected.


L. Brain. What! such a porpuss direct me!


Starb. Avast, mistress, avast, I don't like the birth so well -- strike my
flag, brother, I had rather navigate my ship, the Charming Kate, to Jamaica,
without compass or helm, than go master of her for a month -- but what
provisions have you got -- I have taken in nothing but two red herrings, and
three tankards of grog since I came on shore; so bear a hand. [ pulls Sir
Scra^^a^l and exit]


L. Brain. So, there g^ a hopeful (...); a most natural alliance: by the he^p
of this sea-brute. I suppose, Sir Scrap^all intends to usu^p an au^hority; yet,
weak as I am, they shall find some h^^dship in attaining a superiority -- oh I
see the Col^nel coming most luckily to relieve my fatigued spirit: Ruelle and
you retire. Ex^unt.


ENTER COLONEL PARAPIT. Col. Madam your most obedient servant.


L. Brain. Oh, Colonel, you are come in happy time to my relief; do you know
that I have just now been in the condition of poor Androm^da; on the point of
being devoured by a sea monster.


Col, A sea monster, madam!


L. Brain. Yes, truly, the polite brother-in-law of my polite husband: I assure
you, Colonel, the brute threw me into a horrid palpitation.


Col. I presume it was the person I met with Sir Scrapeall, madam, who talked
somewhat of a rasher on the coals, and a bucket of flip as he passed by.


L. Brain. The very same.


Col. Truly an uncouth appearance to address to a Lady; but perhaps, madam, his
externals injure concealed merit: intrinsic value lies often hid under such
rough outside.


L. Brain. Well, Colonel, I must say your good nature and delicacy are
remarkable for reconciling inconsistencies, and placing persons, or things, in
the most amiable light. But, Colonel -- I have met a most melancholy accident
since I saw you -- sure poor charmer is dead.


Col. Indeed! I am perfectly concerned that your Ladyship should lose such an
engaging little animal.


L. Brain. Ay, Colonel, you know, and valued his amiable qualifications --
well, since his fate was inevitable, it is some comfort to find such genteel
sympathy in the breast of a friend; but that care is not single, Sir Scrapeall
takes pains to mortify my concerns.


Col. Truly, madam, I have often blamed fortune in private, which could lavish
such a profusion of beauty and merit, as you are possessed of, upon avarice and
insensibility --


L. Brain. Oh, Sir, you are infinitely obliging.


C^l. And have been sorry to think, that your Ladyship should be exiled into a
kind of matrimonial Siberia.


L. Brain. It Is too true, Colonel; but you know my condition, and charitably
sooth it with agreeable conversation.


Col. Rather say, madam, I do myself both honor and pleasure, when I render
you the smallest satisfaction.


L. Brain. Sir, so refined a compliment would prove my inability of return, but
that my sister-in-law's ap^r^^ch saves me.


Col. The devil ^t does ( as^de)


L. Brain. She will amuse you, Colonel, for some minutes, while I give Ruell^
directions about poor Charmer; which done I shall return to assist you against
the violence of a never-ceasing tongue.


Col. Madam, you are particularly obliging -- ( exit L. Brain.) I must
endeavor to retreat though before she returns, for it would be almost an
impossibility to please such contrarieties at once; and, on Emmeline's account,
I must, if possible, keep fair with both.


ENTER MRS. BUSY. Mrs. B. Colonel, your most obedient humble servant -- I
profess you are grown a great stranger: methinks it is an age since your last
visit, and yet I believe it is but three days neither; but expectation makes
time long, as the saying is, and you have particular good wishes from this
family, I assure you, Colonel.


Col. It is the pride and pleasure of my heart, madam, to deserve them.


Mrs. B. Most elegantly expressed -- was not that my sister left the room as I
came in?


Col. Yes, madam, it was her ladyship.


Mrs. B. Her Ladyship! humph! these feathers in the cap make people hold their
heads so high, forsooth; but you and I, Colonel, know better.


Col. Most certainly, madam; as you say, titles are mere feathers.


Mrs. B. And pray now, Colonel, do you really think this sister of mine, so
fine a woman as the world says?


Col. Really, madam, it is hard to say; beauty is not universal; and that which
pleases one ^ye palls upon another; Lady Brainless is not without her
attractions; but I must confess there are charms in this house, of milder,
steddier natu^^, which more powerfully command my approbation.


Mrs. B. Infinitely discreet I profess -- ah, Colonel, if every fine Gentleman
was as prudent, we should not have so many minx presume upon their doll-dousy
faces.


Col. Very true, madam.


Mrs. B. Good houswifery would then take place of rambling and cards; and idle
routes give way to the dear society of kind, sober husbands.


Col. And if all the fine ladies had such prudential notions as yours, madam,
sense, as well as passion, must own their influence.


Mrs. B. How happy do I esteem myself, Colonel, that my notions so particular
agree with yours; I wish her Ladyship was here to be convinced, I am not quite
so ignorant as she is pleased to imagine.


Col. Heaven forbid, till I am gone however. aside


Mrs. B. And here she comes, I profess -- now for it, Colonel.


Col. Would I were gone, I shall most certainly disoblige one of them. ( aside)


ENTER LADY BRAINLESS. L. Brain. Well, Colonel, I have settled poor Charmer's
funeral procession; he is to be interred under a rose tree, and I am to be chief
mourner.


Mrs. B. Lord, sister, I am amazed you can be so unpolite as to trouble the
Colonel with that little ugly creature.


L. Brain. Really, madam, I did not come into the city to learn politeness.


Mrs. B. If your Ladyship had, perhaps you might have met some useful
instructions --


Col. So, so, now it begins. ( asi^e.)


Mrs. B. And persons who would have informed you, that prudence is preferable
to all the finical airs of quality.


L. Brain. Prudence -- ha! ha! ha! really, madam, you oblige me to trespass
upon my present concern, and laugh at your mechanical notions -- ha! ha! ha! ha!


Mr^. B. Mechanical notions -- if your Ladyship is confident of your cause,
what if we refer ourselves to the Colonel.


Col. Ay now it comes. ( aside)


L. Brain. You could not have proposed a more agreeable judge; I know he must
despise the wretch. ( aside)


Col. Your ladyship's good opinion does me honor.


Mrs. B. Then madam, we are both pleased -- for I know he will be of my side. (
aside)


L. Brain. Now then, Colonel, please to let us know if you was to choose a lady,
which you would have her, polite or prudent, according to our opinions of those
terms.


Col. Oons! what shall I say? ( aside) undoubtedly, madam, politeness is one of
the most agreeable qualifications of human nature.


L. Brain. What say you to that, madam?


Mrs. B. But, Colonel, did not you say that a prudent behavior was the most
amiable?


Col. Ye -- ye -- yes, madam, I did, to be sure; and I think so still -- that
is -- I think -- bless me! I Am afraid we shall not have time for the necessary
disquisition -- I was to have met Sir Charles Prudent, and I find I have slipped
my time a quarter of an hour -- therefore if you please some other opportunity
( going) --


L. Brain. No, no, Colonel, you shall determine now.


Mrs. B. Ay, ay, positively you shall not go.


Col. Then I must stand buff I find; I Will try to confuse and so escape ( aside)
why then, ladies, since you insist upon it, I shall endeavor to clear up the
point -- politeness -- ay, we'll consider that first -- politeness is a
vivifying ray, which animates and enlightens social intercourse; facilitating
expression, harmonizing temper, and regulating deportment: as the natural sun
influences and animates the vegetable world, so this beautous child of art,
polishes, adorns, and dignifies society.


L. Brain. Infinitely fanciful: what think you now madam?


Mrs. B. Proceed, Sir.


Col. Prudence, I take to be that kind and gentle moderator, whom reason
deputes to assist us against the impulse of irregular passions; a cool friend,
an infallible guide, to lead with safety through the labyrinth of life.


Mrs. B. And pray what does your ladyship think now?


Col. Nay, ladies, I absolutely declare against any pre-eminence; being
thoroughly convinced that they are highly essential to each other, by seeing
them so happily united before me. [bows to each of the ladies.]


L. Brain. Delicately complaisant -- his look gave me the preference. ( aside)


Mrs. B. Charming man -- his eyes spoke in my favor. ( aside)


ENTER RUELLE. Ruelle. Colonel, one of your servants desires to speak with you.


Col. In lucky time ( aside) very well -- ( Ruelle whispers Mrs. Busy and gives
her a letter) your Ladyship might observe I was cautious of putting the old
Lady out of temper. ( to Lady Brainless)


L. Brain. I did observe, and commend your humanity. ( Ruelle goes and whispers
Lady Brainless)


Col. I was obliged, madam, to favor her Ladyship's opinion somewhat; to
prevent appearing too particular. ( to Mrs. Busy)


Mrs. B. Most engagingly discreet -- I perceived and admired your caution.
exit. Ruelle.


Col. Ladies, you find I am under a necessity of forcing myself from your
agreeable company. going


L. Brain. It Is we, Sir, that are the sufferers.


Mrs. B. Yes, Colonel, it is we that are unhappy.


Col. I wish I was gone ( aside) oh ladies -- ( going)


L. Brain. Your Ladyship may spare that trouble, for I Will see the Colonel down
stairs.


Col. Heavens! you overwhelm me ladies!


Mrs. B. I must and will wait upon you, Colonel.


L. Brain. Consider, madam, you are the elder, and not so fit to bear fatigue.


Col. Nay, then, it is time to fly ( exit Lady Brainless after him)


Mrs. B. The elder! an impudent young minx, to twit me with age -- and before
the Colonel too -- I Will see if I cannot take madam a peg lower, with her taunts,
and her sneers -- but he is my own for all her -- I see the dear man loves me --
I Will take a chair and go to mother Sly's this instant -- she is a notable
contriver in such matters, and since I have determined to marry, why should I
lose the opportunity of a handsome, sweet, agreeable young fellow: no, no.

Unpracticed girls, indeed, with bliss may dally,
But sprightly widows never stand shilly, shally.

END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
FUSEE dressed as CAPTAIN SPONTOON. WELL, if what I have heard the Colonel say
be true, that the outside of a man is mostly considered, I am in a fair way of
being as much respected as my betters: so Monmouth-Street I thank thee for this
gaudy title page; I wish the volume of my brain, like many modern pieces, may
not fall short of what is promised -- if that should be the case, I shall be
still the more like a fine gentleman, and at worst may make a brazen front
stand for the unfurnished inside, that is some comfort, however; and has been
the road to preferment of many an enterprising blade, -- Soft, let me recollect
my instructions, for what is a military man without his plan of operations. --
Fusee, says my master, I know women, and he that courts a widow must throw
aside modesty -- I know that too, Sir, says I, for I have courted, ah, and
married, several of your honors oceasional widows. -- Well, no matter for
that, Fusee, this mother Busy must be taken off at all events; she has received
a letter to prepare her for your reception; praise her beauty, be very fond,
and the business is done -- ay, and when it is done, a hopeful bargain I shall
have; there will be no need of any death's head but her face; I shall never see
it in a morning but it will put me in mind of the other world; and, to say the
truth, I have not much inclination to think that way yet; but, damn it, the
hopes of plunder have made many a man run his head against cannon balls; then
why should I be afraid of a witch? so most engaging, glib-tongued ancient Lady
-- have at you.

Exit Fusee. SCENE II.
COLONEL PARAPET meeting SIR CHARLES. Col. Well met, Sir Charles -- why this
unusual anxiety in your countenance? It is not philosophical I assure you.


Sir Char. Nay, Frank, all our resolution, natural and speculative, must give
way upon particular occasions -- I am miserable.


Col. Marry! heaven forbid! -- why, man, your acres are not swallowed up by an
earthquake.


Sir Char. Pshaw! that were a trifle -- I could bear any thing calmly but the
disappointment of my heart. -- I fear Lady Charlotte has a tincture of that
inconstancy which is charged against her sex in general.


Col. How so? whence your suspicion? has she started a rival to amuse you?


Sir Char. Not that I know of, though I may fear it -- I was to have paid her a
visit as this hour, but calling at her house, a servant told me she had set off
for her brother's, the Earl of Greenhill's, two hours ago; and that without
leaving any apology, or the slightest hint of return.


Col. And this is the mighty source of care! oh love, love, what a capricious
deity are thou, who can so turn our wits the seamy side without, as Shakespeare
has it. -- Prithee, my friend, don't take trifles to heart; this flight of Lady
Charlotte's is only the whim of a fine lady, who has the prerogative of custom
to give herself as many affected and inconsistent airs as she pleases.


Sir Char. Nay, dear Colonel, don't be too severe; I cannot think her good sense
descends to so trifling a character as you mean, by a fine Lady; she has
spirits without wildness, goodnature without weakness, dignity without
affectation, and humility without meanness: therefore this unaccountable
behavior surprises me the more.


Col. Unaccountable behavior! not at all -- your gravity is an excellent
subject for wit and vivacity to play upon -- come, come, Sir Charles, rest
assured, that he who so palpably devotes himself to a single object, will be
liable to such rubs; I love one, yet gallant half a dozen at a time; had you
taken the same course, ten to one but her volat^le ladyship had long, ere now,
flown into your arms upon the wings of jealousy.


Sir Char. Well Frank, I acknowledge your superiority in the affairs of love;
what then would you advise upon the present case?


Col. Faith, Sir Charles, there seems to be but a limited choice of
proceedings; you have an excellent set of nags, and if you wish for an
immediate ecclaircissement, even pursue, and tell her you will not be treated with
such indifference for the future; or rather take no notice of the matter 'till
her ladyship chooses to come back, which, if I am any judge of woman, she very
shortly will.


Sir Char. Your latter opinion shall guide me -- her servant mentioned the
arrival of Lord Frederic Bloom, her younger brother, could I obtain an intimacy
with him it might be useful.


Col. Most certainly, as you would thereby know the motions of the enemy.


ENTER a SERVANT. Serve. Lord Frederic Bloom's compliments, and this letter, Sir.


Col. Very well, wait a moment -- Lord Frederic's compliments! this is somewhat
odd, as I never knew any of the family but Lady Charlotte -- eh, what have we
here? -- Charlotte Bloom! -- suppose this should be a love-letter? -- upon my
honor, Sir Charles, I never made any advances.


Sir Char. Dear Colonel, you have alarmed my curiosity; and if the purport is
not very particular, your communication will oblige me.


Col. Purport -- gad you shall have it all -- you shall read it, kiss it, and
take it as a relic for adoration if you will -- there.


Sir Char. ( Reads) "Sir, meeting my brother, Lord Frederic, on the road, and
knowing after three years travel, commenced upon his leaving the university,
that he must be rather deficient of acquaintance; I have taken the liberty of
introducing him to you as a gentleman highly deserving his observation and
regard. Your most, etc. Charlotte Bloom." -- This may be a lucky hit for me,
Colonel.


Col. Right, Sir Charles; my interest may be of some use, as the lady honors
me with so kind an opinion -- here, friend, -- is his Lordship at Lady
Charlotte's?


Serve. He is, Sir, and desires to know what time will be most convenient for
his Lordship to wait on you?


Col. Oh, my compliments, and I Will save the trouble, by waiting upon him
immediately ( Exit Servant) Well, my friend, I am a notable spy, I assure you;
and if any thing falls in my way you may depend upon diligence.


Sir Char. I can never doubt or repay your friendship; but as I know your
disposition, I shall refer you to the delicate pleasure which results to a
generous mind from good-natured actions -- I will not detain you from this visit
-- when it is over shall I see you at my house?


Col. You shall; so adieu -- but harkee, Charles, in the mean time, I desire,
for philosophy's sake, that you will sigh as little as you possibly can.


Exeunt severally. ENTER LADY CHARLOTTE (dressed as Lord Frederic) and
EMMELINE. Emme. Well, Lady Charlotte, there is somewhat so unexpected, and so
romantic in this metamorphose of yours, that positively I cannot help laughing,
even at the expense of good manners -- ha! ha! ha! ha! -- you will excuse me.


L. Charlo. Excuse, ha! ha! ha! I Will laugh with you, my dear; I am never better
pleased than when laughing at myself; and certainly I was never a better
subject for it than at present -- but come, give me your opinion, don't I make
a tolerable smart figure in this masculine outside? -- a little upon the
coxcomb or so -- eh?


Emme. Not at all; you have a much better right to the title of a fine
gentleman, than many who claim it -- but, after all, to what extraordinary
purpose have you done this? is it merely to torment poor Sir Charles -- bless
us what confusion the poor man seemed in, on hearing you had left town so
abruptly.


L. Charlo. Why ay, I grant you Sir Charles has all the appearance of an
Arcadian swain, and I believe him sincere; but this is only surmise; and when
all the happiness of life depends upon a single choice, that one should
certainly be well grounded; my disguise is an endeavor at this, and for my
friend Emmeline's sake, as well as my own.


Emme. For my sake! in what shape pray?


L. Charlo. In short, child, I want to see you a happy wife as well as myself;
and to be plain, I have always imagined your Colonel to be as suspicious a
piece of gallantry, as any within the sphere of my observation; now in this
form I shall be able to sound the very bottom of his heart, which is more than
you could ever be able to do, until it was perhaps too late.


Emme. I have always thought myself under infinite obligations to dear Lady
Charlotte's goodnature; but this extraordinary instance of friendship, makes
gratitude blush for its poverty.


L. Charlo. Not at all, Emmeline, you would put on a pair of breeches to oblige
me, and then the account is balanced.

ENTER a SERVANT. Colonel Parapet to wait on your Lordship.


L. Charlo. Very well -- conduct him up ( Exit. Servant) So, his complaisance
anticipates my intention of visiting him; and I am glad of it, for if you will
step into my dressing room, there you may hear how I play my part. ( Exit.
Emmeline) I hope this Colonel may stand proof for poor Emmeline's sake;
however, at any rate, before knowledge is better than late repentance.


ENTER COLONEL. Col. My Lord, your most obedient humble servant.


L. Charlo. Colonel, your servant, I am extremely concerned to give you this
trouble.


Col. It Is a pleasure, my Lord, to wait upon so near a relation to Lady
Charlotte; and I hope to merit the very favorable opinion her Ladyship has
indulged me with.


L. Charlo. When there is so much prepossession as I feel, a small share of
attention must certainly effect that; besides I know my sister is not apt to
flatter -- but come, Colonel, as I have been upon my travels these three years,
I must trespass upon you for some account of matters here at home.


Col. Faith, my Lord, I imagine them to be just the same they always were; and
the uncharitable spirit of ridicule, as prevalent among persons of different
dispositions as ever; scarce any thing spoken of but the follies and vices of
our neighbors; while the censors themselves are hourly committing greater
enormities than those they stigmatize; as to the polite and trading world, the
first are endeavoring to ruin each other at cards and horse-racing; and the
latter are studying to overreach one another by deceitful bargains and
paper-currency: in short, reputations and circumstances are a general prey for
scandal and knavery to hunt through the world, while poor honesty is thrown out
of the chase.


L. Charlo. A very comfortable prospect truly; but I presume, Colonel, you are
more attached to, and better acquainted with the sphere of gallantry than any
other?


Col. Why, my Lord, it is part of a soldier's profession; the indulgence of
peace for his fatigues in war, and it would be ungrateful to reject the
blessing; besides, Mars and Venus should never be divorced; for whatever may be
said of glory's charms, I believe there is more courage derived from the
influence of corporeal beauty, than from the love of fame; nor can any better
reason be offered, why Britons are the bravest of men, than that nature has
blessed them with the fairest of women.


L. Charlo. The ladies are obliged to you, Colonel; and since we have touched
upon them, pray do you know Emmeline Fairlove, Sir Scrapeall Brainless's ward?


Col. Yes, my Lord, I have seen the lady very often.


L. Charlo. I am glad of it, since I must presume you are a better judge of
female merit than my sister; but she has possessed me with so high an idea of
the lady, that I am in love with her before I see her.


Col. The devil! ( aside) in love with her, my Lord?


L. Charlo. Yes, truly; and if she answers the description my sister gave of
her, I really don't know how far I may go in the road to matrimony.


Col. Confusion! a rival! and a Lord too! -- I must throw some rubs in the way
if possible ( aside) Matrimony! ha! ha! ha! I presume your Lordship will hardly
drop so soon into a domestic life.


L. Charlo. Why it is somewhat early, as you observe, Colonel, but beauty and
merit joined, are irresistible; therefore I am quite impatient to hear your
opinion; and I don't doubt its being impartial, as I flatter myself with your
friendship.


Emme. ( listening) Now for it.


Col. Your question, my Lord, is somewhat peculiar; however, to be ingenuous, I
think the Lady might make a tolerable decent kind of a citizen's wife; but I am
afraid that quality would sit very aukwardly upon her.


Emme. A very hopeful beginning, truly.


L. Charlo. You surprise me, Colonel!


Col. Besides, she lives in such a queer odd sort of a family, that your
Lordship would find any approaches very disagreeable, unless there was a much
greater share of beauty to reward your pains.


Emme. Beyond bearing! deceitful villain!


L. Charlo. So then she is not handsome?


Col. But very middling, I assure your Lordship.


Emme. Perfidious -- blind wretch!


L. Charlo. How could my sister be so egregiously mistaken?


Col. So the bait will take, I hope; ( aside) why, my Lord, I imagine Lady
Charlotte's goodnature, here got the better of her judgment; I have heard her
profess a strict friendship for Emmeline; besides, your Lordship knows that
beauty is not a recommendation of one female to another.


Emme. Still complimenting.


L. Charlo. Well, Colonel, as the case is so, I shall just pay her a
ceremonious visit to deliver my sister's letter.


Col. Oons! if he sees her all is over ( aside) letter, my Lord?


L. Charlo. Yes, one of introduction -- if you will favor me with your company
to her guardians, Colonel, I shall get away the sooner?


Col. To her guardian's -- to be sure, my Lord -- you honor me -- but then, as
I told your Lordship, it is such a motley, unaccountable family, that you will
undoubtedly meet a very unpolite reception.


L. Charlo. Pray what are they who compose this extraordinary family?


Col. Why, my Lord, there is the old knight, made up of avarice, jealousy, and
rudeness -- his Lady, Emmeline's sister, a scatter-brained piece of
inconsistent affectation --


Emme. So, so, my sister has her share too.


Col. And, ha! ha! ha! ha! an old widow, Sir Scrapeall's sister, who fancy's
herself a blooming beauty, and torments every thing in breeches that goes near
the house; though she is more like an antiquated tapestry figure than any animal
of the present age.


L. Charlo. Ha! ha! ha! ha! a most hopeful society indeed.


Col. So that I believe, if your Lordship would send Lady Charlotte's letter,
it would do better than a visit.


L. Charlo. Oh, by no means, for I promised to deliver it; besides, I love
curiosities -- I presume the citizen will not set his great dog at me, as to any
thing else I can enjoy it for once -- here -- get the chariot ready.


Col. So, I have been lying so long to no purpose -- this affair must end in a
scrape, I see ( aside)


L. Charlo. Well, Colonel, shall I have the honor of your company to Sir
Scrapeall's?


Col. I must beg your Lordship's excuse; I am to call upon Sir Charles Prudent
about this hour.


L. Charlo. Sir Charles Prudent -- if I don't mistake, I have heard of that
gentleman's paying his addresses to my sister; if he is seriously in love with
her I pity him; for she is now gone into the country upon a treaty of marriage.


Col. A treaty of marriage!


L. Charlo. Yes; and I believe it is entirely settled.


Col. So here is comfort for my friend too ( aside) my Lord I Will take my leave.


L. Charlo. Well, Colonel, I shall depend upon seeing you often.


Col. Certainly, my Lord -- but it must not be as a rival. ( aside)


L. Charlo. Give me leave to wait on you Colonel.


Col. It Is needless ceremony, my Lord.


L. Charlo. Nay, I insist upon it. Exit.

EMMELINE sola. False man! how unguarded, how credulous are we women to take in
the poison of flattery -- this discovery of his baseness, unexpected, and
mortifying as it is, I must esteem fortunate.

ENTER LADY CHARLOTTE. Well, Emily, what think you of the Colonel now?


Emme. Think! why that he is like all men, treacherous and base.


L. Charlo. Come, child, I see this trial has put your heart into a horrid
palpitation; but be comforted, I entertain a better opinion of your favorite
than I did.


Emme. How, Lady Charlotte! after he could treat me so disrespectfully, so
rudely; and in every article contradict what he has a thousand times vowed and
swore to me.


L. Charlo. Come, you must not judge unfavourably; if I can read countenances
right, the thoughts of a rival alarmed him more than a battery of cannon would.


Emme. But what could be the cause of his treating me so lightly?


L. Charlo. A stroke of policy to secure you to himself; it is very common in
those affairs, as well as those of love, to affect an indifference for, or even
to dispraise those things we like best -- but come, I must be an assiduous
lover of yours, so make haste home, that I may visit you in form -- keep good
spirits, and fear nothing.


Emme. My lord, your most obedient.


L. Char. Madam, your devoted slave -- nay I must gallant you to your chair.


Emme. Ha! ha! ha! ha! Exeunt.


ENTER SIR SCRAPEALL and TIMOTHY. Sir Scr. Four bottles of rum in punch,
already! you astonish me Timothy!


Tim. And well I may, an like your worship, but, lackaday, Sir, how can it be
otherwise, when that black fellow, the captain's mate, knocked off three pints
of punch at a tip, as he called it.


Sir Scr. Would he had been tip'd into the sea before he came here -- but
where is my wife -- eh Timothy?


Tim. In the drawing room, an like your worship, and has a poor, thin, shabby
fellow in black with her.


Sir Scr. A poor, thin shabby fellow in black; what the mischief business can
she have with him; by the description, he is neither a gamester, nor a
horn-planter -- eh Timothy?


Tim. Marry, I believe not Sir; but whatever the man is I fancy he is a little
mad, for when I opened the door, the hinges creeking for want of oil, he
started thus --


Sir. Scr. Take care of my gout, Timothy.


Tim. Stared in my face wildly, and cried, hark!
Hark! how the grating hinges croak despair!

Sir Scr. Hinges and despair! -- mad indeed! -- and what has such a creature to
do here? we are all mad enough without him -- eh Timothy?


Tim. Ah, Sir, it was not so in my good old Lady's time -- no such
rantipole-doings; we might go to bed then at ten o'clock, and mind church twice
of a Sunday, besides all holidays; but now we are up five nights a week, and
never see a church; I am made a slave in my old days, and am destroying both
soul and body in your worship's service; but you are a kind indulgent master,
and if my old mi -- mi -- mistress had lived -- I ca -- ca -- cant help weeping
when I think of her -- oh -- h -- h.


Sir Scr. It is very true Timothy, very true; and though I did not shed a tear
when Cicely died, I ca -- ca -- cant help it now oh -- h -- h -- but what does
all this signify; while we are weeping for grief, the cormorants, on every
side, are devouring me up -- eh -- what fellow's this Timothy?


Tim. Oh, it is the madman, an like your worship.


ENTER CRAMBO. Cram. Mirror of knighthood I am trebly yours.


Sir Scr. Quite lunatic, Timothy; well honest friend, what would you say to me?


Cram. That royal sword never dubbed a worthier knight.


Sir Scr. Very likely, friend, very likely.


Cram. In short, Sir, as common conversation sounds more natural in prose than
blank verse, though not so lofty; I shall give respite to the muse, and tell
you, Sir, in plain English, that I am a poet.


Sir Scr. A poet! -- what is that friend?


Cram. How, Sir! don't you know what a poet is?


Sir Scr. No truly -- do you Timothy?


Tim. Lackaday, Sir, not I.


Cram. Astonishing! then pray Sir what is it you do know!


Sir Scr. Why the nine figures, friend, the nine figures.


Cram. Low and mechanical, what are the nine figures to the nine muses, from
whom a poet descends? a poet, who gives life to inanimate things; harmonizes
language; realizes ideas; calls back past time; constitutes heroes;
immortalizes fame; destroys thousands, rattles drums, sounds trumpets, points
spears, whets swords, springs mines, storms towns, rouses tempests, wrecks
fleets, launches thunder, wings lightening -- ( during this rhapsody Sir
Scrapeall and Timothy traverse the stage, Crambo pursuing.)


Sir Scr. Stand between us, Timothy -- the fit's on him.


Cram. In short Sir, a poet is -- is the most complicate, comprehensive, and
exalted character upon earth; and, Sir, I am the greatest poet of the present
age.


Sir Scr. If that is the case, I see plainly by your dress, what kind of a
trade it is.


Cram. Ah, nothing at all, Sir; the immortal Homer begged his bread, yet is
richer in fame than the opulent Croesus -- but to my business here, Sir; having
been informed that a favorite domestic of your Lady's died lately, and that she
wished to have an epitaph --


Sir Scr. How! an epitaph!


Cram. Yes, Sir, and I assure you it was originally written for a very
promising young nobleman; but his avaricious parents not choosing to pay the
proper price, I have adapted it to Lady Brainless's domestic.


Sir Scr. Domestic! why I have had no death in my family these seven years, but
a lap-dog.


Cram. And he, Sir, is the subject of my piece -- her Ladyship approves it
highly -- I Will read it to you.


Sir Scr. You need not trouble yourself, friend -- I wish he was gone, Timothy.


Tim. And I too, Sir.


Cram. Let me see -- here -- no that is my poem for the first son of Lord
Stately, when he happens to be born -- and this is my copy of verses on beau
Feathertop's mistress, to pass as his own -- oh, here, here is the epitaph --
now, now, Sir, be pleased to mind. Stop passenger, who ever thou art,
And taste of grief the bitter smart;
While to your wounded ears I tell,
(mind, Sir, Prosopopoeia, the monument speaks)
That Charmer's dead -- of dogs the belle!
Truly pathetic!
Of nicest judgment -- purest taste,
With every canine virtue graced;
The desert world now cannot boast,
Such merit as in him is lost.
there, Sir, there is an epitaph, might serve the greatest man in the land, and
the price no more than five guineas.


Sir. Scr. How! what! five guineas!


Cram. Yes, Sir, and it is richly worth twenty; nor would I take less, but that
I hope to have the honor of writing epitaphs for you, Sir, and all your family.


Sir Scr. How! before we are dead!


Cram. Oh, Sir, nothing commoner; we never wait for events -- we are prepared
for every thing; I have occasional panagerics by me to serve all the victories,
heroes, beauties, and patriots of a whole century; I have an excellent stock I
assure you.


Sir. Scr. Go, go, I have no business for a scribbler.


Cram. A scribbler! ha! -- oh most indignant term.


Sir Scr. Timothy, show the man out.


Cram. Is this for one, that treads Parnassus hill?
That quaffs of Helicon's inspiring streams?
Melpomene, Apollo, and Calliope;
Urania: all the tuneful tribe, unite
In just revenge of your insulted bard.

Sir Scr. Hey day! Parnassus hill! that I suppose is a cant phrase for Ludgate
hill, where they pick pockets; and these are his accomplices who are to cut our
throats, perhaps -- a terrible dog -- Timothy, turn him out.


Tim. He Will mind your worship most; besides, Sir, suppose he should bite, and
make a poet of me too.


Sir Scr. Then call brother Starboard, he will do it at once -- and that will
bring him from the punch too.


Cram. Say shall the guineas be produced or not?
Tremble, Sir Knight, at an incensed muse,
That brandishes a pen full fraught with gall.

Sir Scr. Ay, ay, it is so; I thought the fellow wanted to rob me.

ENTER STARBORD (singing) with a punch bowl. Early in the morning, the
ninetenth of may,
For ever be recorded the glorious ninety-two:
yo, ho; what squall now, brother Brainless?


Sir Scr. Why here is an impudent fellow will not go out of my house, and I want
you to turn him out.


Starb. What this here weather-beaten thing? -- strike my topsails he looks as
if he had been on short allowance a whole West India voyage: why you would not
have me give such a crazy yawl as this a broadside? that would be just the
same, as thof a first rate should fire into a dung-boat.


Sir Scr. Ah, he is a terrible fellow for all that.


Starb. Say you so? mess then he must have something concealed under hatches;
he must depend upon close quarters, like a Newcastle cat; he has nothing above
board but the ensigns of poverty: I Will hail him -- yo, ho, what cheer, what
cheer, mess-mate.


Cram. Who ever thou art, most inconsid'rate man,
By thus intruding on my reverie,
Thou have deprived me of the noblest thought.

Starb. What thought -- spring my bowsprit I never think at all; but here is
brother Brainless says as how you loom like one of those small craft, that lie
under the land to see what they can surprise.


Sir Scra. Ay, I do say so; now tell brother Starboard what and who you are?


Cram. Truth cannot hurt where innocence defends
And the foul breath of scandal I defy,
Though belched from Erebus and Stygian gloom;
Therefore be told, since you desire to know,
Crambo's my name, and poetry my trade.

Starb. Zoons! brother! don't make so many tacks when you may sail right ahead
-- Poetry, that is writing of ghosts, bloody murders, and ballads.


Cram. In lyric verses I have written songs.


Starb. Say you so; slice me but I like a good song; I had a poet on board my
ship once, I cannot say he was able, for he could scarce hand, reef, and steer;
but he was a damned rum duke: so we used to clap him on the capstern, as they
do monkeys on board East India ships, to play tricks and make us merry -- here,
mess-mate, stow in some punch.


Cram. Punch is the earthly nectar that I like.


drinks. Sir Scra. So, so, here is fine work, another cormorant introduced. (
aside)


Starb. Hark you, brother poet, could not you make a good joculous song upon my
fat landlady at the punch-bowl? or upon my ship the Charming Kate?


Cram. It may be done, although a barren theme.


Starb. Enough, enough, put it upon the stocks, rigg it with a merry tune, and
we'll launch it in ten gallons of flip, to wash down some good beef and
biscuit, or a dish of bubble and squeek: what say you to that, heart of oak?
mess, you seem to want some ballast in your hold -- go to brother Brainless's
locker, and take in some, or you will overset the first sharp gale.


Cram. The epitaph, Sir Knight, you will not have?


Sir. Scr. Begone, sirrah, you and your balderdash together.


Starb. Avast, avast, what epitaph?


Sir Scr. Why truly one for my wife's lap-dog; and the unconcionable knave
would have five guineas for it.


Starb. Five guineas! mess, that is top and top-gallant -- no, no, brother, must
not carry too much head-sail neither; -- however, if you can make it serve my
wife, who lies at anchor in Stepney churchyard, and me, when I steer to the
same port, I Will tip you one piece toward getting a better main-sheet, than
this here tattered piratical flag.


Cram. To what an ebb, oh genius art thou come?
It shall be done -- what is thy consort's name?

Starb. Consort, prithee keep thy helm steady, and don't veer out more cable
than needs: my wife's name was Margery, and mine Dick Starboard.


Cram. Horridly dissonant -- tomorrow's sun
Shall not to Thetis liquid lap descend,
Ere you receive the epitaph and song. going

Starb. Harkee, bring too at the pantry, and take in some sea-store -- yo ho,
Timothy, here fill the bucket again -- but not so much water -- Sblood, if this
last tift had been in Greenland, we should have had nothing to swallow but
gobbets of ice in five minutes.


Sir Scr. Oh, mercy upon me! ( aside)


Starb. Come, brother, steer this course; we'll make a Virginia trip, take in
some pipes of tobacco; touch at Jamaica for a few gallons of rum, and then make
sail for the land of Nod. -- I expect my boatswain here in less than half a
glass; he shall crack some forecastle jests, and haul up our hearts with a
bowling of sea-wit to the top-gallant mast of jocularity -- come, you being a
heavy sailer I Will take you in tow. [Pulls Sir Scrapeal]


Sir Scr. Softly, softly, good brother Starboard, I Will follow.


Starb. Nay, nay, an we don't make way ahead we shall lose the tide -- so bear
a hand. Exit.


Sir Scr. I shall have no head, hand, heart, or any thing else to bear soon, at
this rate -- ay, I have it of all sides -- my precious wife is fashion mad, my
doting sister courting mad, my sea brother punch mad, my ward husband mad, and
I myself horn mad -- sure as pretty a set as ever met in one family; and for
our comforts, I believe all incurable: lackaday what a miserable wretch am I!
-- I want nothing to complete me but poverty and the toothache.


END of the THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
SIR CHARLES and the COLONEL. DEAR Colonel, this unexpected rival of yours adds
to my own perplexity; but from the idea I have of your mistress, I think your
happiness in no danger.

Col. There it is; every man thinks his own case worst; mischief on it, I am
chiefly vexed, that after such experience I should let any attachment have
power to perplex me -- however I threw what objections I could in the way.


Sir Char. How so?


Col. Why I gave as unfavourable an idea as I could of the family -- nay, went
so far as to contradict my heart in regard of Emmeline's beauty and merit --
but, Sir Charles, in my confusion I had forgot to tell you that Lady
Charlotte's expedition into the country is upon a treaty of marriage.


Sir Char. A treaty of marriage! with who?


Col. That his Lordship did not particularize, but said the affair was settled.


Sir Char. Sdeath! it cannot be! what, after permitting my addresses with most
engaging condescension; after intimating I was not disagreeable to her, and
giving delicate hopes of a happy issue; after all this to change without the
smallest pretext of offense, or assigning the slightest reason.


Col. So, my friend, it appears at present -- you know the brother could not
have any view, and he mentioned it with a tender sense of your disappointment.


Sir Charl. My disappointment! he should rather have felt for his sister's most
egregious falsehood -- if she has jilted me I Will expose her publicly.


Col. I am afraid, Sir Charles, that revenge will light upon yourself --
fashion and spirit will only laugh at your sincere easy disposition.


Sir Char. Shall I therefore tamely bear such an insult to my heart and
affections? if I cannot prevent the match I Will at least render it as
disagreeable as may be; I Will take post for the Earl's tomorrow morning, lay my
previous claim before him, upbraid her inconstancy, and, if the new lover
should have spirit enough to appear, convince him I am not that commodious
passive utensil she would make of me.


Col. I applaud your resolution; and if you have any occasion for an auxiliary
sword you know where to find it: in the mean time I think you had better find
Lord Frederic and receive fuller information from him; besides, if you can
detain him for the evening it may be of singular service to me.


Sir Char. The latter motive alone is sufficient to excite my diligence; for,
rest assured, dear Colonel, that whatever my cross stars design for me, I
heartily wish your affairs may feel the influence of a propitious planet.


Col. And be satisfied, Sir Charles, my happiness must be incomplete without
yours; therefore let us hope the best on both sides. Exeunt severally.


RUELLE conducting FUSEE. Ruelle. Please to come this way, Sir, and Mrs. Busy
will wait on you immediately.


Fusee. Very well, I shall attend the lady's leisure, child, la, la, la, (
sings)


Ruelle. What an impudent fellow is this ( aside) your honor will not be angry if
I ask a question?


Fusee. No, not at all, my dear.


Ruelle. Pray did your honor ever hear of a brother of mine, one Thomas
Ruelle, a soldier?


Fusee. No, child; nor was it at all likely I should, unless he had been in my
own company; we officers seldom know any thing of the private, but that they
are men, or look like such; we who bear commissions are entirely among
ourselves, my dear, la, la, la, la ( sings)


Ruelle. Ha! ha! ha! ha! I can hold no longer -- well said captain Fusee; why,
sirrah, could you imagine that fine clothes, a bag wig, and quality airs, could
hide that sweet gunpowder face from my knowledge?


Fusee. Pox of this discerning jade, I shall infallibly be blown up ( aside)


Ruelle. Bless me, Captain! does your well-tried assurance fail you -- pray
what scheme, what military trick is your honor upon in this disguise?


Fusee. Since it is in vain to dissemble, I Will even tell you -- my master
wanting to get the old lady of this house off his hands, has put me into
masquerade -- I have had but one conference, and yet, by the help of mother
Sly, want nothing but a parson to finish the affair.


Ruelle. Mighty well! and what then becomes of all your fine spun protestations
to me, Mr. Saucebox?


Fusee. Why you know, Mrs. Ruelle, Pyramus and Thisbe never loved so well; but
you was allways throwing dependence and poverty in my teeth, so I thought it
high time to mend myself.


Ruelle. A very fine come-off indeed; but I Will spoil your master's project, and
yours, Mr. Impudence, I will, and discover all this moment.


Fusee. Nay, dear Ruelle, don't be so cruel as that neither.


Ruelle. Dear Ruelle -- not so much familiarity, puppy, you and your master are
a couple of deceitful forsworn rakehells, and ought to be exposed.


Fusee. What will nothing pacify you? nothing bridle that harmonious tongue?


Ruelle. No, wretch -- not all the eloquence you have.


Fusee. Why then let my master speak -- he desired me to present his
compliments and this (gives a purse) the first I had no scruple to give, but
the latter I thought to have saved.


Ruelle. Very honest indeed, noble captain, and like the rest of your tricks --
let me see -- hum -- hum -- ten guineas! why ah, these are compliments worth
receiving, and shows the Colonel knows how to speak most feelingly -- Yet,
after all, must I not only lose so sweet a swain, but, as I have read in some
play, be made myself the instrument? must I not only die, but plunge the dagger
in my heart myself? this is indeed refining on calamity.


Fusee. Tender loving soul -- I never thought her so fond as this -- poor
pretty soft rogue, let me kiss off thy tears.


Ruelle. Tears! -- ha! ha! ha! ha! not so foolish as that neither, good Mr.
Captain; and since your sincerity is brought to light, I Will show you that I was
prepared against it.


Fusee. What does the jade mean?


Ruelle. Mean, why I mean there is a sea captain, worth ten thousand pounds, my
master's brother-in-law, whose heart I have so engaged, by helping him to some
bowls of punch more than Sir Scrapeall allowed, that he has given me several
kind glances, squeezed my hands almost to a jelly; and sworn, if I have a mind,
he will get a parson to splice us together tomorrow morning.


Fusee. Oh, snap him by all means; and when we have made the double match, you
and I can be on better terms than ever, Mrs, Ruelle.


Ruelle. Stand off, jackanapes, and learn a proper distance to your betters --
you and your old madam, must not put yourself on a footing with a real
Captain's Lady; for my mess-mate, as he calls himself, though he is but a scurvy
original, has the recommendation of a fine gilded frame to set him off -- I
shall so gall madam Fusee by taking place of her -- for I am resolved, when
once Mrs Starboard, to hold my own; to pay as many visits, to wear as fine
clothes, and have as grand a route as any city lady of them all.


Fusee Hoity toity! what whirligigs fortune has planted in the wench's head
already.


Ruelle. Captain, to your arms, the General's at hand. Exit.


Fusee. Sblood! this mistress of mine has the same effect upon me that a
labelled bottle has upon the stomach of a sick man; -- but I must take the dose
to cure the consumptive state of my pockets.

ENTER MRS. BUSY. Captain, your very most humble servant.


Fusee. Madam, your eternal slave.


Mrs. B. Lard, Captain, I am most infinitely concerned at the rudeness of
having made you wait so long, and scarce know how to apologize; but my poor
neighbor, Mrs. Doleful, who has a sad fellow of a husband, came to consult
me, and would not let me stir.


Fusee. Madam, though your absence to me is worse than riding the wooden horse,
standing upon the picket, being tied up to the halberts, or even running the
gantelope, upon so good-natured an occasion of delay as comforting a distressed
neighbor, I must be not only satisfied, but pleased also at the beauty of your
mind, as much as I am captivated with the beauty of your person, madam.


Mrs. B. Bless me, Sir, the force and delicacy of your compliment, makes me
blush; I profess it does -- yet who would ever trust a man after what my good
friend Mrs. Sly related of the Colonel.


Fusee. Oh, name him not, madam, the young fellow is indeed plausible enough,
but nothing of a soldier except the title -- good friends, no merit; and as to
gallantry, I know he makes it his business to boast of favors from the ladies.


Mrs. B. Nay, Sir, I defy him there, he could never boast of favors from me
but in an honorable way -- I don't flaunt about with profligate young fellows
-- no -- I act with discretion -- I have an unsullied character to support --
ay, ay -- if some forward flirting minx's of the age, would take half so much
care of reputations as they do of complexions, there would not be such wicked
and sensual doings.


Fusee. Very true, madam -- ravishing sentiments -- killing eyes -- let me
swear by the horrors of war, that though I have had my hat taken off by a four
and twenty pounder; though my beard has been close singed by the flash of a
cannon; though my teeth have been picked with bayonets; though a whole platoon of
musket balls has passed through my body; and though I have been three times
blown up on the forlorn hope; yet never did my heart feel such palpitation as
those charms have caused.


Mrs. B. Oh dear, that is a most powerful impression -- well, military gentlemen
undergo great hardship -- and I presume you are forced to kill people in your
own defense, Sir?


Fusee. Certainly, madam -- why now in the battle of -- of -- pshaw, pox, I
have been in so many I don't know which it was -- but this single arm
demolished two French Marqui's, four Counts, and above a dozen rank and file;
but such bloody deeds are at an end; the promise of your fair hand, madam, has
made me determine to throw up my commission.


Mrs B. Obliging and tender to the last degree.


Fusee. But I shall not quit the service of my country entirely; I have a borough
waiting for me, and I believe I shall accept of it -- but, madam, say when
shall the special license, I have obtained, take effect.


Mrs. B. You are so zealous, Sir, but since you are determined even when you
please.


Fusee. Tomorrow morning then, my fair, the chaplain of our regiment shall
attend, and I Will fly upon the wings of love to give you notice.


Mrs. B. Dear Sir, you are so irresistably persuading -- I shall certainly
attend your call.


Fusee. Transporting sound!


Mrs. B. Bless me, I hear somebody coming; and I would keep all snug till
things are done.


Fusee. Madam your words plant silence on my lips -- ten thousand soft adieus.


Mrs. B. The same let me return -- remember tomorrow Exeunt severally.


LADY BRAINLESS meeting the COLONEL. L. Brain. Colonel you are welcome.


Col. Your Ladyship's most obedient -- pray, madam, was not that Lord Frederic
who parted from you just now?


L. Brain. The same, Sir.


Col. So then here is anticipation against me. ( aside)


L. Brain. I profess, Colonel, your coming has given me great pleasure; I began
to almost despair of you; and my route would have been as insipid in your
absence as a humdrum society of country-folks set to cards in a winter's
evening.


Col. Your Ladyship does me particular honor.


L. Brain. Well, after all this matrimony is a very sad thing -- Siberia, I
think you called it, did not you, Colonel? -- notwithstanding which, my sister
I believe will shortly travel to that desert clime -- well, I hope she may find
it a pleasanter spot than I have done.


Col. Your sister, madam!


L. Brain. Yes, truly -- Lord Frederic, though his first visit, I find has hinted
something that way, and my sister seems to have no objection.


Col. 'Sdeath! it is as I feared ( aside) -- this is a very sudden affair
indeed, madam; but perhaps the match may not be so agreeable to Sir Scrapeall,
and she cannot marry without his consent.


L. Brain. That Is true, as you say, Colonel; but I believe his generous worship
considers her as a saleable piece of goods, and would be glad to make a
profitable affair of his consent.


Col. That hint may be of use to me ( aside) I should hardly have supposed your
Ladyship's sister capable of so precipitate a compliance.


L. Brain. Why its a little out of the common course, but the impressions of
love are lightning-winged, and very variable in their flight -- witness those
tender expressions, and the profusion of regard you have lavished upon me,
Colonel -- though any woman might be vain of the conquest, yet I never sought
it: however I am really concerned you should be so much in love with me; but
what can I possibly do?


Col. A hopeful theme for my perplexity ( aside) I am much debtor to your
Ladyship's humanity, and must be content to sigh away my passion in absence.


L. Brain. Absence; nay that looks like absolute despair -- and despair is a
very sad thing -- I should grieve to be the cause of it -- come, who knows,
Colonel, my agreeable lord and master cannot live always, and when he is gone --


Col. I wish I was gone with all my heart ( aside) your Ladyship is so much in
the right, that hope, though ever so distant, beams cheering rays; but if Lord
Frederic should prevail, and blast --


L. Brain. Lord Frederic! why you know Colonel, he addresses my sister.


Col. True, madam -- he does so -- I -- I mistook -- you will excuse my confusion.


L. Brain. Poor man, I protest I pity him, I never saw him so much affected
before, but I cannot help the bewitching power of my eyes ( aside) -- nay,
Colonel, be comforted, within the bounds of honor you may command me.


Col. I cannot in the least doubt your Ladyship's goodness, but ardent love is
impatient of delay and fearful of defeat, therefore if your sister should
resolve to check my wishes and favor a rival.


L. Brain. My sister -- you don't imagine she shall direct my choice.


Col. No, madam -- I did not mean that -- but then in case -- I say that if
your Ladyship -- a -- oons, I don't know what to say.


L. Brain. I see my staying does but perplex him the more -- humanity instructs
me to withdraw that he may have time to recover -- well, Colonel, perhaps the
company will compose your spirits and banish the train of impertinent thoughts
which so busily intrude upon your quiet -- I Will leave you with Lord Frederic
till we sit down to cards, and I must positively insist upon your being of my
party. Exit.


Col. Pox o'party, cards, and company; every moment till I see Emmeline is
torture.


ENTER LADY CHARLOTTE. L. Charlo. Well, Colonel, I must say you are a gentleman
of very difficult taste, for, as I remember, you told me that Emmeline was very
middling in point of beauty, now I think her exquisite^y charming.


Col. It may be so, my Lord.


L. Charlo. may be so -- nay it is so, Colonel -- I profess myself the Lady's
champion, my sword is devoted to her service as well as my heart, and I shall
esteem any insinuation against her charms as high treason against the queen of
beauty.


Col. Your Lordship is very rapturous upon the occasion, and I don't doubt but
your sword is as ready as you speak it; however, since matters are come so far,
I must take the liberty to inform you that the Lady does not stand in need of
your knight errantry, for I have professed my service, which having been
accepted, I cannot now decline.


L. Charlo. Hey day! why certainly we are got to cross purposes; what a person
of Colonel Parapet's taste interfere with such an odd family as this, and
devote himself to a young Lady who can only make a tolerable citizen's wife, on
whom quality would sit very aukwardly? ha! ha! ha! ha! now I shall take the
pains to polish this rough diamond.


Col. Your Lordship is facetious, but to dash your lordship's hopes, know that
a previous claim to the Lady's favor has been made by me, and countenanced by
her, which I presume, my Lord, will put an end to your pretensions.


L. Charlo. Put an end to my pretensions! as soon to my life, Colonel.


Col. If that be your resolution, my Lord, I know but of one decision -- you
have, in appearance, an excellent sword, and I cannot doubt either your
Lordship's skill or courage in the use of it.


L. Charlo. A very rational method of argument, truly; right military logic,
and in regard of us young fellows may be salutary, our constitutions are too
sanguine, and breathing a vain must be useful, so I shall not baulk your
resolution -- come Sir. ( draws.)


Col. Spoke with the generous pleasantry of true courage, and strict honor, it
will be some pleasure, if I should fall, to fall by so brave a hand (draws)


L. Charlo. Let me warn you, Colonel, to keep at a distance; for there is not a
man in England could stand long before me at close quarters.


Col. You are particularly generous, my Lord, but I am prepared for all events.


L. Charlo. Very well, Sir -- come on then -- yet hold -- two points we have
forgot: it will not be so decent to throw the family into confusion with our
private animosity, and if in this combat the Lady's favorite, which ever it
is, should fall, the conqueror will have no cause for trumph; so that being
somewhat between hawk and buzzard, I think the Lady should be consulted; and if
she declines an explanation we can but appeal to our swords at last.


Col. True, my Lord, and on that footing let me have the honor to call myself
your Lordship's friend.


L. Charlo. I cordially embrace your proposal, and here the Lady comes most
opportunely; if you will open the case you shall have all the justice imaginable.


ENTER EMMELINE. Emme. Colonel, your humble servant.


Col. Madam, your most obedient -- I am sorry there should be any occasion to
desire an explanation of what, for particular reasons, I have endeavored to
conceal; but his Lordship informing me of acl^^ he either has or intends to put
in for your favor, I am under the necessity, madam, of requesting that you
will do justice to the previous right I assert.


Emme. Right! Colonel! -- I protest you astonish me! I am an entire stranger to
the meaning of this formal address.


Col. A stranger, madam!


Emme. Quite so I assure you, Sir -- you talk of right, and favor, and
justice; but upon what cause, and between what parties I really cannot conceive.


Col. How, madam!


Emme. And if I did, not having been used to the law it is very probable I might
not be able to decide; however the curiosity incident to my sex, induces me to
request an explanation.


Col. I am thunderstruck! -- is it possible, madam, you can need an explanation?


L. Charlo. Come, come, Colonel, this affected surprise, and these distant
insinuations are unfair, I Will deal more heartily, and set the Lady right at
onee -- you must know, madam, that happening to mention the impression your
charms have made upon my heart, this gentleman, my friend, declared that he had
already preferred his addresses --


Emme. What! his addresses to me!


L. Char. Yes, madam, and that you had received them most favorably.


Emme. Favorably -- is it possible you could advance this, Colonel!


Col. Why, madam, did you not?


L. Charlo. So upon this supposition, the colonel very kindly proposed his
cutting my throat, or my cutting his; and if you had not appeared, madam, like
the dove with the olive branch, I know not what might have been the
consequence, for our resolutions seemed very terrible on both sides.


Col. Your Lordship is very fanciful and merry; but I am not in a mood of
temper to bear sneers at present.


L. Charlo. Nay now, Colonel, you are quite too severe, that you will neither
allow me to love p^attle nor laugh, ha! ha! ha! ha!


Col. Fire and fury!


Emme. So, so, so, now the mystery begins to clear up; and I perceive that what
appeared rudeness is merely the unhappy effects of frenzy.


Col. Sdeath! madam! frenzy?


Emm^. Most certainly; could any thing else have introduced such romantic
chimaer^s, my Lord?


Col. Madam, this affected ignorance of what you too well know, may prove
insincerity, but cannot add to the reputation of candor and judgment -- choice
is undoubtedly free; but that choice once fixed, does not admit of alteration
without some material reason.


Emme. Ay, there, Sir, I entirely come in with your opinion had any such choice
been made: but I see you are quite too violent for argument, therefore I think
it will be most prudent to retire.


Col. Hold, madam.


L. Charlo. Nay, no violence.


Col. Sdeath! Sir, dare you interpose? ( draws)


Emme. Ah! ( screams)


L. Charlo. Sheath your sword, Colonel, I shall not fight a lunatic, positively.


ENTER LADY BRAINLESS and MRS BUSY hastily. L. Brain. Bless me what was the
reason of that scream? -- a sword drawn -- ah, I shall certainly faint.


Mrs. B. The Colonel -- my blood boils at the fellow.


Col. So, I shall have the whole crew upon me, ( aside)


L. Brain. For heavens sake, Emmeline, what is the meaning of all this?


Emme. Only the Colonel, sister, who because I would not confess being in love
with him, very heroically intended to murder his Lordship.


L. Brain. What! you in love with him?


Emme. Yes, truly, and talks of having paid his addresses in form; asserts they
were favorably received; and charges me with insincerity.


L. Brain. What were his professions to make a cat's paw of me -- my pride is
hurt ( aside)


Mrs. B. Ah, have a care child -- he is a most dangerous fellow, he would have
imposed upon me if he could.


Col Yes, I shall have it now, and soundly too. ( aside)


L. Brain. How, Sir! did you make love to my sister?


Col. To your sister, madam --


Mrs. B. Did not you sigh, and vow, and swear to me perjured wretch?


Col. To you! --


L. Brain. What was that your delicate taste?


Mrs. B. Where was your discretion.


Col. Oons! I had no discretion to run myself into such a --


L. Brain. Such a what, Sir?


Mrs. B. Ay, Sir, such a what?


Col. Why, such, such -- 'sdeath! no words can paint my condition.


L. Brain. Have not you attempted to asperse my sister?


Mrs. B. Did you not strive to delude me?


L. Charlo. I find you are a general lover, Colonel, ha! ha! ha! ha!


Col. And what then, my Lord?


L. Brain Why then you are a deceitful treacherous hypocrite.


Mrs. B. A base, designing, scurvy fellow.


Col. I am infinitely obliged to you, ladies.


L. Brain. You are an inveigler of hearts.


Mrs. B. A breaker of vows.


L. Brain. A vile betrayer.


Mrs B. A monster of prey.


Col. Mighty well, mighty well, truly; I have brought myself to a fine pass
here; bubbled of my mistress, jeered by a coxcomb, baited like a bear by a
couple of -- well ladies I hope your lungs may be the better for this breathing
whatever my ears may have suffered; for you, madam, who have so very short a
memory, or such a weathercock heart, I have only to repent the knowledge of so
much beauty and falsehood; his facetious Lordship I may meet in a fitter time
and place. ( going.)


Mrs. B. Hold, hold, Sir.


Col. What for you to begin again! 'sdeath! I Would sooner stand at the mouth of a
charged cannon with a lighted match at the touchhole. runs off.


L. Brain. Positively he shall not escape so easy. Exit.


Mrs. B. Easy; no, no, he shall have the other sasarara before he gets off. Exit.


L. Charlo. Ha! ha! ha! ha! let us follow and have a little more of it.


Emme. With all my heart -- though I almost begin to pity him. Exeunt.


ENTER STARBOARD, RUELLE leading him, Ruelle. Bless me, Sir! have a care -- I Am
afraid you will fall.


Starb. No, no, my little pilot -- you know the song -- steady, boys, steady --
thof I do carry too much canvas, and sail gunwale too, in a rolling sea I shall
weather the gale -- but strike my topsails, what are all these fresh water
passengers that are come aboard our ship, we shall not have stowage for them.


Ruelle. You mean, Sir, the company that are coming to my Lady's route.


Starb. Route what is that?


Ruelle. Why, Sir, a great many ladies and gentlemen who meet to play at cards
all night.


Starb. An that be their trim, spring my bowsprit, if I were master of the
vessel but I Would heave all such live lumber overboard -- but what say you, my
little pinace, to that same voyage I was talking about? an you like it I Will
heave out a hawser of love, and take you in tow for the port of matrimony.


Ruelle. La, Sir, I am afraid you only want to delude me; I have heard such
strange things of you gentlemen.


Starb. Gentlemen! strike my flag not so bad as that neither -- I Am a sailor,
my heart of gold, not like one of your land pirates, who fight under false
colors, and trade to horn-fair; we at sea stick to our sweethearts as we do to
our ships, as long as they can swim -- so if you like to swing in my hammock
say the word; I Will cruize for a parson tomorrow morning, that shall splice us
fast together as if we were at moorings with the best bower and cable of a
first --


Ruelle. To be sure, Sir, you are very good; and I must own have won my heart;
but I am afraid that Sir Scrapeall will be angry.


Starb. And what then? think you he is to have steering of me? -- blow me up,
Dick Starboard has not been so many leagues on the salt sea to be commanded by
any land-lubber of them all.


Ruelle. Yes, Sir, but your family may think it such a disgrace; and I would
not have it said for the whole world -- you know, Sir, I am but a waiting woman.


Starb. A waiting woman! and what then? board me I was but a swabber myself, so
there is family for family, ho! ho! ho! -- mess it is not always safe to sail in
your gilded ginger-bread pleasure-boats -- I like your model and trim; and
look, do you see, if you will choose me master, I Will navigate you while there is
compass, helm, and sea-store.


Ruelle. Indeed, Sir, I don't know what to say to you; you are so fond, and so
engaging, and so sincere, that, excuse my blushes -- I cannot possibly refuse
you any thing.


Starb. Why that is well said -- this seals my commission (kisses her and
stumbles forward) avast, avast, mess I shipped a head-sea on my poop there, and
had much ado to come to rights again -- well, my little frigate, I Will clear out
of the canonical customhouse, and steer away with you for Merryland tomorrow
morning -- wind and weather permitting -- mess thou shall be rigged as fine,
and swagger with any quality yacht of them all; and so, do you see, if you will
toss me up such another can of flip as I had just now, and make a trip with it
to my hammock, when its my watch I Will do the same for you.


Ruelle. Sir, I thought you might want something, so I kept the keys; Sir
Scrapeall ordered Timothy to take them to bed, but I insisted on having them.


Starb. Well said, again, my little trimmer -- run me ashore an it had not been
for thee I might have lived on rope's ends and four small beer in this here
ship; but choke my pumps, and scuttle my bottom, an she will swim long -- so many
masters and never a steersman, she will soon be on the shallows. ( going jostles
the side wing) So, so, bring the land marks to bear Dick Starboard, and double
the head-lands, seaman like.


Ruelle. There, Sir, you are at your chamber door.


Starb. Enough, enough, enough, I Will cast anchor in Slumber-bay in less than
half a glass. -- Yo, ho, mess-mate, bear a hand, and don't forget the flip,
do you hear. Exit.


END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
SIR CHARLES and the COLONEL. HA! ha! ha! ha! a pretty situation you had got
into among the females; however, my discovery of the pretended Lord Frederic,
has occasioned a considerable revolution in your countenance, Colonel.

Col. Ay, and in my heart too, Sir Charles; but I am impatient to know the
method of your discovery.


Sir Cha. Know then I went in search of Lord Frederic, and being told he was
gone to Lady Brainless's route, I followed; where I was so thoroughly mortified
with an account of Lady Charlotte's marriage, that to collect my spirits, I
retired and took a moonlight turn in the garden.


Col. A proper place, and fit season, for melancholy reflection.


Sir Cha. I had not been long there when her masquerading Ladyship, and
Emmeline, came down a neighboring walk, enjoying aloud the perplexity they had
given us; encouraged by the subject, I drew near, and received conviction that
your rival is no other than my mistress, who concluded with remarking, that she
thought they had played upon us sufficiently.


Col. Yes, truly, I think they have; so long that I began to be most horridly
out of tune -- but prithee what could be at the bottom of this Quixote scheme?


Sir Cha. To gain some assurance of our sincerity, which, after laughing at us
a little, they seemed satisfied with.


Col. Dear Sir Charles, let me embrace you, so prudent and spirited a design
makes the little gypsies ten times dearer than ever -- did you let them know
the discovery?


Sir Cha. Not for the world -- I hastened from the garden, joined the company
some minutes before them, shook off all concern, was unusually gay, and
gallanted Lady Betty Ombre so warmly, that poor Lord Charles was, in his turn,
utterly discontented.


Col. Ha! ha! ha! ha! bravissimo! that was turning the tables upon them with
strict justice; and I think it would not be amiss to have a little more of it


Sir Char. By all means, I sought you for that purpose, I am to call at Sir
Scrapeall's this morning, and would have you drop in occasionally; for as the
politicians played a double game into each others hands, it is but fit we
should return like for like.


Col. With all my heart, it will be notable revenge; mischief on it had your
discovery been made a little sooner it might have saved me five thousand pounds
for ought I know.


Sir Char. What mean you?


Col. Why in the heat of my passion, I went to the Knight, made known my
passion for Emmeline, and offered half her fortune for his consent.


Sir Char. Ha! -- a substantial compliment to the Lady, Colonel, but we must
try to settle matters otherwise -- but come the hour calls me to the citizen's
-- I Will lead the van, do you bring up the rear.


Col. Fear not, I am ever punctual to my orders.


Exeunt. ENTER LADY CHARLOTTE and EMMELINE. Emme. Dear Lady Charlotte, I am
concerned to see your natural vivacity so much disconcerted by a slight
supposition.


L. Charlo. Slight supposition! alas, Emmeline, in your case you don't see with
the eyes of love, else you would put another construction upon Sir Charles's
behavior.


Emme. I admit there was something extraordinary; but the feelings he confessed
when you told him of the intended marriage were strong and sincere; the gaiety
he afterward assumed was, if I judge right, a slight veil occasionally thrown
over a gloomy heart.


L. Brain. I cannot think so -- forced spirits are easily seen through, and such
could never have carried him so far as to gallant that forward shallow piece of
coquetry, Lady Betty.


Emme. There, I must acknowledge, he was somewhat mysterious.


L. Charlo. Would I had not taken this disguise, though it has been so far
useful as to prove the sincerity of your lover, it has only purchased pain for
me -- I cannot blame Sir Charles -- the fault is mine -- I have acted like a
foolish boy, who plays with and teizes a favorite bird, till breaking bondage,
it takes wing never to be recalled; dear friend what step shall I take?


Emme. I would hope the best: still you know by appointment he will soon be
here, sound him a little further and I dare believe he will yet fulfill my good
opinion of him.


L. Charlo. I would indulge that hope, but strong doubts press forward to
exclude it.


Emme. I see him coming, and shall leave you to a private conference. Exit.


ENTER SIR CHARLES. L. Charlo. Sir Charles good morning -- I have, according to
promise, prepared a letter for my sister Charlotte, wherein I have enlarged
upon your previous pretensions as much as possible.


Sir Char. I am infinitely obliged to your Lordship; but upon second thought, I
have determined not to offend Lady Charlotte by a visit.


L. Charlo. Your resolution so warmly urged is very soon changed, Sir.


Sir Char. Why, my Lord, upon cool deliberation, I think it better not to
proceed any further in the affair; it is possible I might have interpreted the
Lady's good nature too partially in my own favor; and as freedom of choice is
undoubtedly just, it would be rude and cruel to interrupt her present scheme of
happiness.


L. Charlo. You are of a very happy disposition, Sir Charles, that can so soon,
and so coolly, reconcile an affair which seemed so interesting --


Sir Cha. Yes, my Lord, I am tolerably philosophical in these matters; besides,
to own the truth, I had, amongst other conversation, talked so much of love to
Lady Charlotte that I fancied our hearts engaged when there was nothing meant,
I believe, but a little fashionable gallantry.


L. Charlo. Then all my fears are true; ( aside) but suppose, Sir, my sister's
affection should have been seriously engaged.


Sir Char. Nay, my Lord, she is too much a fine Lady to be in any danger that
way --

ENTER COLONEL. Colonel Parrapet your most humble servant.


Col. Sir Charles, yours: my Lord I kiss your hand.


L. Char. Sir, I don't think your behavior and our last parting admit of such
familiarity.


Col. Nay, my Lord, I came on purpose to solicit pardon; too free a glass had
flustered my temper without the least intention of offense; acknowledgement of
error is, I know, sufficient to a man of honor, but I must confess myself a
little puzzled for an apology to this Lady.


ENTER EMMELINE. Emme. Sir Charles, your servant -- oh! the Colonel -- may we
hope that night and reflection, Sir, have given your thoughts a calm?


Col. Most certainly, madam, and I hope your good nature will grant indulgence
to unlimited confession, especially as I am come to make all atonement
possible by offering any assistance which may promote his Lordship's happiness
and yours.


L. Charlo. So this swain is changed about too.


( aside) Emme. Your condescension is very forward, Sir, but I presume his
Lordship can take care of his own happiness without your assistance.


Col. Doubtless, madam -- but if I could any way contribute --


Emme. Oh, Sir, you are exceeding liberal and courtly in your professions and
promises, I can witness that.


Col. How so madam? for by your own declaration I never had the honor of
promising or professing to you --


Emme. It Is no matter, Sir, but I believe if you had, you are very capable of
forswearing it.


Col. Oh dear madam, I am sorry you have so terrible an opinion of me; but I
perceive this subject grows too interesting -- adso, I had almost forgot to
tell you, Sir Charles, that I met Lady Betty Ombre just now, and to use her own
phrase, she dies till she sees you.


L. Charlo. I shall go distracted. ( aside)


Sir Char. Colonel I am obliged to you for delivering so kind a message; and
from so accomplished a Lady; when your match with her sister Lady Frances is
completed; of friends we shall become brothers.


Emme. Confident! faith^ess wretches! ( aside)


Col. That will be double pleasure; pray, madam, are you intimate with the
family of the Ombre^s


Emme. I don't know, I cannot tell -- insolent tormenting man. ( aside)


Col. Your Lordship will be happy in an acquaintance there -- Sir Charles will
introduce you, and if your Lordship's choice was not already fixed upon this
Lady, there is a third sister who has a most bewitching pair of eyes.


L. Charlo. I can hold no longer.


Sir Char. A very dangerous pair of sparklers, indeed, my Lord.


L. Charlo. Sir, you are a villain.


Emme. And, Sir, you are the worst of villains.


Sir Char. Amazing!


Col. Wonderful!


Emme. Oh that I were a man for justice sake.


L. Charlo. And I too.


Sir Char. And I too -- what self betrayed, ha! ha! ha! ha! this is more than I
expected, and hastens the comedy to a conclusion -- what think you ladies, have
we balanced the account of perplexity or not?


L. Charlo. Ladies!


Emme. What do you mean, Sir?


Sir Char. Nay, never look strange; your scheme was well laid, and had not
chance directed me to a moonlight walk in the garden last night, we might have
continued food for mirth at the expense of our peace.


Emme. I am glad its no worse. ( aside)


L. Charlo. I am so confused and so pleased, I know not what to say. ( aside)


Sir Char. The palpitation of our hearts will, I hope, ladies, make this
trespass on your patience appear excusable.


L. Charlo. Well, gentlemen, since it is in vain to deny, I admit your
discovery, and cannot but acknowledge your treatment has been founded on strict
justice.


Col. Spoke with your usual candor and generosity, lady Charlotte, and hence
let mutual confidence ensue; as to you, madam, I have Sir Scrapeall's promise
to make you mine.


L. Charlo. So! so! Here Is counter-working -- was it fair to undermine me; but
pray how did you prevail upon the knight.


Col. By the rhetoric of five thousand pounds; that is, offering to surrender
half the Lady's fortune.


Emme. Generous indeed!


Col. And had it been twenty times as much I should have only thought it a fit
sacrifice to so much merit.


L. Charlo. An excellent proof of disinterested love, Colonel -- but you are
outbid, for I proposed to take the Lady without any fortune at all; and am to
have the honest Citizen's written consent within.


Col. Contemptible reptile!


Sir Cha. Ha! ha! ha! ha! upon my honor, Colonel, you have been fairly
outsoldiered, beat at your own weapons.


Emme. And poor I set up at auction to the best bidder.


L. Charlo. Ha! ha! ha! even so, Emmeline; but all for the better, I hope --
oh! I see Lady Brainless, I have some business with her in my Lordly capacity
and shall beg of you to retire.


Sir Cha. You command us madam.


Exeunt Emme. Sir Cha. and Col. L. Charlo. Now must I play a part severely kind
in hopes of good effects, your Ladyship's most obedient.

ENTER LADY BRAINLESS. My Lord, your humble servant,


L. Charlo. Your Ladyship had a bad run at cards last night.


L. Brain. Oh terrible! my Lord! it seemed as if fortune had determined to
cross me.


L. Charlo. Were not such things common, madam, in matters of chance, they
would press hard upon patience -- I think your Ladyship lost fifteen hundred
pounds? one thousand to me, and five hundred to Lord Robert Whist?


L. Brain. Thereabouts, I believe, my Lord.


L. Charlo. I am sorry to urge your Ladyship; but being myself a good deal out
of cash at present, and having a bill of eight hundred to pay this forenoon,
should be obliged to you for the trifle depending between us.


L. Brain. Really, my Lord, your demand takes me rather at a disadvantage.


L. Charl. You know, madam, it is not like the impertinent bill of a
troublesome mechanic for work done, or goods delivered, it is a debt of honor;
and such you know, takes place of all other payments among people of fashion.


L. Brain. That Is very true, my Lord, and I would always act up to the fashion,
but inclination must give way where ability is totally wanting; and though Sir
Scrapeall deals in cash I am almost as bare as if he was not worth a single
shilling.


L. Charl. If this be the case I find I ventured real against imaginary sums,
and must therefore be more cautious of my company.


L. Brain. Really, my Lord, there is much less politeness in that inuendo than
I should have expected from a man of fashion.


L. Charlo. Politeness, madam, is very well upon particular occasions; but in
gaming there is no such thing, we win of whom and when we can; like death, it
cuts off all distinction of rank, relations and friends, and stakes must be
paid, or persons exposed; but as your Ladyship is a fine woman matters should
be made as easy as possible, and if --


L. Brain. If what, my Lord!


L. Charlo. I presume there could not be much love in your match with Sir
Scrapeall -- I have conceived a passion, give it suitable return, and let the
thousand pounds --


L. Brain. Insolent man, no more; what part of my conduct, though perhaps
ungarded, could encourage so gross an insult -- gratify your malice, expose the
sum due, and set me up the sport of laughing libertines, I Will bear all
patiently, as the fruit and punishment of my own indiscretion, secure in this
pleasing reflection, that though you publish my poverty you cannot taint my
virtue.


L. Charlo. Come, come, madam, Colonel Parapet would have received a gentler
answer.


L. Brain. No, my Lord, there you are mistaken also; for though that gentleman
may have been allowed a particular intimacy, and may have improved or
misconstrued appearances, he must be a consumate villain if ever he dropped a
prejudicial insinuation; for let me say to you, to him, and all the world, that
however I have dipped into follies, the vices of life could never make me a
proselyte.


L. Charlo. It Is as I always thought, dear Lady Brainless, these just and noble
sentiments force off false appearances, and reveal me, instead of a gaming
Lord, your disinterested and inviolable friend Charlotte Bloom.


L. Brain. Lady Charlotte! why then this disguise! or why would friendship
alarm such painful sensations.


L. Charlo. As to the motive of this appearance you shall know in due time --
why I have wounded your delicate feeling was to awaken a sense of what you
justly call follies, which have long obscured many valuable qualifications, and
subjected you to the reproach of several who have l^ss real merit, but more
external caution.


L. Brain. Dear Lady Charlotte, I shall be ever debtor to your kind opinion and
friendly design; reflection tells me I have given too just cause for censure,
yet not without some plea of justification.


L. Charlo. I am certain of it, your most disproportionate marriage, if not an
entire excuse, is at least a powerful palliation.


L. Brain. Marriage; there you have said all at once, those who should have
studied and judged better for my future happiness warmly urged the match; young
and unexperienced I was, allured by the hopes of a title, and unlimited
command; ever since I have been almost hourly rendered unhappy by the selfish
and perverse temper of Sir Scrapeall, which has occasioned me to despise and
cross him in every particular; and most of my extravagncies have been more
calculated for killing time, than any pleasure -- pity me, dear Charlotte, for
I find my scheme of life widely different from what I wish, and yet in self
defense I am obliged to follow it; when avarice, jealousy, and discord prevail
at home, peace must be sought abroad.


L. Charlo. I have no reason to doubt your friendship -- but tell me, did the
Colonel use any freedom with my character?


L. Charlo. No, upon my honor, what I hinted was from observation last night;
and repeated to alarm you, though I sincerely believe you meant nothing.


L. Brain. Your interpretation, my friend, is kind and just; I own my horrid
situation made me fond of his engaging conversation; and female vanity was
flattered in some compliments he passed upon me, nothing more, I assure you,
and yet, now I look back, such gallant trifling is like sporting on the
unstedfast margin of a lucid stream, where while we admire the beautiful
reflection in its liquid bosom, one false step hurries us to certain
destruction.


L. Charlo. Your similitude, my friend, is fancifully just; but we are too
grave, Sir Charles, the Colonel and Emmeline are but in the next room, shall we
join them and prattle away gloomy ideas.


L. Brain. Excuse me for the present, dear Lady Charlotte, the reflections you
have awakened render my spirits unfit for conversation, therefore give me leave
to retire -- think for me, gentle friend, and if any means can be found to free
from, or alleviate my bondage, I promise that future conduct shall prove my
errors the effect of disagreeable circumstances; of a tormented, but not a
dishonest heart. Exit.


L. Charlo. How good a heart may inadvertently be led into unfavourable
appearance?


ENTER SIR CHARLES COLONEL and EMMELINE. Emme. Knowing your design. Lady
Charlotte, I ventured to make these gentlemen ear witnesses of the work of
reformation, and they admire it vastly.


L. Charlo. I am glad of it; and hope you will all join to set her Ladyship
free.


Col. Sdeath! if there be no other method I Will chuck old cent. per cent. out of
the window and ^her^ ^t liberty that way.


L. Charlo. Come, come, I hope to effect it by some less furious means -- I Will
slep to him for a few minutes. Exit.


Sir Char. Hey-day! what have we here?


Col. As I live, mother Busy, and my man Fusee -- married, I hope.


ENTER MRS. BUSY and FUSEE. Mrs. B. Sir Charles, your most humble servant --
Emmeline, how do do child?


Col. And pray, madam, why am I left out of the catalogue of compliments.


Mrs. B. You! marry come up! indeed I wonder you have assurance to look me in
the face after such behavior, I should have been prettily off, indeed, if I
had depended upon your fine speeches and palav'ring -- I should have been a
fine laughing truly, for all the coxcombs and gill flirts; but I Would have you
know, Mr. Colonel, grown birds are not to be catched with chaff, no, no, I saw
through all your designs.


Col. Designs! madam! what could you see but the most faithful, the most ardent
passion; but I suppose you tax me with inconstancy to justify your own
falsehood, and will give yourself away to blast all my hopes.


Mrs. B. Ah, that wheedling tongue, and that deceitful fa^e, if my virtue had
not been impregnable, if I had not been as cold as ice to unlawful love, I
don't know what might have been the consequence; but as I am not to be imposed
upon; I know the world, and the difference of people -- Captain Spontoon, my
husband, has heard your baseness.


Col. How! husband! -- ah cruel fair -- are you then married.


Mrs. B. Yes, truly, Sir -- perhaps you thought I could not get a match; but
the Captain has discernment -- you might have made your market, Sir, but now
it is too late.


Col. Then, animosity aside, I wish you joy with all my heart; and hope Fusee
may make you a good husband.


Sir. Char. and Emme. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. B. Fusee! and who is that pray?


Col. A very honest fellow I assure you, madam, my servant that was, and your
lord and master that is -- how long have you been a Captain, Fusee?


Fusee. Not much above four and twenty hours, Sir.


Sir Char. Col. and Emme. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Mrs B. What can all this mean? -- how, Sir! are you no Captain?


Fusee No truly, not at present -- but I will be one if you will buy me a
commission, my charming dear.


Mrs. B. Buy you a halter, my roguish dear.


Sir Char. Col. and Emme. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. B. What am I tricked then? has neighbor Sly imposied on me?


Emme. Oh no, madam, you are not to be imposed upon -- you know the world, and
the difference of people, ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. B. Hold your tongue, hussy, must such a minx as you set up your face?


Col. Nay, good madam, don't be in a passion, it discomposes your beauty -- a
bride, and frown -- oh fie.


Sir Char and Emme. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. B They provoke me so I don't know what to say or do -- married to his
servant! well you are pleased to be mighty merry, good folks -- but I am not
the first that has been deceived, nor sh^n't be the last -- as for you,
Colonel, I Will let your character be known; and this fellow I can be revenged of
at any time; for if I throw myself into the river my jointure goes with me, so
there is tit for tat, and bite for bite, he! he! he! runs off


Col. Follow your Lady, Fusee, she will come too when she cannot help herself.


Fusee. I Will do what I can, Sir, for sake of the money; but if she should
resolve upon a lover's leap even let her go, for truly I begin to think her
service will prove harder duty than the brown musket and sixpence a day. Exit.


Col. Well, madam, I think her insolence to you is pretty well repaid.


Emme. Thoroughly, as I could wish.


Sir Char. Nothing but strict justice on your own account, for she was most
abominably troublesome -- here comes Lady Charlotte and the Knight.


ENTER SIR SCRAPEALL and LADY CHARLOTTE. Sir Scr. Well, my Lord, upon signing
the paper I sent you to peruse; you shall have my consent to marry her in
writing.


Col. Sir Scrapeall, your very humble servant.


Sir Scr. How! my scarlet friend! what shall I say to him? ( aside) your
servant, Sir.


Col. Well, Sir Scrapeall, the young Lady agrees to your consent in my favor.


Sir Scr. Consent, Sir! ay, but --


L. Charlo. How, Sir! have you been in treaty with another?


Sir Scr. In treaty!


Col. Another* why, Sir, did not you promise me your consent on abating half
the Lady's fortune?


L. Char. Nay, Colonel, but I abate the whole of her fortune.


Emme. Hey day! guardian! have you set me up to public sale?


Col. I shall depend upon your word, Sir Scrapeall.


L. Charlo. And I shall positively insist upon my claim.


Sir Scr. You are very peremptory, gentlemen; but suppose I will not consent to
either, what then -- as to you, Colonel, I don't think your fortune sufficient,
and for you my Lord -- keep our bargain and you shall have my consent to run
away with her to Scotland. ( aside)


L. Char. Ha! ha! ha! a very honest and generous proposal, indeed, Sir Knight,
but -- a word in your ear, I have more occasion for a husband than a wife.


Sir Scr. What! a husband!


Sir Char. Yes Sir, that I Will testify.


Sir Scr. How! are not you a Lord then?


L. Charlo. No Sir, but I am a Lady by courtesy.


Sir Scr. What the mischief, women turned into men; I have long scrupled to
believe my ears, and now I shall not choose to trust my eyes -- well, Colonel, I
shall consider your proposals.


L Charlo. Nay, Sir, it shall be settled now, and -- draw this way -- not only
give your consent but the Lady's whole fortune, or I Will make you repent it.


Sir Scr. make me repent it -- I defy you, Sir -- madam, I mean.


L Charlo. Softly, Sir, you sent me a paper to peruse.


Sir rcr. And what then?


L Charlo. You thought it was a release for that Lady's fortune; but listen to
the title -- directions for John Ringbolt, master of the ship Peggy, to run her
ashore, she being insured at treble value --


Sir Scr. Oh that blundering dog, my clerk aside well, Colonel, since I believe
you will make the girl a good husband, and she is willing, I shall give my
consent.


L. Charlo. Ay, Sir, but it must be done in due form; and now as your Lady has
many just causes of complaint, to prevent the trouble, scandal, and expense of
a public divorce, she proposes a voluntary separation.


Sir Scr. With all my heart, I Will resign all title to her -- let her march as
soon as she pleases.


L. Charlo. And take her whole fortune with her.


Sir Scra. No, no, I did not say that neither.


L. Charlo. What I must consult the insurers, must I. ( aside)


Sir Scra. Oh -- h -- h -- no, I Will do what you have a mind.


L. Charlo. Well gentlemen and ladies, I call upon you as witnesses, that Sir
Scrapeall agrees to a separation proposed by his Lady, and is so generous as to
return her whole fortune.


Sir Scra. Ay, all but the two thousand pounds her extravagance cost me.


L. Charlo. Oh, the insurers shall settle that point.

( aside.)
Sir Scra. I shall certainly run mad -- stark staring mad -- if it was not for
the hopes that brother Starboard will drink himself dead in a month, and make
me his heir, I could never hold out.


Starb ( without) Who Is aboard, yo, ho.


Sir Cha. What naval greeting's that?


Emme. By the harmony of expression it should be Sir Scrapeall's delicate
brother-in-law.


ENTER STARBOARD and RUELLE, arm in arm. Starb. ( singing) And Moll, and Kate,
and Nancy shall roll in loui's d'ors. -- What cheer, what cheer, messmates? why
brother Brainless, your poop always carries a signal of distress; what have you
been in a guard gale since I saw you? mess, I have sailed through the channel of
courtship twelve knots an hour, and made the harbor of matrimony with my
little snow half a glass since.


Sir Scra. How! what! not married, I hope?


Starb. I don't know what you call married, but I showed the parson a cocquet
to clear out of the canonical custom-house; he clapped on his uniform, read
grace, spliced our hands, and launched us off to swing in a hammock together.


Sir Cha. Bravely said, honest captain.


Emme. Mrs. Ruelle I heartily wish you joy.


Ruelle. I am obliged to you, madam.


Starb. Ay, ay, thank you, thank you, young woman, the same to you when you
steer the like course.


Sir Scra. I profess I am astonished!


Starb. And why so, forsooth? is not she a tight built thing?


Sir Scra. Well, since it is so, I desire you to pay me for the punch and
eatables you and your followers have devoured, and the things you have broke.


Starb. Pay! blow me up then this here ship of yours is no better than a
bum-boat; so do you see, order us a good bucket of rumbo, make your bill, and
we'll pay all together -- a l^ght heart, etc. ( sings)


Goes off with Ruelle. Sir Scra. Oh mercy on me! I must follow the mad bear to
see he does no more mischief. Exit.


Sir Cha. Ha! ha! ha! what a rueful condition is the poor Knight in.


Col. Deservedly -- madam you have negotiated and distributed justice with most
commendable impartiality.


L. Charlo. The pleasing effects are amply rewarded, Colonel.


Sir Cha. And now, my friend, it remains to perfect our own happiness, which
has cost us so much anxiety in the pursuit.


Col. But will, in the hands of these ladies, more than repay it all; for how
pleasing soever the irregular sallies of dissipation may be, I doubt not but we
shall be perfectly and happily convinced That human kind no equal bliss can
prove,
To the chaste raptures of connubial love.



FINIS.

